DIVINE COOL BREEZE ISSUE 6 &Z VOLUME VIII oe d into thelghtiess STEness- min Aluays I tell yon meditacel reditate bechnse ould beghobgtiess awareness: whereonto not teant H.E SHMEt Nirmala Day must kn o nae to go beyond your Irmala 3e Birthday e G Delhi, aaEM

 Shivratri Puja (Synopsis) Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sydney, 3 March 96 Shri Shiva is the reflection of Sadashiva within us. Sadashiva is the God Almighty, the one who sees the play of Adi Shakti. He is the father who is watching each one of His creation. His support to Adi Shakti is entirely and fully strengthening. There's no doubt in His mind about the capability of the Adi Shakti. But when he finds that in the play of Adi Shakti the people or the world as such try to disturb Her or spoil Her work then He gets into His wrathful He destroys all such people and maybe He destroys the whole world. On one side He is wrathful and on the other side He is the ocean of compassion and joy. That's why when He is reflected within us, we get our self-realisation. We get the light of our spirit we get into the ocean of our joy. He is the ocean of knowledge. Those who get their self-realisation get the knowledge of the Divine, which is very subtle permeating into every atom and molecule. The power of this knowledge is there. His style is such that in His compassion He forgives even very Rakshas, if they dedicate themselves to him, because His compassion has no limits and sometimes the same people who are blessed by Him try to trouble the devotees of Adi Shakti. But it is just to create a drama. Unless and until there is some drama people won't understand. We had to have Ramayana, Mahabharata, crucification of Christ and Mohammed being tortured. All that drama was there because people don't remember. In the spiritual life of human beings they have seen lots of drama between the blessings and the powers of the Adi Shakti. As the time has moved, today in the history of spirituality a great discovery has been made, that people can get their realisation in the collective en-mass. Thousands can get their realisation. Now we should know what is this realization we have got. What does it mean and what is the culminating point. cruel First of all the mind, about which we speak, and depend upon is a myth. There is nothing like mind. Brain is reality, not the mind. Mind is created by us reacting to outside. Either we react to conditionings or to our ego. Thus this mind is created like bubbles on the ocean of reality. But that is not reality. With this mind whatever we decide we know is very limited, elusive and sometimes shocking. The mind always moves in a linear direction, and because there is no reality in it, it recoils and boomerangs. Thus all the enterprises, and projections we have done so far it seems comes back to us. Whatever they discover comes back to us as a big destructive power, or a very big shock. One has to decide what to do, how to get out of this trap of our mind. Kundalini is the solution. When She awakens She takes you beyond your mind. The first thing is to go beyond your mind. With mind you will do many things but it will not be satisfying. It will not be a solution, it will not help. When we start depending too much on our mind we develop all kinds of physical, mental and emotional problems. The latest is the stress. They say there is no solution for stress. But in Sahaja Yoga we find the solution, by crossing over this mind. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 6 & 7

 It's like a barrier for our advancement. When you get your realisation you must understand that your Kundalini has taken your attention beyond the mind. Now this reaction to outside has come because we human beings have a prism-like brain or prism-like skull. When the energy passes into it, it goes into bifurcations or refractions by which our attention goes out and we react. If we react too much then these bubbles create a very horrible mind which can lead to any kind of thing. It justifies itself, it pampers your ego. The ego and the conditioning that creates this mind start oozing and this mind for the purpose of their fulfillment of all their accumulation, of ideas and thoughts which has no backing which has no reality with it. It's like we make the computer, ultimately we become salves of the computer. We make the watches ourselves and then we become slaves of the watches. That's how it dominates human beings. Howa person who has a very strong mind decides to destroy like Hitler did with some idea, he can go on destroying, which has a very far fetched effect on our culture, on our spirituality. The first step is to become thoughtlessly aware, where you cross your mind. You go above your mind. Mind cannot affect you. This is the first stage, as we call it thoughtless awareness. Second one is where you start seeing the working of this Param Chaitanya, of this all pervading power and you start becoming aware that there is lot of truth in what Shri Mataji That there is this power which works out many things. It works out miraculously so says. many things for you. It gives you blessings, it guides you, it helps you. In so many ways it helps you.. It gives you good health, good wealth and also a very good society, beautiful of very people in the collective. All that you can see clearly is happening here. This happening of achieving thoughtless awareness is very simple and easy. But to maintain at that point is difficult. We still react and we think. Anything you see, you react. To get to that point in thoughtless awareness is first to change your attention. For example once we were climbing a very high mountain to see a temple called Palitana. We were really tired because we had to climb many steps and when we went up there was a beautiful canopy made of marble, so we just lay down there. They were very tired and they were grudging that what is this kind of a temple, while I looked up and I saw lots of beautiful elephants were carved so I told my son-in-law that they all have tails of different types. He said "Mummy, we are all dying, how can you think of the tails of elephants. It was just to divert their attention from the tiredness that I told them why not see the tails of elephants. you are putting your attention so much to outside all the time then you must first of also divert your attention. For example you see these beautifully made things. Just try to enjoy the beauty. There are beautiful carpets here, just look at them without thinking. Because they God, When don't belong to you so no headache. Otherwise if it belongs to you, you will think, "O my I am spreading them here, what will happen". That's common human reaction. But if it doesn't belong to you then you can watch it nicely. Now you watch it and don't think, you will be his put joy, has exuberance into it. You will be amazed that after realization this exuberance will feel you amazed when you see the beauty which is inside this. You will see the artist who has into you and a cool kind of relaxation will come into you, and this Kundalini will rise and will become steady in thoughtless awareness. Whenever you look at any beautiful thing, even today's election. Just watch the man who has been elected. Watching him itself gives him Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 2.

 blessings, gives him better ideas. You get ideas also which are coming from reality, which are there. How to make this man a successful person, or how to make the country a successful democracy. All these things happen when your attention is diverted from criticizing, from reacting. Just you watch. Become the witness. Try to witness everything. It's not so practised, I have seen even when we achieve our realisation we don't realize that we have to witness everything. When you start witnessing through your spirit, then you don't see the bad points of another, you see the good points. You just pick up the person with very good points. Once you see that, the witness state enlarges, and you start enjoying another person. You start enjoying everything that is there. Even a small blade of grass you can enjoy, if you have that capacity. In Japan, Zen system started on these lines, and Viditama made a garden out of moss, different moss and there were little, little flowers also. There was hardly about 5 feet of the garden. It looks like the shape of a question mark. You have to go on a lift and reach that platform on top of a hill or a mountain. When you start seeing it, your thought stops, because such a marvelous thing. When you put attention to His creation your thoughts stop. You must practise to find out what stops your thoughts, what makes you the witness. Once you develop this habit will station yourself nicely in the thoughtless awareness, then you start watching. How Sahaja Yoga has helped you, how it has been blissful what you have achieved through Sahaja Yoga. If you just start watching it everywhere you will be amazed how this Param Chaitanya acts. you Now this Param Chaitanya has become active because of Krita Yuga. You can see from the way it is playing around with vibrations around me, so many photographs of mine where these vibrations are there. Also you have seen the photographs of so many Sahaja Yogis sitting before me, on their head my name is written in Arabic language. You have seen in so many ways by which you can find out there is the play of the Divine. Now the mind will still try to say somethings. Don't listen. Just watch. The effect of Sahaja Yoga you should watch on yourself and on your body. Don't think about it but just watch it and you will be amazed how you have changed. It is this witness state which takes you to another realm we call as doubtless awareness. At that stage you can become so empowered that you can give realisation to others. You can give complete knowledge about Sahaja Yoga. You can talk to them. Also you emit. Your whole spiritual state becomes so much blissful, you become so powerful, so compassionate, and so loving, so balanced completely cleansed of all the destructive, depressive ideas. Then you really stand up as a great Sahaji who can do tremendous work, like recently I heard that Germans and Austrians are now going to Israel, because they think Jews were killed by their fore-fathers, and there's a big centre now started in Israel. Just imagine how these people, once they reach that state go to countries single handed, they have done so much. Same in Turkey, same in places which are very tremendously remote in South Africa. Because from inside they become completely confident in thoughtless awareness as doubtlessly aware. Once you start growing by meditative attention then your attention becomes enlightened. Now the job is to motivate your attention. It's not just to enjoy, but to motivate it. To put it to proper use. Supposing you have some problem on a national basis, you all can put your attention to that and things will work out, because you are the channel of this all pervading Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze

 power which is trying to create a new world for you, new human beings. And this evolution can take place very fast if you all decide that whatever we now have within ourselves we should motivate it and direct it and put this attention to some use. Whatever wealth we have it should not be wasted. The main question today is what is God's realisation. First is the self-realisation and then there are many ambitious people who want to be God realized. First and foremost thing we should know that human beings cannot become God. It's not the becoming of it . You have not also in a way become Spirit because Spirit is emitting through you, using you, giving you, looking after become the Spirit there won't be any body left. So with this body intact, the If you. Spirit is acting through this body, giving you all the light. But one cannot become God Almighty, this one has to understand very clearly. God's realisation is to know about God. To know about God is to know how His powers are working, how He controls, by becoming part and parcel of God Almighty. Like my finger does not know about my brain but it acts according to my brain. The finger cannot become the brain but it has to act absolutely according to my brain because it is so connected. It is so one. Here when you have God's realisation you know about the brain, you know about God. You know about His powers, you you know everything about Him. As far as I am concerned it is a difficult task for you, because I am a Mahamaya. It is difficult for you to know each and every thing about me. I am quite an elusive person, and whatever is do or achieve it is just for you to see and understand that after all it is Adi Shakti. She can do all these things. You can also do all the things but you cannot become me, but you have to know through love, through devotion, through prayers, to know the God's powers is the way you are God realised. Then you can control the nature, you can control everything. If you have that knowledge within you about God, for that a complete humility is needed. You cannot become God, you cannot become God Almighty, you cannot become the deities. But definitely you can become God realised, means God acts through you, uses you as His power, His channel and that you know what He is doing to you, what He is telling, what His vision is, and what is the information. The connection is like that. Many people in Sahaja Yoga have been benefitted but they don't know how they have been benefitted. What has worked it out, how it has worked it out. What connection of theirs has helped them. Once you know that clearly how things are working out with what power you have achieved it then it's God's realisation. Such people become extremely powerful in the sense that they can control so many things. There have been many saints of that kind. But sometimes they fell from that and developed their ego. They didn't have their own humility, that devotion, that dedication, that surrendering. They fell down, they become quite proud of their achievements and they don't want to give it to anyone. They think that they have achieved it with great difficulties and why should they give it to others. Such people are not going to rise very high. But you people who have got your realisation and who are humble who know that out of humility only you are going to achieve your surrendering. Islam means surrender. Mohammed Sahib has talked about Islam, meaning you surrender. If surrender you can never know God. He has clearly said that unless and until you know yourself you will not know about God. cannot you As Sahajis you have to know all the little things and big things and all the great visions that you can do it because of the Grace of God, because of His blessings, because of His love for Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7

 you. That you have entered into the Kingdom of God. I may say you have entered and achieved that state but still you are not there. Like if I tell somebody that now you are in Australia. He is not in Australia but I can say you are in Australia. So he believes I am in Australia'. That's not the way. You have to be in Australia, then you have to know about Australia, you have to know what sort of climate it is, what sort of place it is. One of the qualities of Shiva is complete detachment and that is what you have to develop is to become completely detached. Detachment does not mean that you neglect anything. I've explained to you many times that like the sap in the tree rises, goes to various places and then evaporates or then goes back to Mother Earth. In the same way your detachment should be. If you get attached because it's your son, if you get attached because he is Australian or maybe he belongs to a certain family or certain class then you are still limited. All these limitations have to be dropped if you have to cross over. These limitations create such a big load that whatever I may try, whatever you may try you cannot stay in thoughtless awareness. That's a very beautiful state in which all of you should be there. In that you are not dominating or compromising. You stand on your own legs and you know for definite that you are not swayed away by any idea, any domination or any subjection of yours by anyone. So you become completely a free bird.Then it becomes your job to achieve your flight. One flight is to the thoughtless awareness. The second one is up to the doubtless awareness. The third up. one is to God's realisation. I have seen people who are very close to me also don't understand. They behave in such a manner as if now they have become Gods. So egoistical I am amazed at them. Then they have to leave Sahaja Yoga. they are that Even if I praise you too much, if I say anything too much you shouldn't get pampered. It's a testing ground, or otherwise also if I tell you that this is not good you should improve on this, should not mind, because I have to do it, that's my job and your job is to listen to me, you because I have nothing to gain from you. I do not ask for anything. What I want is that you all should get all my powers. You may not become what I am, but please try to get all the powers that I have, which is not a difficult thing. This is what is God's realisation. That's what is to know Shiva and Sadashiva. Through the Shiva you know Sadashiva. You see the reflection and from reflection you know who is the original. From the reflection you learn. Thus you reach that state where you think that now you are definitely settled in the Kingdom of God and that you can see God, you can feel God, you can understand God, and love God. you can May God Bless You. Divine Cool Breeze Vol, VIII Issue 6 & 7

 BIRTHDAY PUJA Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis) 21/03/1996, New Delhi People don't know what this mind is. It is very easy to understand for Sahaja Yogis that we are the ones who react to everything that is outside. The reason is, we have two horrible tendencies, one which is an Ego and another tendency is that we are being trained that or we can call it the Superego or the conditionings. Both the things, our Ego and conditionings are all the time acting outside. This reaction which is built in within us is just like bubbles in the ocean. And these bubbles keep us away from reality. These bubbles are of thoughts and they just blast you all the time in your head and you don't know why they are coming. When you depend on this artificial mind of yours then you have no discretion as to understarnd what is good and what is bad. This mind is the one where all kinds of evil things start. All kinds of quarrels, fights and posessiveness, lastly the war also comes there. It is in this mind only which is nothing but a myth, all these concrete destructive ideas somehow or other come up and then they start growing and growing. Then you find people whom you can impress also put ideas into their heads. By reading they learn or by their lectures or by mesmerism whatever kinds of things they can do. They put your mind into such a frame that you accept these destructive ideas. For yourself individually or maybe for the collective. way This mind is just a myth and we are working through this mind. We are all the time satisfying ourselves by saying 'oh that's my mind, my mind wants it. Like one Indian Sahaja Yogi went to America. And he told me that Americans are mad after their mind. I said what do you mean. He said, I gave money to my wife to buy one shirt for me. She went and bought some skirts. She has many skirts but she bought some skirts. So I asked her, why did you buy the skirts. She said, my mind said that you should buy the skirts, so I bought skirts. The mind can take you to all kinds of wrong things because it has no connection with reality firstly. Secondly it is a mythical thing. Absolutely mythical. People think that whatever they have created it is out of their mind. It is a wrong idea. All great scientists, say Einstein has said I was tired trying to find out the theory of relativity. He had some concept, like all scientists take up some sort of a concept and they try to build up their research on that. One day he was playing with the soap bubbles like a small child. And suddenly from somewhere unknown, he says, the theory of relativity dawned upon him. Many scientists have said that they don't know from where they get this idea. It is a special study now people are doing, to find out how these scientists got these things and in a very Sahaj manner. Even the way penicillin was discovered or anything was discovered by these people was not through the probing or manipulation of the mind but through some unknown force it came into their mind and that's what they thought that this was from their mind, even Newton realised that it is coming from something, some source which I am not aware of. As Sahaja Yogis you know it is the source of the divine power which is all pervading. The Paramchaitanya. "You know, because you can feel it. You know it is there. But even when know, must know you have to go beyond your mind minimum. Always I tell you 'meditate!, meditate!" because you should be in thoughtless awareness, where you do not react". So what happens, you become you you you into thoughtless awareness - a witness. And you become the witmess of the whole drama, of the whole scene and are Divine Cool Breeze 6. Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7

 absolutely at ease with yourself. No problem. What you are doing, that you become an instrument of this Paramchaitanya of this All-Pervading-Power. You are just watching, you are a witness and as watching everything you realise that whatever you watch cannot react on you. But you know what it is. And this is what, is the state in which you understand the reality of the whole situation. I have told you many times, that if you are standing in the water you are afraid that the waves might kill you. But supposing you get into a boat then you can watch those waves as something beautiful. If you learn how to swim you can jump and bring back people who are getting drowned. This is exactly what happens when you are in that state that you can give realisation to others. You can put them in connection with the divine power but first of all you must know how to become thoughtlessly aware. Some people say 'Mother, for a second only we become, for two seconds we become'. Because you see, in our mind. Even if you come to Sahaja Yoga you have so many conditionings to begin with. First of all, if you are born in India then you are identified with India. If you are born in England you are identified with England. One thing I have noticed about Sahaja Yogis, once they get out of this nonsense of this mind first thing they start criticizing the way they have been living in the atmosphere. For example they say This is Indian, this is what the Indians are'. If they are British, they say These are the British, you see The mind itself, starts seing, the mind itself sees that it is a myth. And then the cheating that takes place all the time, that the intelligence that cheats itself, stops. You start seing the thing in a proper, full manner, because you don't react. To react, is a sign of a person who is very conditioned. You can be conditioned by many other things like, you are born in a particular religion. What has religion to do now a days with human beings? There is no real religion anywhere. It has become like a money orientation or power orientation. That's why they are all fighting among themselves. And you know for definite that no religion is exclusive. But they fight. The reason is, the mind is conditioned that you must fight for your religion. Now, they have no religion within. There is no religion that is working out in their lives. They might be the most corrupt, most immoral people but they belong to a particular religion, like a club. And then they start identifying themselves at something and they have a right to do these things because they belong to a particular religion. Now there are people who can really use this mind. Though it is artificial. In modern times you are using so many artificial things, and this artificiality can creep into everything. Like plastic. This mind can penetrate into anything and it penetrates into the minds of people. That's how Hitler managed all the young people of Germany.All these people, who have been able to destroy the reasoning which is logical- not through the mind. If it is through the mind it's no logic. It is just a reasoning that we can see clearly stupidity. Because this mind, which is just a bubble is so limited that it cannot comprehend the beauty, the glory, the expanse of reality. This mind is just a collection of all the garbage which we have to somehow or other deny and tell ourselves that I have to go beyond my mind. So called mind of mine has done no good for me. This mind of mine which has been all the time controlling me is just like the watch we have made and it is controlling us or like the computer that controls us. We have to be careful that we are the ones who have created this mind and this mind has no business to control us. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7

 Many people try to control the mind. There is a way of doing it that I'll control my try to understand, how will you control the mind? Only through mind ! Either by Ego or by conditioning. You have no means of controlling your mind because it is the mind which mind. Now your have created. And that is just existing there which you cannot control, though you might you think, I can control. "You have to go beyond this mind. And to go beyond this mind the most helpful thing is Kundalini-awakening. Because She passes through your limbic area, pierces through your fontanel-bone-area and just takes you away, out, into the realm of reality." And the 'Yoga' takes place between your brain, I should say, your heart, with this all pervading power. She is the one which connects. She is the one who does it. Many people are doing Sahaj Yog, I know that. But it is difficult for them, sometimes, to get to meditation, to establish this thoughtless awareness, which is an extremely important state, which you all should achieve. As long as you are in the turmoil of mind you cannot progress.Whatever is created out of their mind, has no reality in it, is very limited and is also sometimes very repulsive. Because with this mind people start thinking, I'm such and such now you become, supposing-I don't know what position - but supposing you become the governor. Then you think you can do what you like because you have become the governor. This mind doesn't know that you have become the governor, you are not the governor. This governorship is ruling you. Not that you are ruling the governorship. Once these ideas come into your head, you start behaving in a manner in which you should not behave. Even among Sahaja Yogis there are leaders. Leaders also start sometimes thinking I am a leader'. It's a myth, absolute myth. Leadership in Sahaja Yoga is an absolute myth. But once they know they are leaders, they become sort of absolutely mindful and full of thoughts. Thoughts, how to dominate, how to control. When they start controlling others, then you must know that it is the mind which is telling them to control. Why to control anyone? If you are a real Sahaja Yogi, there is no need to control. There is no need to manoeuvre, to manipulate. Now, once your attention goes beyond the mind - only the Sahaja Yogis will understand this point very clearly. When this mind goes beyond the thoughts, then the manipulation of the attention is very important. Then whatever you manipulate means you take this attention to this or to that. You will be surprised how dynamic you become, how effective you become and how knowledgeable you become. Because once you can take this attention to anything you want, immediately there is light on that issue, on that person, on that problem and you see how it works out, how it helps. In Sahaja Yoga you have said "Mother, there have been lots of miracles with your attention' or something like that. I agree, but your attention also is quite capable of doing things which normal people can't do. Because now your attention is purified firstly, secondly it is manipulated with the divine power and is manifesting it's powers. Before that, I have seen people who come to Sahaj Yog, they send me letters of crying "Mother, this is happening, that is happening, my father is sick and my leg is paining, my hands are paining, all kinds of things. Not only on the physical level, but also on mental level and all sort of things they go on. They sometimes write to me such long letters, I don't know how to read them. There is nothing to write so much. But they do, because at that stage they are still reacting and they don't know what to do. They go to such a limit, that they think that Sahaja Yoga is like a contract. Now I have come to Sahaj Yog, I must get this. This must happen. Only they come to Sahaja Yoga then they will think it's a contract and they must get this and they must get Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 8.

 that help. All this kind of behaviour is not that of a Sahaja Yogi. In Sanskrit there is a very good word "tathast", a very good word. "Tathast" means the one who is standing on the shore and watching. That is the state in which you have to be. But as a result you do not become a person who is not effective. You become extremely effective. If such people are there, won't believe, so many things can happen. Wars can stop. Peace can spread. People who you are evil will be exposed. Now because it's such an "en masse" working out of Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yogis should not in any way find themselves in conflict with each other. Still I find sometimes and I am amazed how people criticize other Sahaja Yogis or other leaders while they themselves have problems. The reason is that once you start going beyond the mind you automatically become introspective. And you start seeing "what's wrong with me - this mind of mine now ". So better stand before the mirror or can even close your eyes and say "Now Mr. Mind, what are you doing ?, What are you up to ? You face yourself. You stand out from yourself and see for yourself and ask the mind "what are you up to ?" That's the way. Once you are out of it you can control it. You are celebrating my birthday. Now I am supposed to be quite old though I don't think like that, because I don't think. One has to be beyond the mind. To think about yourself all the time or to think about things which do not concern you sometimes and just try to put your mind into a turmoil which is very dangerous these days. To stop your thought first of all in Sahaja Yoga you should stop reading anything. Because if you start reading, then what happens again, you start collecting thoughts from that book. I have seen many people whose mind is nothing but the books from others or the words of others or quotation of others. They are nowhere, you cannot find them. They are all lost people. He says so and that one says so. When I was writing this book which you know that I have written now they were saying "Mother, but Plato said like this and Rousseau said like that". I said, let them say whatever they wanted to, I say what I know. Why should I refer to them. I don't have to go to the libraries and read what Rousseau said, what Plato said. What I know, whatever I have witnessed in my life I should write it clearly without thinking about what others have to say, what others have described. And also this mind has another big big problem, that whatever is written down in black and white becomes bible. Then whatever is done before is something great. Like now, there is no Christ, there is no Mohammed Saheb and there is no Abraham, there is no Krishna, there is no Rama, today. But they will think of what Rama said, what Krishna said, then in Gita this he said. In Gita he has not said a word about Kundalini, so why Mother is talking about Kundalini. Who wrote Gita? Never Shri Krishna, Christ never wrote bible. Koran was not written by Mohammed Saheb. So what they have said why should you worry about that. Instead of that you take the experience that everybody has said, that you are to be born again, everybody has said, that you have to go beyond the mind also everyone has said. Why not do that and then see for yourself. But people like and they are identified. Now there are Christians who have come into Sahaja Yoga, still they are happy if it is Christ. Very happy. If they are Hindus, it should be Krishna or Rama. If they are Moslems it should be Mohammed Saheb, Fatima or someone. Otherwise they can't get out of it, it's very difficult. Their mind is such, that is so much made from childhood you are told "You are a Moslem,you are a Moslem, you are a Christian, you are a Christian, so they believe it. Supposing you are born in some other Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze

 religion then what would have happened. You would have been something different. But this mind has been injected with the ideas which have gone into your head and that's how you are so much without any freedom. You are tied down with these conditionings. And that's what I find among Sahaja Yogis also a very big conditioning that such and such thing is good or bad, they decide. You see for yourself. For example, if I talk on Guru Nanak, then the Sikhs will be very happy, but I talk on Christ, they won't be happy. I talked on Christ in Pune, so they said, She is trying to convert everybody to Christianity. And when I was talking about Shri Krishna in London, they said, She is making everybody a Hindu. This identification that we have is coming to us so intensly from - we should say, it's like from the birth. All these ideas still are there and we are not free. That doesn't mean that you should not have faith in all these people. They were all great. We have great respect for them and understanding. But first be free. You be free to krow them. Your mind should be free. It should not be the you injections that are put into your heads that you cannot see the point. That's why they don't enjoy also, I have seen, partly they enjoy, partly they don't. Sahaja Yoga is to give complete freedom and also complete sense of freedom, so you respect the freedom of others. On the whole you understand what freedom is. If that doesn't work out, then I would say that Sahaja Yoga is of no use, because it should work out in such a manner that you should get rid of all these conditionings you have had. Take the second enemy of our's, is Mr. Ego, which is another headache and it works very In many countries where already Ego has been bloated. This ego comes to us from different angles and actually you will be surprised, from the deformity of our chakra. For some people fast. very important. We must get money, somehow or other. If I don't get money, what's is money the use being in Sahaja Yoga. Money is very important. We are living in a money-oriented world, no doubt. But I have told you, that what's the uIse of having money that makes you a fool? Now see the countries which are very much money-oriented, who are supposed to be very rich, all the Scandinavian countries, and Switzerland, whatever they might have done to get that money, doesn't matter. But they are people with money. Young people are committing suicide. There is a competition going on. They are very unhappy. Why? That means money cannot bring happiness. Money, if that goes into your head also, then you cannot be a Sahaja Yogi. But the money is there just for you, to use it, to express your love. Now, you go to the shop, then you see something. This is very nice to be given to such and such person. You think like that. It's a very sweet feeling you get there you can give this to this one, he needs it much. When your mind becomes the other way round, I mean, when it is thoughtlessly aware then you will buy something that is joygiving, something artistic, something beautiful, something useful, to that person. It will be a kind of a mind that will be extremely full of generosity. Enjoying it's generosity, and all the time it will guide you to the projection of your attention to things by which you can give happiness to others. Small, small things, not necessarily expensive things. If you have money, better spend money in buying things that you can give to others, that you can express your love, your gratitude, your "shraddha". It is remarkable how people give money to these Sadhus and Babas in thousands. Because, very very in them it has come, that to satisfy their "shraddha", they must give it, and so they give. And they have amassed and amassed so much money. They have no sense of it, they don't understand the value of that. To them it is nothing but money. In the modern time the worst Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze 10

 thing of Ego is money. I have seen people who are very rich, supposed to be great business "walas" and something like that. They must meet me separately, we must come, Mother, and see. But they are useless people, absolutely useless. They will come and tell me, you having a loss in this, I'm having a loss in that, can you help us in this way or that way. I just don't say anything to them but they have said, Mother we have recovered because of your blessings maybe but it is stupid. Like Lao-Tze described that you are going through the Yang-Tze River. It's beautiful. On the sides you see beautiful scenes, but you better be on the boat and reach the ocean. In the same way, supposing we have to catch a plane, and we see something very effects of this mind are these, that we divert our attention to wrong things and waste our know I'm nice on the road, and get down there, how can we catch the plane? The side into it . Ultimately we are not happy, as you know that in general wants are not energy satiable. It's the love that you give and the love that you receive which is not a love which is entangled into anything with any purpose, with any idea but just to feel that love, pure love within yourself and within others is the greatest gift of the Divine. All other things are useless, you'll find. You find it every day. Today you want to have a car, all right have it, then you want to have a house, have it. But you are not bothered about the car now you want to have a house. Now you get the house, then you are not satisfied, then you want something else and something else. Which is that "want" which is satisfying is this pure love, genuine love that you feel for the others and others feel for you. We have lots of conditionings of ego. In our country specially, to dominate the wife is one of the greatest ego. I have seen people, how they tortured women, their wives and the children of others, just because they think "I am a man". What do you get? You don't get any joy, you car never be joyous. If you try to dominate another person you can never be joyous, never be joyous. It's only through loving and affection and care that you can feel the joy, because joy has these symptoms, joy is not domination or demanding or asking. These are not the signs of a person who is joyous. The joyous person is that who just enjoys the caring, the loving, the gentle relationship. And this is another point where I've seen Indian men specially and specially in the north because of they say Muslem influence, the men are extremely dominating to their wives. And they insult the wife also. So, the women here have become idea extremely dominating also. Naturally action has a reaction.This reaction itself is a wrong and this reaction should be just dissolved into the feeling of pure love, the ocean of compassion. For example I see on the streets of Delhi so many people begging, small children are there and all that. And, now the feeling that I get is not of scolding them or getting angry with them, maybe they are cheating, maybe anything after all everybody is cheating even those who have lots of money are cheating. So what is there if these poor people are cheating, doesn't matter. But the compassion is built in within me like this, that let me somehow get a plot of land somewhere, let me organize some sort of a place where all these people who are and orphans can be put there and given all the help. And maybe from this bond of misery poverty you might get lots of lotuses coming out. But the feeling has to be collective. I feel that that will solve the problem of Delhi, but that doesn't mean that like other social workers Like I have been connected with some social workers and I was amazed that it was nothing but an ego-pampering-business, it has nothing to do with social workers. Hap hazard and nothing deep in their attention to look after these people. With the great feeling of love and way Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze 11

 compassion we all can do it. One of my desires is this, if it is a desire of you all, it will work out. It's very important, that they are also human beings and we have to look after them. But for that one should not think that,"I will be the treasurer, I will be the president, and I will be this. All this clergyship should go away, from the mind itself, otherwise you are not free, know. Like there is a nice joke about it, that, somebody went to see the minister and the you private secretary was there attending to the people. And he was getting very angry with them and all that. So, some villagers said "Who are you?", he said "don't you know I am P.A." Ah, P. A. ho?", that means you are drunk, all right, we have nothing to say. So, a person with ego behaves, like a person who has ego, is a person like a, you can say a drunkard or sometimes like a lunatic also, really like a lunatic. Sometimes you have to meet them with a bargepole, I told Some of these people who have got awards for peace, one has to talk to them with you. a bargepole, because they might just jump on you. Just like a cat or could be like a leopard. You don't know how they are built up.I don't know how they got these awards for peace, but they have. The peace is within ourselves. And this peace has to be retained and introspected and seen. Are we peaceful? Or we are reacting. If we are reacting then we are not peaceful. But people will say "Yes, yes I am very peaceful, but I have to react", then you are not peaceful. Just face yourselves straight foreward and see for yourself that if you are peaceful, then this peace will spread all over. It will help others. It gives them physical, mental, emotional and spiritual peace. You people have a great responsibility of coming to Sahaja Yoga. It is not just a certificate or my badge that you are a Sahaja Yogi. I would like also women to see to this point, because what I have seen about women is that they are mostly worried about their children and about their husbands, jobs and things like that. But they are not worried about others, about people who are around them. They have to also take to Sahaja style of life in which they expand their love, expand their attention to other people and see how they can please others. This situation used to be non existent in the western countries. I think they never knew that you should please somebody for no reward or for no purpose. If you give any present to somebody they'll say "Oh, what do you want? They cannot understand that somebody wants to express ones love. Now mind has changed because Sahaja Yogis are there, and they are different people. We should not adopt their stupid ideas that we can control people by giving them things, or by giving them some sort of promises. We have actually to control ourselves and that control can come if you do not allow your mind to control. That control is a comnplete freedom for example now take an aeroplane which is perfectly built, which is absolutely alright then only it can fly. In the same way if you are a perfect Sahaja Yogi then you'll have no problems in dealing with any problem, with any circumstances, with any person whatsoever. There are many Sahaja Yogis they say "Mother we don't want to take any active work because we'll develop our ego". They think their balloon is alredy bloated out and if they do some work their ego will go up, so they say, we don't want to do. It's not so. It's the love. You are working for love. Such an ocean of love is within you. How can you do without that? And this has to work out at every level, whether it is your family, city, country or the whole world. This is the new. Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze 12

 generation we have to create of people who believe in love which is truth, which is truth, without love you cannot have truth. Because when you love somebody you know everything about that person, in the same way when you love your country you know everything about that country, but first you must love. Why people are now having problems, because they don't love their country. If you love your country you will know what is the essence of country, what are the problems of your country, what it is going through. And that intense feeling of oneness itself will work out because after all you are connected to the Divine. But with intensity you should feel for all these things that are really so destructive and troublesome in these modern times. your I again want to thank you for celebrating this birthday and for all the sweetness you have showered upon me. You are just like these beautiful flowers for me which are anxious all the time to make you happy, to please you. Just like that I find you before me, beautiful flowers, fragrant, with divinity I hope you all will understand your own value and work it out. May God Bless You. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 13

 Lecture on Metascience and Medicine by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi At Lady Harding Medical College, 9.4.96 Medical Conference Delhi We are all seekers of the truth. But we don't know what to seek. The truth is eternal. We cannot change it.. We cannot transform it. We have to know it. Knowing the truth is not through your mind. Actually mind is a myth. You can only know it beyond your mind. This is the truth which is absolute. No one can challenge it. Everybody knows that same truth. This is the knowledge that was called Bodh, from where the word Buddha has come, this is the knowledge that's called as Vidd from where Vedd has come. Thus, this knowledge we have to know on our central nervous system, but not knowing it mentally. This is something very important we have to learn that we have come to a state of human awareness. But it is not yet complete, if it was, there would have been no problem. Why do we quarrel, why do we argue? So, there must be truth which is absolute and to find this truth is the aim of our evolution. That is how we have to evolve in a higher state of self-realisation by which your self-knowledge. u get you You have to see it as a metascience because you have to open your minds like scientists. You don't have to believe me like blind faith. We have had lots of problems with blind faith but you have to see for yourself, judge for yourself, experiment with it and if you find that what I am telling you is the truth, then you must believe in it like honest people. As people who are to be benevolent to their family, to the country and to the whole world. Without evolution we cannot reach that state. All the arrangement for evolution is made within ourself. The power that resides in your triangular bone is called the Kundalini. It is the knowledge in this country we have known for thousands and thousands of years. It is our heritage. As Indians, we have inherited all this knowledge that somehow it was all closed down by the Western influence. Of course, the Western influence is not harmful as far as the medicine is concerned. But, we have to go beyond it to see that whatever knowledge we have is not only for one eye, something for another eye, something specialising, going into such minute details, ultimately reaching bifurcations. Sahaja Yoga is the synthesis of the whole thing. We go to the basics within ourself. How do we get sick? The basics are, what I am going to tell you, what you will not believe as I have told you. But, please try to understand it as scientists. We have within ourself seven centres which are energy centres which give us subtle energy for everything, for our mental, physical, emotional and spiritual growth. When this energy from any one of these centres gets exhausted, then we get ill. Now, the question of cancer. Any one of our centres can be affected. The centre part is Parasympathetic, and the left and the right are the sympathetic. Now what happens? We start using, say the energy of a particular centre or of three centres, we start using that energy say, by thinking too much, working too much, whichever way. It becomes a small space for the Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze 14

 energy. Ultimately something can happen on the left side that's more emotional. Then it breaks. When it breaks, the connection with the main is lost. This right-sided on its own. When it becomes on its own, it starts growing. When this power Kundalini passes through that centre, it not only brings them together but also nourishes them, also it integrates with other centres. becomes energy It's a fact, it has cured many blood cancer patients and other cancer patients it is a fact. But understand it first of all we should know we are not in the basics. What we are doing, that if the tree is sick we are treating the leaves or the flowers but we have to go to the root if we have to treat the whole tree. This is the knowledge of the roots which we have in our country for thousands of years. When the centres are nourished, they create balance. There are many things still in the medical science that we don't know because I was a medical student and I was quite worried as to how to talk to medical science people about it, which is not mentioned in any of the books. For example we don't know that the sympathetic systems are opposite to each other. In a way they are complementary but they are not in the same function. The pitutary is the right sympathetic through a nadi called Pingala nadi and the pineal is the left side, another nadi called Ida. These two are complementary in a way that's why they are opposite in action. The one which is on the left side is for emotional side. The right side is the one for action. What is the root cause of getting asthma, diabetes? The root cause is our liver. We don't know much about it in medical science I assure you. Within the centre which is called the Swadhistan chakra, the second centre which starts from the Nabhi, the navel. This centre goes round and round and supplies the aortic plexus. This plexus is looking after many things. It is looking after the liver, pancreas, spleen, kidneys. When we start thinking we don't know from where this energy comes. This energy comes from the same Swadhistan chakra. Same Swadhistan chakra gives this energy futuristic movement. So the energy that is to be used is forced upon. and Liver, in very general terminology, collects all the poison of the body and passes heat into the circulation. This liver gets affected because it is neglected. When this centre doesn't look after it, it is neglected. Then the heat starts going all over. It cannot get into the blood so it starts going upward, downward, sideways. First it goes to the right side of heart we call it the right heart. According to Sahaja Yoga there are three hearts not only one. On the right side if the heart centre which looks after your lungs gets hot so it affects the lungs in a way because it affects that centre. That's how you get asthma. When you put ice on your liver, the ice is cooling down your liver. It's a simple thing The heat can move to your pancreas. When it goes to your pancreas, you get diabetes. This diabetes is a common disease not only in doctors but lawyers and bureaucrates especially because they plan too much. If you go to a village people take 3 to 4 spoons of sugar and the spoon must stand at right angles otherwise they won't think it's tea. They never get any diabetes. What is the reason? Whatever they earn, they spend and sleep off. They are not bothered about insurance or anything. The third thing that gets affected that is even much worse, is your spleen. Nowadays in the morning when you get up, read the newspaper anybody who is sensitive can get a shock. So Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze 15

 your sympathetic goes into activity and your spleen starts jumping. Poor spleen doesn't know how to deal with such a hectic person. In America people even brush their teeth in the car. They are so much in a hury, so time bound. We have become so speedy that our body cannot follow that speed. This poor spleen cannot understand how to cope with this hectic it goes mad and disease sets in called blood cancer. Definitely blood cancer has been cured, that's fact. They were told, doctors were being very fair and honest that the patient will not live more than one month. Nine years have passed but he is fine. This thing is such big example for us to see that you don't have to take out the blood or anything. You just get cured How? Because when the Kundalini goes to this Swadhistan Chakra she finds that has no energy, so it supplies all the energy. By that energy, they get alright. person, poor thing Then it comes to another which is our kidneys. When kidney fails they can't pass urine so put them on dialysis. I haven't met one person who has been cured out of dialysis. Then comes your intestine. Intestines also gets constricted. Then your digestion goes out. You get belching, the worst that you get is constipation. This is the greatest curse of modern times that people suffer from this horrible thing called constipation. It's very unnatural, but it happens. This happens and plays ternis and works very hard, he will get a heart attack. That's a fatal heart attack. At that age you cannot be saved, later on also this kind of heat fermentation on the heart goes on and people get massive heart attack. when heat starts moving up. If a boy is about 21 25 years of age he drinks too much Another thing which is also very dangerous is that this heat reaches the brain. On the right side then brain also fails and you get paralysis on the right side. This is only with one centre. When you put also ice here you will be surprised that paralysis can be cured. Glasses can got rid of if you put ice on the back Agnya. Because Swadhistan chakra is here. Sahaja Yoga discipline and ice can work it out. You can imagine with one centre how many diseases you can cure especially you people who are working as doctors are quite open to it. Basically if you do not understand that we just start treating somebody for the eyes, for diabetes, nothing will work. They become really like psychosomatics which cannot be cured, which has no solution. But the solution lies in the metascience of medicine where you have to just accept it. Just accept as a hypothesis and then try, if it works, why not. Of course there is one thing, you cannot take money for it because you are not using anything but the power of a person who is Divine power That does not mean that doctors will starve because they have no money. Because you see very few people actually come to Sahaja Yoga. Most of them just believe in doctors only. For the smallest thing they will run to doctors. Also the rich people will never come to Sahaja Yoga. What we have found that there is nothing to worry about your profession. But once you become enlightened with this Divine power you yourself you become the power. I have known of a surgeon, he said Mother without doing much I am performing surgery and it works out wonders because from my hand this power is flowing. This power is there to cure, it heals. If they believe in Christ that He only healed 21 people. But how He did, how He did that nobody knows. Even people who are artists, musicians, they are so much endowed with energy that they start playing something miraculously better. Actually it cannot be forced on anyone. You have to ask for it. Actually if you know of a Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze 16

 person who is very adamant, arrogant, also who is an idiot, it won't work. We have to put them in proper shape. Once they are in proper shape it works. But all of you have this power and it is your birthright to have this self realisation. They say this is my head, this is my body, this is my mind. Who is the owner of this mind? You ask the doctor who runs your heart? He will say autonomous nervous system. Alright who is this auto? That is what we have to know. We have to be the spirit. Because we are not this body, this mind, we are not these emotions and ego or our conditionings but we are the pure spirit. The second ene is that there is all pervading power of the Divine which we have never felt before. Everybody has described. Adi Shankara has said, described it as, "Saleelam, Saleelam" cool and cool. In the bible it is said cool breeze of the holy ghost. In the Quran it is described as Ruh'. Mohammed Sahib had said very clearly, you cannot know God until yourself. The whole of our Indian culture is for knowing ourself, we call it Moksha, we call it self realisation, Atma Sakshatkar, call it by any name whatsoever. But all these efforts were to get to yourself. know you In these modern times one thing good has happened. There are so many seekers of truth all over. Second thing is that is Sahaja it is spontaneous. You don't have to go to the Himalayas, don't have to stand on your heads you didn't have to give up this, give up your wife, nothing. You can maintain yourself, it works automatically, you don't have to do reading or any kind of chanting. It is so simple. If the doctors become that they will become the greatest scientists of India as far as the medical science is concerned. I was surprised in Russia when they had about 250 doctors and about 200 scientists sitting of a very high calibre. I started talking on science and using scientific terminology. So they said Mother, we don't want, we want to know the science of Divine. You talk to us about the science of Divine, and whatever I said they just tried to find out. I told them that all these seven centres are represented in the brain. Now they have such equipment to do it. There is one place called Novasbisk. Where they have got all the scientists. They have a beautiful campus of all the scientists and all kinds of laboratories. When I told them that you can find out if these centres are represented in the brain they found out. They worked it out. Also there was an American scientist who found out what I told you that the first chakra is made of carbon. Carbon has 4 valancies. I said now you do one thing, take a photograph of a carbon atom and make a model of it. If you see the model from the right to the left, you will see a Swastika. When you see from left to right what you see will be Omkara. And if you see from down to up you will see alpha and omega. You will see omega first and then alpha. Now Christ has said I am the Alpha and I am the Omega. Ganesha also is Omkara. So, Ganesha incarnated as Christ. We don't know that this Ganesha is acting within us. These things are not so much hanging in the air, deities and all but they are within us. They stay within us and for which at least as Indians we must open out minds. As Western people I have tried to open their minds, doctors in Russia, Bulgaria, also in Romania, I have seen these doctors were amazed when I told them about this and that I could explain so many things, then and they are at it now. They have started working at it. They are not so money-oriented. Actually Russians are not so Money-oriented. So they are working at it and they are trying to prove whatever I have said. Instead of doubting me, and saying how Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 17

 can it happen, who were the deity. In the same way you cannot say, certain medicines, how they work. Now take aspirin. You cannot say what aspirin does. But it does help. In the same way we will see how this vibrations of the Divine help you, you will be amazed. You can feel them on your finger tips, on the palm and even a child can say what centres they are catching. You will know about yourself and about others because you become collectively conscious. You become a very intense personality. Sitting down here you can feel everyone and you can know, also you cannot find out but here you can know on the finger tips, you can know and find it. All those powers are within you. You don't know how you are you don't know about it. What wealth, what spirituality lies within Indians. They are tremendous, I must tell you when your spirit stan the same time you become extremely compassionate and all, You can, you see, give up anything you want because you start seeing what is destructive. don't have to go to the rigmarole of this diagnosis, what is the diagnosis. But then you ds in your attention you become a very powerful person, a very valued person. At You have to exercise your realisation otherwise it cannot work. You cannot pay for it. It is divine love for which you cannot pay, which people do not understand it. If the Guru is paid by you, he cannot be your Guru, he is your servant, you cannot pay for it, it's an evolutionary process, it's a living process of evolution. For example if you have a seed in your hand and you put it in the mother earth, it will sprout by itself, spontaneously. You don't have to stand head. Because the mother earth has the power to sprout it and the built in seed has the powers. In the same way you are all capable of getting your self realisation. I say you should really open your mind, this knowledge which was not available to us, before. I know, that 300 years ago when Britishers were here you had to have English and their medicine. But even I was happy to know that about Kundalini. At least they talk about Kundalini and say self your on there is a power acting. Something, somewhere we find. But unless and until you get your realisation, you cannot do anything about yourself or about others. Then you can cure people. You can give them realisation and you enjoy the real peace. You enjoy the real peace of your being when you become thoughtlessly aware. Then you enjoy yourself fully and that enjoyment is so Divine that cannot be described and this enjoyment you all can have if you stay in that state of self realisation. Some people grow so fast. But some people require to meditate and then it works out. Especially people who are supposed to be intellectuals, who have conditionings of medical science or any science. There is a great cloud here which has to be crossed. But once you understand how it works, how it acts you are amazed. It's no miracle as such but one has to see for yourself and understand. Because if you do not open your mind, nobody can force you. I am very happy today that I could speak to the medical professionals and medical students and such august company here. I could never imagine that any day I will be able to address you, because, you see, I was selected for Balakram Medical college, only six girls were selected in merit, but they rejected me because I was not from north. So I went to, I travelled up to Lahore, and went and saw the principal and I told him that this is sheer injustice because you say that this is for the whole of India. Then how can you say that I am not a Punjabi. I can speak Punjabi very well. You will have to select me. So, he said from where do you come? I said from Nagpur. He said, oh, my god, you are the daughter of such and such person. Yes I am because my mother was a serving in the Mental Hospital, both of them were there. He said if there is one girl who does not come, then I will Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 18

 admit you and that's how I was there. A wonderful college it was, we had very nice lecturers and all but, you see then this problem started and I came to Delhi and then my parents married me off. My husband said you want to study more, I said I do, he said there is no need for it and that's that. I just wanted to know what you call what, just wanted to know the names then I did psychology some I should say some dictionaries.That's how I came to know what's called what because there is no name, in the Divine. It is only name given by doctors, Psychologists. So, to talk to them, I wanted to have that. It's a fact that if you are scientists and doctors you can change such a lot of these ideas and dogmas that are sitting on your head. For example, now genes is very important nowadays, people are talking about genes is a myth, they are carrying, also that genes are inherited and cannot be cured. In Sahaja Yoga it can be cured. The complete data changes with Sahaja Yoga and that's how a very nasty person can be changed. That's the point of changing the data base and it works out. We have worked it and it has been proved. But to prove it you see, the scientific method is that at least 100 doctors must approve, and there should be 2000 disciples and all. But at least for yourself you first of all achieve it and then see for yourself how many powers you have in every walk of life because it is the totality I am talking about it's not one person here, one person there, it's totality. May God Bless You. Voi. VIlII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze 19

 Easter Puja Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 14-4-96 Calcutta (Synopsis) (Translation From Hindi) Easter is an important day for Sahaja Yoga because Jesus Christ showed us that the resurrection of mankind is possible and for that resurrection, we should keep trying. His crucification also had great meaning that by crucifying Him the cross at the Agnya Chakra is a form of the Swastika. Jesus Christ was hung at the cross and there He gave up His life. At that time the most important thing He said was that wait for the Mother. Look out for the Mother, anyone may make out its meaning to be anything, but it is apparant that He said that I will send for you such a Shakti which will have three forms, Trigunatmika. It has been described very beautifully that there is one power which will give us comfort. The power that comforts us is the power of Mahakali, that comforts us, cures us of our illnesses and by which a lot of questions of our past get solved. The second power He sent was Mahasaraswati. He called Her the counsellor. One that will explain to us, make us understand. Yog Nirupa' from this power we will get knowledge, pure knowledge. The third power was of Mahalakshmi by which we get our redemption. In this way He spoke of three powers. Buddha also said I will send you Matreya, means three types of mothers together. People did not understand what Matreya was, so they made it Maitreya. This Matreya all together can only be in Adishakti. He must have called Adi Shakti the Primordial Mother but the people who wrote the Bible changed it to the Holy Ghost and made a pigeon in its place. Because the people who changed the Bible hated the women folk. They could not believe that a woman could do such a great thing. Because of that hatred, they made it the Holy Ghost and said a pigeon, means a messenger of peace. But they did not talk of a woman at all. In our Shastras it is written that there will be Mahamaya but you will not be able to recognise Her. To recognise Her also, you will need your self realisation. If you have nof received your self-realisation, you cannot recognise Her. In His life He said it as explicitly as He could. Out of those we don't know how many things they said and how many they didn't say. But still there were some truths, they could not change. For Sahaja Yoga, the coming of Jesus Christ was very important. He was an innocent child and it has been proved that He was an incarnation of Ganesha. Ganesha was incarnated only once, as Jesus Christ. These three, Buddha, Mahavira, and Jesus Christ, on the level at which they were realised, was that of sacrifice. They worked at the Virata and there was sacrifice at that level. They said that man should sacrifice. Man should do penance. Only then can he cross the Agnya Chakra and go out. To Cross the Agnya Chakra was very important because without that your Kundalini could not rise. The crossing of the Agnya Chakra was done by the resurrection of Christ. First He died, then He was resurrected. So for us, Easter has a special message that it is because of the resurrection of Christ that we have got our resurrection. The most difficult Chakra in man is the Agnya Chakra. Man keeps thinking all the time and by thinking all the time, his mind is like a bubble of thought and he cannot go beyond his thoughts. Only when you cross the Agnya do you go into thoughtlessness. That's why, had Christ not given up His life and got His resurrection, Sahaja Yoga would have been difficult. Divine Cool Breeze 20 Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7

 Work has been done by all the incarnations at their own place, at their own time, at their own level, but the work that was done by the resurrection of Christ was a wonderful thing. That's why it is not difficult to open the Agnya. There have been many Gurus, they did things because of whom people got enlightened, they got interested in Dharma and got interested in their self - realisation. Christ came to our country because the place where He came from, there the people had nothing subtle in their vision, they had no knowledge of their inner self, so He came to Kashmir and met King Shalivahan there. Shalivahan asked Him His name, so He said my name is Isa Maseeh, Maseeh meaning messenger. He said the country I come from, there the people are 'Mal Icha' meaning people who desire 'Mal' you can see, in the West, people, whatever programs they do they only desire dirt, they only like madness. If films, you see their feel they are mad people. So, in our country, people used to call them 'Mlechha' you meaning people who desire 'mal, Ichha'. He said they desire 'mal', so where should I go, there is knowledge of self here, so I will stay here. So Shalivahan told Him, you are such a realised soul you go back and in your own country, teach them the principle of purity. If you establish the principle of purity there, people will be rid of their desire for dirt. He went back and somehow stayed for three and a half years before He was caught and then His crucified. That was destined for Him, He had to do it. But the way in which He gave up life, shows us that He was a great personality. In such a short span of time, three and a half years, in life the things He did were great. That is there, that He could not give self-realisation to others. But at that time, there were not such seekers there at that time like you are. I am lucky, and so, this job that was done was the job before self-realisation. People realised that beyond this life also there is another life. He said that you will have to be born again. He told them about resurrection. Here also they say like a bird comes out of an egg, there is another life when it undergoes a transformation and gets power, then it can fly and go anywhere in the world. It gets that power. You are aware of how from Siberia birds fly and come to India. In the winters, they come here and in the summers they go back there. They don't have any radar, or any aeroplane. How do they come, and they come to the right place to the same lake where they came the last time, their children also come there. Once they experimented and hid some children, but they managed to find their children. Some could not even find their children, still the children flew and came to India. They had no one to tell them, still they managed. That's why they say the Paramachaitanya has set up everything so beautifully, so that we get our resurrection. I call it the Blossom time. So many of you are sitting here were there so many people and thousands of times more than this in other places. It is very surprising that before Christ there were such few people nor did anyone know what self- realisation is and why should one get their Self-realisation. Even today in our country there are blind people who do not understand this. But because of the great souls who have been in this country, one thing has happened that people are aware of this. That we have to be born again, and we have to know ourselves. All the Sufis say the same. Not only this, but all the shastras, any religion, they all say the same thing. Today is very auspicious for us, because it is the day of Bengal's new year and so we can talk about the resurrection of Bengal today. Today, that we have celebrated the Easter Puja in Bengal, this Puja will definitely benefit Bengal. The culture and civilisation here, the freedom Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze 21

 fighters here, the great saints here, the people who had put India at a very high level, today the same people are going from where to where. The Western regime finished. They have gone back, but still we are following the Western ways to such an extent, have accepted it in such a manner we do not know where we have reached, we don't know what their condition is, what they have achieved. Lot of Christians feel that Jesus Christ was born in England and to wear a 'dhoti' is to be a Hindu. These type of vivid imaginations have sat on our head and we feel that by being English we can understand Christ very closely. These people have now understood that our heritage, our thinking, our attitude towards righteousness is very subtle and beautiful and such people can take to Sahaja Yoga very easily, that you have seen. But Sahaja Yogis should try to stay absolutely collective and this message of resurrection they should spread everywhere. Because now your country, the state it is in, its condition cannot be improved except by change, by knowledge of self. You may do anything , by putting cables in the sky, nothing will happen. Each person should think about to how many people we talk about Sahaja Yoga. Jesus Chris was all alone. He had no one with Him. He had only twelve disciples. Out of them, some were like this and like that, half hearted. On that also, He worked a lot and a very important message He gave by His resurrection. We are able to see His message from the outside only, that should actually work within us also. We have reached that level where we have been able to pierce through the fontanel bone area. He always spoke of forgiveness. Buddha always spoke of compassion. They always spoke of forgiveness that you should be able to forgive everyone. He himself, while on the cross, He prayed and said, "Forgive them for they know not what they do" so forgive them. In that state, where people had dug nails into Him and put a crown of thorns on His head, at that time also, with such love He said this, that, forgive them for they know not what they do. If anyone does something wrong in Sahaja Yoga I get worried. On one side is Christ, on the other is Ganesha and Hanumana and Bhairav Nath. They are not able to get out of the hold of these four. Anyone who does anything slightly wrong, if he does wrong in work, in money, I keep looking after them, that nothing bad should happen to them. Because, when you come into something that is pure see like this white sheet here. If there is any mark on this white sheet it will stand out. In the same way it makes you absolutely pure and any fault in you shows out. The fault gets caught at once and one doesn't know how you may get punished. This is a big difficulty. Whereas in His time He gave up His life, but for me He said that if you say anything about me alright, but if you speak of anything against Adi Shakti, there will be no one worse than me. I see that people make a lot of mistakes. They cannot set it right. If have regarded me as your Mother, I respect you sentiments, then even if people bother you me, I say never mind, they have called me their Mother. But these people do not understand all this. If we have been resurrected, you should remember, that this is due to a great deal of dedication of our past life, a great amount of hard work of our past life, respect, due to all this the fruits of our labour is what we have got now. In this life when you have got these special blessings very special, what people thought could never happen, that what you have received, should take care not to do anything wrong. You should not do anything wrong, because you if you do so, your purity gets caught. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 22

 I am not scaring you but telling you the truth. That whatever you do, it should be done with great love, and done with great enjoyment. It can happen that someone is bothering you. Never mind, how long can he bother you, because the person who bothers you, he gets straightened. That's why at any level, in any area, never forget that you are a Sahaja Yogi. Then, if someone is like that, there is nothing to be scared of. If you have to, feel scared for him, say God please save him, what will happen to him. Because you are in the kingdom of God and in that state keeping this in mind, you should know that you are not alone now. You re absolutely secure. Why are you bothered in that state of security? When Jesus Christ was on the cross, He was not bothered, then what has happened to you. See, you are sitting at a great height. Problems keep playing down in front of you, do not even look at them. But if all the time you are thinking about problems, you should understand that there is something lacking with you, you should introspect. You should introspect that we are Sahaja Yogis with that, inside us a source of peace, and a sense of self-confidence prevails that people only can understand. You don't have to speak anything, you don't have to fight or anything, you just keep silent. If you are silent, then the Paramachaitanya takes charge of everything, and each is more powerful than the other.But if the fault is within you, they will say, set him straight. In this way, today, we have to see, that Jesus Christ's short life span of thirty five years, how He wandered and came to India and how much He did in His life. In His name, people have done so many things made so many institutions, said we are doing this and that. It is all an untruth. In His mouth also they put wrong things. In this ostentatious religion there is nothing you can see that. That diamond which they hid is shining within you. That is set in Agnya. The more your power of forgiveness grows, that much you see, you will go into the Sahasrar. your Now, the problem with the Christians is that since they were born as Christians, they can only life think of Christianity. If you have died in the name of God and you have given up your for it. Now, after 500 years, what will emerge from your grave, just think about it. Just imagine what will emerge after 500 years. If you are buried and resurrected then your bone will emerge? A lot of people believe this. This belief is so strong, that some people came to me from Bosnia, I told them, why are you going on fighting so much? You are Muslims, you believe in a formless God. Why are you fighting for land ? They said in our ancient religious text it is written if you die in the name of God, then this will happen. I said first where is the name of God in this you tell me. Secondly, Hindus also, Hindus know only Krishna, Shiva. Now, you are away from all this, you are beyond all this, you have become Sufis. In everything, look for the truth, the essence, there are lots of things in these religions which are untrue. Take for example Christianity and Islam. When you die they bury the body they believe that. Then, when you resurrect, this body will emerge from your grave and your resurrection will die and resurrect after 500 years, what will come out of your grave? All these bhoots will emerge from the ground of these graves. Our Shastras are right. That after death, the soul comes out and it comes in another body. But to think that after 500 years it will resurrect, is a great stupidity. Because of this there is fighting all over. Today in Israel there is fighting, tomorrow somewhere else. Wherever you go, there is fighting in the name of religion, no religion is different. They are all interlinked and this is quite self evident. Everyone has said that. Then why this fighting? That is because some people feel that they are happen. If you Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 Divine Cool Breeze 23

 responsible for this 'Dharna Makand' and they do all this. You just think that Jesus Christ said a very great thing " Thou shall not have adulterous eyes". It is such a subtle thing. Not adultery, but even adulterous eyes. In the West, people are looking here, and looking there, someone is looking at the men, someone is looking at the womnen and this is just going on. This sort of words that He said, who listened to Him ? Who believed Him ? No one. The great reason is only one, that they did not get their self realisation. Had they received their self realisation, when people get their self realisation, then their attention gets fixed and they are in complete peace and bliss. But what Jesus Christ said, by saying it could not happen and in the West, this illness is more than anything then what do we understand from this? Whatever he said, we are not able to do. In every religion, it is the same. There is no religion, in which people don't say something and do something else. The reason is that they are without meaning. Means that what they are, they have no meaning to it. Somebody will say he is a Sikh but he will drink alcohol. Somebody will say I am a Christian, but he will have roving eyes. Somebaody will say I am a Jain, but he will have a cloth shop. What they are not supposed to do, they will do. The reason for this is that after receiving your self-realisation, if not respect your self-realisation, you only get lots of difficulties and before this the difficulties you face you do not feel. But now, you have become sensitive. That's why we should understand that this great thing we have received, by that we have become beautified. So in that, like when Jesus Christ arose from the grave, His face was even more radiant. His words became even more beautiful. His words had even more meaning. In the same way, for us He was a great Sahaja Yogi. But He did not receive anything, He had already received it. For He gave up His life, so that your Agnya Chakra could be opened. One should stay away from vices such as egoism. By introspecting, you will be able to understand that God knows for what reason you are thinking so mighty of yourself. In Sahaja Yoga, there is complete permission for a married life. Although Jesus Christ did not get married, He did not need to but absolutely, for everything there is room in Sahaja Yoga. And because of this permission, for the outside, you can live like ordinary people although from the inside you are unlike them and do you you you are aware of your uniqueness just like Jesus Christ was aware of His uniqueness, just like the Sufis were aware of their uniqueness. Single handedly they fought with everyone and did so much for everyone. You have so many brothers and sisters all over the world. How much self-confidence you should have in yourself. You are not alone. Everyone is saying the same thing. Everyone has received the same thing. And when you receive this thing, you should understand its importance. There is nothing more precious than this. Although I am very happy that so much work has been done in Calcutta. There are so many Sahaja Yogis here, there is so much love and affection between them, there are no quarrels between them, no differences amongst them, that is a very big thing, and in this matter I feel that there is some special blessing of the Devi here that people have received Sahaja Yoga and are in it. Women also should work the way the men are working and when Sahaja Yoga will spread all around then you see that Bengal will become such a beautiful place. May God Bless You. Edited by Published by : Yogi Mahajan : Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029 Golden Arts, B -2/11 Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029. Printed by Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7 24 Divine Cool Breeze



----------------------

1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
ISSUE 6 &Z
VOLUME VIII
oe d into thelghtiess
STEness- min Aluays I tell yon meditacel reditate bechnse
ould beghobgtiess awareness: whereonto not teant
H.E SHMEt Nirmala Day
must kn
o nae to go beyond your
Irmala 3e
Birthday e
G Delhi, aaEM
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Shivratri Puja (Synopsis)
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Sydney, 3 March 96
Shri Shiva is the reflection of Sadashiva within us. Sadashiva is the God Almighty, the one
who sees the play of Adi Shakti. He is the father who is watching each one of His creation.
His support to Adi Shakti is entirely and fully strengthening. There's no doubt in His mind
about the capability of the Adi Shakti. But when he finds that in the play of Adi Shakti the
people or the world as such try to disturb Her or spoil Her work then He gets into His
wrathful He destroys all such people and maybe He destroys the whole world. On one side
He is wrathful and on the other side He is the ocean of compassion and joy. That's why when
He is reflected within us, we get our self-realisation. We get the light of our spirit we get into
the ocean of our joy.
He is the ocean of knowledge. Those who get their self-realisation get the knowledge of the
Divine, which is very subtle permeating into every atom and molecule. The power of this
knowledge is there. His style is such that in His compassion He forgives even very
Rakshas, if they dedicate themselves to him, because His compassion has no limits and
sometimes the same people who are blessed by Him try to trouble the devotees of Adi Shakti.
But it is just to create a drama. Unless and until there is some drama people won't understand.
We had to have Ramayana, Mahabharata, crucification of Christ and Mohammed being
tortured. All that drama was there because people don't remember. In the spiritual life of
human beings they have seen lots of drama between the blessings and the powers of the Adi
Shakti. As the time has moved, today in the history of spirituality a great discovery has been
made, that people can get their realisation in the collective en-mass. Thousands can get their
realisation. Now we should know what is this realization we have got. What does it mean and
what is the culminating point.
cruel
First of all the mind, about which we speak, and depend upon is a myth. There is nothing like
mind. Brain is reality, not the mind. Mind is created by us reacting to outside. Either we react
to conditionings or to our ego. Thus this mind is created like bubbles on the ocean of reality.
But that is not reality. With this mind whatever we decide we know is very limited, elusive
and sometimes shocking. The mind always moves in a linear direction, and because there is
no reality in it, it recoils and boomerangs. Thus all the enterprises, and projections we have
done so far it seems comes back to us. Whatever they discover comes back to us as a big
destructive power, or a very big shock. One has to decide what to do, how to get out of this
trap of our mind.
Kundalini is the solution. When She awakens She takes you beyond your mind. The first thing
is to go beyond your mind. With mind you will do many things but it will not be satisfying.
It will not be a solution, it will not help. When we start depending too much on our mind we
develop all kinds of physical, mental and emotional problems. The latest is the stress. They say
there is no solution for stress. But in Sahaja Yoga we find the solution, by crossing over this
mind.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 6 & 7
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-2.txt 
 It's like a barrier for our advancement. When you get your realisation you must understand
that your Kundalini has taken your attention beyond the mind. Now this reaction to outside
has come because we human beings have a prism-like brain or prism-like skull. When the
energy passes into it, it goes into bifurcations or refractions by which our attention goes out
and we react. If we react too much then these bubbles create a very horrible mind which can
lead to any kind of thing. It justifies itself, it pampers your ego. The ego and the conditioning
that creates this mind start oozing and this mind for the purpose of their fulfillment of all their
accumulation, of ideas and thoughts which has no backing which has no reality with it. It's
like we make the computer, ultimately we become salves of the computer. We make the
watches ourselves and then we become slaves of the watches. That's how it dominates human
beings. Howa person who has a very strong mind decides to destroy like Hitler did with some
idea, he can go on destroying, which has a very far fetched effect on our culture, on our
spirituality.
The first step is to become thoughtlessly aware, where you cross your mind. You go above
your mind. Mind cannot affect you. This is the first stage, as we call it thoughtless awareness.
Second one is where you start seeing the working of this Param Chaitanya, of this all
pervading power and you start becoming aware that there is lot of truth in what Shri Mataji
That there is this power which works out many things. It works out miraculously so
says.
many things for you. It gives you blessings, it guides you, it helps you. In so many ways it
helps you.. It gives you good health, good wealth and also a very good society,
beautiful
of
very
people in the collective. All that you can see clearly is happening here.
This happening of achieving thoughtless awareness is very simple and easy. But to maintain
at that point is difficult. We still react and we think. Anything you see, you react. To get to
that point in thoughtless awareness is first to change your attention. For example once we
were climbing a very high mountain to see a temple called Palitana. We were really tired
because we had to climb many steps and when we went up there was a beautiful canopy made
of marble, so we just lay down there. They were very tired and they were grudging that what
is this kind of a temple, while I looked up and I saw lots of beautiful elephants were carved
so I told my son-in-law that they all have tails of different types. He said "Mummy, we are
all dying, how can you think of the tails of elephants. It was just to divert their attention from
the tiredness that I told them why not see the tails of elephants.
you are putting your attention so much to outside all the time then you must first of
also divert your attention. For example you see these beautifully made things. Just try to enjoy
the beauty. There are beautiful carpets here, just look at them without thinking. Because they
God,
When
don't belong to you so no headache. Otherwise if it belongs to you, you will think, "O my
I am spreading them here, what will happen". That's common human reaction. But if it doesn't
belong to you then you can watch it nicely. Now you watch it and don't think, you will be
his
put
joy, has exuberance into it. You will be amazed that after realization this exuberance will feel
you
amazed when you see the beauty which is inside this. You will see the artist who has
into you and a cool kind of relaxation will come into you, and this Kundalini will rise and
will become steady in thoughtless awareness. Whenever you look at any beautiful thing, even
today's election. Just watch the man who has been elected. Watching him itself gives him
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
2.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-3.txt 
 blessings, gives him better ideas. You get ideas also which are coming from reality, which are
there. How to make this man a successful person, or how to make the country a successful
democracy. All these things happen when your attention is diverted from criticizing, from
reacting. Just you watch. Become the witness. Try to witness everything. It's not so practised,
I have seen even when we achieve our realisation we don't realize that we have to witness
everything. When you start witnessing through your spirit, then you don't see the bad points
of another, you see the good points. You just pick up the person with very good points. Once
you see that, the witness state enlarges, and you start enjoying another person. You start
enjoying everything that is there. Even a small blade of grass you can enjoy, if you have that
capacity. In Japan, Zen system started on these lines, and Viditama made a garden out of
moss, different moss and there were little, little flowers also. There was hardly about 5 feet of
the garden. It looks like the shape of a question mark. You have to go on a lift and reach that
platform on top of a hill or a mountain. When you start seeing it, your thought stops, because
such a marvelous thing. When you put attention to His creation your thoughts stop. You must
practise to find out what stops your thoughts, what makes you the witness. Once you develop
this habit will station yourself nicely in the thoughtless awareness, then you start
watching. How Sahaja Yoga has helped you, how it has been blissful what you have achieved
through Sahaja Yoga. If you just start watching it everywhere you will be amazed how this
Param Chaitanya acts.
you
Now this Param Chaitanya has become active because of Krita Yuga. You can see from the
way it is playing around with vibrations around me, so many photographs of mine where
these vibrations are there. Also you have seen the photographs of so many Sahaja Yogis sitting
before me, on their head my name is written in Arabic language. You have seen in so many
ways by which you can find out there is the play of the Divine. Now the mind will still try
to say somethings. Don't listen. Just watch. The effect of Sahaja Yoga you should watch on
yourself and on your body. Don't think about it but just watch it and you will be amazed how
you have changed.
It is this witness state which takes you to another realm we call as doubtless awareness. At that
stage you can become so empowered that you can give realisation to others. You can give
complete knowledge about Sahaja Yoga. You can talk to them. Also you emit. Your whole
spiritual state becomes so much blissful, you become so powerful, so compassionate, and so
loving, so balanced completely cleansed of all the destructive, depressive ideas. Then you
really stand up as a great Sahaji who can do tremendous work, like recently I heard that
Germans and Austrians are now going to Israel, because they think Jews were killed by their
fore-fathers, and there's a big centre now started in Israel. Just imagine how these people, once
they reach that state go to countries single handed, they have done so much. Same in Turkey,
same in places which are very tremendously remote in South Africa. Because from inside they
become completely confident in thoughtless awareness as doubtlessly aware. Once you start
growing by meditative attention then your attention becomes enlightened.
Now the job is to motivate your attention. It's not just to enjoy, but to motivate it. To put it
to proper use. Supposing you have some problem on a national basis, you all can put your
attention to that and things will work out, because you are the channel of this all pervading
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-4.txt 
 power which is trying to create a new world for you, new human beings. And this evolution
can take place very fast if you all decide that whatever we now have within ourselves we
should motivate it and direct it and put this attention to some use. Whatever wealth we have
it should not be wasted.
The main question today is what is God's realisation. First is the self-realisation and then there
are many ambitious people who want to be God realized. First and foremost thing we should
know that human beings cannot become God. It's not the becoming of it . You have not also
in a way become Spirit because Spirit is emitting through you, using you, giving you, looking
after
become the Spirit there won't be any body left. So with this body intact, the
If
you.
Spirit is acting through this body, giving you all the light. But one cannot become God
Almighty, this one has to understand very clearly. God's realisation is to know about God. To
know about God is to know how His powers are working, how He controls, by becoming part
and parcel of God Almighty. Like my finger does not know about my brain but it acts
according to my brain. The finger cannot become the brain but it has to act absolutely
according to my brain because it is so connected. It is so one. Here when you have God's
realisation
you
know about the brain, you know about God. You know about His powers, you
you
know everything about Him. As far as I am concerned it is a difficult task for you, because
I am a Mahamaya. It is difficult for you to know each and every thing about me. I am quite
an elusive person, and whatever is do or achieve it is just for you to see and understand that
after all it is Adi Shakti. She can do all these things. You can also do all the things but you
cannot become me, but you have to know through love, through devotion, through prayers,
to know the God's powers is the way you are God realised. Then you can control the nature,
you can control everything. If you have that knowledge within you about God, for that a
complete humility is needed. You cannot become God, you cannot become God Almighty,
you cannot become the deities. But definitely you can become God realised, means God acts
through you, uses you as His power, His channel and that you know what He is doing to you,
what He is telling, what His vision is, and what is the information. The connection is like that.
Many people in Sahaja Yoga have been benefitted but they don't know how they have been
benefitted. What has worked it out, how it has worked it out. What connection of theirs has
helped them. Once you know that clearly how things are working out with what power you
have achieved it then it's God's realisation. Such people become extremely powerful in the
sense that they can control so many things. There have been many saints of that kind. But
sometimes they fell from that and developed their ego. They didn't have their own humility,
that devotion, that dedication, that surrendering. They fell down, they become quite proud of
their achievements and they don't want to give it to anyone. They think that they have
achieved it with great difficulties and why should they give it to others. Such people are not
going to rise very high. But you people who have got your realisation and who are humble
who know that out of humility only you are going to achieve your surrendering. Islam means
surrender. Mohammed Sahib has talked about Islam, meaning you surrender. If
surrender you can never know God. He has clearly said that unless and until you know
yourself you will not know about God.
cannot
you
As Sahajis you have to know all the little things and big things and all the great visions that
you can do it because of the Grace of God, because of His blessings, because of His love for
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-5.txt 
 you. That you have entered into the Kingdom of God. I may say you have entered and
achieved that state but still you are not there. Like if I tell somebody that now you are in
Australia. He is not in Australia but I can say you are in Australia. So he believes I am in
Australia'. That's not the way. You have to be in Australia, then you have to know about
Australia, you have to know what sort of climate it is, what sort of place it is.
One of the qualities of Shiva is complete detachment and that is what you have to develop is
to become completely detached. Detachment does not mean that you neglect anything. I've
explained to you many times that like the sap in the tree rises, goes to various places and then
evaporates or then goes back to Mother Earth. In the same way your detachment should be.
If you get attached because it's your son, if you get attached because he is Australian or maybe
he belongs to a certain family or certain class then you are still limited. All these limitations
have to be dropped if you have to cross over. These limitations create such a big load that
whatever I may try, whatever you may try you cannot stay in thoughtless awareness. That's
a very beautiful state in which all of you should be there. In that you are not dominating or
compromising. You stand on your own legs and you know for definite that you are not
swayed away by any idea, any domination or any subjection of yours by anyone. So you
become completely a free bird.Then it becomes your job to achieve your flight. One flight is
to the thoughtless awareness. The second one is up to the doubtless awareness. The third
up.
one is to God's realisation. I have seen people who are very close to me also don't understand.
They behave in such a manner as if now they have become Gods. So egoistical
I am amazed at them. Then they have to leave Sahaja Yoga.
they are that
Even if I praise you too much, if I say anything too much you shouldn't get pampered. It's a
testing ground, or otherwise also if I tell you that this is not good you should improve on this,
should not mind, because I have to do it, that's my job and your job is to listen to me,
you
because I have nothing to gain from you. I do not ask for anything. What I want is that you
all should get all my powers. You may not become what I am, but please try to get all the
powers that I have, which is not a difficult thing. This is what is God's realisation. That's what
is to know Shiva and Sadashiva. Through the Shiva you know Sadashiva. You see the
reflection and from reflection you know who is the original. From the reflection you learn.
Thus you reach that state where you think that now you are definitely settled in the Kingdom
of God and that you can see God, you can feel God, you can understand God, and
love God.
you can
May God Bless You.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol, VIII Issue 6 & 7
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-6.txt 
 BIRTHDAY PUJA
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Synopsis)
21/03/1996, New Delhi
People don't know what this mind is. It is very easy to understand for Sahaja Yogis that we
are the ones who react to everything that is outside. The reason is, we have two horrible
tendencies, one which is an Ego and another tendency is that we are being trained that
or we can call it the Superego or the conditionings. Both the things, our Ego and conditionings
are all the time acting outside. This reaction which is built in within us is just like bubbles in
the ocean. And these bubbles keep us away from reality. These bubbles are of thoughts and
they just blast you all the time in your head and you don't know why they are coming. When
you depend on this artificial mind of yours then you have no discretion as to understarnd what
is good and what is bad. This mind is the one where all kinds of evil things start. All kinds
of quarrels, fights and posessiveness, lastly the war also comes there. It is in this mind only
which is nothing but a myth, all these concrete destructive ideas somehow or other come up
and then they start growing and growing. Then you find people whom you can impress also
put ideas into their heads. By reading they learn or by their lectures or by mesmerism
whatever kinds of things they can do. They put your mind into such a frame that you accept
these destructive ideas. For yourself individually or maybe for the collective.
way
This mind is just a myth and we are working through this mind. We are all the time satisfying
ourselves by saying 'oh that's my mind, my mind wants it. Like one Indian Sahaja Yogi went
to America. And he told me that Americans are mad after their mind. I said what do
you
mean. He said, I gave money to my wife to buy one shirt for me. She went and bought some
skirts. She has many skirts but she bought some skirts. So I asked her, why did you buy the
skirts. She said, my mind said that you should buy the skirts, so I bought skirts. The mind can
take you to all kinds of wrong things because it has no connection with reality firstly. Secondly
it is a mythical thing. Absolutely mythical. People think that whatever they have created it is
out of their mind. It is a wrong idea. All great scientists, say Einstein has said I was tired
trying to find out the theory of relativity. He had some concept, like all scientists take up some
sort of a concept and they try to build up their research on that. One day he was playing with
the soap bubbles like a small child. And suddenly from somewhere unknown, he says, the
theory of relativity dawned upon him. Many scientists have said that they don't know from
where they get this idea. It is a special study now people are doing, to find out how these
scientists got these things and in a very Sahaj manner. Even the way penicillin was discovered
or anything was discovered by these people was not through the probing or manipulation of
the mind but through some unknown force it came into their mind and that's what they
thought that this was from their mind, even Newton realised that it is coming from something,
some source which I am not aware of. As Sahaja Yogis you know it is the source of the divine
power which is all pervading. The Paramchaitanya. "You know, because you can feel it. You
know it is there. But even when know, must know you have to go beyond your mind
minimum. Always I tell you 'meditate!, meditate!" because you
should be in thoughtless awareness, where you do not react". So what happens, you become
you
you
you
into thoughtless awareness -
a witness. And you become the witmess of the whole drama, of the whole scene and
are
Divine Cool Breeze
6.
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-7.txt 
 absolutely at ease with yourself. No problem. What you are doing, that you become an
instrument of this Paramchaitanya of this All-Pervading-Power. You are just watching, you are
a witness and as watching everything you realise that whatever you watch cannot react on
you. But you know what it is. And this is what, is the state in which you understand the
reality of the whole situation. I have told you many times, that if you are standing in the water
you are afraid that the waves might kill you. But supposing you get into a boat then you can
watch those waves as something beautiful. If you learn how to swim you can jump and bring
back people who are getting drowned. This is exactly what happens when you are in that state
that
you can give realisation to others. You can put them in connection with the divine power
but first of all you must know how to become thoughtlessly aware. Some people say 'Mother,
for a second only we become, for two seconds we become'. Because you see, in our mind.
Even if you come to Sahaja Yoga you have so many conditionings to begin with. First of all,
if
you are born in India then you are identified with India. If you are born in England you
are identified with England. One thing I have noticed about Sahaja Yogis, once they get out
of this nonsense of this mind first thing they start criticizing the way they have been living in
the atmosphere. For example they say This is Indian, this is what the Indians are'. If they are
British, they say These are the British, you see
The mind itself, starts seing, the mind itself sees that it is a myth. And then the cheating that
takes place all the time, that the intelligence that cheats itself, stops. You start seing the thing
in a proper, full manner, because you don't react. To react, is a sign of a person who is very
conditioned. You can be conditioned by many other things like, you are born in a particular
religion. What has religion to do now a days with human beings? There is no real religion
anywhere. It has become like a money orientation or power orientation. That's why they are
all fighting among themselves. And you know for definite that no religion is exclusive. But
they fight. The reason is, the mind is conditioned that you must fight for your religion. Now,
they have no religion within. There is no religion that is working out in their lives. They might
be the most corrupt, most immoral people but they belong to a particular religion, like a club.
And then they start identifying themselves at something and they have a right to do these
things because they belong to a particular religion. Now there are people who can really use
this mind. Though it is artificial. In modern times you are using so many artificial things, and
this artificiality can creep into everything. Like plastic. This mind can penetrate into anything
and it penetrates into the minds of people. That's how Hitler managed all the young people
of Germany.All these people, who have been able to destroy the reasoning which is logical-
not through the mind. If it is through the mind it's no logic. It is just a reasoning that we can
see clearly stupidity.
Because this mind, which is just a bubble is so limited that it cannot comprehend the beauty,
the glory, the expanse of reality. This mind is just a collection of all the garbage which we
have to somehow or other deny and tell ourselves that I have to go beyond my mind. So called
mind of mine has done no good for me. This mind of mine which has been all the time
controlling me is just like the watch we have made and it is controlling us or like the computer
that controls us. We have to be careful that we are the ones who have created this mind and
this mind has no business to control us.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Many people try to control the mind. There is a way of doing it that I'll control my
try to understand, how will you control the mind? Only through mind ! Either by Ego or by
conditioning. You have no means of controlling your mind because it is the mind which
mind. Now
your
have created. And that is just existing there which you cannot control, though you might
you
think, I can control. "You have to go beyond this mind. And to go beyond this mind the most
helpful thing is Kundalini-awakening. Because She passes through your limbic area, pierces
through your fontanel-bone-area and just takes you away, out, into the realm of reality." And
the 'Yoga' takes place between your brain, I should say, your heart, with this all pervading
power. She is the one which connects. She is the one who does it. Many people are doing Sahaj
Yog, I know that. But it is difficult for them, sometimes, to get to meditation, to establish this
thoughtless awareness, which is an extremely important state, which you all should achieve.
As long as you are in the turmoil of mind you cannot progress.Whatever is created out of their
mind, has no reality in it, is very limited and is also sometimes very repulsive. Because with
this mind people start thinking, I'm such and such now you become, supposing-I don't know
what position - but supposing you become the governor. Then you think you can do what you
like because you have become the governor. This mind doesn't know that you have become
the governor, you are not the governor. This governorship is ruling you. Not that you are
ruling the governorship. Once these ideas come into your head, you start behaving in a
manner in which you should not behave. Even among Sahaja Yogis there are leaders. Leaders
also start sometimes thinking I am a leader'. It's a myth, absolute myth. Leadership in Sahaja
Yoga is an absolute myth. But once they know they are leaders, they become sort of absolutely
mindful and full of thoughts. Thoughts, how to dominate, how to control. When they start
controlling others, then you must know that it is the mind which is telling them to control.
Why to control anyone? If you are a real Sahaja Yogi, there is no need to control. There is no
need to manoeuvre, to manipulate. Now, once your attention goes beyond the mind - only the
Sahaja Yogis will understand this point very clearly. When this mind goes beyond the
thoughts, then the manipulation of the attention is very important. Then whatever you
manipulate means you take this attention to this or to that. You will be surprised how dynamic
you become, how effective you become and how knowledgeable you become. Because once
you can take this attention to anything you want, immediately there is light on that issue, on
that person, on that problem and you see how it works out, how it helps.
In Sahaja Yoga you have said "Mother, there have been lots of miracles with your attention'
or something like that. I agree, but your attention also is quite capable of doing things which
normal people can't do. Because now your attention is purified firstly, secondly it is
manipulated with the divine power and is manifesting it's powers. Before that, I have seen
people who come to Sahaj Yog, they send me letters of crying "Mother, this is happening, that
is happening, my father is sick and my leg is paining, my hands are paining, all kinds of
things. Not only on the physical level, but also on mental level and all sort of things they go
on. They sometimes write to me such long letters, I don't know how to read them. There is
nothing to write so much. But they do, because at that stage they are still reacting and they
don't know what to do. They go to such a limit, that they think that Sahaja Yoga is like a
contract. Now I have come to Sahaj Yog, I must get this. This must happen. Only they come
to Sahaja Yoga then they will think it's a contract and they must get this and they must get
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
8.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-9.txt 
 that help. All this kind of behaviour is not that of a Sahaja Yogi. In Sanskrit there is a very
good word "tathast", a very good word. "Tathast" means the one who is standing on the
shore and watching. That is the state in which you have to be. But as a result you do not
become a person who is not effective. You become extremely effective. If such people are there,
won't believe, so many things can happen. Wars can stop. Peace can spread. People who
you
are evil will be exposed. Now because it's such an "en masse" working out of Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja Yogis should not in any way find themselves in conflict with each other. Still I find
sometimes and I am amazed how people criticize other Sahaja Yogis or other leaders while
they themselves have problems. The reason is that once you start going beyond the mind you
automatically become introspective. And you start seeing "what's wrong with me - this mind
of mine now ". So better stand before the mirror or can even close your eyes and say "Now
Mr. Mind, what are you doing ?, What are you up to ? You face yourself. You stand out from
yourself and see for yourself and ask the mind "what are you up to ?" That's the way. Once
you are out of it you can control it.
You are celebrating my birthday. Now I am supposed to be quite old though I don't think like
that, because I don't think. One has to be beyond the mind. To think about yourself all the time
or to think about things which do not concern you sometimes and just try to put your mind
into a turmoil which is very dangerous these days. To stop your thought first of all in Sahaja
Yoga you should stop reading anything. Because if you start reading, then what happens
again, you start collecting thoughts from that book. I have seen many people whose mind is
nothing but the books from others or the words of others or quotation of others. They are
nowhere, you cannot find them. They are all lost people. He says so and that one says so.
When I was writing this book which you know that I have written now they were saying
"Mother, but Plato said like this and Rousseau said like that". I said, let them say whatever
they wanted to, I say what I know. Why should I refer to them. I don't have to go to the
libraries and read what Rousseau said, what Plato said. What I know, whatever I have
witnessed in my life I should write it clearly without thinking about what others have to say,
what others have described. And also this mind has another big big problem, that whatever
is written down in black and white becomes bible. Then whatever is done before is something
great. Like now, there is no Christ, there is no Mohammed Saheb and there is no Abraham,
there is no Krishna, there is no Rama, today. But they will think of what Rama said, what
Krishna said, then in Gita this he said. In Gita he has not said a word about Kundalini, so why
Mother is talking about Kundalini. Who wrote Gita? Never Shri Krishna, Christ never wrote
bible. Koran was not written by Mohammed Saheb. So what they have said why should
you
worry about that.
Instead of that you take the experience that everybody has said, that you are to be born again,
everybody has said, that you have to go beyond the mind also everyone has said. Why not do
that and then see for yourself. But people like and they are identified. Now there are Christians
who have come into Sahaja Yoga, still they are happy if it is Christ. Very happy. If they are
Hindus, it should be Krishna or Rama. If they are Moslems it should be Mohammed Saheb,
Fatima or someone. Otherwise they can't get out of it, it's very difficult. Their mind is such,
that is so much made from childhood you are told "You are a Moslem,you are a Moslem, you
are a Christian, you are a Christian, so they believe it. Supposing you are born in some other
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-10.txt 
 religion then what would have happened. You would have been something different. But this
mind has been injected with the ideas which have gone into your head and that's how you are
so much without any freedom. You are tied down with these conditionings. And that's what
I find among Sahaja Yogis also a very big conditioning that such and such thing is good or
bad, they decide. You see for yourself. For example, if I talk on Guru Nanak, then the Sikhs
will be very happy, but I talk on Christ, they won't be happy. I talked on Christ in Pune, so
they said, She is trying to convert everybody to Christianity. And when I was talking about
Shri Krishna in London, they said, She is making everybody a Hindu. This identification that
we have is coming to us so intensly from - we should say, it's like from the birth. All these
ideas still are there and we are not free. That doesn't mean that you should not have faith in
all these people. They were all great. We have great respect for them and understanding. But
first
be free. You be free to krow them. Your mind should be free. It should not be the
you
injections that are put into your heads that you cannot see the point. That's why they don't
enjoy also, I have seen, partly they enjoy, partly they don't. Sahaja Yoga is to give complete
freedom and also complete sense of freedom, so you respect the freedom of others. On the
whole you understand what freedom is. If that doesn't work out, then I would say that Sahaja
Yoga is of no use, because it should work out in such a manner that you should get rid of all
these conditionings you have had.
Take the second enemy of our's, is Mr. Ego, which is another headache and it works very
In many countries where already Ego has been bloated. This ego comes to us from different
angles and actually you will be surprised, from the deformity of our chakra. For some people
fast.
very important. We must get money, somehow or other. If I don't get money, what's
is
money
the use being in Sahaja Yoga. Money is very important. We are living in a money-oriented
world, no doubt. But I have told you, that what's the uIse of having money that makes you a
fool? Now see the countries which are very much money-oriented, who are supposed to be
very rich, all the Scandinavian countries, and Switzerland, whatever they might have done to
get that money, doesn't matter. But they are people with money. Young people are committing
suicide. There is a competition going on. They are very unhappy. Why? That means money
cannot bring happiness. Money, if that goes into your head also, then you cannot be a Sahaja
Yogi. But the money is there just for you, to use it, to express your love. Now, you go to the
shop, then you see something. This is very nice to be given to such and such person. You think
like that. It's a very sweet feeling you get there you can give this to this one, he needs it
much. When your mind becomes the other way round, I mean, when it is thoughtlessly aware
then you will buy something that is joygiving, something artistic, something beautiful,
something useful, to that person. It will be a kind of a mind that will be extremely full of
generosity. Enjoying it's generosity, and all the time it will guide you to the projection of your
attention to things by which you can give happiness to others. Small, small things, not
necessarily expensive things. If you have money, better spend money in buying things that
you can give to others, that you can express your love, your gratitude, your "shraddha". It is
remarkable how people give money to these Sadhus and Babas in thousands. Because,
very
very
in them it has come, that to satisfy their "shraddha", they must give it, and so they give. And
they have amassed and amassed so much money. They have no sense of it, they don't
understand the value of that. To them it is nothing but money. In the modern time the worst
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-11.txt 
 thing of Ego is money. I have seen people who are very rich, supposed to be great business
"walas" and something like that. They must meet me separately, we must come, Mother, and
see. But they are useless people, absolutely useless. They will come and tell me, you
having a loss in this, I'm having a loss in that, can you help us in this way or that way. I just
don't say anything to them but they have said, Mother we have recovered because of your
blessings maybe but it is stupid. Like Lao-Tze described that you are going through the
Yang-Tze River. It's beautiful. On the sides you see beautiful scenes, but you better be on the
boat and reach the ocean. In the same way, supposing we have to catch a plane, and we see
something very
effects of this mind are these, that we divert our attention to wrong things and waste our
know I'm
nice on the road, and get down there, how can we catch the plane? The side
into it . Ultimately we are not happy, as you know that in general wants are not
energy
satiable. It's the love that you give and the love that you receive which is not a love which is
entangled into anything with any purpose, with any idea but just to feel that love, pure love
within yourself and within others is the greatest gift of the Divine. All other things are useless,
you'll find. You find it every day. Today you want to have a car, all right have it, then you
want to have a house, have it. But you are not bothered about the car now you want to have
a house. Now you get the house, then you are not satisfied, then you want something else and
something else. Which is that "want" which is satisfying is this pure love, genuine love that
you feel for the others and others feel for you.
We have lots of conditionings of ego. In our country specially, to dominate the wife is one of
the greatest ego. I have seen people, how they tortured women, their wives and the children
of others, just because they think "I am a man". What do you get? You don't get any joy, you
car never be joyous. If you try to dominate another person you can never be joyous, never be
joyous. It's only through loving and affection and care that you can feel the joy, because joy
has these symptoms, joy is not domination or demanding or asking. These are not the signs
of a person who is joyous. The joyous person is that who just enjoys the caring, the loving, the
gentle relationship. And this is another point where I've seen Indian men specially and
specially in the north because of they say Muslem influence, the men are extremely
dominating to their wives. And they insult the wife also. So, the women here have become
idea
extremely dominating also. Naturally action has a reaction.This reaction itself is a wrong
and this reaction should be just dissolved into the feeling of pure love, the ocean of
compassion. For example I see on the streets of Delhi so many people begging, small children
are there and all that. And, now the feeling that I get is not of scolding them or getting angry
with them, maybe they are cheating, maybe anything after all everybody is cheating even
those who have lots of money are cheating. So what is there if these poor people are cheating,
doesn't matter. But the compassion is built in within me like this, that let me somehow get a
plot of land somewhere, let me organize some sort of a place where all these people who are
and
orphans can be put there and given all the help. And maybe from this bond of misery
poverty you might get lots of lotuses coming out. But the feeling has to be collective. I feel that
that will solve the problem of Delhi, but that doesn't mean that like other social workers
Like I have been connected with some social workers and I was amazed that it was nothing
but an ego-pampering-business, it has nothing to do with social workers. Hap hazard and
nothing deep in their attention to look after these people. With the great feeling of love and
way
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
11
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-12.txt 
 compassion we all can do it. One of my desires is this, if it is a desire of you all, it will work
out. It's very important, that they are also human beings and we have to look after them. But
for that one should not think that,"I will be the treasurer, I will be the president, and I will
be this. All this clergyship should go away, from the mind itself, otherwise you are not free,
know. Like there is a nice joke about it, that, somebody went to see the minister and the
you
private secretary was there attending to the people. And he was getting very angry with them
and all that. So, some villagers said "Who are you?", he said "don't you know I am P.A." Ah,
P. A. ho?", that means you are drunk, all right, we have nothing to say. So, a person with ego
behaves, like a person who has ego, is a person like a, you can say a drunkard or sometimes
like a lunatic also, really like a lunatic. Sometimes you have to meet them with a bargepole,
I told
Some of these people who have got awards for peace, one has to talk to them with
you.
a bargepole, because they might just jump on you. Just like a cat or could be like a leopard.
You don't know how they are built up.I don't know how they got these awards for peace, but
they have.
The peace is within ourselves. And this peace has to be retained and introspected and seen.
Are we peaceful? Or we are reacting. If we are reacting then we are not peaceful. But people
will say "Yes, yes I am very peaceful, but I have to react", then you are not peaceful. Just face
yourselves straight foreward and see for yourself that if you are peaceful, then this peace will
spread all over. It will help others. It gives them physical, mental, emotional and spiritual
peace.
You people have a great responsibility of coming to Sahaja Yoga. It is not just a certificate or
my badge that you are a Sahaja Yogi. I would like also women to see to this point, because
what I have seen about women is that they are mostly worried about their children and about
their husbands, jobs and things like that. But they are not worried about others, about people
who are around them. They have to also take to Sahaja style of life in which they expand their
love, expand their attention to other people and see how they can please others. This situation
used to be non existent in the western countries. I think they never knew that you should
please somebody for no reward or for no purpose. If you give any present to somebody they'll
say "Oh, what do you want? They cannot understand that somebody wants to express ones
love. Now mind has changed because Sahaja Yogis are there, and they are different people.
We should not adopt their stupid ideas that we can control people by giving them things, or
by giving them some sort of promises. We have actually to control ourselves and that control
can come if you do not allow your mind to control. That control is a comnplete freedom for
example now take an aeroplane which is perfectly built, which is absolutely alright then only
it can fly. In the same way if you are a perfect Sahaja Yogi then you'll have no problems in
dealing with any problem, with any circumstances, with any person whatsoever.
There are many Sahaja Yogis they say "Mother we don't want to take any active work because
we'll develop our ego". They think their balloon is alredy bloated out and if they do some
work their ego will go up, so they say, we don't want to do. It's not so. It's the love. You are
working for love.
Such an ocean of love is within you. How can you do without that? And this has to work out
at every level, whether it is your family, city, country or the whole world. This is the new.
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
12
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-13.txt 
 generation we have to create of people who believe in love which is truth, which is truth,
without love you cannot have truth. Because when you love somebody you know everything
about that person, in the same way when you love your country you know everything about
that country, but first you must love. Why people are now having problems, because they
don't love their country. If you love your country you will know what is the essence of
country, what are the problems of your country, what it is going through. And that intense
feeling of oneness itself will work out because after all you are connected to the Divine. But
with intensity you should feel for all these things that are really so destructive and
troublesome in these modern times.
your
I again want to thank you for celebrating this birthday and for all the sweetness you have
showered upon me. You are just like these beautiful flowers for me which are anxious all the
time to make you happy, to please you. Just like that I find you before me, beautiful flowers,
fragrant, with divinity I hope you all will understand your own value and work it out.
May God Bless You.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
13
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Lecture on Metascience and Medicine
by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
At Lady Harding Medical College, 9.4.96
Medical Conference Delhi
We are all seekers of the truth. But we don't know what to seek. The truth is eternal. We
cannot change it.. We cannot transform it. We have to know it. Knowing the truth is not
through your mind. Actually mind is a myth. You can only know it beyond your mind. This
is the truth which is absolute. No one can challenge it. Everybody knows that same truth.
This is the knowledge that was called Bodh, from where the word Buddha has come, this is
the knowledge that's called as Vidd from where Vedd has come. Thus, this knowledge we
have to know on our central nervous system, but not knowing it mentally. This is something
very important we have to learn that we have come to a state of human awareness. But it is
not yet complete, if it was, there would have been no problem. Why do we quarrel, why do
we
argue? So, there must be truth which is absolute and to find this truth is the aim of our
evolution. That is how we have to evolve in a higher state of self-realisation by which
your self-knowledge.
u get
you
You have to see it as a metascience because you have to open your minds like scientists. You
don't have to believe me like blind faith. We have had lots of problems with blind faith but
you have to see for yourself, judge for yourself, experiment with it and if you find that what
I am telling you is the truth, then you must believe in it like honest people. As people who
are to be benevolent to their family, to the country and to the whole world. Without evolution
we cannot reach that state. All the arrangement for evolution is made within ourself. The
power that resides in your triangular bone is called the Kundalini. It is the knowledge in this
country we have known for thousands and thousands of years. It is our heritage. As Indians,
we have inherited all this knowledge that somehow it was all closed down by the Western
influence. Of course, the Western influence is not harmful as far as the medicine is concerned.
But, we have to go beyond it to see that whatever knowledge we have is not only for one eye,
something for another eye, something specialising, going into such minute details, ultimately
reaching bifurcations. Sahaja Yoga is the synthesis of the whole thing. We go to the basics
within ourself. How do we get sick?
The basics are, what I am going to tell you, what you will not believe as I have told you. But,
please try to understand it as scientists. We have within ourself seven centres which are energy
centres which give us subtle energy for everything, for our mental, physical, emotional and
spiritual growth. When this energy from any one of these centres gets exhausted, then we get
ill.
Now, the question of cancer. Any one of our centres can be affected. The centre part is
Parasympathetic, and the left and the right are the sympathetic. Now what happens? We start
using, say the energy of a particular centre or of three centres, we start using that energy say,
by thinking too much, working too much, whichever way. It becomes a small space for the
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-15.txt 
 energy. Ultimately something can happen on the left side that's more emotional. Then it
breaks. When it breaks, the connection with the main is lost. This right-sided
on its own. When it becomes on its own, it starts growing. When this power Kundalini passes
through that centre, it not only brings them together but also nourishes them, also it integrates
with other centres.
becomes
energy
It's a fact, it has cured many blood cancer patients and other cancer patients it is a fact. But
understand it first of all we should know we are not in the basics. What we are doing, that
if the tree is sick we are treating the leaves or the flowers but we have to go to the root if we
have to treat the whole tree. This is the knowledge of the roots which we have in our country
for thousands of years. When the centres are nourished, they create balance.
There are many things still in the medical science that we don't know because I was a medical
student and I was quite worried as to how to talk to medical science people about it, which
is not mentioned in any of the books. For example we don't know that the sympathetic
systems are opposite to each other. In a way they are complementary but they are not in the
same function. The pitutary is the right sympathetic through a nadi called Pingala nadi and
the pineal is the left side, another nadi called Ida. These two are complementary in a way
that's why they are opposite in action. The one which is on the left side is for emotional side.
The right side is the one for action. What is the root cause of getting asthma, diabetes? The root
cause is our liver. We don't know much about it in medical science I assure you. Within the
centre which is called the Swadhistan chakra, the second centre which starts from the Nabhi,
the navel. This centre goes round and round and supplies the aortic plexus. This plexus is
looking after many things. It is looking after the liver, pancreas, spleen, kidneys. When we
start thinking we don't know from where this energy comes. This energy comes from the same
Swadhistan chakra. Same Swadhistan chakra gives this energy futuristic movement. So the
energy that is to be used is forced upon.
and
Liver, in very general terminology, collects all the poison of the body and passes heat into the
circulation. This liver gets affected because it is neglected. When this centre doesn't look after
it, it is neglected. Then the heat starts going all over. It cannot get into the blood so it starts
going upward, downward, sideways. First it goes to the right side of heart we call it the right
heart. According to Sahaja Yoga there are three hearts not only one. On the right side if the
heart centre which looks after your lungs gets hot so it affects the lungs in a way because it
affects that centre. That's how you get asthma. When you put ice on your liver, the ice is
cooling down your liver. It's a simple thing
The heat can move to your pancreas. When it goes to your pancreas, you get diabetes. This
diabetes is a common disease not only in doctors but lawyers and bureaucrates especially
because they plan too much. If you go to a village people take 3 to 4 spoons of sugar and the
spoon must stand at right angles otherwise they won't think it's tea. They never get any
diabetes. What is the reason? Whatever they earn, they spend and sleep off. They are not
bothered about insurance or anything.
The third thing that gets affected that is even much worse, is your spleen. Nowadays in the
morning when you get up, read the newspaper anybody who is sensitive can get a shock. So
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
15
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-16.txt 
 your sympathetic goes into activity and your spleen starts jumping. Poor spleen doesn't know
how to deal with such a hectic person. In America people even brush their teeth in the car.
They are so much in a hury, so time bound. We have become so speedy that our body cannot
follow that speed. This poor spleen cannot understand how to cope with this hectic
it goes mad and disease sets in called blood cancer. Definitely blood cancer has been cured,
that's fact. They were told, doctors were being very fair and honest that the patient will not
live more than one month. Nine years have passed but he is fine. This thing is such big
example for us to see that you don't have to take out the blood or anything. You just get cured
How? Because when the Kundalini goes to this Swadhistan Chakra she finds that
has no energy, so it supplies all the energy. By that energy, they get alright.
person,
poor thing
Then it comes to another which is our kidneys. When kidney fails they can't pass urine so put
them on dialysis. I haven't met one person who has been cured out of dialysis. Then comes
your intestine. Intestines also gets constricted. Then your digestion goes out. You get belching,
the worst that you get is constipation. This is the greatest curse of modern times that people
suffer from this horrible thing called constipation. It's very unnatural, but it happens. This
happens
and plays ternis and works very hard, he will get a heart attack. That's a fatal heart attack.
At that age you cannot be saved, later on also this kind of heat fermentation on the heart goes
on and people get massive heart attack.
when heat starts moving up. If a boy is about 21
25 years of age he drinks too much
Another thing which is also very dangerous is that this heat reaches the brain. On the right
side then brain also fails and you get paralysis on the right side. This is only with one centre.
When you put also ice here you will be surprised that paralysis can be cured.
Glasses can got rid of if you put ice on the back Agnya. Because Swadhistan chakra is here.
Sahaja Yoga discipline and ice can work it out. You can imagine with one centre how many
diseases you can cure especially you people who are working as doctors are quite open to it.
Basically if you do not understand that we just start treating somebody for the eyes, for
diabetes, nothing will work. They become really like psychosomatics which cannot be cured,
which has no solution. But the solution lies in the metascience of medicine where you have
to just accept it. Just accept as a hypothesis and then try, if it works, why not. Of course there
is one thing, you cannot take money for it because you are not using anything but the power
of a person who is Divine power That does not mean that doctors will starve because they
have no money. Because you see very few people actually come to Sahaja Yoga. Most of them
just believe in doctors only. For the smallest thing they will run to doctors. Also the rich people
will never come to Sahaja Yoga. What we have found that there is nothing to worry about
your profession. But once you become enlightened with this Divine power you yourself
you
become the power. I have known of a surgeon, he said Mother without doing much I am
performing surgery and it works out wonders because from my hand this power is flowing.
This power is there to cure, it heals. If they believe in Christ that He only healed 21 people.
But how He did, how He did that nobody knows. Even people who are artists, musicians, they
are so much endowed with energy that they start playing something miraculously better.
Actually it cannot be forced on anyone. You have to ask for it. Actually if you know of a
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
16
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-17.txt 
 person who is very adamant, arrogant, also who is an idiot, it won't work. We have to put
them in proper shape. Once they are in proper shape it works. But all of you have this power
and it is your birthright to have this self realisation.
They say this is my head, this is my body, this is my mind. Who is the owner of this mind?
You ask the doctor who runs your heart? He will say autonomous nervous system. Alright
who is this auto? That is what we have to know. We have to be the spirit. Because we are not
this body, this mind, we are not these emotions and ego or our conditionings but we are the
pure spirit.
The second ene is that there is all pervading power of the Divine which we have never felt
before. Everybody has described. Adi Shankara has said, described it as, "Saleelam, Saleelam"
cool and cool. In the bible it is said cool breeze of the holy ghost. In the Quran it is described
as Ruh'. Mohammed Sahib had said very clearly, you cannot know God until
yourself. The whole of our Indian culture is for knowing ourself, we call it Moksha, we call
it self realisation, Atma Sakshatkar, call it by any name whatsoever. But all these efforts were
to get to yourself.
know
you
In these modern times one thing good has happened. There are so many seekers of truth all
over. Second thing is that is Sahaja it is spontaneous. You don't have to go to the Himalayas,
don't have to stand on your heads you didn't have to give up this, give up your wife, nothing.
You can maintain yourself, it works automatically, you don't have to do reading or any kind
of chanting. It is so simple. If the doctors become that they will become the greatest scientists
of India as far as the medical science is concerned. I was surprised in Russia when they had
about 250 doctors and about 200 scientists sitting of a very high calibre. I started talking on
science and using scientific terminology. So they said Mother, we don't want, we want to
know the science of Divine. You talk to us about the science of Divine, and whatever I said
they just tried to find out. I told them that all these seven centres are represented in the brain.
Now they have such equipment to do it. There is one place called Novasbisk. Where they have
got all the scientists. They have a beautiful campus of all the scientists and all kinds of
laboratories. When I told them that you can find out if these centres are represented in the
brain they found out. They worked it out. Also there was an American scientist who found
out what I told you that the first chakra is made of carbon. Carbon has 4 valancies. I said now
you do one thing, take a photograph of a carbon atom and make a model of it. If you see the
model from the right to the left, you will see a Swastika. When you see from left to right what
you see will be Omkara. And if you see from down to up you will see alpha and omega. You
will see omega first and then alpha. Now Christ has said I am the Alpha and I am the Omega.
Ganesha also is Omkara. So, Ganesha incarnated as Christ. We don't know that this Ganesha
is acting within us. These things are not so much hanging in the air, deities and all but they
are within us. They stay within us and for which at least as Indians we must open out minds.
As Western people I have tried to open their minds, doctors in Russia, Bulgaria, also in
Romania, I have seen these doctors were amazed when I told them about this and that I could
explain so many things, then and they are at it now. They have started working at it. They are
not so money-oriented. Actually Russians are not so Money-oriented. So they are working at
it and they are trying to prove whatever I have said. Instead of doubting me, and saying how
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
17
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-18.txt 
 can it happen, who were the deity. In the same way you cannot say, certain medicines, how
they work. Now take aspirin. You cannot say what aspirin does. But it does help. In the same
way we will see how this vibrations of the Divine help you, you will be amazed. You can feel
them on your finger tips, on the palm and even a child can say what centres they are catching.
You will know about yourself and about others because you become collectively conscious.
You become a very intense personality. Sitting down here you can feel everyone and you can
know,
also you cannot find out but here you can know on the finger tips, you can know and find it.
All those powers are within you. You don't know how you are you don't know about it. What
wealth, what spirituality lies within Indians. They are tremendous, I must tell you when your
spirit stan
the same time you become extremely compassionate and all, You can, you see, give up
anything you want because you start seeing what is destructive.
don't have to go to the rigmarole of this diagnosis, what is the diagnosis. But then
you
ds in your attention you become a very powerful person, a very valued person. At
You have to exercise your realisation otherwise it cannot work. You cannot pay for it. It is
divine love for which you cannot pay, which people do not understand it. If the Guru is paid
by you, he cannot be your Guru, he is your servant, you cannot pay for it, it's an evolutionary
process, it's a living process of evolution. For example if you have a seed in your hand and
you put it in the mother earth, it will sprout by itself, spontaneously. You don't have to stand
head. Because the mother earth has the power to sprout it and the built in seed has
the powers. In the same way you are all capable of getting your self realisation. I say you
should really open your mind, this knowledge which was not available to us, before. I know,
that 300 years ago when Britishers were here you had to have English and their medicine. But
even I was happy to know that about Kundalini. At least they talk about Kundalini and say
self
your
on
there is a power acting. Something, somewhere we find. But unless and until you get your
realisation, you cannot do anything about yourself or about others. Then you can cure people.
You can give them realisation and you enjoy the real peace. You enjoy the real peace of your
being when you become thoughtlessly aware. Then you enjoy yourself fully and that
enjoyment is so Divine that cannot be described and this enjoyment you all can have if you
stay in that state of self realisation. Some people grow so fast. But some people require to
meditate and then it works out. Especially people who are supposed to be intellectuals, who
have conditionings of medical science or any science. There is a great cloud here which has
to be crossed. But once you understand how it works, how it acts you are amazed. It's no
miracle as such but one has to see for yourself and understand. Because if you do not open
your mind, nobody can force you. I am very happy today that I could speak to the medical
professionals and medical students and such august company here. I could never imagine that
any day I will be able to address you, because, you see, I was selected for Balakram Medical
college, only six girls were selected in merit, but they rejected me because I was not from
north. So I went to, I travelled up to Lahore, and went and saw the principal and I told him
that this is sheer injustice because you say that this is for the whole of India. Then how can
you say that I am not a Punjabi. I can speak Punjabi very well. You will have to select me. So,
he said from where do you come? I said from Nagpur. He said, oh, my god, you are the
daughter of such and such person. Yes I am because my mother was a serving in the Mental
Hospital, both of them were there. He said if there is one girl who does not come, then I will
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
18
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-19.txt 
 admit you and that's how I was there. A wonderful college it was, we had very nice lecturers
and all but, you see then this problem started and I came to Delhi and then my parents
married me off. My husband said you want to study more, I said I do, he said there is no need
for it and that's that. I just wanted to know what you call what, just wanted to know the
names then I did psychology some I should say some dictionaries.That's how I came to know
what's called what because there is no name, in the Divine. It is only name given by doctors,
Psychologists. So, to talk to them, I wanted to have that.
It's a fact that if you are scientists and doctors you can change such a lot of these ideas and
dogmas that are sitting on your head. For example, now genes is very important nowadays,
people are talking about genes is a myth, they are carrying, also that genes are inherited and
cannot be cured. In Sahaja Yoga it can be cured. The complete data changes with Sahaja Yoga
and that's how a very nasty person can be changed. That's the point of changing the data base
and it works out. We have worked it and it has been proved.
But to prove it you see, the scientific method is that at least 100 doctors must approve, and
there should be 2000 disciples and all. But at least for yourself you first of all achieve it and
then see for yourself how many powers you have in every walk of life because it is the totality
I am talking about it's not one person here, one person there, it's totality.
May God Bless You.
Voi. VIlII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
19
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Easter Puja Talk
by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
14-4-96 Calcutta (Synopsis)
(Translation From Hindi)
Easter is an important day for Sahaja Yoga because Jesus Christ showed us that the
resurrection of mankind is possible and for that resurrection, we should keep trying. His
crucification also had great meaning that by crucifying Him the cross at the Agnya Chakra is
a form of the Swastika. Jesus Christ was hung at the cross and there He gave up His life. At
that time the most important thing He said was that wait for the Mother. Look out for the
Mother, anyone may make out its meaning to be anything, but it is apparant that He said that
I will send for you such a Shakti which will have three forms, Trigunatmika. It has been
described very beautifully that there is one power which will give us comfort. The power that
comforts us is the power of Mahakali, that comforts us, cures us of our illnesses and by which
a lot of questions of our past get solved. The second power He sent was Mahasaraswati. He
called Her the counsellor. One that will explain to us, make us understand. Yog Nirupa' from
this power we will get knowledge, pure knowledge. The third power was of Mahalakshmi by
which we get our redemption. In this way He spoke of three powers. Buddha also said I will
send you Matreya, means three types of mothers together. People did not understand what
Matreya was, so they made it Maitreya. This Matreya all together can only be in Adishakti.
He must have called Adi Shakti the Primordial Mother but the people who wrote the Bible
changed it to the Holy Ghost and made a pigeon in its place. Because the people who changed
the Bible hated the women folk. They could not believe that a woman could do such a great
thing. Because of that hatred, they made it the Holy Ghost and said a pigeon, means a
messenger of peace. But they did not talk of a woman at all. In our Shastras it is written that
there will be Mahamaya but you will not be able to recognise Her. To recognise Her also, you
will need your self realisation. If you have nof received your self-realisation, you cannot
recognise Her. In His life He said it as explicitly as He could. Out of those we don't know how
many things they said and how many they didn't say. But still there were some truths, they
could not change.
For Sahaja Yoga, the coming of Jesus Christ was very important. He was an innocent child and
it has been proved that He was an incarnation of Ganesha. Ganesha was incarnated only once,
as Jesus Christ. These three, Buddha, Mahavira, and Jesus Christ, on the level at which they
were realised, was that of sacrifice. They worked at the Virata and there was sacrifice at that
level. They said that man should sacrifice. Man should do penance. Only then can he cross the
Agnya Chakra and go out. To Cross the Agnya Chakra was very important because without
that your Kundalini could not rise. The crossing of the Agnya Chakra was done by the
resurrection of Christ. First He died, then He was resurrected. So for us, Easter has a special
message that it is because of the resurrection of Christ that we have got our resurrection. The
most difficult Chakra in man is the Agnya Chakra. Man keeps thinking all the time and by
thinking all the time, his mind is like a bubble of thought and he cannot go beyond his
thoughts. Only when you cross the Agnya do you go into thoughtlessness. That's why, had
Christ not given up His life and got His resurrection, Sahaja Yoga would have been difficult.
Divine Cool Breeze
20
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Work has been done by all the incarnations at their own place, at their own time, at their own
level, but the work that was done by the resurrection of Christ was a wonderful thing. That's
why it is not difficult to open the Agnya. There have been many Gurus, they did things
because of whom people got enlightened, they got interested in Dharma and got interested in
their self - realisation.
Christ came to our country because the place where He came from, there the people had
nothing subtle in their vision, they had no knowledge of their inner self, so He came to
Kashmir and met King Shalivahan there. Shalivahan asked Him His name, so He said my
name is Isa Maseeh, Maseeh meaning messenger. He said the country I come from, there the
people are 'Mal Icha' meaning people who desire 'Mal' you can see, in the West, people,
whatever programs they do they only desire dirt, they only like madness. If
films,
you see their
feel they are mad people. So, in our country, people used to call them 'Mlechha'
you
meaning people who desire 'mal, Ichha'. He said they desire 'mal', so where should I go, there
is knowledge of self here, so I will stay here. So Shalivahan told Him, you are such a realised
soul you go back and in your own country, teach them the principle of purity. If you establish
the principle of purity there, people will be rid of their desire for dirt.
He went back and somehow stayed for three and a half years before He was caught and then
His
crucified. That was destined for Him, He had to do it. But the way in which He
gave up
life, shows us that He was a great personality. In such a short span of time, three and a half
years, in life the things He did were great. That is there, that He could not give self-realisation
to others. But at that time, there were not such seekers there at that time like you are. I am
lucky, and so, this job that was done was the job before self-realisation. People realised that
beyond this life also there is another life. He said that you will have to be born again. He told
them about resurrection. Here also they say like a bird comes out of an egg, there is another
life when it undergoes a transformation and gets power, then it can fly and go anywhere in
the world. It gets that power. You are aware of how from Siberia birds fly and come to India.
In the winters, they come here and in the summers they go back there. They don't have
any
radar, or any aeroplane. How do they come, and they come to the right place to the same lake
where they came the last time, their children also come there. Once they experimented and hid
some children, but they managed to find their children. Some could not even find their
children, still the children flew and came to India. They had no one to tell them, still they
managed. That's why they say the Paramachaitanya has set up everything so beautifully, so
that we get our resurrection. I call it the Blossom time. So many of you are sitting here were
there so many people and thousands of times more than this in other places. It is very
surprising that before Christ there were such few people nor did anyone know what self-
realisation is and why should one get their Self-realisation. Even today in our country there
are blind people who do not understand this. But because of the great souls who have been
in this country, one thing has happened that people are aware of this. That we have to be born
again, and we have to know ourselves. All the Sufis say the same. Not only this, but all the
shastras, any religion, they all say the same thing.
Today is very auspicious for us, because it is the day of Bengal's new year and so we can talk
about the resurrection of Bengal today. Today, that we have celebrated the Easter Puja in
Bengal, this Puja will definitely benefit Bengal. The culture and civilisation here, the freedom
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
21
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-22.txt 
 fighters here, the great saints here, the people who had put India at a very high level, today
the same people are going from where to where. The Western regime finished. They have gone
back, but still we are following the Western ways to such an extent, have accepted it in such
a manner we do not know where we have reached, we don't know what their condition is,
what they have achieved. Lot of Christians feel that Jesus Christ was born in England and to
wear a 'dhoti' is to be a Hindu. These type of vivid imaginations have sat on our head and
we feel that by being English we can understand Christ very closely. These people have now
understood that our heritage, our thinking, our attitude towards righteousness is very subtle
and beautiful and such people can take to Sahaja Yoga very easily, that you have seen. But
Sahaja Yogis should try to stay absolutely collective and this message of resurrection they
should spread everywhere. Because now your country, the state it is in, its condition cannot
be improved except by change, by knowledge of self. You may do anything , by putting cables
in the sky, nothing will happen.
Each person should think about to how many people we talk about Sahaja Yoga. Jesus Chris
was all alone. He had no one with Him. He had only twelve disciples. Out of them, some
were like this and like that, half hearted. On that also, He worked a lot and a very important
message He gave by His resurrection. We are able to see His message from the outside only,
that should actually work within us also. We have reached that level where we have been able
to pierce through the fontanel bone area. He always spoke of forgiveness. Buddha always
spoke of compassion. They always spoke of forgiveness that you should be able to forgive
everyone. He himself, while on the cross, He prayed and said, "Forgive them for they know
not what they do" so forgive them. In that state, where people had dug nails into Him and
put a crown of thorns on His head, at that time also, with such love He said this, that, forgive
them for they know not what they do.
If anyone does something wrong in Sahaja Yoga I get worried. On one side is Christ, on the
other is Ganesha and Hanumana and Bhairav Nath. They are not able to get out of the hold
of these four. Anyone who does anything slightly wrong, if he does wrong in work, in money,
I keep looking after them, that nothing bad should happen to them. Because, when you come
into something that is pure see like this white sheet here. If there is any mark on this white
sheet it will stand out. In the same way it makes you absolutely pure and any fault in you
shows out. The fault gets caught at once and one doesn't know how you may get punished.
This is a big difficulty. Whereas in His time He gave up His life, but for me He said that if
you say anything about me alright, but if you speak of anything against Adi Shakti, there will
be no one worse than me. I see that people make a lot of mistakes. They cannot set it right.
If
have regarded me as your Mother, I respect you sentiments, then even if people bother
you
me, I say never mind, they have called me their Mother. But these people do not understand
all this. If we have been resurrected, you should remember, that this is due to a great deal of
dedication of our past life, a great amount of hard work of our past life, respect, due to all this
the fruits of our labour is what we have got now. In this life when you have got these special
blessings very special, what people thought could never happen, that what you have received,
should take care not to do anything wrong. You should not do anything wrong, because
you
if you do so, your purity gets caught.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
22
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-23.txt 
 I am not scaring you but telling you the truth. That whatever you do, it should be done with
great love, and done with great enjoyment. It can happen that someone is bothering you.
Never mind, how long can he bother you, because the person who bothers you, he gets
straightened. That's why at any level, in any area, never forget that you are a Sahaja Yogi.
Then, if someone is like that, there is nothing to be scared of. If you have to, feel scared for
him, say God please save him, what will happen to him. Because you are in the kingdom of
God and in that state keeping this in mind, you should know that you are not alone now. You
re absolutely secure. Why are you bothered in that state of security? When Jesus Christ was
on the cross, He was not bothered, then what has happened to you. See, you are sitting at a
great height. Problems keep playing down in front of you, do not even look at them. But if all
the time you are thinking about problems, you should understand that there is something
lacking with you, you should introspect. You should introspect that we are Sahaja Yogis with
that, inside us a source of peace, and a sense of self-confidence prevails that people only can
understand. You don't have to speak anything, you don't have to fight or anything, you just
keep silent. If you are silent, then the Paramachaitanya takes charge of everything, and each
is more powerful than the other.But if the fault is within you, they will say, set him straight.
In this way, today, we have to see, that Jesus Christ's short life span of thirty five years, how
He wandered and came to India and how much He did in His life. In His name, people have
done so many things made so many institutions, said we are doing this and that. It is all an
untruth. In His mouth also they put wrong things. In this ostentatious religion there is nothing
you can see that. That diamond which they hid is shining within you. That is set in
Agnya. The more your power of forgiveness grows, that much you see, you will go into the
Sahasrar.
your
Now, the problem with the Christians is that since they were born as Christians, they can only
life
think of Christianity. If you have died in the name of God and you have given up your
for it. Now, after 500 years, what will emerge from your grave, just think about it. Just imagine
what will emerge after 500 years. If you are buried and resurrected then your bone will
emerge? A lot of people believe this. This belief is so strong, that some people came to me from
Bosnia, I told them, why are you going on fighting so much? You are Muslims, you believe
in a formless God. Why are you fighting for land ? They said in our ancient religious text it
is written if you die in the name of God, then this will happen. I said first where is the name
of God in this you tell me. Secondly, Hindus also, Hindus know only Krishna, Shiva. Now,
you are away from all this, you are beyond all this, you have become Sufis. In everything, look
for the truth, the essence, there are lots of things in these religions which are untrue. Take for
example Christianity and Islam. When you die they bury the body they believe that. Then,
when you resurrect, this body will emerge from your grave and your resurrection will
die and resurrect after 500 years, what will come out of your grave? All these
bhoots will emerge from the ground of these graves. Our Shastras are right. That after death,
the soul comes out and it comes in another body. But to think that after 500 years it will
resurrect, is a great stupidity. Because of this there is fighting all over. Today in Israel there
is fighting, tomorrow somewhere else. Wherever you go, there is fighting in the name of
religion, no religion is different. They are all interlinked and this is quite self evident. Everyone
has said that. Then why this fighting? That is because some people feel that they are
happen. If
you
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
Divine Cool Breeze
23
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_6,7.pdf-page-24.txt 
 responsible for this 'Dharna Makand' and they do all this. You just think that Jesus Christ said
a very great thing " Thou shall not have adulterous eyes". It is such a subtle thing. Not
adultery, but even adulterous eyes. In the West, people are looking here, and looking there,
someone is looking at the men, someone is looking at the womnen and this is just going on. This
sort of
words that He said, who listened to Him ? Who believed Him ? No one. The
great
reason is only one, that they did not get their self realisation. Had they received their self
realisation, when people get their self realisation, then their attention gets fixed and they are
in complete peace and bliss. But what Jesus Christ said, by saying it could not happen and in
the West, this illness is more than anything then what do we understand from this? Whatever
he said, we are not able to do. In every religion, it is the same. There is no religion, in which
people don't say something and do something else. The reason is that they are without
meaning. Means that what they are, they have no meaning to it. Somebody will say he is a
Sikh but he will drink alcohol. Somebody will say I am a Christian, but he will have roving
eyes. Somebaody will say I am a Jain, but he will have a cloth shop. What they are not supposed
to do, they will do. The reason for this is that after receiving your self-realisation, if
not respect your self-realisation, you only get lots of difficulties and before this the difficulties
you face you do not feel. But now, you have become sensitive. That's why we should
understand that this great thing we have received, by that we have become beautified. So in
that, like when Jesus Christ arose from the grave, His face was even more radiant. His words
became even more beautiful. His words had even more meaning. In the same way, for us He
was a great Sahaja Yogi. But He did not receive anything, He had already received it. For
He gave up His life, so that your Agnya Chakra could be opened. One should stay away from
vices such as egoism. By introspecting, you will be able to understand that God knows for
what reason you are thinking so mighty of yourself. In Sahaja Yoga, there is complete
permission for a married life. Although Jesus Christ did not get married, He did not need to
but absolutely, for everything there is room in Sahaja Yoga. And because of this permission,
for the outside, you can live like ordinary people although from the inside you are unlike them
and
do
you
you
you are aware of your uniqueness just like Jesus Christ was aware of His uniqueness, just
like the Sufis were aware of their uniqueness. Single handedly they fought with everyone and
did so much for everyone. You have so many brothers and sisters all over the world. How
much self-confidence you should have in yourself. You are not alone. Everyone is saying the
same thing. Everyone has received the same thing. And when you receive this thing, you
should understand its importance. There is nothing more precious than this.
Although I am very happy that so much work has been done in Calcutta. There are so many
Sahaja Yogis here, there is so much love and affection between them, there are no quarrels
between them, no differences amongst them, that is a very big thing, and in this matter I feel
that there is some special blessing of the Devi here that people have received Sahaja Yoga
and are in it. Women also should work the way the men are working and when Sahaja Yoga
will spread all around then you see that Bengal will become such a beautiful place.
May God Bless You.
Edited by
Published by
: Yogi Mahajan
: Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029
Golden Arts, B -2/11 Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029.
Printed by
Vol. VIII Issue 6 & 7
24
Divine Cool Breeze
