DIVINE COOL BREEZE ISSUE 3 VOLUME VIII Enjoyment is only possible when you are beyond your mind, with your mind you can never enjoy. Enjoyment comes when you are in complete silence, in rippleless lake. H. H. Shri. Mataji Nirmala Devi Navaratri Puja Cabella, Italy.

 NAVRATRI PUJA By H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 1-10-1995 CABELLA, Italy Durga protected all the seekers, sadhakas, and she killed the people who have been troubling, torturing, killing the seekers of Truth. Her whole advent was to protect them from all these evil forces, that's how the sadhakas came up to this modern times, and now they are seekers of truth or they have found the Truth. All these different passages have taught the sadhakas what is the use of their lives. They were frantically first trying to find the truth, they went into different difficult places they thought, by going into some lonely places, they will be able to settle their mind in peace, and they will be able to find the truth. Also they sacrificed things, their wealth which was bothering them, their families they thought was standing in the way of their research. All this went on and there are still some people who believe that by becoming an ascetic, one can find this Truth. Buddha did the same, Mahavira did the same, their life was nothing but a great tapasya. Their tapasyas are helping us today in such a way that we now have got Such a blessing that our personalities as they are can receive self realisation for which people struggle and struggle in such a way that if you read that, that they were suffering, you might be really amazed how they went through all this suffering and all this tapasya just with the goal to get their realisation. While they were seeking, also, there were so many people who tried to trouble them, who tried to torture them, who tried to kill, why? The many people surrounding them did not know what they were doing. They used to ridicule them, laugh at them, make fun of them. With all this, what we learn that we have got out self realisation very easily, without any torture, without any ordeal, without any suffering, fasting, nothing. It is not true, because you are the same people who have done all this before, and that is why you are here. It is your matter of right to have your self realisation. It is not correct way to say that without anything, we got it. Because it is life after life, you have been seekers. Whatever path you follow, whatever religion you follow, whatever faith you follow, it was a torture for you and this torture is now fruitful that, today you are self realised people. But in any way we see that human beings, if they get something rather easily, they don't understand the value of how they got it. Now to get this easily, actually you must know it's not just because you were nothing, you were something great, you were great saints, went to Himalayas, you did all kinds fasting, and so many of you were killed and butchered in the name of God. Today whatever you have got, whatever realisation you have got, it is not just something you should think that it's only Mother's Grace that we have got it. It is your own great personality which has achieved it. Otherwise it would have been impossible for me to give you realisation. Whatever the work the Deities have done, they have brought you to this level of human existence, protecting you. Now actually, this is the last step that you have crossed, and have achieved this self realisation, and so many of you have achieved great heights. you This power within us, the Kundalini, which has connected you to this all pervading power, has been struggling, has been guiding you, has been all the time looking after you, protecting you, so that you should achieve your goal in this Kali Yuga. It was said that only during Kali Vol. VIII Issue 3 Divine Cool Breeze 1

 Yuga this will happen, when those people who are looking for God in the mountain and the valleys will find it. But they will be normal people, people who will have household and living like normal people in the society, they won't be some sort of Sadhus or saints, but are married, who have children, all such people who are leading a very normal life will receive their realisation. It is already said, it is already predicted by Bhrigumuni. It is all being already said, I think, all been planned. But in this, a credit goes of course to you, people, that you have recognized what is the Truth. As you know, there are so many false people going around. They are doing all kinds of tricks, they äre trying all kinds of methods to entice people. Despite that, you have recognized me. This recognition is something very remarkable, and I am myself surprised how, like lost children finding their Mother, they come back to Her. In the same way all of you are here. But in this, we should not think that we have got it easily, or we have got it without any difficulties. Because this can create a little problemn that we will people who further with the same speed, with the same dedication as we have been doing before. not go So whatever you think is easy, it is not easy at all. It is Sahaja, it is one can say, spontaneous. But now it is for you to understand that this time is so important. We have to save the whole world, that you have to project yourself and to find out ways and methods how you can do this thing. In Russia I had a very good experience of very highly developed soul who is a very well known scientist. He is one of the biggest scientist of Russia. He is indulging also into spirituality. He told people that I am indulging into spirituality I would like to see Mother, I said All right, "I would love to see him. "When he came, he looked at me and he said, " I know Mother, that you are the incarnation of God in these modern times." I was quite surprised, for a scientist to say that. But his eyes were so pure and so full of devotion and humility. Then he said, "We want to do something if you help me." I said, " What do you want to do?" He said, " I cannot measure your power, I cannot." He had an instrument by which he could measure the power. I can't also measure the power of your photograph. He said he told me a number that I could not understand, it is something, seven hundred raised to power some sort of billion into billions, like that. I said But what is this number, I don't know. So he told me that this is what your photograph is I said all right, now what do you want Me to do? I told him You can take this photograph if you think it is so powerful so he took the photograph with such respect and this thing, at least 4,5 times he bowed to Me. I said What do to do about it? He said that, I want to put it in a satellite. Now see the projection part satellite, now what will you do? I am going to put electromagnetic force behind it. So the power that is in this one will penetrate into things because electromagnet can penetrate, with that these vibrations will also penetrate. So I will go onto the satellite and from there, I will and we will solve the global problems. Then wherever I will project this, the problems will be solved. One photograph of mine can you imagine! See his projection I was amazed. Look at this man, what he has been thinking all the time. He said this is not difficult, it is not difficult, I said how? So he showed me with a spring, he put it on the water which I vibrated, and the spring started jumping. Then he showed with his machine that the whole thing was moving so fast. Mother, just see the water that you have vibrated, how great it is I said, I never heard that you can transform this power into something which will work out on material thing. He said this power can work out on anything. It is this power which has created everything, so want you project this Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 3

 it will work out on anything, I was so surprised, and he said, I have been waiting just to meet and this I am going to start. I have got lots of work to be done, I want to do all this in you, the life time of Mother. She should see what we have to do. I was amazed from where this fellow had dropped. Such an experience of a scientist. In Russia people who are very highly placed, have many ideas. But spirituality is the main thing, and morality, there was another gentleman say he was hardly about 30-32 years of age. Very much sparkling, I asked him, what do you want me to do? He said No, You have done too much for us. Now we will do for you. So what do you want to do? He said, I am incharge here of spirituality in the government, can you imagine? We have no government where there is a subject like spirituality. He said, I have to deal with students from very young age to college, can you tell me, Mother, at what age the children are more receptive to spirituality? I said, there is no hard and fast rule about it. But the very small children, because they are so innocent, so it works out. He asked me, How do we put spirituality into them? I said raise their Kundalini, you can tie them up and they will become really people with such attention that you will be amazed at that. He said I am gathering all the people of that I am going to tell them that it is only Sahaja Yoga that is the right part. you can age and Then the third one came. He was also member of Parliament, very dynamic. First he was right hand man of Yeltsin but then he gave him up. He said he is not moral. I don't want anything to do with a person who is not moral. He said Now we are thinking of being elected by another party whose name is 'My Mother Land.' In that we will not have fixed ideas like it is a democracy or communism. But what suits my Mother land, that we will do. Very practical. Such a truthful man. He said the basis of human life is morality. If you have no morality, then all the rest is nonsense. When I went to Ukraine, I saw some very nice paintings done with a very aboriginal sort of colours. They said, Mother, this we had before the Christians came in. They showed me a magazine in which there was a photograph of the Primordial Mother. They called it Aditi, in Sanskrit also we call Aditi. Can you Imagine? Then they said this culture existed before the Christian aggression. There was paintings of Mooladhara Chakras in different ways, and also of Agya Chakra. They said that, we have books on this, but because of the church, it was all said to be nonsense. They said we had relations with India and they were Aryans and we used to meet them. Machhindra Nath had gone to the north of India. He might have come to this Ukrain. Ukrain comes from Kuru, and I was amazed what a culture they had. It's something unbelievable, they said that this was before Christ, 3000 years. But they said India is the source of spirituality. Can you imagine that so many years back Kundalini existed in that Ukraine? Such a beautiful culture of spirituality. First time I went to Ukrain, we had people at the Programme from Chernobyl, you know that there was a big explosion. And they were all like somebody had the fingers cut out, or second attached to each other, somebody had boils all over the body, somebody's nose was turned like that. But then this time the whole hall was full, the passages were full, and still the people outside were standing. And they said we were the people who had suffered from Chernobyl. Now look at us, we are completely cured. They came to my programme, and they had got cured. Vol. VIII Issue 3 Divine Cool Breeze 3

 I used to wonder why these Russians and Ukrainians are so sensitive persons to spirituality? Then I realised that these people who have got spirituality in ancient, from ancient times they were practicing this. But nobody practiced Kundalini awakening to this extent. In village, they used to make these paintings about Mooladhara, about Agnya chakra, very clearly. And in Agnya Chakra was Yin and Yang of the Chinese. After discovering that I really felt that in the world, there must be lots of people like that. Now in Columbia, they have the same Kundalini, and Kumba, and everything. I think that is even more than that 3-4 thousand back before Christ. So what we find that we have all this knowledge in all these every years countries and that knowledge is still working in the minds of the people. They were very introspective. This kind of sensitivity comes only when basically the roots of that country have exposure to spirituality. It is a kind of miraculous revelation one could see there, how they know everything about Kundalini, about Primordial Mother, about spirituality, and what happens to a person when he becomes a realised soul. The speciality about them was that they are extremely humble people. To them I am really, I don't know, how they bow to me. Sometimes I just can't imagine how these people have such sense of spirituality and such peace. They have this school. I asked them, " Aren't you worried? This school is here, and I don't know what will happen to your country. They said, " Why should we worry? After all we are in the kingdom of God, we are not in Russia. So why should we worry. We see such nice people there, such sensitive people to spirituality. They have thrown away practically all the false gurus, and for me they show such respect and such care. They had this conference only for Me. Now I am telling you all this that now you all have got your realisation, You have now felt your spirit. And you have entered into the kingdom of God, no doubt. But now you must understand that this power that you have, what it does to you, what it creates you. The most important thing is, by this power, you become thoughtlessly aware. You come in the to achieve the present is an impossible task. Once you are in thoughtless awareness, what happens that no thoughts bombard your mind wherever you may be. What does that mean. In very simple language, you can say, it means that you do not reflect. You do not have a reflecting mind. Now this is the basic problem of Sahaja Yogis of today which one should try i to conquer. That you do not reflect. present, For example, I have seen people, for nothing at all they just start laughing, they see somebody, immediately they react. They start giving their opinion, about everything. Everybody seems to be very knowledgable, and starts telling what is the best, what is not the best, what is not good, and they start saying something like that, mind becomes reflective. If the mind is not reflective, then you are in thoughtless awareness. Watch anything, just you watch, you just witness. You should not reflect. If you are using your mental power, then this power subsides. This is a very common defect with people because I think you people are more intelligent, well educated. I don't know whatever you think. But this reflecting mind is a very dangerous thing for spirituality. You will never grow. Then with a reflecting mind, you have different emotions. With something you reflect on somebody. Now if your son or daughter or something, you get identified. Identification with Vol. VIII Issue 3 Divine Cool Breeze

 some is artificial. It is not in reality. But because this mind reflects, it identifies. Now many identifications you have dropped out. For example, your ideas about religion, races, nationalities, you drop, But still the reflecting mind still acts. This is the greatest hurdle for the of Sahaja Yogis of today, I have been thinking why this reflecting mind is so active progress in Sahaja Yogis of today. If you could stop reflecting, immediately you establish yourself in ocean of peace. You watch something, just watch. There is no ripple of thought in your mind. Then you become extremely creative, dynamic, extremely compassionate, and you have no fear. Some people think if you are compassionate, this man might lench you. Have no fears. All virtues that you have to enjoy, you can only enjoy when you do not reflect. That means that leave every thing to the Divine. You are not in charge. You don't see that you have you to be reflecting on something. This is the greatest power you have got, is not to reflect, not to look at somebody with that kind of. I have seen, this still there, lingering. Now I told you to have introspection. For introspection also it can be reflection. But that at "least gives you an idea as to where you are. But with that, psychologically you can become extremely depressed, you can condemn yourself. Then you many not understand yourself as a personality that, you will go on sort of losing your vibrations, losing your power. Because you are not in control of yourself. So introspection also, if it brings about depression and demeaning activities I have seen create problems. of your personality, best is not to introspect yourself. Because all these mental In a state where you are thoughtlessly aware, introspection comes to you automatically. You see it automatically, you understand it automatically. You do not think about it. It just comes to you. The whole picture comes to you and you are at peace with yourself. You are never in turmoil, never in trouble, then you don't get angry, you do not argue, you do not discuss, but become as if dropped in the ocean of awareness. And you don't have to worry as to solve you something. When you are reflecting, then you find that this power works. It becomes very contradictive to say that you have to project and you don't have to reflect. Now when we reflect, we absorb. When we reflect on something, we absorb that thing. Mostly our attention goes to the defects of others. This person is not good, that is not good, her hair are not all right, her sari is not all right, this, that and all nonsense. So what are we doing? We are absorbing all the bad things also. When you start admiration of something, then what happens that you won't get the bad things, but at least you are on a better line. But still the admiration in thoughtless awareness is really very deep. I saw this in the eyes of this scientist, absolutely he was just one with me, and his eyes were like an ocean of peace. He was just looking at me and for quite some time, and then he came to his thoughts and he told me, this is what we can do with your photograph. So the depth in you will only come when you do not reflect. But it is very common with the human beings, this carpet is not good, that is not good, this smell is coming, that, this, there. Always trying to judge others. Judge other things, which isn't important. What is so important? If you are sitting in the garden of Heavens, what does it matter where you are sitting, what you are doing? This reflection sets in waves of thoughts in our mind. I have already described it by drawing, how the energy that falls on the right side goes to the left side and falls on the left, goes to the right, crosses over. Then after this energy that goes to the right, this energy that goes to Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 3 5

 the left, it is sucked in partly into the sympathetic. Now whatever is left out is the one that reflects. That is the way it goes on reflecting. Now if you can suck in all that energy and put it on your sympathetic, then all our energies will be thousand times much more. We will not be tired, we will not be unhappy. We will be able to stand lots of nonsense. But we will not call it a nonsense, we will not think it is a bad thing, so it has no effect on us. This quality we have to develop. What a Devi can do, you should not do. That is her job, that she is supposed to do this, not you. What you have to do is to only be in silence so that you absorb whatever will increase that silence, which will increase your depth. Devi will look after all the other rest of the things. She will look after all the filth, all the anger, all the temper, all the everything that is going on this world. She will absorb all that, but what you have to do is to just enjoy everything that is pure. Enjoyment is only possible when you are beyond your mind, with your mind you can never enjoy. Enjoyment comes when you are in complete silence, in a rippleless lake. The reflection of all the joy that is created on the shores of that lake are completely reflecting, they are not reflected. If there would have been ripples it would have been a different image altogether, and would have been something more and near to the image of reality. So one must have a mind which is kept lower than reality. The reality actually is nothing but peace and joy, no sufferings, no starvation, nothing. They must just enjoy. But even to enjoy this, even to live in that complete peaceful state, you have to be non reflective. Now you watch yourself. You will be amazed how much reflective you are. When there is everything for you, when the Paramachaitanya, I don't know how many things it is doing. It is trying to fill up the whole atmosphere with its activity. What is your activity should be to stop your activity. You will be amazed, in that state only you will grow. With that growth only you will become like that scientist. How the contradiction now is, that when you have your depth, you can project you depth, not your mind. Sometimes when I say project, people think it is the projection of the mind. No. You have to project that depth, that reality that is within you. For that, you don't have to think, you don't have to plan, it will just work. But you are the instrument for that projection. It is very simple to understand. Like I am talking on this instrument, all right, now if this instrument is absolutely all right, there is no problem in it, it will be peaceful. But if this is full of ideas and thought like our brain is, whatever I am saying will not be the same that will be broadcasted in the same way, when our mind is full of turmoil and arguments and what can say, comments, or we can also say the reflection, then what happens that this mind gets into, like a whirlpool of disturbances and it cannot project itself fully because it is disturbed it is not a normal thing. Now you will understand there is no contradiction. You can only project yourself when you are absolutely peaceful. This is what we have to learn. you ier You should know that Navratri starts actually in the western world from the 21 after the equinox in September. There are 2 Navratris. One starts now and the other starts after the second equinox. Now in this equinox. Mother Mary's birthday is there, and that is why people celebrate her birthday. They don't know why she was born on the equinox for the balance. Because nothing was explained about the lives of these great incarnations, people used them Vol. VIII Issue 3 Divine Cool Breeze

 the way they liked, because they have seen miracles with them. They do not try to understand why this equinox and why this is celebrated. Now I was told in Iran, this is the time they have the New Year. That means the Muslim observe this as the New Year, so when Navaratri starts it is the new year. That means it is the 12th month for them, and so many things are suggesting of that. Why should there be 12 months? Why should the Godess be born at 12 o' clock? AIl this has a special meaning, which you can find out, but it is only possible when you are not reflecting. This is the state where you are really in connection with the All Pervading Power. Otherwise, you are not there, you are not one with that state. To be one with that state, you have to be absolutely silent within yourself. For the Goddess, She is silent. There is a fight on, She is silent because She is so confident. She knows about Her powers, She knows Mahishasura cannot trouble Her, cannot even touch Her. She knows what their powers are, and She knows all Her powers, so She doesn't have to be disturbed by anything. She is not disturbed because She is really the personification of this peace state where She is so powerful. She doesn't have tot know about her power, She doesn't have to ask the power, they just work automatically. * unknowingly. Without you doing anything, and that is what we call as coincidences. But actually it is not coincidence. It is the state in which we are in a thoughtless awareness and then the Paramachitanya is related to us, absolutely, we are there, and that's working out everything for us. This is the state in which you will be amazed so many things happen In Sahaja Yoga, this time as you know about the Goddess that She has done so much work for years together. Now you have become realised souls and you must understand and have complete confidence in yourself, complete understanding about yourself, never to have fear, never to have any thoughts which can bombard your mind, at that state you are the most powerful person. I hope for this Navaratri, you will realize what work the Goddess has done for any CO how much She has worked hard, how much She has been fighting with these horrible you, devils and rakshasas. And sometimes I feel now these devils are within us, they are not outside and that comes to us because we reflect too much on this. If we talk to any one of the Western people, you are amazed as if all the media they have on their heads. They know about each and every person, what he did, what was this, what was that. But he is not worried, he does not think how he can improve, how you can work it out. At this state of thoughtless awareness, you encompass the whole universe and at that state, this power works wherever the problem may be. We have to understand our value, that we have this power within ourselves. This is to be respected, and to give credit to the Goddess because She has done so much for you, for us, that She should not feel that now they have got realisation just for a while and that they are not bothered, they don't know how to develop it. She will not be in any way hurt, but Her work, what She has done, we have to see, we have to understand, and we have to have a feeling that somehow, as we now have got enlightenment, we should try to be people as complete instruments of that power. That is only possible when you don't have you own ideas, your own interferences. Complete instruments, just like as I said, this instrument has to be perfectly all right, otherwise it cannot work. Thank you very much. THE May God Bless You, Vol. VIII Isue 3 Divine Cool Breeze 7.

 DIWALI PUJA TALK BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI (Translaied from Hindi) Synopsis 29-10-1995 When I came to Nargol 25 years ago, it was not my idea that the Sahasrara should be opened. I was thinking, let me wait and see what is the state of human beings. Man has still not reached that state where he could understand what is self-realisation. Although many saints have talked of realization and the knowledge of this is a lot in Maharashtra. The reason is that the centre path followers who are called as Nath Panthies, these people talked of only one path for the benevolence of the self, that is knowledge of the self. Without knowing yourself you cannot achieve anything. This even I knew but at that time the state in which I saw human beings was very strange. That man would run after such people who had no truth in them. These people had no other aim except to earn money. When the state of man is such that he cannot recognize truth at all, then it is very difficult to talk of truth to him. Why would people listen to me? I used to feel again and again that man has to grow more. But then I saw that people are bearing extreme problems of Kali Yuga. There were many people who due to past live karmas were in great trouble. Some people because of the past lives came as Rakshas in this world, and they were busy troubling, creating problems for people. They never felt bad or faltered. I saw two types of people. One who gave trouble to others and the other who are unhappy and troubled. I had to think to whom should I put my attention. The ones who troubled others felt that they were perfect humans. They never ever imagined that they are troubling others. The troubled people were bearing all this perhaps due to their helplessness or they did not know that they should oppose such people who aggress them. At that time I thought when will man think that he has to change. We have to bring forth a change. Some would trouble more and some less, and some would bear more troubles and some less. This was the state of the society. Maybe it could be in the name of God, or it could be in the name of the country, or it could be government or economical. Someone was extremely poor and someone extremely rich. This way in this country there was a kind of a deception going on. I used to think that till man does not change, till he does not recognise himself, till he does not attain his greatness and glory till then he will go on behaving in this manner. This was in mind since childhood and I thought to understand human beings is necessary. First I used to study humans a lot. I used to remain like a witness I tried to understand what is a human being? What are his problems and faults and why does he think this way. Then I reached a conclusion that man has either too much ego or super-ego which means conditioning. Because of this he has no balance. Till he does not have balance how will the Kundalini rise? This is and sages my also a great problem. When I came to Nargol, due to some strange going-on where a very wicked Rakshas had put up his camp here. He had begged my husband to send me. I did not like him one bit but I came here due to my husband's request. I stayed in the same bunglow. I was sitting under a tree and watching the spectacle of this Rakshas and his camp. I was really surprised that this fellow had called everyone and was mesmerizing them. Some were screaming, some were barking like dogs, some were roaring like lions. I then realised that he was taking them to the Vol. VIII Issue 3 Divine Cool Breeze

 animal womb. He was awakening their sub-conscious mind. I got very worried. I had seen many untruthful people before. I went around to see what they do. At least one should know about them. I saw that they were extremely frightened people They had the guards and weapons with them. If they were doing the work of God then why did they need all these things? They would spend lot of money. They robbed people of crores of rupees by telling lies. This is the importance of Kali Yuga that such wicked, evil people are still prospering. So the answer to all this was that human awareness should be enlightened and awakened. Wisdom should come and in one's awareness he should understand what is wrong. I saw that in the society in which I lived, every minute people would do such things by which they were destroying themselves like drinking, running after money, etc. When they spoke it was not natural. It was artificial behaviour like a drama. I used to think what has happened to man? Why is he stuck in such slavery and he is doing such wrong things. But to whom could I say all this? I was completely alone. At that time when I came here I was in a dilemma as to what should be done. I saw that this Rakshas was mesmerizing the people. Then I understood that if I do not open the Sahasrara then the real seekers who are searching for God may land up God alone knows where. The next night I sat at the sea-shore the whole night. I was alone and I felt very nice. Then I went into meditation and saw within myself and thought that I should open the Sahasrara. As soon as I desired that the Brahmarandra should open, I saw the Kundalini within myself. She rose like a telescope making a 'khat' noise through each chakra. Her colour was like many colours, like when you heat iron and the many colours that flame from it. Then the Kundalini arose and pierced through the Brahmarandra. I understood that now I could begin my because the problem finished, I became completely free from worries. I thought, what will happen? Perhaps people will oppose, protest or may laugh at me? If they want to do more they will kill me. So there's nothing to worry about. I have to do this because I have come into this world for this job. Because I had to awaken collective-consciousness. I thought till people do not get self-realisation, they do not know themselves till then this work is impossible. You can do all the things in the world but its no use. work The person was a very old lady to whom I gave realisation to. She believed in me a lot. I thought, thank God at least she got realisation. As it is its not easy to give realisation in this Kali Yuga to people. When she got her self realisation then I realised that it carn be that many others also be given realisation. To give vibrations and realisation to one was very easy. may To cure one person was very easy. If a person had a certain problem, ailment or some conditioning, to take it out what should be done? One person has one kind of problem, another has a different problem and a third has a third kind of problem. If one has to do collective work then only by one session of realisation everyone should benefit. The work of collective consciousness and realisation through this method I achieved with a lot of meditation and contemplation. I turned my kundalini in all the directions, I put the grace of Kundalini on others and no one knew anything what I was doing. No one knew what my powers I had within me, who am I, not even in my family. I never told anyone, because it is very difficult for the human brain to absorb. Everyone is sitting in their own egos. Now who could tell them? Like Kabir has said "How do I tell them, the whole world is blind". The world Vol. VIII Isue 3 Divine Cool Breeze

 is not blind but ignorant. Then how could I give such subtle knowledge to them? But when the Kundalini awakened in that lady then I saw that a very subtle power came into her and she started understanding me with that subtle power. After that twelve people got their realisation. After realisation I was surprised that their eyes starting shining and they started observing everything. A strange experience came into them by which they could feel. I worked on each chakra of the first twelve people because the foundation should be strong. To make it strong I had to work very hard because though their Kundalini had awakened after awakening the Kundalini to make it move in the right direction, it is necessary to do meditation and contemplation, one has to make her settle down properly. I realised that if these twelve people have twelve different natures, and by making them sit together, how to organize the light of the Spirit, like we take a needle and thread and make a garland by putting flowers one by one in it. How to get them collectively together. How to take the different natures of these twelve men and how to tie them in one thread. When they got their realisation then I saw that in all of them a one-threadness taking place slowly But to tell the common people collectively this was not easy. Then they organised a programme Cawasji Jehangir Hall. Then I told everyone how many Rakshas have come on this earth, what they will do etc. Everyone got frightened. They said "If Shri Mataji talks like this someone will murder Her". Everyone told me "Please don't say all these things otherwise there will be many problems. I said, "Till now no one has been born who can Kill me. So do not worry". in I told them to meditate on my Kundalini, so they would become thoughtless immediately. By becoming thoughtless they would feel that there is a great connection with me. Slowly thoughtless awareness started growing and a new light of collectivity spread. I saw for the first time at Cawasji Jehangir Hall that Indians have been born in India because their past lives must have been very good. I did not have to work so hard in India, people would realisation very quickly. In the beginning it certainly took a while but in the western countries I would break my hands trying to give them realisation. To raise someone's Kundalini was like trying to lift a mountain and then it would fall down again. Then when I started this work in the collective I found it really difficult. They would ask strange and stupid questions. When I would give them the answer they would be amazed that how does she know so much. They would test me all the time. Because ego is tremendous there. In London the first time there were seven Sahaja Yogis. All seven were hippies and used to take drugs. Then they became Sahaja Yogis. I became a kind of a support that people left drugs because of Sahaja Yoga. To put drug addicts right was not easy. In a way it was good because the hard work that I did on them gave me an experience that even the most difficult of human beings, when he really desires that he should get self-knowledge, then he does get realisation. get their I would tell them that desire from your heart your self-realisation that's all. Only by that they would get realisation. I have different experiences of different countries like Russia, Ukraine or Romania. These countries must have definitely got some connection with our country. Nathpanthi saints like Gorakhnath, Machindranath must have gone to these countries because what I found there, I realised that these people knew about the Kundalini hundreds of before. Then I understood why these people got their realisation so fast. Nathpanthis did a lot of work in Maharashtra and I also worked here a lot but the painful Vol. VIII Issue 3 Divine Cool Breeze 10

 thing is that what I have been able to achieve in north India, I have still not seen that in Maharashtra. I can't understand where the saints have worked so hard and,every Maharashtrian knows who were the Naths and what work they did. In this very Maharashtra Sahaja Yoga has not settled down so fast like in the North. What could be the cause for this? I feel that when people know everything before hand then a kind of indifference comes towards it. In Sanskrit there is a saying when you go again and again somewhere or meet someone then disrespect is shown towards you. Then you do not get the same respect. Because people who live in Prayag instead of bathing in the Triveni, they bathe in their houses. Whereas people from all over the world go there after doing puja to bathe in the rivers. There are many Sahaja Yogis in Maharashtra who are very active, but the surrender to Sahaja Yoga is lacking. Surrender means that the Sahaja Yogi state which we have got, how do we use that state of a Sahaja Yogi. Is it only for our own benevolence solve our own problens, or our own families or is it for the whole world? The first thing you have to do is meditation is to go deep. When you go deep then you feel that why should I only enjoy it, why should not others enjoy it. When this desire comes within then Sahaja Yoga grows. After that man thinks that in his life he should give joy and happiness to others there is nothing greater than that. He forgets all other things. When this happens then Sahaja Yoga grows. Day and night he keeps thinking the same thing. He enjoys it. Now money has become a big thing in Maharashtra. From morning they get up at 4 am, do meditation, etc. But it is a kind of mechanical thing. It should be done from the heart and with devotion. Try to spread that devotion. This is what Maharashtrians should do. I had never thought that I will see all this in my lifetime. This is the greatness of the Kundalini and the work of Param Chaitanya. I was myself surprised by the Param Chaitanya that what it will do next. Although it is my Power but this paramchaitanya is making different kinds of photographs of mine, is showing different kinds of miracles. Like in Mexico a lady who worked in the U.N.O. got her realisation. She wrote to me that her son got very ill. she had an illness in her family where children grow aged. This child had this disease. She wrote three letters to me. In the fourth letter she wrote that the boy recovered by himself. This is the work of Param Chaitanya and there is no doctor greater than the Param Chaitanya. The works its amazing. Many have had many miraculous experiences, because the Param Chaitanya is now filled with blessings. Everywhere you have blessings. It will give you love, peace and will look after you in every way. Everything is there but now a lot of speed has come into its movement. This time there was such a big programme in America in a big hall where people had no place to sit and in five minutes everyone got realisation and that also in a place like Los Angeles. Everywhere I went it took five minutes to give realisation. It was surprising. The actions of Param Chaitanya have grown so much, and of such diverse it way really kinds that one can't understand. Someone took my photo and desired that what is said of the Devi that in Her feet is the moon and on Her head the sun, should get such a photo and really such a photo came. Whatever you people desire will happen. What should be said. This Param Chaitanya's power works so efficiently and knows so well the problems and ailments of all and cures them with great love and patience. When you have worshipped the Adi Shakti at that very moment you have also worshipped the Param Chaitanya or the 'Ruh'. This Shakti Vol. VIII Issue 3 Divine Cool Breeze 11

 is now so activated that you people should not delay the global transformation of this world. The ones who will come andwill work for it they will gain. The way this Shakti works. And you can get realisation because of it. If you start using it then you can do every kind of work If someone is troubling you, you can give him bandhan. You can give bandhan to any work you want to do. In bandhan what do you do? The shakti that is flowing through you. you take that Shakti and tie it and whatever questions or problems you have you give bandhan to that: You have this shakti and you are so powerful. If you use this, I don't know where you can reach. May God Bless You. Edited by Published by : Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, : Yogi Mahajan Pune - 411 029. Printed by : Golden Arts, 2/11, Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Pune 411 029. Vol. VIII Issue 3 Divine Cool Breeze 12



----------------------

1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
ISSUE 3
VOLUME VIII
Enjoyment is only possible when you are beyond your mind, with
your mind you can never enjoy. Enjoyment comes when you are in
complete silence, in rippleless lake.
H. H. Shri. Mataji Nirmala Devi
Navaratri Puja
Cabella, Italy.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NAVRATRI PUJA
By H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
1-10-1995 CABELLA, Italy
Durga protected all the seekers, sadhakas, and she killed the people who have been troubling,
torturing, killing the seekers of Truth. Her whole advent was to protect them from all these
evil forces, that's how the sadhakas came up to this modern times, and now they are seekers
of truth or they have found the Truth. All these different passages have taught the sadhakas
what is the use of their lives. They were frantically first trying to find the truth, they went into
different difficult places they thought, by going into some lonely places, they will be able to
settle their mind in peace, and they will be able to find the truth. Also they sacrificed
things, their wealth which was bothering them, their families they thought was standing in the
way of their research. All this went on and there are still some people who believe that by
becoming an ascetic, one can find this Truth. Buddha did the same, Mahavira did the same,
their life was nothing but a great tapasya. Their tapasyas are helping us today in such a way
that we now have got Such a blessing that our personalities as they are can receive self
realisation for which people struggle and struggle in such a way that if you read that, that they
were suffering, you might be really amazed how they went through all this suffering and all
this tapasya just with the goal to get their realisation. While they were seeking, also, there were
so many people who tried to trouble them, who tried to torture them, who tried to kill, why?
The
many
people surrounding them did not know what they were doing. They used to ridicule
them, laugh at them, make fun of them. With all this, what we learn that we have got out self
realisation very easily, without any torture, without any ordeal, without any suffering, fasting,
nothing.
It is not true, because you are the same people who have done all this before, and that is why
you are here. It is your matter of right to have your self realisation. It is not correct way to say
that without anything, we got it. Because it is life after life, you have been seekers. Whatever
path you follow, whatever religion you follow, whatever faith you follow, it was a torture for
you and this torture is now fruitful that, today you are self realised people. But in any way
we see that human beings, if they get something rather easily, they don't understand the value
of how they got it. Now to get this easily, actually you must know it's not just because you
were nothing, you were something great, you were great saints, went to Himalayas, you did
all kinds fasting, and so many of you were killed and butchered in the name of God. Today
whatever you have got, whatever realisation you have got, it is not just something you should
think that it's only Mother's Grace that we have got it. It is your own great personality which
has achieved it. Otherwise it would have been impossible for me to give you realisation.
Whatever the work the Deities have done, they have brought you to this level of human
existence, protecting you. Now actually, this is the last step that you have crossed, and
have achieved this self realisation, and so many of you have achieved great heights.
you
This power within us, the Kundalini, which has connected you to this all pervading power,
has been struggling, has been guiding you, has been all the time looking after you, protecting
you, so that you should achieve your goal in this Kali Yuga. It was said that only during Kali
Vol. VIII Issue 3
Divine Cool Breeze
1
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Yuga this will happen, when those people who are looking for God in the mountain and the
valleys will find it. But they will be normal people, people who will have household and living
like normal people in the society, they won't be some sort of Sadhus or saints, but
are married, who have children, all such people who are leading a very normal life will receive
their realisation. It is already said, it is already predicted by Bhrigumuni. It is all being already
said, I think, all been planned. But in this, a credit goes of course to you, people, that you have
recognized what is the Truth. As you know, there are so many false people going around.
They are doing all kinds of tricks, they äre trying all kinds of methods to entice people. Despite
that, you have recognized me. This recognition is something very remarkable, and I am
myself surprised how, like lost children finding their Mother, they come back to Her. In the
same way all of you are here. But in this, we should not think that we have got it easily, or
we have got it without any difficulties. Because this can create a little problemn that we will
people who
further with the same speed, with the same dedication as we have been doing before.
not
go
So whatever you think is easy, it is not easy at all. It is Sahaja, it is one can say, spontaneous.
But now it is for you to understand that this time is so important. We have to save the whole
world, that you have to project yourself and to find out ways and methods how you can do
this thing.
In Russia I had a very good experience of very highly developed soul who is a very well
known scientist. He is one of the biggest scientist of Russia. He is indulging also into
spirituality. He told people that I am indulging into spirituality I would like to see Mother, I
said All right, "I would love to see him. "When he came, he looked at me and he said, " I know
Mother, that you are the incarnation of God in these modern times." I was quite surprised, for
a scientist to say that. But his eyes were so pure and so full of devotion and humility. Then
he said, "We want to do something if you help me." I said, " What do you want to do?" He
said, " I cannot measure your power, I cannot." He had an instrument by which he could
measure the power. I can't also measure the power of your photograph. He said he told me
a number that I could not understand, it is something, seven hundred raised to power some
sort of billion into billions, like that. I said But what is this number, I don't know. So he told
me that this is what your photograph is I said all right, now what do you want Me to do? I
told him You can take this photograph if you think it is so powerful so he took the photograph
with such respect and this thing, at least 4,5 times he bowed to Me. I said What do
to do about it? He said that, I want to put it in a satellite. Now see the projection part satellite,
now what will you do? I am going to put electromagnetic force behind it. So the power that
is in this one will penetrate into things because electromagnet can penetrate, with that these
vibrations will also penetrate. So I will go onto the satellite and from there, I will
and we will solve the global problems. Then wherever I will project this, the problems will be
solved. One photograph of mine can you imagine! See his projection I was amazed. Look at
this man, what he has been thinking all the time. He said this is not difficult, it is not difficult,
I said how? So he showed me with a spring, he put it on the water which I vibrated, and the
spring started jumping. Then he showed with his machine that the whole thing was moving
so fast. Mother, just see the water that you have vibrated, how great it is I said, I never heard
that you can transform this power into something which will work out on material thing. He
said this power can work out on anything. It is this power which has created everything, so
want
you
project this
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 3
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-3.txt 
 it will work out on anything, I was so surprised, and he said, I have been waiting just to meet
and this I am going to start. I have got lots of work to be done, I want to do all this in
you,
the life time of Mother. She should see what we have to do. I was amazed from where this
fellow had dropped. Such an experience of a scientist.
In Russia people who are very highly placed, have many ideas. But spirituality is the main
thing, and morality, there was another gentleman say he was hardly about 30-32 years of age.
Very much sparkling, I asked him, what do you want me to do? He said No, You have done
too much for us. Now we will do for you. So what do you want to do? He said, I am incharge
here of spirituality in the government, can you imagine? We have no government where there
is a subject like spirituality. He said, I have to deal with students from very young age to
college, can you tell me, Mother, at what age the children are more receptive to spirituality?
I said, there is no hard and fast rule about it. But the very small children, because they are so
innocent, so it works out. He asked me, How do we put spirituality into them? I said
raise their Kundalini, you can tie them up and they will become really people with such
attention that you will be amazed at that. He said I am gathering all the people of that
I am going to tell them that it is only Sahaja Yoga that is the right part.
you can
age and
Then the third one came. He was also member of Parliament, very dynamic. First he was right
hand man of Yeltsin but then he gave him up. He said he is not moral. I don't want anything
to do with a person who is not moral. He said Now we are thinking of being elected by
another party whose name is 'My Mother Land.' In that we will not have fixed ideas like it
is a democracy or communism. But what suits my Mother land, that we will do. Very practical.
Such a truthful man. He said the basis of human life is morality. If you have no morality, then
all the rest is nonsense.
When I went to Ukraine, I saw some very nice paintings done with a very aboriginal sort of
colours. They said, Mother, this we had before the Christians came in. They showed me a
magazine in which there was a photograph of the Primordial Mother. They called it Aditi, in
Sanskrit also we call Aditi. Can you Imagine? Then they said this culture existed before the
Christian
aggression. There was paintings of Mooladhara Chakras in different ways, and also
of Agya Chakra. They said that, we have books on this, but because of the church, it was all
said to be nonsense. They said we had relations with India and they were Aryans and we
used to meet them. Machhindra Nath had gone to the north of India. He might have come to
this Ukrain. Ukrain comes from Kuru, and I was amazed what a culture they had. It's
something unbelievable, they said that this was before Christ, 3000 years. But they said India
is the source of spirituality. Can you imagine that so many years back Kundalini existed in that
Ukraine? Such a beautiful culture of spirituality.
First time I went to Ukrain, we had people at the Programme from Chernobyl, you know that
there was a big explosion. And they were all like somebody had the fingers cut out, or second
attached to each other, somebody had boils all over the body, somebody's nose was turned
like that. But then this time the whole hall was full, the passages were full, and still the people
outside were standing. And they said we were the people who had suffered from Chernobyl.
Now look at us, we are completely cured. They came to my programme, and they had
got
cured.
Vol. VIII Issue 3
Divine Cool Breeze
3
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-4.txt 
 I used to wonder why these Russians and Ukrainians are so sensitive persons to spirituality?
Then I realised that these people who have got spirituality in ancient, from ancient times they
were practicing this. But nobody practiced Kundalini awakening to this extent. In
village, they used to make these paintings about Mooladhara, about Agnya chakra, very
clearly. And in Agnya Chakra was Yin and Yang of the Chinese. After discovering that I really
felt that in the world, there must be lots of people like that. Now in Columbia, they have the
same Kundalini, and Kumba, and everything. I think that is even more than that 3-4 thousand
back before Christ. So what we find that we have all this knowledge in all these
every
years
countries and that knowledge is still working in the minds of the people. They were very
introspective.
This kind of sensitivity comes only when basically the roots of that country have exposure to
spirituality. It is a kind of miraculous revelation one could see there, how they know
everything about Kundalini, about Primordial Mother, about spirituality, and what happens
to a person when he becomes a realised soul. The speciality about them was that they are
extremely humble people. To them I am really, I don't know, how they bow to me. Sometimes
I just can't imagine how these people have such sense of spirituality and such peace. They
have this school. I asked them, " Aren't you worried? This school is here, and I don't know
what will happen to your country. They said, " Why should we worry? After all we are in the
kingdom of God, we are not in Russia. So why should we worry. We see such nice people
there, such sensitive people to spirituality. They have thrown away practically all the false
gurus, and for me they show such respect and such care. They had this conference only for
Me.
Now I am telling you all this that now you all have got your realisation, You have now felt
your spirit. And you have entered into the kingdom of God, no doubt. But now you must
understand that this power that you have, what it does to you, what it creates you. The most
important thing is, by this power, you become thoughtlessly aware. You come in the
to achieve the present is an impossible task. Once you are in thoughtless awareness, what
happens that no thoughts bombard your mind wherever you may be. What does that mean.
In very simple language, you can say, it means that you do not reflect. You do not have a
reflecting mind. Now this is the basic problem of Sahaja Yogis of today which one should try
i to conquer. That you do not reflect.
present,
For example, I have seen people, for nothing at all they just start laughing, they see somebody,
immediately they react. They start giving their opinion, about everything. Everybody seems
to be very knowledgable, and starts telling what is the best, what is not the best, what is not
good, and they start saying something like that, mind becomes reflective. If the mind is not
reflective, then you are in thoughtless awareness. Watch anything, just you watch, you just
witness. You should not reflect. If you are using your mental power, then this power subsides.
This is a very common defect with people because I think you people are more intelligent, well
educated. I don't know whatever you think. But this reflecting mind is a very dangerous thing
for spirituality. You will never grow.
Then with a reflecting mind, you have different emotions. With something you reflect on
somebody. Now if your son or daughter or something, you get identified. Identification with
Vol. VIII Issue 3
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-5.txt 
 some is artificial. It is not in reality. But because this mind reflects, it identifies. Now many
identifications you have dropped out. For example, your ideas about religion, races,
nationalities, you drop, But still the reflecting mind still acts. This is the greatest hurdle for the
of Sahaja Yogis of today, I have been thinking why this reflecting mind is so active
progress
in Sahaja Yogis of today. If you could stop reflecting, immediately you establish yourself in
ocean of peace. You watch something, just watch. There is no ripple of thought in your mind.
Then you become extremely creative, dynamic, extremely compassionate, and you have no
fear. Some people think if you are compassionate, this man might lench you. Have no fears.
All virtues that you have to enjoy, you can only enjoy when you do not reflect. That means
that
leave every thing to the Divine. You are not in charge. You don't see that you have
you
to be reflecting on something. This is the greatest power you have got, is not to reflect, not to
look at somebody with that kind of. I have seen, this still there, lingering.
Now I told you to have introspection. For introspection also it can be reflection. But that at
"least gives you an idea as to where you are. But with that, psychologically you can become
extremely depressed, you can condemn yourself. Then you many not understand yourself as
a personality that, you will go on sort of losing your vibrations, losing your power. Because
you are not in control of yourself. So introspection also, if it brings about depression and
demeaning
activities I have seen create problems.
of
your personality, best is not to introspect yourself. Because all these mental
In a state where you are thoughtlessly aware, introspection comes to you automatically. You
see it automatically, you understand it automatically. You do not think about it. It just comes
to you. The whole picture comes to you and you are at peace with yourself. You are never in
turmoil, never in trouble, then you don't get angry, you do not argue, you do not discuss, but
become as if dropped in the ocean of awareness. And you don't have to worry as to solve
you
something. When you are reflecting, then you find that this power works.
It becomes very contradictive to say that you have to project and you don't have to reflect.
Now when we reflect, we absorb. When we reflect on something, we absorb that thing. Mostly
our attention goes to the defects of others. This person is not good, that is not good, her hair
are not all right, her sari is not all right, this, that and all nonsense. So what are we doing? We
are absorbing all the bad things also. When you start admiration of something, then what
happens that you won't get the bad things, but at least you are on a better line. But still the
admiration in thoughtless awareness is really very deep. I saw this in the eyes of this
scientist, absolutely he was just one with me, and his eyes were like an ocean of peace. He was
just looking at me and for quite some time, and then he came to his thoughts and he told me,
this is what we can do with your photograph. So the depth in you will only come when you
do not reflect. But it is very common with the human beings, this carpet is not good, that is
not good, this smell is coming, that, this, there. Always trying to judge others. Judge other
things, which isn't important. What is so important? If you are sitting in the garden of
Heavens, what does it matter where you are sitting, what you are doing?
This reflection sets in waves of thoughts in our mind. I have already described it by drawing,
how the energy that falls on the right side goes to the left side and falls on the left, goes to
the right, crosses over. Then after this energy that goes to the right, this energy that goes to
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 3
5
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-6.txt 
 the left, it is sucked in partly into the sympathetic. Now whatever is left out is the one that
reflects. That is the way it goes on reflecting. Now if you can suck in all that energy and put
it on your sympathetic, then all our energies will be thousand times much more. We will not
be tired, we will not be unhappy. We will be able to stand lots of nonsense. But we will not
call it a nonsense, we will not think it is a bad thing, so it has no effect on us. This quality we
have to develop.
What a Devi can do, you should not do. That is her job, that she is supposed to do this, not
you. What you have to do is to only be in silence so that you absorb whatever will increase
that silence, which will increase your depth. Devi will look after all the other rest of the things.
She will look after all the filth, all the anger, all the temper, all the everything that is going on
this world. She will absorb all that, but what you have to do is to just enjoy everything that
is pure.
Enjoyment is only possible when you are beyond your mind, with your mind you can never
enjoy. Enjoyment comes when you are in complete silence, in a rippleless lake. The reflection
of all the joy that is created on the shores of that lake are completely reflecting, they are not
reflected. If there would have been ripples it would have been a different image altogether,
and would have been something more and near to the image of reality. So one must have a
mind which is kept lower than reality. The reality actually is nothing but peace and joy, no
sufferings, no starvation, nothing. They must just enjoy. But even to enjoy this, even to live in
that complete peaceful state, you have to be non reflective. Now you watch yourself. You will
be amazed how much reflective you are. When there is everything for you, when the
Paramachaitanya, I don't know how many things it is doing. It is trying to fill up the whole
atmosphere with its activity. What is your activity should be to stop your activity. You will
be amazed, in that state only you will grow. With that growth only you will become like that
scientist.
How the contradiction now is, that when you have your depth, you can project you depth, not
your mind. Sometimes when I say project, people think it is the projection of the mind. No.
You have to project that depth, that reality that is within you. For that, you don't have to think,
you don't have to plan, it will just work. But you are the instrument for that projection. It is
very simple to understand. Like I am talking on this instrument, all right, now if this
instrument is absolutely all right, there is no problem in it, it will be peaceful. But if this is full
of ideas and thought like our brain is, whatever I am saying will not be the same that will be
broadcasted in the same way, when our mind is full of turmoil and arguments and what
can say, comments, or we can also say the reflection, then what happens that this mind gets
into, like a whirlpool of disturbances and it cannot project itself fully because it is disturbed
it is not a normal thing. Now you will understand there is no contradiction. You can only
project yourself when you are absolutely peaceful. This is what we have to learn.
you
ier
You should know that Navratri starts actually in the western world from the 21 after the
equinox in September. There are 2 Navratris. One starts now and the other starts after the
second equinox. Now in this equinox. Mother Mary's birthday is there, and that is why people
celebrate her birthday. They don't know why she was born on the equinox for the balance.
Because nothing was explained about the lives of these great incarnations, people used them
Vol. VIII Issue 3
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-7.txt 
 the way they liked, because they have seen miracles with them. They do not try to understand
why this equinox and why this is celebrated. Now I was told in Iran, this is the time they have
the New Year. That means the Muslim observe this as the New Year, so when Navaratri starts
it is the new year. That means it is the 12th month for them, and so many things are suggesting
of that. Why should there be 12 months? Why should the Godess be born at 12 o' clock? AIl
this has a special meaning, which you can find out, but it is only possible when you are not
reflecting.
This is the state where you are really in connection with the All Pervading Power. Otherwise,
you are not there, you are not one with that state. To be one with that state, you have to be
absolutely silent within yourself. For the Goddess, She is silent. There is a fight on, She is silent
because She is so confident. She knows about Her powers, She knows Mahishasura cannot
trouble Her, cannot even touch Her. She knows what their powers are, and She knows all Her
powers, so She doesn't have to be disturbed by anything. She is not disturbed because She is
really the personification of this peace state where She is so powerful. She doesn't have tot
know about her power, She doesn't have to ask the power, they just work automatically.
* unknowingly. Without
you doing anything, and that is what we call as coincidences. But actually it is not coincidence.
It is the state in which we are in a thoughtless awareness and then the Paramachitanya is
related to us, absolutely, we are there, and that's working out everything for us.
This is the state in which you will be amazed so many things happen
In Sahaja Yoga, this time as you know about the Goddess that She has done so much work
for years together. Now you have become realised souls and you must understand and have
complete confidence in yourself, complete understanding about yourself, never to have
fear, never to have any thoughts which can bombard your mind, at that state you are the most
powerful person. I hope for this Navaratri, you will realize what work the Goddess has done
for
any
CO
how much She has worked hard, how much She has been fighting with these horrible
you,
devils and rakshasas. And sometimes I feel now these devils are within us, they are not
outside and that comes to us because we reflect too much on this. If we talk to any one of the
Western people, you are amazed as if all the media they have on their heads. They know about
each and every person, what he did, what was this, what was that. But he is not worried, he
does not think how he can improve, how you can work it out. At this state of thoughtless
awareness, you encompass the whole universe and at that state, this power works wherever
the problem may be.
We have to understand our value, that we have this power within ourselves. This is to be
respected, and to give credit to the Goddess because She has done so much for you, for us,
that She should not feel that now they have got realisation just for a while and that they are
not bothered, they don't know how to develop it. She will not be in any way hurt, but Her
work, what She has done, we have to see, we have to understand, and we have to have a
feeling that somehow, as we now have got enlightenment, we should try to be people as
complete instruments of that power. That is only possible when you don't have you own
ideas, your own interferences. Complete instruments, just like as I said, this instrument has to
be perfectly all right, otherwise it cannot work. Thank you very much.
THE
May God Bless You,
Vol. VIII Isue 3
Divine Cool Breeze
7.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-8.txt 
 DIWALI PUJA TALK
BY H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
(Translaied from Hindi)
Synopsis 29-10-1995
When I came to Nargol 25 years ago, it was not my idea that the Sahasrara should be opened.
I was thinking, let me wait and see what is the state of human beings. Man has still not
reached that state where he could understand what is self-realisation. Although many saints
have talked of realization and the knowledge of this is a lot in Maharashtra. The
reason is that the centre path followers who are called as Nath Panthies, these people talked
of only one path for the benevolence of the self, that is knowledge of the self. Without knowing
yourself you cannot achieve anything. This even I knew but at that time the state in which I
saw human beings was very strange. That man would run after such people who had no truth
in them. These people had no other aim except to earn money. When the state of man is such
that he cannot recognize truth at all, then it is very difficult to talk of truth to him. Why would
people listen to me? I used to feel again and again that man has to grow more. But then I saw
that people are bearing extreme problems of Kali Yuga. There were many people who due to
past live karmas were in great trouble. Some people because of the past lives came as Rakshas
in this world, and they were busy troubling, creating problems for people. They never felt bad
or faltered. I saw two types of people. One who gave trouble to others and the other who are
unhappy and troubled. I had to think to whom should I put my attention. The ones who
troubled others felt that they were perfect humans. They never ever imagined that they are
troubling others. The troubled people were bearing all this perhaps due to their helplessness
or they did not know that they should oppose such people who aggress them. At that time I
thought when will man think that he has to change. We have to bring forth a change. Some
would trouble more and some less, and some would bear more troubles and some less. This
was the state of the society. Maybe it could be in the name of God, or it could be in the name
of the country, or it could be government or economical. Someone was extremely poor and
someone extremely rich. This way in this country there was a kind of a deception going on.
I used to think that till man does not change, till he does not recognise himself, till he does
not attain his greatness and glory till then he will go on behaving in this manner. This was in
mind since childhood and I thought to understand human beings is necessary. First I used
to study humans a lot. I used to remain like a witness I tried to understand what is a human
being? What are his problems and faults and why does he think this way. Then I reached a
conclusion that man has either too much ego or super-ego which means conditioning. Because
of this he has no balance. Till he does not have balance how will the Kundalini rise? This is
and
sages
my
also a great problem.
When I came to Nargol, due to some strange going-on where a very wicked Rakshas had put
up his camp here. He had begged my husband to send me. I did not like him one bit but I
came here due to my husband's request. I stayed in the same bunglow. I was sitting under a
tree and watching the spectacle of this Rakshas and his camp. I was really surprised that this
fellow had called everyone and was mesmerizing them. Some were screaming, some were
barking like dogs, some were roaring like lions. I then realised that he was taking them to the
Vol. VIII Issue 3
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-9.txt 
 animal womb. He was awakening their sub-conscious mind. I got very worried. I had seen
many untruthful people before. I went around to see what they do. At least one should know
about them. I saw that they were extremely frightened people They had the guards and
weapons with them. If they were doing the work of God then why did they need all these
things? They would spend lot of money. They robbed people of crores of rupees by telling
lies. This is the importance of Kali Yuga that such wicked, evil people are still prospering. So
the answer to all this was that human awareness should be enlightened and awakened.
Wisdom should come and in one's awareness he should understand what is wrong.
I saw that in the society in which I lived, every minute people would do such things by which
they were destroying themselves like drinking, running after money, etc. When they spoke it
was not natural. It was artificial behaviour like a drama. I used to think what has happened
to man? Why is he stuck in such slavery and he is doing such wrong things. But to whom
could I say all this? I was completely alone. At that time when I came here I was in a dilemma
as to what should be done. I saw that this Rakshas was mesmerizing the people. Then I
understood that if I do not open the Sahasrara then the real seekers who are searching for God
may land up God alone knows where.
The next night I sat at the sea-shore the whole night. I was alone and I felt very nice. Then I
went into meditation and saw within myself and thought that I should open the Sahasrara. As
soon as I desired that the Brahmarandra should open, I saw the Kundalini within myself. She
rose like a telescope making a 'khat' noise through each chakra. Her colour was like many
colours, like when you heat iron and the many colours that flame from it. Then the Kundalini
arose and pierced through the Brahmarandra. I understood that now I could begin my
because the problem finished, I became completely free from worries. I thought, what will
happen? Perhaps people will oppose, protest or may laugh at me? If they want to do more
they will kill me. So there's nothing to worry about. I have to do this because I have come into
this world for this job. Because I had to awaken collective-consciousness. I thought till people
do not get self-realisation, they do not know themselves till then this work is impossible. You
can do all the things in the world but its no use.
work
The person was a very old lady to whom I gave realisation to. She believed in me a lot. I
thought, thank God at least she got realisation. As it is its not easy to give realisation in this
Kali Yuga to people. When she got her self realisation then I realised that it carn be that many
others
also be given realisation. To give vibrations and realisation to one was very easy.
may
To cure one person was very easy. If a person had a certain problem, ailment or some
conditioning, to take it out what should be done? One person has one kind of problem,
another has a different problem and a third has a third kind of problem. If one has to do
collective work then only by one session of realisation everyone should benefit.
The work of collective consciousness and realisation through this method I achieved with a lot
of meditation and contemplation. I turned my kundalini in all the directions, I put the grace
of
Kundalini on others and no one knew anything what I was doing. No one knew what
my
powers I had within me, who am I, not even in my family. I never told anyone, because it is
very difficult for the human brain to absorb. Everyone is sitting in their own egos. Now who
could tell them? Like Kabir has said "How do I tell them, the whole world is blind". The world
Vol. VIII Isue 3
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-10.txt 
 is not blind but ignorant. Then how could I give such subtle knowledge to them? But when
the Kundalini awakened in that lady then I saw that a very subtle power came into her and
she started understanding me with that subtle power. After that twelve people got their
realisation. After realisation I was surprised that their eyes starting shining and they started
observing everything. A strange experience came into them by which they could feel. I worked
on each chakra of the first twelve people because the foundation should be strong. To make
it strong I had to work very hard because though their Kundalini had awakened after
awakening the Kundalini to make it move in the right direction, it is necessary to do
meditation and contemplation, one has to make her settle down properly.
I realised that if these twelve people have twelve different natures, and by making them sit
together, how to organize the light of the Spirit, like we take a needle and thread and make
a garland by putting flowers one by one in it. How to get them collectively together. How to
take the different natures of these twelve men and how to tie them in one thread. When they
got their realisation then I saw that in all of them a one-threadness taking place slowly But to
tell the common people collectively this was not easy. Then they organised a programme
Cawasji Jehangir Hall. Then I told everyone how many Rakshas have come on this earth, what
they will do etc. Everyone got frightened. They said "If Shri Mataji talks like this someone will
murder Her". Everyone told me "Please don't say all these things otherwise there will be
many problems. I said, "Till now no one has been born who can Kill me. So do not worry".
in
I told them to meditate on my Kundalini, so they would become thoughtless immediately. By
becoming thoughtless they would feel that there is a great connection with me. Slowly
thoughtless awareness started growing and a new light of collectivity spread. I saw for the first
time at Cawasji Jehangir Hall that Indians have been born in India because their past lives
must have been very good. I did not have to work so hard in India, people would
realisation very quickly. In the beginning it certainly took a while but in the western countries
I would break my hands trying to give them realisation. To raise someone's Kundalini was like
trying to lift a mountain and then it would fall down again. Then when I started this work in
the collective I found it really difficult. They would ask strange and stupid questions. When
I would give them the answer they would be amazed that how does she know so much. They
would test me all the time. Because ego is tremendous there. In London the first time there
were seven Sahaja Yogis. All seven were hippies and used to take drugs. Then they became
Sahaja Yogis. I became a kind of a support that people left drugs because of Sahaja Yoga. To
put drug addicts right was not easy. In a way it was good because the hard work that I did
on them gave me an experience that even the most difficult of human beings, when he really
desires that he should get self-knowledge, then he does get realisation.
get their
I would tell them that desire from your heart your self-realisation that's all. Only by that they
would get realisation. I have different experiences of different countries like Russia, Ukraine
or Romania. These countries must have definitely got some connection with our country.
Nathpanthi saints like Gorakhnath, Machindranath must have gone to these countries because
what I found there, I realised that these people knew about the Kundalini hundreds of
before. Then I understood why these people got their realisation so fast.
Nathpanthis did a lot of work in Maharashtra and I also worked here a lot but the painful
Vol. VIII Issue 3
Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-11.txt 
 thing is that what I have been able to achieve in north India, I have still not seen that in
Maharashtra. I can't understand where the saints have worked so hard and,every
Maharashtrian knows who were the Naths and what work they did. In this very Maharashtra
Sahaja Yoga has not settled down so fast like in the North. What could be the cause for this?
I feel that when people know everything before hand then a kind of indifference comes
towards it. In Sanskrit there is a saying when you go again and again somewhere or meet
someone then disrespect is shown towards you. Then you do not get the same respect. Because
people who live in Prayag instead of bathing in the Triveni, they bathe in their houses.
Whereas people from all over the world go there after doing puja to bathe in the rivers. There
are many Sahaja Yogis in Maharashtra who are very active, but the surrender to Sahaja Yoga
is lacking. Surrender means that the Sahaja Yogi state which we have got, how do we use that
state of a Sahaja Yogi. Is it only for our own benevolence solve our own problens, or our own
families or is it for the whole world?
The first thing you have to do is meditation is to go deep. When you go deep then you feel
that why should I only enjoy it, why should not others enjoy it. When this desire comes within
then Sahaja Yoga grows. After that man thinks that in his life he should give joy and happiness
to others there is nothing greater than that. He forgets all other things. When this happens then
Sahaja Yoga grows. Day and night he keeps thinking the same thing. He enjoys it.
Now money has become a big thing in Maharashtra. From morning they get up at 4 am, do
meditation, etc. But it is a kind of mechanical thing. It should be done from the heart and with
devotion. Try to spread that devotion. This is what Maharashtrians should do.
I had never thought that I will see all this in my lifetime. This is the greatness of the Kundalini
and the work of Param Chaitanya. I was myself surprised by the Param Chaitanya that what
it will do next. Although it is my Power but this paramchaitanya is making different kinds of
photographs of mine, is showing different kinds of miracles. Like in Mexico a lady who
worked in the U.N.O. got her realisation. She wrote to me that her son got very ill. she had
an illness in her family where children grow aged. This child had this disease. She wrote three
letters to me. In the fourth letter she wrote that the boy recovered by himself. This is the work
of Param Chaitanya and there is no doctor greater than the Param Chaitanya. The
works its amazing. Many have had many miraculous experiences, because the Param
Chaitanya is now filled with blessings. Everywhere you have blessings. It will give you love,
peace and will look after you in every way. Everything is there but now a lot of speed has
come into its movement. This time there was such a big programme in America in a big hall
where people had no place to sit and in five minutes everyone got realisation and that also in
a place like Los Angeles. Everywhere I went it took five minutes to give realisation. It was
surprising. The actions of Param Chaitanya have grown so much, and of such diverse
it
way
really
kinds that one can't understand. Someone took my photo and desired that what is said of the
Devi that in Her feet is the moon and on Her head the sun, should get such a photo and really
such a photo came. Whatever you people desire will happen. What should be said. This Param
Chaitanya's power works so efficiently and knows so well the problems and ailments of all
and cures them with great love and patience. When you have worshipped the Adi Shakti at
that very moment you have also worshipped the Param Chaitanya or the 'Ruh'. This Shakti
Vol. VIII Issue 3
Divine Cool Breeze
11
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_3.pdf-page-12.txt 
 is now so activated that you people should not delay the global transformation of this world.
The ones who will come andwill work for it they will gain. The way this Shakti works. And
you can get realisation because of it. If you start using it then you can do every kind of work
If someone is troubling you, you can give him bandhan. You can give bandhan to any work
you want to do. In bandhan what do you do? The shakti that is flowing through you. you take
that Shakti and tie it and whatever questions or problems you have you give bandhan to that:
You have this shakti and you are so powerful. If you use this, I don't know where you can
reach.
May God Bless You.
Edited by
Published by : Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud,
: Yogi Mahajan
Pune - 411 029.
Printed by
: Golden Arts, 2/11, Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Pune 411 029.
Vol. VIII Issue 3
Divine Cool Breeze
12
