COOL BREEZE DIVINE VOLUME VIII ISSUE 8.9 & t When you teel responsible, you must know that you are not incharge. Secondly you must also know that there are so many other forces, so many angeis and ganas who are with you. You are not alone. So to think that you are doing anything will make you, may be, egoistic. At that time, what you have to say iS alright I am not doing anything it is Divine that is working it out. by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahasrara Puja 96. Cabella, Italy

 DIVINE C OOL BREEZE VOLUME VIII ISSUE 8, 9 & 10 CONTENTS 1. ADDRESS TO BUSINESSMENS 3 2. SAHASRARA PUJA SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA 3. 14 SCRIPTURAL REFERENCE TO SAHAJA YOGA 4. 21 5. GURU PUJA. 26 Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 1

 ADDRESS TO BUSINESSMENS Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 5-4 - 96, Delhi (Synopsis) Until we find out the truth we keep thinking of this and that, what we call our mind is actually not our brain. We keep thinking about what our mind is saying but, you will be surprised to learn where this mind comes from and what it actually is, it is very important to know this. This mind that is in us is really a situation made by us. The reason for this is that when we look at something, maybe not true of animals, we tend to react upon it. For example this beautiful laid here we see it is very beautiful, now, if it is ours, we are worried that it carpet might get spoilt, so we should get it insured and if it is not ours, then we are worried about where it came from, for how much, all such things keep coming to our mind. When a child is small and its mother is with it, it is enjoying itself. Then its mother wants to take it some other way ad the child does not like it. It feels why is my mother bothering me. Then that reaction which develops within the child gradually develops as what is called his When the mother tells it not to do something, it does not like it, but listens to her because ego. she is its mother, that forms the child's conditioning. In this way, there are only two things within us, either we go according to our ego or our conditioning. There is no third thing in us that can guide us about what we are doing, whether it is right or wrong, whether we will benefit from it or not, whether it is driving us towards our destruction or our fame. Which ever way, we are our conditioned, we keep moving in that direction and then our ego develop. Depending on the kind of ego, we function. Both these things are present within us, are made by us. Take, for example this watch which we have made. Now we have become slaves of this watch. As soon as these people said, Mother you have to leave at seven o'clock, I thought to myself, now there goes, we won't reach on time because, we are away from time. If someone tries to tie me down by time, that job is gone. Then this was a great worry, why are they saying this. In this manner we get tied down by time and become a slave to it. also. can But for the computer, we cannot add two plus two. This also, we must try to rectify. Then this give and take is not in us, then this brain, which is the reality, has very little work to do and just like a cartridge of a watch, we are moving, and just like a robot, we are living. Then what the reality is, we are away from it. We can get into the realm of reality. When we get into this realm, we can not only find out about ourselves, but about others too. That does not mean about what clothes or jewellery they are wearing, but about their chakras in what condition they are. You will be surprised to know that these Seven Chakras within us are our energy centres. Now, this energy centre has a little power what we use. When we use it too much, then people have stress, or heart ailments or some other ilinesses. These are the centres, from where all our physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual problems get solved. These are the seven centres within us, maybe you are not aware of their existence. Not only do these seven centres exist, but a lot of people have found the key to them. However, we take these centres too much to one side that we do not have Satisfaction. You yourself can think that on a physical level what problems businessmen can have. There is a Chakra which we call the Swadhistan Chakra. Now this Chakra is very important because Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 3.

 its main job is to nourish our grey cells in our brain. The doctors are not aware of this, but it is a fact. If all the time we are using our mind then where is it going to get the energy from. For all our thoughts, desires, plans, to complete them, it requires energy, and this energy comes from the Swadhistan Chakra. Now this Swadhistan Chakra has a lot more to do. It is from this that our liver, spleen and kidneys function. When this works on one side its energy towards one direction, then all sorts of illnesses manifest themselves. First of all, the liver goes gets hot, then to top it, a lot of thinking, planning, gets it more hot. The liver, whose job is really to release this heat into the blood stream, is not able to do so. Then this heat either passes up or down or sideways. When it goes up, then you will be suprised to learn, you get asthama. A lot of people complain, Mother, I have got asthama, it is incurable, no it can definetely be cured. In fact one doctor who is now in America has received his M. D. in this. The second illness that sets in is very common, diabetes. This Chakra also looks after the pancreas. If it gets spoilt, diabetes sets in. Those people who think a lot, plan a lot, their spleen gets affected because the job of the spleen is to release red blood corpuscles in our body in an emergency. Now a days the era is such that we are time-bound people. We sleep late, get up early, somehow run to our car and office. Our spleen which is so sensitive feels let me give red blood corpuscles, it also gets worried with the worries of the person, and then the illness that sets in is a very horrible one, blood cancer. The second illness is kidney failure, all of a sudden, First you are put on dialysis. Then you get bankrupt. Because you cannot be cured by dialysis. That is a fact, inspite of what the doctors say. Apart from this, there are many illnesses like constipation, terrible constipation and this also causes diseases. However, the heart cannot be saved. Because, if the heat goes towards the heart, it is a young person, he is drinking, playing tennis, thinking also, then it catches such a person. Why? This rush of heat that will go towards the heart, will be fatal if a person gets a heart attack between the age of 21 and 25, he cannot survive. Now lets see how this heart is controlled. When it keeps getting this heart, the heat gets weak. Then suddenly one finds out, at the age of 55, one starts getting heart attacks. Then, people get worse, paralysis takes place and such horrible paralysis that the entire right side stops functioning. One chakra can cause so many illnesses, especially those in people who plan a lot, who are very futuristic. Such people will always have a cold, and sometimes they will get the flu. Now imagine if one chakra can cause so many diseases, what will happen if somebody's second chakra gets spoilt. All these diseases that are psychosomatic, like cancer, Parkinson's they originate from the swadhistana and then in their combination other chakras get spoilt and there is no other way to treat them. If you think doctors can treat them with medicine etc. they cannot. You have to put energy in them and for this the almighty has in the Mooladhar bone put this called the Kundalini. The name has been suggested by human beings because it is in three and a half coil and one coil in Sanskrit is called a Kundal and because it is Mother's power, it is called Kundalini. When this energy is awakened and it passes through these chakras and pierces through out fontanel bone then it meets with the all pervading power of the divine. energy What is the truth ? The truth is that all these beautiful things you see, the trees, the greenery, the world, we do not even think how these were made, isn't it surprising. For example these Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10

 beautiful flowers, how their fragrance is who does this ? If you ask a doctor, who makes my heart beat, he will say the autonomous nervous system. Now, who is this auto? If it is an äuto then there is a driver inside, who is he? They have no answer to this. It is your spirit and we are alive because our spirit is alive. This does riot mean that you go away to the jungles, or the himalayas, or stand on one leg. There is no need for that. It all happened in your previous life itself, that's why you are here. There is no need for such dramas or to spend money. You cannot buy this. Like you are a human being, you can become a great person, this is a living process, it car happen very easily and this energy is within everyone and you have to receive it. You do not have to do anything for it, it is Sahaja, spontaneous. For example you have a seed which you have to plant in the ground. What do you have to do ? Nothing, just plant it because that seed also has power and the mother earth also has power, it is fertile. In the same way, it is not difficult to awaken the Kundalini within you. There is no obligation. Now, when we have this power within us and we can get it, why shouldn't we? Now, what are the difficulties we can face, we should understand. Like if we are trying to make a discovery. The world today is such we must get some peace. Now, until we go beyond this mind of ours, we cannot get peace. It is the Kundalini which takes us where we are absolutely at peace within. We see everything like a witness, we do not react to anything, as a consequence our memory improves. Whatever we want to see, a problem, as long as we are within the problem, we are unable to solve it but as soon as we come out of the problem it solves because we are connected to the divine. We are one with the Divine, it should not be difficult but first you should have the faith. Why so many people lose faith? Maybe you have committed some mistakes, forget them. That was your past, you are not concerned with it, You are in the present, I call it the Blossom time because so many people have come, been born, Yogis flower have blossomed and with the awakening of the Kundalini they have borne fruit. It has happened with thousands and lakhs of people and it is not diffucult for it to happen to you. There is no obligation on anyone's part in this, mine or yours. It is Your own individual thing. The only thing is that after receiving it, you have to meditate for a while, there is no restriction that you do not eat this, or do this, nothing of this sort that you leave you house or children. This everyone has said, Christ said "Know thyself", Prophet Mohammed said clearly, you will be surprised, that until you know yourself, you cannot know God. Now, if others say something else, we are not concerned. If everyone has said that know yourself and it is not difficult, then why not. Some people think that after that they will lose their business, they are very afraid. It will flourish ten fold, it does because your outlook is honest and you are satisfied. Not that like mad people you are at it, sometime this happens, then that happens, nothing like that. The madness goes away and you are absolutely satistfied. You know that the Economic law is that wants are not satiable in general. Like today you desire a car, then a house. Now you have a car then on one side, you want a house now. You have a house, now you want an aeroplane. One after another, never satisfied. The reason is that these things can never satisfy you. Satisfaction is only a state of mind. If he has it, well and good, if he doesen't, it doesen't matter. He doesen't get upset and worry too much about his bodily comforts. Now an whether you make him sit on velvet, or on the floor, he is happy. He is on badshah', nothing can tie him down. He is in 'Bad shahat'. You can receive all this and you have a right to do so. If you receive it, it is very good. The biggest achievement will be you will realise that over you there is a great power, a power of love. Till now none has used this power of love. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 5.

 Everyone is using might. You use this power of love and see. You are seeing that in our country there is so much turmoil. This greed has increased to such an extent, there is no need for it. These people do not have any place to keep their money, they are putting it in their walls. Now will they take their walls up with them? There is no sense left, there is a limit to one's greed. I can understand that something you do not have you enjoy. They cannot enjoy anything, they just go on and on. This is madness and ther should be escape from this madness. Whatever you have, you should enjoy it. Now you will definitely feel that Mother has taken us to an ocean of joy. We have a disciple, Mr. Zaffar a Muslim doctor. He came to me and everyone was singing at that time. I don't know what happened to him. Out of sheer joy he kept singing. I asked him, "Dr. Zafar, what happened to you?" he said, "I was in the complete bliss that's all I can say", and for hours, he was in bliss, I said "eat something", he said "I was in thoughtless awareness". Just think that you people attend so many parties, host so many parties, but you cannot get jov. Then talk about this one, that one, somebody's thing came from there, this one was saying that, all this will stop. Such friendship and such love, till now you have not seen such love in collectivity. It is such an enjoyable thing, that thousands of people are sitting together in the ocean of love. Whoever sees us is surprised. In a country like Russia there is communism in Russia. I have nothing to do with communism and nor do I approve of it. But one good thing came out of it, that there was no desire left in them. Like the government told them that we give you flats, take them in your name, they said no, don't give them in our name you keep them. Everybody is scared of having things in their name. There, God knows how many people became Sahaja Yogis. There are so many scientists, so many people with no desire. Yes, there are some 35% people who want things like Malborough cigarettes, some 35%, not the rest, they are so well educated, intelligent people. I asked them you are not bothered, you are going to have a coup here, they said we have no problem, Mother why should we worry, we are all in the Kingdom of God we are not in this Kingdom ! Which Chakra causes what, there is no need to bother about it. You get self-realisation. Nowadays in the market there are lots of Gurus. Their business is such to take so much mothey how can you take money for something that is invaluable? You can purchase a Guru, then that Guru is your servant, how can he be your Guru? If you can understand this, then it is good, there are many such false Gurus in our country and outside also. This also can sometimes cause harm. This self realisation is all your wealth. You have to receive it. For this you just have to have faith in yourself. That I have to receive it. May God bless you. Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze

 SAHASRARA PUJA Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 5 - 5 - 96, Cabella, Italy (Synopsis) This for all the humanity it was such an achievement, which I never realised before now I can see that without self realisation it would have been impossible to talk to people. When this happened I thought that how will I talk to people about it, because no one would understand and it would be a bit of mistake on my part to say something about Sahasrara, because even about Sahasrara no where in the scriptures as was described. It was absolutely an ambiguous description, people could not have even thought there is realm beyond Sahasrara. One has to enter into that reality, where is the reality? That time what I saw around me, I felt is all darkness and unless and until there are many lights people will never realise how important it is to have lights. It is a human error also, all the time, that if somebody achieves something, then they put that person into a shell, for example Christ, but we are not Christ. Mohammad Sahib, we are not Mohammad. Rama was Rama, Krishna was Krishna, we are not that. How can you expect human beings to behave like that? So, absolutely they separated, the Divine personality away from human personalities. It was just a duration of faith, when they said we could try to follow them but people could not follow them, because I think, human movement is on parallel lines with the Divine and these lines do not meet, unless and until you give them. self realisation. Human level is moving on a another plane and it has to come up to a higher plane to understand that what they know is not reality. People described to be very bad, cruel, licentious, cheats, horrible, but I have seen that, every human being is as is made of the same character as far as the spirit is concerned. Outside they maybe different to look at, their way of talking may be different, their styles may be different, their fondness for things may be different, but inside they are all very good and this I found out one after another. You do not know how much joy it was giving me, not only joy but encouragement support and patience and then how you see Sahaj Yoga has grown. The greatest thing that happened is which I realised, I am very happy about it, that Sahaja Yogis feel very responsible about Sahaja Yoga, and they feel that they have to spread this enlightenment everywhere. It is their innate desire how to spread Sahaja Yoga. Firstly it was that they should become spirits before that also there were some people who did not actually seek spirits, but they also become Sahaja Yogis and I am surprised that some of you that I have never expected that they would go so far and suddenly you hear that such and such person has gone there and has done this and that when you canme into the realm of reality, I do not know, which principle you accepted first, that is your understanding, but one thing you realised that you are definitely connected with the Divine. Some people had so tremendous experiences, some had mild experiences, but most of them I saw started believing in themselves, understanding them selves and having confidence about themselves. There are so many myths about God, Religion, Gurus, that when they saw the light of the spirit which gave them sense of reality. As if they have studied their mind, themselves. All this happened, in a very short time, I did not say that it took me long or I had to go to lots of various experinces because to me these experineces are nothing. If I see the sea-worthy it can face all Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze

 kinds of high tides, all kinds of shark and everything without any difficulty because it is sea worthy only I felt from the human level to spiritual level to Divine level, When you are coming then some of that still lingers on, some of that is still there. It has to be cleansed, it has to be brightened, or absolutely enlightened what is great thing about Sahaja Yoga is that you yourself did all that. It is nice to you to say that mother you did this, you did that, may be the enlightenment part of it, but see how there are lights, here, unless and until they attended to look after and given oil of love, how can they go on burning? This is something that I must say that how important it was to become good Sahaj Yogis. May be by introspection, I did not say, may be somebody else talked about it. May be it is your own understanding. Whatever it was, all of you tried to be good Sahaj Yogis. Of course, there are people who are sometimes very angry with me, like why you do not cure my sister, why don't you cure my father if you are God this that or this that, but it makes no difference to me because they so frustrated, so upset, so they are talking, if you see one or two persons here and there you see thousands of such beautiful people complete emancipations of this growth. I am sure it will take place, if you people take up the responsibility. The responsibility has certain problems. When you feel responsible, you must know that are not incharge. Secondly you must also know that there are so many other forces, so many angels and ganas who are with you. You are not alone. So to think that youu are doing anything will make you, may be, egoistic. At that time, what you have to do, is to best is to say alright I am not doing anything it is Divine that is working it out not that Divine wants for that, but by saying that this balloon of ego will not come you will become humble and this humility will definitely improve this greatness of spirituality within you, Definitely it will make you a very ivolved personality. No doubt about it, but first of all we have to say that I am not doing any thing. It is very important to understand when you have spiritual authority to do this. It is not a testing ground. Many people think that mother is testing us. I am not testing. You are testing yourself. I am not saying don't do this and don't do that. You are testing yourself and now must know that you are in beautiful garden of reality, where very few have entered and there, in that garden when you enter, what do you see is every thing is full of beauty, every person has something sweet about it, because all other Sahaj Yogis are also having the same kind of experiences of this reality, which cannot be described in words but you start thinking that oneness, that friendship without any expectations. A kind of a complete integrated organism has become an organisatio, which is living organisation. In that do not feel that you are something separate. Any Sahaja Yogi whether he is highly placed you credit any you or he is not doing much in life, this integration, this oneness is feeling of identification with others makes you so large, so big, so great, so powerful. You are not alone and you say I am not doing anything. So you become so humble that you forget all these false ideas about class consciousness or religion conscienceness when that humility becomes your character you are humble. When people are doing some sort of Sahaja yoga, they will be extremely humble or they will be unkind otherwise. When that doesn't mean you become weak. Humility is only very possible for people who are strong, because they don't need any reactions. They don't need any protection. Their humility keeps them protected, so you just start thinking or feeling, thinking is funny work, feeling that you are a small dust part. At the same time you feel you Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10

 are the whole sky. It depends on where you are what are doing what you are seeing what are witnessing. Sometimes you feel that all these big big Johnys are useless. You feel nothing to worry about them. They are very small and with some people you feel you are very. small such a flexible temperament should be there and that makes you subtler and subtler because it can penetrate into anything, any subject, any personality, any understanding, any book, any thing, any enterprise, in ver being subtle manner and you immediately see what is to be done became you become subtler and then when you become very great, then you start thinking or I should say feeling what you can do to help so many people to this great job they don't think. that you are egoistic, nor you should think that you are very you small. Now, you are the spirit. Spirit is very subtler. So very subtle but it can penetrate into any thing, it could expand into anything it can rémain anywhere or it can disappear any where. This subtly personality that you are which is your spirit. You even don't use it, but it uses you the time, without your knowledge it tuses you. all The second thing, should be that you should not determine, what you are going to do. What I have to do. Tf I have decided I must do that. Whatever you have decided is alright, but if it is does not materialised there is nothing to worry. There is nothing to be upset. There is nothing to be overly nervous about it, I give an example; One day I was going to America, and all the Sahaja Yogis were worried about the flight. Time, no time, this time. I said, I have to go to America why are you worried. Suddenly one of the Sahaja Yogi's child feel down and broke her hand and she could not meve her fingers. As soon as she brought the child I said alright I am not going just now to the airport. They were very upset, now she is not going to the airport as if all the heavens are going to fall down, treated the child and the child was alright. Alright now let us now go to the airport. They were saying "Mother, the plane must have left" When we went to the air port, it was reported that there was something wrong with the plane but there was another plane going to Washington, and I wanted actually to go to Washington instead of New York. So, I was in the plane nicely going to washington. One must know that you are not doing anything. Everything is arranged, planned and beautifully kept for you. You decide something it is alright, if your decision is alright, if you are to do that it will work out, If it is doesn't work out. It should not have been worked. Now, this is the difference between a person who is realised soul and who is not a realised soul. Realised soul is not bothered what he wants, what he likes what he is fond of. Whatever, he gets is alright. That you can live under any circumstances, because you don't worry about your physical comforts any moment. You only think of your own spiritual comfort. Even children if something funny comes in T. V. immediately they close their eyes. We don't want to see. those things. Nobody has to tell them because they have inside a built in subtle personality which cannot stand nonsense. They may not say something. They may not be harsh, but they shun and go away from such places automatically. So to describe the new personality is this way, that in the nature we see very clearly. In the nature we see that a tree grows. Now, it has to expand but if it cannot so it does not. f it it will and also it trys to bring all the leaves exposed to the sunlight somehow. I don't think that trees have that intelligence to organise it, but there is something that organises it. Now that it is not only one tree, but Thousands and thousands. The one who does all that is the can, Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 6.

 one with whom you are in contact. The trees are just playing into the hands of nature, but they cannot manipulate, maneuver, understand this Divine power. Animals cannot. Even human beings cannot. But you can because you have crossed the limit of this human bondage and now you are just like great citizens of the great realm of Divinity. This Divine force helps you, works it out, and also it takes you, guides you manages you, so what you have to do is to keep yourself open for the guidance at the same time you must act because the guidance will also come from within, by which you will know what I have to do. Now supposing even then you feel that this was not achieved in you, when you feel that still I don't know why I couldn't get what I wanted, it never means that you should give up, or that you should not desire. Sahaja Yogis desires are much more powerful than mine. The reasons is I am disireless. I have no desires as such. I do not earnestly want anything. You people are differently made, because you have achieved something. I have not achieved anything. I am what I am. Because you have achieved something. You know, how you were and what you are now. Because of your achievement, it is a boon, that whatever you desire worksout. Because you have worked so hard, it is boon. It is a special blessing, that will be effective and try to realise that you are no more ordinary human beings. You have crossed the bondage and now you are not even Sahasrara, you are beyond it. Sahasrara is the limbic area and this limbic area is closed like a lotus and when you get your Kundalini entering into it then this lotus opens like this and that is what is written in the Bible that "I will appear before like tounges of flames" is the Divine. These subtle flames are nothing but nerves which are enlightened and look like flames but these flames are not with any heat (Taap Heen) extremely cooling, soothing, beautifully burning. When this Sahasrara lotus opens, the Kundalini pierces through your fontanel bone and get your open, and there is where we fail sometimes because there are still some ingering human feelings within us. Firstly, it is covered with the ego and conditionings, super ego, two balloons. These two balloons again and again try to close the Sahasrara. So you have to be on the guard that what is closing my Sahasrara. The first is ego because you want to attack your ego, you will have to attack through ego only. That is the only vehicle. So we have this state of Nirveechara, of thoughtless awareness, where we have to go. But the simple stäte to is very practical. Try to understand that why you are being egoistical, with whom are you angry, why are you angry, what makes you think to dominate someone or to control someone or to check someone, why? The mind will not answer. you realisation. This is what has happened to you. Now the only thing is to keep this lotus The simple thing if you can do that whatever things that upsets you or makes you feel very great try to understand that compared to you nothing is great. Compared to your love nothing is great, compared to you compassion nothing is great because in this there is light of Divine hood. You hate someone, you get angry with someone, just know you have to love that person. Now how will you love that person. There is no way to have any measurement of that, love itself suggests how satisfied your feeling how happy you are. I will give an example. The other day I received the letter from someone challenging me very much from Poland that her mother is sick with cancer or something that if you are God you must cure my mother I said alright. I put my attention to the case perhaps, your Mother is best. But instead of getting angry I said she is so frustrated, she is so upset, she is so worried even if she is challenging, Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 10

 it is alright, it makes no difference. Whether she calls me God or not God makes no difference whatever I am, I am. So, instead of getting angry, I felt tremendous compassion for her. She is a human being and her mother is sick that is only source of her life then I understand why she is so upset. If you just try which you can do very easily. It is not difficult, because you are realised souls. I am talking to saints, if you just put your attention on a person with love then you get. Understanding of that person, you realise, as if identified with that person, then you realise that if I was in her place as a human being what I would have felt. This desperation this anger, if I was that, if I was the same type of person, with the same kind of problems then what would I have do. You can penetrate, identification with another is very important and you can do it, because you are realised souls. Just place yourself in the same position as the other person and then you realise that you have powers of love. Identification is the only way, i think, one can understand love. This ego will immediately get sucked in as Soon as you put your loving attention on that person. In your life time you will get so many experiences that you will be amazed at your self how can I do all these things, because you are a realised soul. Also as I said, when you are identified with another person you put that person incharge of Divinity. Just a feeling of oneness. Sometimes we have very wrong ideas about ourselves and about others Small, small things also we have our own ideas about somethings. Say, some sort of a living standard some people say, I don't like it, or I like it a saint, never says that, supposing somebody has done a I beautiful flower arrangement, instead of appreciating and enjoying it you come and say, identify yourself with the gentleman who has done it, You will enjoy the way way that person enjoyed in doing it. Because, you are just thinking of yourself, self opinionated with which you think that this is not done so good that could have been better, Who are you to judge anyone? This critisising nature comes from a terrible misunderstanding about oneself. What are we? Why we should judge anybody else. Are we paid for it? So, why waste energy in judging others. We should see what is good in others, because in the realm of realities all good, everything is fine, every thing is first-class, but if you are trying to see what's wrong with others then you are not in reality. You can watch, you can witness, but you do not get upset with it or you do not even say something that would upset others. You are watching it. It is all beautifu just the joy of the person who put it all these beautiful things unless and until you identified with those who have done this, you might say, this should have been better that should have been better. You can be in the same position, supposing you do something another will come and say you could have done it this way, that way. Wasting our energy for nothing at all. don't like, this could have been better. I don't know why, people say that but if you Our energy is spiritual energy. Then again you become lights in the sky. You are too greats to bother about all these things. Wasting our energy on very, very trivar things, useless things and just making yourself small. But, if this spiritual energy is used because, you can use it, you are the ones only who can manipulate it, not the trees, not the flowers. Then what you will do is to create oceans of joy. So, then we come to Sahaj. What Sahaja has given you is alright. But what have I given to Sahaja Yoga ? Have I created oceans of joys for others ? What kindness I have shown, what Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 11

 compassion I have shown, what love I have expressed or whatever Sahaja Yoga has given, you have taken it for granted, once they come to Sahaja Yoga, they think it is a contract already signed and if thing work out then what is this, we had a contract with God and we have not been rewarded fully for whatever we have paid, whatever we have done. What have you done in this realm of reality ? Have you enjoyed the reality? Have you felt the joy of this real love of Divine. Are you dissolved into that or you are still standing on the shores watching it. You can create, you are quite capable of creating tremendous joy, tremendous happiness and peace. See the world today in what condition it is . Complete turmoil, confusion, all kinds of corrupt and destructive things going on, so ugly, this world has become. Can you beautify it? You can, because you can transform people, but if you are not yourself a beautiful Sahaja Yogi, How can you? So it is our attention on ourselves when we work out, that we have to bring others into this realm of reality. This is one side of ourselves where we have to understand our subtleties, the other side is that we are still identified with things which we should not have identified. We can just find out identified consciousness with ideas, identified with some sort of a conscientiousness. All these things make may be a fool of you. All the fools who are conditioned are really like a train which has no driver. God knows when it is going to collide, Once in my own life, I was with some relation of mine, this gentleman Lused to get up at 4 O'clock and would start singing some sort of a Rama-Shloka. The whole house was sleeping, children were sleeping he would be shouting at the top of his voice. Even Rama might be sleeping at that time, but he would shout. His bathing was another thing everybody knew because he used to sing another shlokas. I was in the next room and heard something like banging,banging I said what's the matter might be epilepsy or what. I rushed to other people and told this gentleman is suffering from epilepsy. They said no, he does not suffer he rubs that sandal wood, With such a big thud everytime he was putting that stone on the ground. This we understand as stupidity. Then we see others. Even realised souls. You are in the realm of reality. You do accept sometimes unreal things, Because of age-old- conditionings. Your forefathers were like this so still continuing we call it genes, but In Sahaja yoga these genes also change. This kind of a conditioning, which is lingering on still with your bodies, minds with your emotions. Has to be seen and cleaned out, because that kills the joy, that kills the full experience of the reality. If you want to have full experience of the beauty of reality then you should shed out all these things which are really befooling you morning till evening. People take advantage of such people very much, like you entrepreneurs who keep changing fashions every day. We are not brainless people but also have enlightened brains. We do not take to things which are just in the fashion. We are of our own fashion. This is not ego. This is identification with your own spirit. You won't take anything nonsensical if you are the wisdom of your spirit stupid So in the realm of reality, your all the Seven Chakras are absolutely enlightened, integrated, nourished and at position where we see is ourselves, It has nothing limited it is absolutely unlimited,we can penetrate, say expand or we contract. This is absolutely a flexible personality, and a personality that creates, ease, joy and harmony Because Sahasrara opening. The whole world would be integrated one day we will understand the problems that are facing us because of stupidity. This integration when it takes place, you will see the of the Divine will be absolutely shining out of light darkness of these destructive Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 12

 forces. It is going to happen. If somany Sahasraras could be opened out then why not the Sahasraras of this world also opened out to put to reality. So today is important day, in the history of spirituality, for it is to realise, it is very important we are enlightened, we are the light of joy, light of Compassion, light of love like the silent flames of Sahasrara, in different colours, beautifully dancing. Then we know what the enjoyment of reality is. May God Bless You. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 13

 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 9 - 6 - 96, Cabella (Synopsis) The reflection of Adi Shakti within you is the Kundalini. We can say this is the worship of the Adi Shakti and Adi Kundalini. Whatever is created on this universe and in many universes is the work of the Adi Shakti. Now, many people believe that there is one God. It is true. There is one God, God Almighty, but He Has his own powers which He can embody into someone and can get His own manifestation expressed. So, first of all what He did was to create the power of Adi Shakti. When it was created thern there was a sound, the sound that we call as AUM, Logos, or anything you call it by the Primordial Sound. These three powers came out of that sound A, U and M, AUM. The Adi Shakti is the who embodies the desire of God Almighty. The desire of God Almighty comes out of His compassion and for His own expression, for his own manifestation, for His own reflection. I would say that He must be tired of loneliness so He must have thought of creating a partner, who will manifest His desires. Thus the power of God Almighty separated from Him and formed an embodiment of His compassion, His desire to create. In Sanskrit they use a word Chit Vilas, it is the enjoyment of the Adi Shakti. Chit is attention. The attention has its own joy and to manifest that joy of our attention, She created all the Luniverses. She created this Mother Earth, She created all this nature, She created all the animals, She created all the human beings and She created all the Sahaja Yogis. This is how the whole creation has worked out. At this juncture one may ask that why did She not straight forward create human beings. That was the idea of God Almighty. Just to create human beings, without telling them anything, something a better animals than the rest of the animals. But Adi Shakti, being the mother, She had Her own way of expression. She thought She must create the mirrors for God Almighty to see His face, to see His image, to see His character and that's how this long range of evolution took place. This evolution had to work out this way because they had to know from where they come. We must know that we come from nature. Even nature should know it comes from the Mother Earth. Mother Earth herself has her own Kundalini. She too is not just a dead earth but she knows, she thinks, she understands and she regulates. You can see in the nature how every tree has got its own limitations, how every fruit is produced in a particular tree, how it happens? What works out this kind of regulation? If this Mother Earth was moving with a higher speed than what it is today we would not have been born even. If it would have been less speed, it would not have worked out. See the whole plan that was made. It's a beautiful plan that the Mother Earth has to move around the sun in such a manner that different seasons are created. That's why the power, the Parama Chaitanya, which is the of the Adi Shakti is also called as Ritumbhara Pragya. This is the power that does all the living work, all the organisation, all the creation. In our human ego we start thinking that we do something. We can create. We cannot even create a particle of dust, leave alone anything else. Whatever is created out of that we may combine, we can put together and create something. you see that this whole thing is nothing but beyond our any power. We cannot create power But if Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 14

 anything, But what do we create is our myths, for example - something is made of Gold, still it is Gold. Now something is made of wood, whatever it is it is made of wood. The principle is the same in everything. Whatever may be your birth, whatever may be the country you are born, whatever may be your culture, you are human beings. Basically you all are the same. You laugh the same, you smile the same smile, also you cry the same way. I have never seen any body crying with his hands, tears falling out of his fingers, and that is how one has to realize that we are all bound by some common principle of life. The common principle of life that is bound us by the Adi Shakti is that we all have Kundalini within us. All the human beings have Kundalini within us. It is in the animals also but it is not so developed, It's not yet full form of Kundalini that can be awakened. But in the human form only it has evolved as a connection, as the one that is the Divine force within us, which is the reflection of the Adi Kundalini which is so easily awakened in this Kali Yuga. This is the common principle we all have. So we have to respect all the people, all the human beings, whatever nation they come from, whatever country they belong, whatever colour they have, because they all have their Kundalini. Then there are people as you people are who are awakened people, who are enlightened people, who have got your realization. When you understand that this is the enjoyment of the attention of the Adi Maa, of the primordial Mother, it's just the play and the enjoyment. Then when you have achieved your full growth in spirituality what should happen to you? What should we feel? How do we then exist ? This is the question many a times Now when you ask questions itself it shows that you are not there, because once you are there you don't ask questions. have asked. you Secondly what happens to you is that you become just the existence, and that existence that you become, then you start reflecting the character of Divinity. This Divine Character is expressed not only nowadays but also much before. In every religion we have had people who had this Divine Character very well developed. For example even the people who lived three thousand, years back. In Colombia I found that in their statues they had Kundalini, and a Kumbha also commonly. Whatever were found out they had a Kundalini being expressed, three and a half coils. This Kundalini we have within ourselves, is now proved to you. You know that there is this power within us. Also you come to know what happens when we deviate from the middle path of our ascent. Here also the same Kundalini which is the expression of the Primordial Mother tells you on your finger tips what's going wrong with you, where are you lacking, what is your problem? Now when we are enlightened people we have become saints and we are above all others, what should we do, is to understand fully well, not only mentally but from your heart, that now you have got these Divine vibrations, and these Divine vibrations can tell you where are you, what are you? where is the problem? Also it will tell you wherever you, like I talked to some people who went to Jerusalem and they said that, "Mother, the whole place was just, vibrating with spiritual vibrations." Somebody went to Chindwara, and he said, "I will find out Mothers place what is there after all it's not difficult, through vibrations Il find out." he said, "as soon as I touched the railway platform I started jumping, I said now what to do, where to go from here only there are vibrations, how will I reach Mothers place." then he sat down and started wondering "now how will I find out where did Mother take Her birth?" He Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 15

 was sitting down and then he saw the star which is the Venus. He followed the Venus star and then he went and said that's he found the place. The whole plan, the whole thing is not done in any haphazard way. If you see a tree,every tree has leaves and every leaf is given chance to have the sun's rays. In the nature if you see it is so harmonious, so beautiful. We are the ones to spoil the nature, because we don't understand that we have come from nature and we have to respect it. I have already told you many a time about how huuman beings were formed, by different chemicals, who came, also carbon came from the mother earth. All this leads us to understand that we have a very big responsibility. The whole work has taken thousands and thousands'and thousands of years, and now you all have reached a state where you have become yourself. You know your-self. This is a very big jump in the evolutionary process. The evolutionary process started long long time very important for you to worship the Adi Shakti and the Adi Kundalini. Absolutely you cannot understand how you have become a saint. When you will know within yourself yoI have got all these centres and these centres have to be awakened through the awakening of the Kundalini and that the Kundalini expresses herself through your finger tips. Unless and you fully identify with this knowledge there is always a possibility that you will deviate from the path of your perfection. Many people who come to Sahaja Yoga I have seen they meet some Sahaja Yogis who are half way and because they are mental they start arguing how is it this is this way, how is it, it is this way. How is it he is a Sahaja Yogi, and he behaves like that. There are so many ways of people relating to the power of the Divine. I have told in the beginning that God felt lonely and that's why he created this Adi Shakti and through Her the whole universe was created. But also true, that as you are seeking, also the Divine is seeking you. Also that your seeking is absolutely rewarded if you understand the simple thing about Divine, that it is the one that has given you intelligence. It is the one that has given you wisdom. It is the one which has given you whatever you. If that is the case that all that you have is given by your Kundalini, by this mother power of your Kundalini then its very important to understand what is the need of keeping Her happy and Her satisfaction, you must try to see what makes Her happy. There is a relationship between the realized souls and the Divine and the Divine is happy when you are happy. We can say the Divine makes you happy, when you are happy then the Divine is happy. Its such a relationship. Its so close, we can say as the sun has surn's rays, or the moon has its own moonlight. It is so close. It's so ingrained, so much built in and that should give you full control over yourself and over your development. They describe it in various ways that you must surrender. One surrenders of course with fear if somebody comes with a sword and says alright you surrender, you may but as soon as that person will disappear you will take out another sword and cut his throat. That surrender has no meaning. That surrender is a surrender which is just forced onto you. All such surrenders have been creating problems because it has a reaction. But your surrender to Divine is extremely joy giving like a salt which dissolves into the sea automatically, in to the water automatically. That soluble nature is really joy giving. If you can just feel that, within yourself, that you are one with the Divine you are dissolved in the ocean of the Divine, and then what takes your form is nothing but extreme love, compassion and as a result extreme joy. It's ago. until you Many people tell Me that Mother it is very difficult to forgive someone. But I think it's very Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VII Issue 8, 9 & 10 16

 horrible not to forgive someone. There's a great joy in forgiving, a very great joy in forgiving, and as soon as you forgive the Divine takes over, and Divine will look after you. Nobody can disturb you. But first you must surrender to the Divine. That is what is forgiveness. Just don't bother yourself as to punish somebody or to do something against somebody. The Divine takes over from you and does whatever is needed, and in such a beautiful manner that it is worth seeing how it works. Adi Shakti's power this Divine is described in every religion. In Islam it is called Rooh'. In the Bible it is called as 'All Pervading Power', it's called as 'Alak' that is that which cannot be seen, Niranjana' the one which is beyond any attachment. All these words are used for this Divine power. People have heard about it, people have sung about it but unfortunately very few people felt it and when they felt it they did not know how to give it to others, how to make others feel it. So whatever they talked became sort of a story or something nonsensical. Nobody could believe that they have felt anything like that or could imagine that there is such a power really existing. Now luckily it has become quite a universal fact for all of that you know there is this power. You are sure about this power because you can feel it within yourself and when you feel it you feel very joyous. You can make out whether somebody is telling you the truth or not because you can see on the vibrations, on this, the power of Adi Shakti, She tells you the truth. If somebody has done some harm to you for example, now you may say, that Mother if you forgive that person then, its not the truth because he has definitely harmed and if I forgive that means I accept that he has not harmed. This kind of argument is possible. You will be surprised that you forgive that person because the truth is whether you forgive or you don't forgive, you don't do anything. That's the truth. So out of compassion if you forgive someone, compassion becomes the truth. It is the compassion that tells you the truth, so all the absolute truth that you know is through the compassion of the Divine Power. Maybe sometimes people say we saw the vibrations Mother and we felt this way and still it happened. It makes no difference whatever has happened, has happened, doesn't matter you have felt the vibrations and you ask the vibrations and you acted upon the vibrations, that's all. Whether it turned out to be that way or not is different, because it had to be the other way round. Some drama is going on. It's the Chitvilas', is the enjoyment of the Chitta of the Divine. It's a play going on. If you can see that play then you you don't get disturbed. It's a play, how it works, how it is organised, is not your headache. You just have to see the play of the Divine how it works out. We have seen now, all of you, which you call as miracles have happened. "Mother, this miracle has happened, that miracle has happened and I know is all the miracle the Divine." When you have the enlightened faith you don't worry about things which are very important in life. If it works out well and good if it doesn't work out, well and good. It should not be assumed that once you are a realized soul that the whole world can fall at your feet. Not necessarily. It's a play. It's a beautiful enjoyment of the attention of the Adi Shakti. If you can become the witness if you can really become the witness of the whole thing then what happens you grow spiritually much closer, you get dissolved into the Divine power. That dissolution has to take place, and that's why Puja to Adi Shakti is very important for you, because if it was not Adi Shakti who had taken an incarnation this work could not have been done This could not have been done because it had to be something that would encompass all the angularities of this human life, all the aspects of this human life. It had to be such an incarnation that would absolutely see human being as a whole, not only his physical self, mental self, emotional self or his particular ideologies or Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 17

 his particular domination. As a whole as a human being, and human beings inside, all of them are just the same. Some are more sensitive and seeking genuinely. Some are not seeking genuinely, and some are not seeking at all. But the seeking also is given to you by Adi Shakti. Now it happens that in the evolutionary process one fish came out of the mother, out of that sea which was like a mother to the sea and then about ten or twelve fishes came out. Then after some time sholles of fish came out. In the same manner your evolution has worked out. As it is we have quite a big number, and we have crossed the number what saint John had said, it doesn't matter, it seems that its a very fertile area, very fertile time, this Kaliyuga where there are so many people who are taking to Divinity. It is the right time to do this, yesterday, when I saw your play, I have seen all that myself and I used to wonder what is going to happen to these people? How are. They have, they have taken, they have taken to spirituality. All these diverse things that you see in modern times should not disturb you much because that has to be that way. It's a drama, it's a play, and in that drama you should know that it will work out in such a beautiful manner that after sometime you will find nothing but the Divine dissolving all the useless things that we have, like our conditioning and your ego. We will have so many people in Sahaja Yoga. By the time 2000 year we will have many many Sahaja Yogis all over the world. Once we have lots of people many would jump into it. That's human nature also. You see they won't take to it till we have lots of people, and once we have a multitude they will jump into it. So some people are always worried, Mother what about others we are now in the heavens, we are enjoying life. It will all work out. But your attention should be how I can dissolve others into this ocean of joy, of this compassion. You will be surprised that it is your own compassion only which is going to give you strength. This compassion within you when you will see people are getting completely drowned, completely destroved, your compassion itself will make you powerful and you will do everything that is needed. You will give up all nonsensical activities and you will really dedicate yourself to emancipate other people and amazingly as you will do this your own level of spirituality will rise. As you see I would say that when you dissolve say some salt in the water, the water rises. In the same way the more people when they will come to Sahaja Yoga the Divine Power will manifest much more. It is manifesting already. But the more people there will be there will be, much more manifestation, because it will be like so many channels, that will be working it out. At this juncture when we all know that there is Divine Power you all have got your realisation and that you are all now saintly people, then we should see to people who were like it. Like we had Sufis, Nath Panthis, Gnostics, all kinds of people in every religion. What did they do? They went all out to awaken other people to the fact that there is Divine Power. They could not give realisation. They couldn't give proof of that but they worked it out, they talked about it, they sang about it. That's what we have to understand that nöthing should deter your compassion to be expressed. When you know the people are getting drowned, they are in a terrible mess, this is a kind of a huge onslaught of the evil on human beings, and if you have that compassion within you, you will go all out to save them. That is what is the work of this chit-vilas, of this enjoyment of your attention. Your attention itself will enjoy when you will start bringing more people into the power of Divinity. Without Divinity there is no saving for human beings, that everybody admits, every one says so. But they have no idea as to what is Divinity, what is the way to achieve it. While you all have this. You have to awaken power Divine Cool Breeze 18 Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10

 Kundalini, you know all about Chakras, you know all the defects of the Chakras, you can find out from the vibrations the truth about everything. The more you use this power the better it will be. You have to go to areas where so far you have not gone. We have not got many people from Africa. So I am thinking of going next year to Africa to work it out. Also we have so many other areas wherel find we have to work it out that if this compassion is within you then it will compel you also to do work that will bring solace to people who are not even seeking. I am already busy with forming some N.G.C.s which will really create very beautiful institutions for people who have nothing. They are starving, they are under trouble, they are under great ordeals. Only you can do it because coming to Sahaja Yoga you have dropped out your greed. You have dropped out your lust. It's finished now you are so free and so independent. With this the compassion cannot take any other form because many people I have seen that they start this kind of work and then they start becoming leaders or they start becoming rich or plundering others. This you will not do You are really as Christ has said "Salt'. Salt which is completely dissolved in the Divinity and this salt is going to dissolve many others. I'm not saying we should be like missionaries converting people into Sahaja Yoga by force We have to look after what they are lacking, first of all. Actually there are very few people in this world who are honest. 1 have known people who never had any greed but as soon as they got some powers they started showing such tremendous greed that surprisingly when you know that person who has never done such a thing and suddenly you find he has become so greedy, you can't believe it. But not Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yogis won't do that, they will enjoy their compassion, not anything else, not their lust, not their greed and also the so called deviations, like taking to drugs, drinking, and other nonsensical things. Because they know where lies the enjoyment. Once you know where lies the enjoyment, you will try to have more of it and more of it it's so easy now for you to do it. no. As the men are working it out women should work it out because women have more sense of compassion, and forgiveness. Because they are mothers, they have children, they have known what is love for the children. Mother dosen't expect anything, She just wants her child to be alright and happy. She enjoys her child, that's all. If you are a woman inbuilt within you is compassion. I have seen young girls if they find little baby they will run after that. They like to take a little baby. They have dolls and they look after the dolls just like their own childrens. for women it should be much easier to show compassion and to express and to manifest and as you are married also your husbands will feel so much strengthened by your own nature of Divinity. What so you sacrifice? Some say, I sacrifice this for God or that for God. What is there to sacrifice for God. What does God need? He doesn't need anything. You have only sacrified your brains, no wisdom is there. It is He who likes change and charnges the whole scene in such a manner that you don't understand how it has happened and worked out. What you have to do is to enjoy the play. In the same manner Sahaja Yogis should have understanding, and enjoyment among yourself. If a Sahaja Yogi cannot enjoy who is going to enjoy life, I can't understand the one who has this Kundalini awakened who has felt the all Pervading Power of love, who knows what is the truth. Who is standing on the complete oneness with the Divine, how can such a person anyway have any kind of problem. It is to realize that you are sitting in the realm of God Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 19

 Almighty. You have entered into this kingdom and you are under the attention and compassion of Adi Shakti But it is like this if you make a beggar who has been begging all his life sit on a throne, he still begs sitting on the throne. That is the situation sometimes with Sahaja Yogis. At this least state should be overcome by all of you because it has a very bad impression also for other people. Its very important, for your own life. That you should grow fully into the understanding of the powers that you have got and the live that your Mother has. When you say you must surrender yourself to Mother, means what ? What do I have to surrender? What you are surrendering is what is pervert in you whatever is destructive in you, whatever that misleads, whatever is your ego and your conditioning that's all you are surrendering just to purify yourself, to enjoy yourself and to know God Almighty. If you know yourself how will you know God. Its impossible, so to know yourself you have to evolve. I know that there are some very great Sahaja Yogis, but still I would say that there are so many other areas where all these very greatly evolved Sahaja Yogis have to enter into, and work out, you can do it. don't When I came first in Rome there was not even a single person in the hall, so I said, what is going to happen in this country. Now we have so many Sahaja Yogis. But as it is growing sideways it should also grow upwards. As it is growing in quantity, it should also grow in quality, and as you grow in quality more and more people will come, because I know all the time you are so collective that all the time you feel that mother I am still not a Sahaja yogi, my brother is not a Sahaja Yogi. I know that feeling you have. Forget about them but those who are seeking, approach them. They are your real relations. Then afterwards all these people will join, your father, mother, brother, sisters, children. Till that time they will wait. They are not seekers. Those who are seekers you should seek them, you should find out where are they. My attention is with you and every time you think of me I will be at your service fully. Whatever you want I will be there to help you in whichever way is possible. Anything find very difficult is not because you take it upon yourself but if you leave it to this All you Pervading Power if Divine love, to this power of Adi Shakti, Param Chaitanya then nothing is difficult. Nothing is so bad that you cannot manage. It is very important that this Puja musi be performed because that is how you grow. This reflection improves and you grow more and more within yourself through the power of Adi Shakti or through the power of Kundalini as you know that Adi Shakti has her own Kundalini which is the Adi Kundalini and the reflection of that within you is the Kundalini, so you to worship, and in the best way to please your own Kundalini, your own Mother who has given you this birth. have May God Bless You. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VilII Issue 8, 9 & 10 20

 SCRIPTURAL REFERENCE TO SAHAJA YOGA. INTRODUCTION "If they (the seekers) had read some books of enlightened people-Gnostics, their scriptures, or anything like that, they would have understood what is the Truth, and where to find it, and how to find it." - H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Adi Shakti Puja, June 26, 1994. REFRENCES FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT PSALMS (46:4) "There is a River, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God, the holy place of the Tabernacles of the Most High." EZEKIEL (47:9) "It shall come to pass that everything that liveth, which moveth wherever the River shall come, shall live. They shall be healed, and everything shall live where the River cometh." JOEL (22:28) "And it shall come to pass äfterward that I will pour out My Holy Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; your old men shall dream dreams; your young men shall see visions." REFERENCES FROM THE NEW TESTAMENT JOHN (7:38) "Rivers of Living Water shall flow from their inner beings. This He spoke of the Spirit which all should receive. For the Holy Spirit was not yet given." (4:14) "Whosoever drinks the Water that I gave him, he will no more thirst through eternity, but that Water shall become in him a well of Water springing up into everlasting life.' (3:5) "Except a man be born of Water and of the Holy Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God." (3:8) "The Wind blows where it will and you hear the sound it makes, but cannot tell where it comes from and where it goes to. So is everyone that is born of the Spirit." (20:22) "And when He had said this, He breathed on them and said to them, Receive the Holy Spirit." ACTS (2:2) "And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing, mighty Wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. Tongues of Fire appeared which divided and sank into every one of them, and all were filled with the Holy Spirit" Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 21 Divine Cool Breeze

 REVELATIONS (22:1) "And he showed me a pure river of Water of Life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb." (33:17) "And the Holy Spirity and the Bride say, 'Come, and let him that is a thirst, come. And whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely'. REFERENCES FROM THE GNOSTIC SCRIPTURES (BG 119:15) "Those drops which fell from the Light and Spirit into the chaos, represent the judgment of the Archigenetor and manifested their forms through the Breeze as a living soul." (BG 121:1) "These things happened through the will of the Mother, the Sophia, so that he, the immortal human, would put into order the veils which have been there. And they welcomed the breath of that Breeze.' (BG 122:1) "The Mother said, 'And so I came here that they become connected with that Spirit and that Breeze, and they both become united as from the very beginning, so that they reap a rich harvest and ascend to the One who existed from the very begining, in inexpressible joy'." TRIMORPHIC PROTENNOIA "But there is a Light that dwells hidden in Silence and it was first to come forth. Whereras She (the Mother) alone exists as Silence, I alone am the Word, ineffable, unpolluted, immeasurable, inconceivable. It (the Word) is a hidden Light, bearing a Fruit of Life, pouring forth a Living Water from the invisible, unpolluted, immeasurable Spring, that is, the unreproducible Voice of the glory of the Mother, the glory of the offspring of God, a male virgin by virtue of a hidden intelect, that is, the silence hidden from the All, being unreproducible, an immeasurable Light, the source of All, the Root of the entire Aeon. It is the Foundation that supports every movement of the Aeons that belong to the might Glory. It is the Foundation of every foundation. It is the Breath of the Powers. It is the Eye of the Three Permanences, which exist as Voice by virtue of Thought. And it is a Word by virtue of Speech; it was sent to illumine those who dwell in the darkness." APOCRYPHON OF JOHN (38) "the Holy Pneuma (Greek for Breeze or Spirit), known as Zoe (Life), the Mother of all." (63) "So the Mother sent the Pneuma, which is Her own." (65) "Everyone on whom the Pneuma of life falls will be saved and become complete, once they unite themselves with the Power. They will become worth of rising to those great Lights, because there they will be cleansed." (67) "Whoever receives this Pneuma will in any case live, and scorn evil. For the Power flows into all people; without it they would not even be in the position to stand straight." (26) "The spring of Pneuma flowed out of the living Water of Light, and equipped all aeons and worlds for every eventuality . He told us that He understands Himself in His own Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 22

 Light which is around Him, which is the source of the Waters of Life." (34) "The Scent of the Father is something of a physical entity like cold Water" (47) "After the invisible Pneuma (granting their wishes) had conceded, it poured Pneuma over them, which stemmed from perfection." (51) "They spoke to the Father, Breathe of that Pneuma which is in You, in his countenance, and the form will arise." UPANISHADS CHANDOGYA AND MAITRAYANI (4:3:4) & (6:20) "Prana is Beath" CHANDOGYA (5:1:17) "the Breath (of life) is everything." MAITRAYANI (2:26) "Prajapati made Himself like air and penetrated into the inner beings of the people, to enlighten their consciousness... the Breath was His body" An artery, known as Shushumna, rises, serving as the passage of the Prana. Through (6:21) that artery, when it has been joined by the Breath, by the sacred syllable Om, and by the mind, let him proceed upwards; and without using any of the organs of sense, let greatness perceiNe greatness. From thence he goes to selflessness, and through selflessness he ceases to be an enjoyer of pleasure and pain; he obtains the Absolute." ATHARVAVEDA (11:4) "Whosoever is driven by the Breath of Life, he will be reborn. TAITTIRIA (3:3) "He perceived that Breath is Brahman, for from Breath these beings are born; by Breath, when born, they live; into Breath they enter at their death" SHANKAYANA (5) "Breath is consciousness; consciousness is Breath." DEVI MAHATMYAM (4:20) To the Devi : "Your face resembling the moon, giving out cool Rays." Quotations from Realised Souls Adi Shankaracharya (Saundarya Lahari) (61) Referring to the Devi : "Bearing in its hollow interior, pearls, kept in their places by Thy very cool Breeze." Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 23

 GYANESHWARA (JNYANESHWARI) (6:14) Gyaneshwara describes the Kundalini as rising through the Shushumna and spraying out Water, which transforms into Nectar; and saves the Wind of Life, which : "rises up, giving a cooling feeling, internally and externally." CARL GUSTAV JUNG (1957, P. 254) The Naassene group, the Pneumatics' (those in whom the Wind blows) were chosen by the "living Water" which was supposed to be the "Great ocean-current, flowing from the centre of the perfectly occomplished human being." (Aurora Consurgens, p. 304) "Seventh and lastly, He bestowed the living Spirit.. for through His Breath He transformed the mortal body into Spirit. And so they say: Your Breath makes the people become spiritual. WILLIAM BLAKE (THE EVERLASTING GOSPEL) "Still the Breath Divine does move, and the Breath Divine is Love." LẠo TZE (THE CHARACTER OF TAO) "Tao is a hollow vessel, and its use is inexhaustible! Foathomless! Like the fountain-head of all things. Its sharp edges rounded off, its tagles untied, its light tempered, its turmoil submerged; yet dark like deep water it seems to remain. I do not know whose Son it is; an image of what existed before God." WILLIAM WORDSWORTH (CONCLUSION) "Why sleeps the future, as a snake enrolled, Coil within coil, at noon-tide? For the Word Yields, if with unpresumptous faith explored, Power at whose touch the sluggard shall unfold His drowsy rings. Look forth! - that Stream behold, That Stream upon whose bosom we have passed Floating at ease while nations have effaced Nations, and Death has gathered to his fold Long Lines of mighty kings-look forth, my soul! (Nor in this vision be though slow to trust) The living Waters, less and less by guilt Stained and polluted, brighten as they roll, Till they have reached the eternal City-built For the perfected Spirits of the just!" AMEN Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 24

 Ode To a Loving Guru In the northern heights of Italy Adorns a Castle of the Golden Godess Its Secret Chambers hold a Treasure that Universe Can't hold Its gardens grow fruits sweeter than honey Seekers from Three Worlds vie to glimpse Her gracious Splendour The lucky one who crosses its threshold Returns home as the King of the World. With a prayer on my lips I softly knock at the lofty Door 'who is there", She asked "Your devoted child", I replied "Ask and I shall give" She graciously Blessed I replied, "I have nothing to ask for what does the world own that is not your gift." "Then why are you here", She asked. I prayed, "To annoint your lotus feet O Mother" She asked, "How long will you wait" cried, "Till you call me O Divine Mother" Suddenly the Door swung open. A gust of cool wind quenched my thirsting soul. The fragrance of musk, jasmine, hina and sandalwood soothed my buring senses. Celestial music of Heavenly rymphs intoxicated me Adorned by all the atoms of the Universe her loving face dazzled more brilliantly than a thousand Suns. Pearls dropped from Her enchanting Smile I was lost in ecstasy, of eternity When I found my senses again I only remembered Her and forgot myself. Yogi Mahajan Guru Puja 96, Cabella Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 25

 GURU PUJA Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 28 - 7- 96, Cabella, Italy (Synopsis) This system of Puja of guru started a long time ago in India, When there were great seekers and their Gurus were sitting in the jungles where they used to get permission to go there and then they would get their realisation. We had many Rishis and Munis in the olden times in India. One of the reasons why the system of Guru started is that there is no organised religion in India. There are no popes, there is no priests. There were priests just for worshipping in the temples but for giving realisation, for talking about higher life they all had of go to very great realised souls and it was absolutely the freedom of the Guru, whom to accept, whom not of accept. Everybody was tested by the Guru thoroughly whether they were capable of receiving their self realisation or not. This test was so hard, so difficult and alsco to a point of cruelty that very few would pass through that test. It was not like Sahaja Yoga, everybody is a Sahaja Yogi. That of course made it a very narrow margin for people to achieve their realisation and their Gurus never used to leave their own seats, called Takya. All those who would like to go to him would be received only if he allowed. You may go on for miles together, nothing. No obligations of the Guru that he would meet you. Perhaps they didn't feel that love and compassion for the seekers. They didn't understand that these seekers were ardently seeking the truth and they should not suffer. They were not so much concerned. All the time they were testing the disciples. Even Ramdas who was the Guru of Shivaji was testing Shivaji so many times though he was a born realised soul. To get this Gurupada, this position of a Guru, they had to work very hard to achieve the state of a saint. But in Sahaj Yoga, that is not the case. I just thought that if people get their realisation they will see for themselves what's wrong with them. They'll introspect themselves. They will try to correct themselves.lt is true for very many people but some of them still are lingering behind and are going on and on, thinking they are Sahaj Yogis, they have achieved a lot, and are very special. This delusion is all the time creating this problem this delusion makes them very narrow minded, selfish, selfcentered and people don't believe how they can be Sahaj Yogis. We have to know that Sahaja Yoga has worked out because this ParamChaitanya is transmit- ting compassion it never did before. It never had that kind of an attitude which is there because I am a Mother. This compassion has worked it this way, that you all have got your realisation, you have achieved a state which you can call as self-realised souls. But still, because you got it so easily, cheaply we didn't realise what we have got. Still we do not practice meditation, introspection and dedication. Some are very much there, but mostly we are living in the idea that we have already achieved it. The first thing we should introspect is, are we concerned about ourselves? All the time do not think that we are suffering, we have this problem, that problem, or this should be done, that should be done. If the attention is on that, that all the time you are worried about yourselves, then you cannot break through the shell of your being which is under the domination of your mental selfishness or of seif- centeredness. Even self-centredness is absolutely against your growth. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 26

 For a saint any place has to be alright; you must have seen me enjoying everything. I can live anywhere, I can sleep anywhere, I have no demands of any kind. But if you are worried about your body comforts, your body troubles, then still you are at a bodylevel which you have to transcend. Worried about how you look, how you dress up, whaf sort of things you have to wear all this makes you yet not a good Sahaja Yogi. This is one style of Sahaj Yogis who still want very great comforts. So what you have to do is if you are used to comforts, try to go and sleep out on the streets. Do all kinds of things that are necessary for your body to under- stand that you are not bound to the comfort of this body. This is one of the greatest things one has to see that you are not bound by your body. Its alright if you have comfort, well and good; do not have well and good. For a Sahaj Yogi it is very important that he should be able if you to live like a saint. Not necessarily that you should become a Sanyasi, but from inside your body should be such that you can dominate your body. How can you not sleep anywhere, why can you not sleep anywhere. That they want to have very comfortable arrangements about bathrooms, this, that. All these ideas are there because you are very self-conscious. But super consciousness is not there. You want to have everything first-class and anybody, who tries to interfere with it, you don't like it. I can understand a person who is very old, he cannot manage things, he has to have a certain amount of body comfort. But even young people these days are extremely comfort oriented That is not for Sahaj Yogi. Of course I have seen, people in the west are better off in this matter. Because when they go to India, they like 5.T. better than comfortable buses I said why? Because Mother you can jump in the bus, nicely with all the luggage, the windows are open, you can breathe. Very natural, very good. They wanted to go on bullock carts also. They enjoy all that. Actually if you see, you notice, in the western world, people are taking to rustic style. They are enjoying more the rustic style of life than of this so called comfortable artificial life. Most of the people in the western countries I have met are really great Because they can sleep anywhere, they can eat anything. You ask them what did eat, "I don't know, Mother" who is not bothered as to what he is eating, what he is getting, what is his taste, I like this, 1 like that; these words stop. It is not difficult, it is not difficult, you may think that I am asking you to do some hazardous thing, its not difficult at all. Because, if you have to impress people around, you have to be like a saint. If you are a fussy person, if you are a fuss pot, then you cannot impress others that you have got your self-realisation. That is the sign of a person the Many people tell me, Mother, people had to do so much, to go to Himalayas, do this, do that and then they got their realisation. How is it these people you have blessed. What right they had to get this realisation. What have they achieved. I said only their desire. Their desire was much there that they should get their realisation, and that's how they got it. But now to very go into only desire is not sufficient. You have to depend on yourself, on the light of your spirit, you should see what is wrong. This is a very important thing Ask questions to yourself. Why do I want this, why do I need this, what is the purpose, as you have seen the rest of the world is mad because they are running after stupid things. They are wanting things that have no meaning of spirituality. Spirituality is self-satisfying. If you are spiritually endowed, you are self satisfied, this self satisfaction within you will lead you to that ocean of joy. For Sahaja Yogis the word we use is Nirananda', Nirananda means a joyous state, where nothing is needed. Joy itself is joy, you are enjoying only joy, nothing is needed to make you Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 27

 happy. You are happy because of the joy that you are in, this is the Nirananda, state. If you go and see how these saints lived, you will be amazed, how they managed their life; you will be very much amazed. How many days they used to fast without food, never both- ered. They never thought it was fasting. They just used to think, we have no food, so no food. Ofcourse you don't have to go through all this you have got your realisation now you have a power to achieve this mastery. Another thing I have noticed about Sahaja Yogis. Some of them have grudges about others. Sahaj Yoga is the blessings of love, blessings of compassion. There is no place for any kind of hatred or any kind of revenge or anger amongst Sahaja Yogis. If you have that you must conquer it. Its a good chance, if you find somebody who is hot-tempered who is very angry and make friends with that person. Just see if you can carry on with that person or fuss pot and see that you achieve that will keep you above all kinds of hatered all kinds of temper. Some Sahaja Yogis have no type; go not. If there is a fuss pot, also make friends with such a that peace lose their temper very fast. I will say they can not be Sahaja Yogis. Because if control over your anger then how are you powerful of compassion and love? But you don't even love to control it, just there. you In the olden days the saints used to be very much angry type. They couldn't bear the stupidity of the world. They used to run away from people. I know of a saint, Nityanand Swami, he lived on a tree and anybody tried to come near he would throw stones at him; couldn't bear people who were all heated up. But you don't need that. You have a way of achieving love and affection of the people who seem to be very troublesome and grudging type. This is not a difficult task if you try a little bit. Mostly people when they find somebody who is a very hot-tempered person they run away from them; those who are good natured, you can always be friendly, what is so great about it? What is so nice about it, what is so sweet about it? But how you speak to that person, how you talk to that person how you manage that person is important. Your love will definitely melt him down because he is a Sahaj Yogi. You have to be extremely affectionate compassionate and loving. Another thing which is extremely important for us to know is that we have got this realisation though Mother's love only by compassion. Only the power of mother's compassion could have worked it out. Now, even if this love is flowing towards the stones or towards the mountains or towards anything which is very solid, the ripples come back, they have to come back. In the same way you people now who have got realisation have to know that sion and love is the only power you have got, nothing else. If you love yourself, you care for yourself, care for your family and care for your children then you haven't achieved much. You are only worried about yourself because that is the limited area where you move. But if can break that and find out places where you have to express your love you can. They say that water finds its own level. In the same way this compassion has to flow to all the places, all the ditches, everywhere and should find its own level. But if you are just satisfied with yourself and are not bothered, just trying to believe that you are a great soul because you are a Sahaj Yogi then I must say that you are sadly mistakei. compas- you Now the third thing that troubles Sahaj Yogis is that, "Mother, we want God's realisation. That makes me laugh. You see it is already there, like once you get to the sea and you say Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 28

 Mother we want to go to the bottom of the sea, you can always go, just slip and you will be there. In the same way once you have developed self realisation and have jumped into the ocean of this compassion there is no need to achieve anything. The source of achievement is all coming from your human haunting. That should be over Now you are all godly people, so you should not think I should achieve this state, I should achieve that state. Just go on slipping, just so on giving up all the weights that you have in your heads and it wil work out. You have to dissolve yourself into the compassion. There are still some people who always want to be in the front, specially Indians. They should sit whrever they get a seat with complete satisfaction. Whether you sit in front or in that corner in the darkness, you get my vibrations. Where you are prominent is not necessary. What is it if you are prominent, what do you get? To be lost into the crowds, to be lost into the ocean of love is the main thing. All these are mythical that we should some how or the other front place. Front will be the back and back will be the front. the get It is very surprising how people are still trying to achieve something so nonsensical. So where is your mind where is your attention? What are you thinking? If you are thoughtless, you will be satisfied, you will be happy you will not ask for anything, you will not want anything. What is there to have? What is so important? All these ideas come from ignorance. Once a Hare Rama Hare Krishna fellow came to me and he said that we have heard that great saint, and you have all the comforts of life, so how are you a saint? I said how are you a saint. He said I have given up my family. I have given up my cars and have given up my house, I have given up my children I said one mnore thing you have given up, your brains. They said but how do you say we have given up our brains? 1 said, very simple. I have given up nothing because I am holding nothing what is there to give up when you are not holding anything? Now, in this house or my body anywhere you think you can find anything equal to the dust particle of Shri Krishna, you can take it. Should be equal though. Then they started looking here and there, I said, see what have you given up, just stones. Why are you about giving up? They even shaved their heads. All these useless ideas that we have done this, we have done that. Anybody in Sahaja Yoga who thinks that he has done lot of work for Sahaj Yoga should give up completely. That's the sign of another ignorance. If you are part and parcel of the ocean, everything is done the by ocean, you are doing nothing. To have such ideas about yourself shows how little know about yourself. You are the ocean. If you are the ocean how can you say I have touched this shore I have touched that shore. No more 'I' is left. When this T ness drops out then only the universal being within you shines. you are a boasting you Some people are very identified with their country or with their worshipping style. All this misidentifications have to be given up. It is very difficult for people because they are so conditioned and as long as you have conditioning you cannot rise above your mind which is a myth. Now try to understand what your conditionings are, one of them, you go to the western | countries, all of them only sing songs of Shri Ganesha. They know all the songs of Shri Ganesha, Shri Ganesha's photograph, Shri Ganesha everything. Now I have they stop. Why should Ganesha the vibrations I realised because I had said Shri Ganesha incarnated as Christ. Their identification is with Christ and Christinity in a very subtle way. Imagine with stops Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 29

 Shri Ganesha music we heard in one of the eastern bloc countries and all the vibrations had stopped. They were singing all the songs of Shri Ganesha; not one song about Sahaj Yoga, leave alone their guru. Even this is a very subtle identification. There was one fellow in Russia, supposed to be very intelligent. He said that alright we keep Mother's photograph and also the icons we can get the same type of vibration. You cannot because icons are made by some artist's, imagination. These are not representing actually even Maria, or Christ or anyone. They are all imaginary. If an Italian makes Christ, it is Italian style. If Frenchman makes, he is thin like French. If you get somebody, from Holland he will have a forehead like that. All of them depict Christ as they want. Then we have Maria the same way. Her expression, photograph everything is all according to the imagination of the artist. These artists are not free. Because all of them have a certain style. Now if it is Rembrant, it is a style. If it is Leonardo, it is a style. Though he is born realised still he has a style. Nobody is like this that he will make today like this, tomorrow like that; there is no freedom. They are bound by their own style. Everybody has one style and that is the style they follow; because, what is the reason? Reason is they must have done 3-4 types, styles but, people must have rejected. Its all opinion of the people. So they must have taken to that one style. You can see Christ, if he is Japanese he will have chinky eyes; if he is Chinese, he will have no nose, if its Indian, he will be dark. How can they emit vibrations. While with my photograph, how can they compare? Cameras were developed at this time, not before that. This loud speaker was not developed before this, Aeroplanes were not developed before. I have been travelling for nineteen days, one day in the plane, second day in the public programme. They could not do all that. Nobody could do this. Neither Shri Krishna, nor anyone. They could not fly by aeroplane those days. But it is only possible because today there are aeroplanes. Even video, the way you are seeing my image There was that available before, science has also supported seekers to find God. We have to be thankful to science. Even there was not a car. I could not have gone up to Milan even. If I had been going on a bullock cart, what would have happened to me. All these things are created today for you. You were also born in these times for these special things. They could not give realisation at that time Because at that time you were not there. Very few people of your cablibre were there. wondered if you understand your calibre. When you are sometimes groaning shows that you do not understand your calibre. You don't know what you are. How much the whole atmosphere has been worked out. Science has been worked out for you. Science is the gift of nature. All this has been worked out for you to achieve the highest state in the shortest time But for that one has to be extremely introspective. Instead of thinking what you have to achieve be introspective. This introspection will help and you will become real gurus. When you go to other villages people should know from your being itself that some great person has come. You don't have to certify. It is the simplicity of your temperament itself. First time I went to Leningrad nobody knew about me, no advertisements: They just put some posters, and there were two thousand people in the hall, two thousand outside. In the hall they had to pay, alright. I was wondering what's the matter. When I came out I gave them realisation but I said you come tomorrow. two thousand from inside and two thousand from outside and about two thousand more came and they all were sitting on the ground. I was amazed. I said what made you come to my programme. They said Mother so obvious, your photograph. Such sensitivity Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 30

 to spirituality. So obvious, from your photograph. There were scientists, there were doctors, all kinds of intelligent people. They could feel the spirituality from the face. That kind of a sensibility we should have, when you don't need any discretion; nothing, you know this is it. Don't have to judge, don't have to think. You cannot say who will be best fitted for this. Those who have come for the first time, those who have come later on, or those who are still coming. Younger orolder women, men or children. Tin my lifetime if I see so many of you transformed, looking so beautiful looking so nice, creating such a good atmosphere, it is more than satisfaction for me. Sometimes I think there's nothing to be done now; finished. But then they invite me here they invite me there. So I just leave. But to be very frank I am oversatisfied. Its like a mango tree. Once you have planted the mango tree, looked after it for 34 years, thern it looks after itself. It gives fruits, it just grows by itself. In the same way, it should happen with you. You should grow by yourself. Of course you will find people who are stupid, who are agressive, who are not at all Sahaja Yogis and are trying to be Sahaj Yogis, just see them, that's all. In this Guru Puja you have to decide what are the criterias. First, a Guru has to be without desires. Any desires, whatsoever. 'Niriccha', they say. There's one false Guru in India, who said if I had the powers that Mother has then I would have become the king of this world. So people said, Why doesn't Mother become like that? Why doesn't She become the king? They said because She has no desires. A person who has no desires will not become anything. I said and tell him if you have desires, you cannot have powers also. " Its only because" she has go no desires, all these powers are there. Any desire that comes to your mind you should say, ah, forget it. Just forget it. When the desire is overpowering, you just divert your attention. How do become desireless is by getting to the thoughtless awareness. Any crises comes you in, you should be able to rise into that state of thoughtlessness. Just be peaceful. Look at your desires with peace. Tell the desire oh, I am very much satisfied, now don't come. I don't want. That's how you can become desireless. There is this compassion and the compassion that becomes actually the power. Small, small things you can express your love. In very sweet ways you can express your love Its very important the world needs today love and peace. You have to give peace and love to everyone that is possible. Ofcourse for a Sahaj Yogi it is very easy. But even non Sahaj Yogi you must treat them with respect and love. But you should not have desire that should get back anything from them. Its alright. Whatever they are its alright. You have known so many Sahaj Yogis who have gained so much and have betrayed us. Doesn't matter. Not important. Because they are going to be losers not we. There is nothing to be bothered about these things. you Then, another thing is try to see that your mind doesn't react. Some people have a habit to react. You tell them something they will put their own one tail with it. Never will they accept. If somebody says something if you are reacting what will go into your heads what will go into your heart what will go into your attention. The reaction itself is sign of not proper develop- ment within yourself. This attention which is trying to go into all the areas of your mind and a body and every act. You cannot see anything just for seeing sake. You react. This is not good, that is not good, if I where. It cannot enter. Because as soon as it tries to enter, you shut it by the say it is 5'O clock they say, no it is five past tow minutes two seconds. This comes with Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze 31

 terrible conditioning which has to go away. Why should you react. Then the argument starts, then fight starts then wars come. If you tell your mind, nothing doing, you are a myth and I am not going to react to it, 99.99% problems will be solved. Then the last, but not the least is the ego. I can't understand a saint having a ego. Its so stupid to have ego. Its a kind of a domination. If somebody says something you get angry. That means your power of love and compassion is still not full. You can ofcourse correct people when they have to be corrected but for that you should have that power within yourself. The person should know that you are correcting that person because you love that person, Not for selfishness. Not for any gain. But this ego is a very big problem and that comes by, not from any ignorance but stupid ideas about yourself. If you thìnk that you are something great already then what can you do? Ego makes you very arrogant, but if you are humble really not to have the humility of a businessmen but if you are humble from within yourself, from your heart, enjoying your humility then this ego can run away. You have to ask yourself, now what are you angry for? Again, I come back to the same point, introspection. Because you are not here to carry on some jobs but you are here to become saints. Then this ego should be made into a great instrument of love and joy. You can, it's not difficult. This is what is ego is reaction to things. You can react to things in a sweet way or you can react to things in a deadly way. Then, humour comes in. Also you speak as if there is fragrant flowers, which are coming out. Then every action of yours, every thing becomes very gentle and sweet. Have this ego that we will be gentle, we will be kind, we will be sweet, we will be forgiving, we will be loving, lets have this ego. Start with this kind of a ego, the other way around. You will be surprised how you can really conquer the whole world. On this day of Guru Puja, the Guru is supposed to tell something to his disciples about correcting themselves. In my own sweet way I have said to you which you shouldn't mind3; I don't mean to condemn you by any chance but to give you a proper sense of introspection by which you all get your Guru Pada. My only vision is that I should see all the Sahaj Yogis drenched in the power of Love. Enjoying each other's Love, enjoying each others's relationship and improving relationships. I know there are problematic people, I know they are problems. But if you cannot solve the problem what is the use of your becoming masters. I leave it to you to solve your own problems which you are facing and introspection with love and com- passion, Not by conditioning yourself. I am sure you can manage It. May God Bless You. :Yogi Mahajan Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029 Golden Arts, B- 2/11 Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029. Edited by Published by Printed by Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10 32



----------------------

1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-0.txt 
 COOL BREEZE
DIVINE
VOLUME VIII
ISSUE 8.9 & t
When you teel responsible, you must know that you are not incharge. Secondly
you must also know that there are so many other forces, so many angeis and
ganas who are with you. You are not alone. So to think that you are doing
anything will make you, may be, egoistic. At that time, what you have to say iS
alright I am not doing anything it is Divine that is working it out.
by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Sahasrara Puja 96. Cabella, Italy
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-1.txt 
 DIVINE C OOL BREEZE
VOLUME VIII
ISSUE 8, 9 & 10
CONTENTS
1.
ADDRESS TO BUSINESSMENS
3
2. SAHASRARA PUJA
SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
3.
14
SCRIPTURAL REFERENCE TO SAHAJA YOGA
4.
21
5. GURU PUJA.
26
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
1
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-2.txt 
 ADDRESS TO BUSINESSMENS
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
5-4 - 96, Delhi (Synopsis)
Until we find out the truth we keep thinking of this and that, what we call our mind is actually
not our brain. We keep thinking about what our mind is saying but, you will be surprised to
learn where this mind comes from and what it actually is, it is very important to know this.
This mind that is in us is really a situation made by us. The reason for this is that when we
look at something, maybe not true of animals, we tend to react upon it. For example this
beautiful
laid here we see it is very beautiful, now, if it is ours, we are worried that it
carpet
might get spoilt, so we should get it insured and if it is not ours, then we are worried about
where it came from, for how much, all such things keep coming to our mind.
When a child is small and its mother is with it, it is enjoying itself. Then its mother wants to
take it some other way ad the child does not like it. It feels why is my mother bothering me.
Then that reaction which develops within the child gradually develops as what is called his
When the mother tells it not to do something, it does not like it, but listens to her because
ego.
she is its mother, that forms the child's conditioning. In this way, there are only two things
within us, either we go according to our ego or our conditioning. There is no third thing in
us that can guide us about what we are doing, whether it is right or wrong, whether we will
benefit from it or not, whether it is driving us towards our destruction or our fame. Which
ever way, we are our conditioned, we keep moving in that direction and then our ego
develop. Depending on the kind of ego, we function. Both these things are present within us,
are made by us. Take, for example this watch which we have made. Now we have become
slaves of this watch. As soon as these people said, Mother you have to leave at seven o'clock,
I thought to myself, now there goes, we won't reach on time because, we are away from time.
If someone tries to tie me down by time, that job is gone. Then this was a great worry, why
are they saying this. In this manner we get tied down by time and become a slave to it.
also.
can
But for the computer, we cannot add two plus two. This also, we must try to rectify. Then this
give and take is not in us, then this brain, which is the reality, has very little work to do and
just like a cartridge of a watch, we are moving, and just like a robot, we are living. Then what
the reality is, we are away from it.
We can get into the realm of reality. When we get into this realm, we can not only find out
about ourselves, but about others too. That does not mean about what clothes or jewellery they
are wearing, but about their chakras in what condition they are. You will be surprised to know
that these Seven Chakras within us are our energy centres. Now, this energy centre has a little
power what we use. When we use it too much, then people have stress, or heart ailments or
some other ilinesses. These are the centres, from where all our physical, mental, emotional,
and spiritual problems get solved. These are the seven centres within us, maybe you are not
aware of their existence. Not only do these seven centres exist, but a lot of people have found
the key to them. However, we take these centres too much to one side that we do not have
Satisfaction.
You yourself can think that on a physical level what problems businessmen can have. There
is a Chakra which we call the Swadhistan Chakra. Now this Chakra is very important because
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
3.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-3.txt 
 its main job is to nourish our grey cells in our brain. The doctors are not aware of this, but it
is a fact. If all the time we are using our mind then where is it going to get the energy from.
For all our thoughts, desires, plans, to complete them, it requires energy, and this energy
comes from the Swadhistan Chakra. Now this Swadhistan Chakra has a lot more to do. It is
from this that our liver, spleen and kidneys function. When this works on one side its energy
towards one direction, then all sorts of illnesses manifest themselves. First of all, the liver
goes
gets hot, then to top it, a lot of thinking, planning, gets it more hot. The liver, whose job is
really to release this heat into the blood stream, is not able to do so. Then this heat either
passes up or down or sideways. When it goes up, then you will be suprised to learn, you get
asthama. A lot of people complain, Mother, I have got asthama, it is incurable, no it can
definetely be cured. In fact one doctor who is now in America has received his M. D. in this.
The second illness that sets in is very common, diabetes. This Chakra also looks after the
pancreas. If it gets spoilt, diabetes sets in. Those people who think a lot, plan a lot, their spleen
gets affected because the job of the spleen is to release red blood corpuscles in our body in an
emergency. Now a days the era is such that we are time-bound people. We sleep late, get up
early, somehow run to our car and office. Our spleen which is so sensitive feels let me give
red blood corpuscles, it also gets worried with the worries of the person, and then the illness
that sets in is a very horrible one, blood cancer. The second illness is kidney failure, all of a
sudden, First you are put on dialysis. Then you get bankrupt. Because you cannot be cured
by dialysis. That is a fact, inspite of what the doctors say.
Apart from this, there are many illnesses like constipation, terrible constipation and this also
causes diseases. However, the heart cannot be saved. Because, if the heat goes towards the
heart, it is a young person, he is drinking, playing tennis, thinking also, then it catches such
a person. Why? This rush of heat that will go towards the heart, will be fatal if a person gets
a heart attack between the age of 21 and 25, he cannot survive. Now lets see how this heart
is controlled. When it keeps getting this heart, the heat gets weak. Then suddenly one finds
out, at the age of 55, one starts getting heart attacks.
Then, people get worse, paralysis takes place and such horrible paralysis that the entire right
side stops functioning. One chakra can cause so many illnesses, especially those in people who
plan a lot, who are very futuristic. Such people will always have a cold, and sometimes they
will get the flu. Now imagine if one chakra can cause so many diseases, what will happen if
somebody's second chakra gets spoilt. All these diseases that are psychosomatic, like cancer,
Parkinson's they originate from the swadhistana and then in their combination other chakras
get spoilt and there is no other way to treat them. If you think doctors can treat them with
medicine etc. they cannot. You have to put energy in them and for this the almighty has in the
Mooladhar bone put this called the Kundalini. The name has been suggested by human
beings because it is in three and a half coil and one coil in Sanskrit is called a Kundal and
because it is Mother's power, it is called Kundalini. When this energy is awakened and it
passes through these chakras and pierces through out fontanel bone then it meets with the all
pervading power of the divine.
energy
What is the truth ? The truth is that all these beautiful things you see, the trees, the greenery,
the world, we do not even think how these were made, isn't it surprising. For example these
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-4.txt 
 beautiful flowers, how their fragrance is who does this ? If you ask a doctor, who makes my
heart beat, he will say the autonomous nervous system. Now, who is this auto? If it is an äuto
then there is a driver inside, who is he? They have no answer to this. It is your spirit and we
are alive because our spirit is alive. This does riot mean that you go away to the jungles, or
the himalayas, or stand on one leg. There is no need for that. It all happened in your previous
life itself, that's why you are here. There is no need for such dramas or to spend money. You
cannot buy this. Like you are a human being, you can become a great person, this is a living
process, it car happen very easily and this energy is within everyone and you have to receive
it. You do not have to do anything for it, it is Sahaja, spontaneous. For example you have a
seed which you have to plant in the ground. What do you have to do ? Nothing, just plant
it because that seed also has power and the mother earth also has power, it is fertile. In the
same way, it is not difficult to awaken the Kundalini within you. There is no obligation. Now,
when we have this power within us and we can get it, why shouldn't we?
Now, what are the difficulties we can face, we should understand. Like if we are trying to
make a discovery. The world today is such we must get some peace. Now, until we go beyond
this mind of ours, we cannot get peace. It is the Kundalini which takes us where we are
absolutely at peace within. We see everything like a witness, we do not react to anything, as
a consequence our memory improves. Whatever we want to see, a problem, as long as we are
within the problem, we are unable to solve it but as soon as we come out of the problem it
solves because we are connected to the divine. We are one with the Divine, it should not be
difficult but first you should have the faith. Why so many people lose faith? Maybe you have
committed some mistakes, forget them. That was your past, you are not concerned with it, You
are in the present, I call it the Blossom time because so many people have come, been born,
Yogis flower have blossomed and with the awakening of the Kundalini they have borne fruit.
It has happened with thousands and lakhs of people and it is not diffucult for it to happen to
you. There is no obligation on anyone's part in this, mine or yours. It is Your own individual
thing. The only thing is that after receiving it, you have to meditate for a while, there is no
restriction that you do not eat this, or do this, nothing of this sort that you leave you house
or children. This everyone has said, Christ said "Know thyself", Prophet Mohammed said
clearly, you will be surprised, that until you know yourself, you cannot know God. Now, if
others say something else, we are not concerned. If everyone has said that know yourself and
it is not difficult, then why not. Some people think that after that they will lose their business,
they are very afraid. It will flourish ten fold, it does because your outlook is honest and
you
are satisfied. Not that like mad people you are at it, sometime this happens, then that happens,
nothing like that. The madness goes away and you are absolutely satistfied. You know that the
Economic law is that wants are not satiable in general. Like today you desire a car, then a
house. Now you have a car then on one side, you want a house now. You have a house, now
you want an aeroplane. One after another, never satisfied. The reason is that these things can
never satisfy you. Satisfaction is only a state of mind. If he has it, well and good, if he doesen't,
it doesen't matter. He doesen't get upset and worry too much about his bodily comforts. Now
an whether you make him sit on velvet, or on the floor, he is happy. He is on badshah',
nothing can tie him down. He is in 'Bad shahat'. You can receive all this and you have a right
to do so. If you receive it, it is very good. The biggest achievement will be you will realise that
over you there is a great power, a power of love. Till now none has used this power of love.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
5.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Everyone is using might. You use this power of love and see. You are seeing that in our
country there is so much turmoil. This greed has increased to such an extent, there is no need
for it. These people do not have any place to keep their money, they are putting it in their
walls. Now will they take their walls up with them? There is no sense left, there is a limit to
one's greed. I can understand that something you do not have you enjoy. They cannot enjoy
anything, they just go on and on. This is madness and ther should be escape from this
madness. Whatever you have, you should enjoy it. Now you will definitely feel that Mother
has taken us to an ocean of joy. We have a disciple, Mr. Zaffar a Muslim doctor. He came to
me and everyone was singing at that time. I don't know what happened to him. Out of sheer
joy he kept singing. I asked him, "Dr. Zafar, what happened to you?" he said, "I was in the
complete bliss that's all I can say", and for hours, he was in bliss, I said "eat something", he
said "I was in thoughtless awareness".
Just think that you people attend so many parties, host so many parties, but you cannot get
jov. Then talk about this one, that one, somebody's thing came from there, this one was saying
that, all this will stop. Such friendship and such love, till now you have not seen such love in
collectivity. It is such an enjoyable thing, that thousands of people are sitting together in the
ocean of love. Whoever sees us is surprised.
In a country like Russia there is communism in Russia. I have nothing to do with communism
and nor do I approve of it. But one good thing came out of it, that there was no desire left in
them. Like the government told them that we give you flats, take them in your name, they said
no, don't give them in our name you keep them. Everybody is scared of having things in their
name. There, God knows how many people became Sahaja Yogis. There are so many scientists,
so many people with no desire. Yes, there are some 35% people who want things like
Malborough cigarettes, some 35%, not the rest, they are so well educated, intelligent people.
I asked them you are not bothered, you are going to have a coup here, they said we have no
problem, Mother why should we worry, we are all in the Kingdom of God we are not in this
Kingdom !
Which Chakra causes what, there is no need to bother about it. You get self-realisation.
Nowadays in the market there are lots of Gurus. Their business is such to take so much
mothey how can you take money for something that is invaluable? You can purchase a Guru,
then that Guru is your servant, how can he be your Guru? If you can understand this, then
it is good, there are many such false Gurus in our country and outside also. This also can
sometimes cause harm. This self realisation is all your wealth. You have to receive it. For this
you just have to have faith in yourself. That I have to receive it.
May God bless you.
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-6.txt 
 SAHASRARA PUJA
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
5 - 5 - 96, Cabella, Italy (Synopsis)
This for all the humanity it was such an achievement, which I never realised before now I can
see that without self realisation it would have been impossible to talk to people. When this
happened I thought that how will I talk to people about it, because no one would understand
and it would be a bit of mistake on my part to say something about Sahasrara, because even
about Sahasrara no where in the scriptures as was described. It was absolutely an ambiguous
description, people could not have even thought there is realm beyond Sahasrara. One has to
enter into that reality, where is the reality? That time what I saw around me, I felt is all
darkness and unless and until there are many lights people will never realise how important
it is to have lights. It is a human error also, all the time, that if somebody achieves something,
then they put that person into a shell, for example Christ, but we are not Christ. Mohammad
Sahib, we are not Mohammad. Rama was Rama, Krishna was Krishna, we are not that. How
can you expect human beings to behave like that? So, absolutely they separated, the Divine
personality away from human personalities. It was just a duration of faith, when they said we
could try to follow them but people could not follow them, because I think, human movement
is on parallel lines with the Divine and these lines do not meet, unless and until you give them.
self realisation.
Human level is moving on a another plane and it has to come up to a higher plane to
understand that what they know is not reality. People described to be very bad, cruel,
licentious, cheats, horrible, but I have seen that, every human being is as is made of the same
character as far as the spirit is concerned. Outside they maybe different to look at, their way
of talking may be different, their styles may be different, their fondness for things may be
different, but inside they are all very good and this I found out one after another. You do not
know how much joy it was giving me, not only joy but encouragement support and patience
and then how you see Sahaj Yoga has grown. The greatest thing that happened is which I
realised, I am very happy about it, that Sahaja Yogis feel very responsible about Sahaja Yoga,
and they feel that they have to spread this enlightenment everywhere. It is their innate desire
how to spread Sahaja Yoga.
Firstly it was that they should become spirits before that also there were some people who did
not actually seek spirits, but they also become Sahaja Yogis and I am surprised that some of
you that I have never expected that they would go so far and suddenly you hear that such and
such person has gone there and has done this and that when you canme into the realm of
reality, I do not know, which principle you accepted first, that is your understanding, but one
thing you realised that you are definitely connected with the Divine. Some people had so
tremendous experiences, some had mild experiences, but most of them I saw started believing
in themselves, understanding them selves and having confidence about themselves. There are
so many myths about God, Religion, Gurus, that when they saw the light of the spirit which
gave them sense of reality. As if they have studied their mind, themselves. All this happened,
in a very short time, I did not say that it took me long or I had to go to lots of various
experinces because to me these experineces are nothing. If I see the sea-worthy it can face all
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-7.txt 
 kinds of high tides, all kinds of shark and everything without any difficulty because it is sea
worthy only I felt from the human level to spiritual level to Divine level, When you are
coming then some of that still lingers on, some of that is still there. It has to be cleansed, it has
to be brightened, or absolutely enlightened what is great thing about Sahaja Yoga is that you
yourself did all that. It is nice to you to say that mother you did this, you did that, may be
the enlightenment part of it, but see how there are lights, here, unless and until they attended
to look after and given oil of love, how can they go on burning?
This is something that I must say that how important it was to become good Sahaj Yogis. May
be by introspection, I did not say, may be somebody else talked about it. May be it is your own
understanding. Whatever it was, all of you tried to be good Sahaj Yogis. Of course, there are
people who are sometimes very angry with me, like why you do not cure my sister, why don't
you cure my father if you are God this that or this that, but it makes no difference to me
because they so frustrated, so upset, so they are talking, if you see one or two persons here
and there you see thousands of such beautiful people complete emancipations of this growth.
I am sure it will take place, if you people take up the responsibility.
The responsibility has certain problems. When you feel responsible, you must know that
are not incharge. Secondly you must also know that there are so many other forces, so many
angels and ganas who are with you. You are not alone. So to think that youu are doing anything
will make you, may be, egoistic. At that time, what you have to do, is to best is to say alright
I am not doing anything it is Divine that is working it out not that Divine wants
for that, but by saying that this balloon of ego will not come you will become humble and this
humility will definitely improve this greatness of spirituality within you, Definitely it will
make you a very ivolved personality. No doubt about it, but first of all we have to say that
I am not doing any thing. It is very important to understand when you have spiritual authority
to do this. It is not a testing ground. Many people think that mother is testing us. I am not
testing. You are testing yourself. I am not saying don't do this and don't do that. You are
testing yourself and now must know that you are in beautiful garden of reality, where very
few have entered and there, in that garden when you enter, what do you see is every thing
is full of beauty, every person has something sweet about it, because all other Sahaj Yogis are
also having the same kind of experiences of this reality, which cannot be described in words
but you start thinking that oneness, that friendship without any expectations. A kind of a
complete integrated organism has become an organisatio, which is living organisation. In that
do not feel that you are something separate. Any Sahaja Yogi whether he is highly placed
you
credit
any
you
or he is not doing much in life, this integration, this oneness is feeling of identification with
others makes you so large, so big, so great, so powerful. You are not alone and you say I am
not doing anything. So you become so humble that you forget all these false ideas about class
consciousness or religion conscienceness when that humility becomes your character you are
humble.
When people are doing some sort of Sahaja yoga, they will be extremely humble or they will
be
unkind otherwise. When that doesn't mean you become weak. Humility is only
very
possible for people who are strong, because they don't need any reactions. They don't need
any protection. Their humility keeps them protected, so you just start thinking or feeling,
thinking is funny work, feeling that you are a small dust part. At the same time you feel you
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-8.txt 
 are the whole sky. It depends on where you are what are doing what you are seeing what
are witnessing. Sometimes you feel that all these big big Johnys are useless. You feel nothing
to worry about them. They are very small and with some people you feel you are very. small
such a flexible temperament should be there and that makes you subtler and subtler because
it can penetrate into anything, any subject, any personality, any understanding, any book, any
thing, any enterprise, in ver being subtle manner and you immediately see what is to be done
became you become subtler and then when you become very great, then you start thinking or
I should say feeling what you can do to help so many people to this great job they don't think.
that you are egoistic, nor you should think that you are very
you
small.
Now, you are the spirit. Spirit is very subtler. So very subtle but it can penetrate into any thing,
it could expand into anything it can rémain anywhere or it can disappear any where. This
subtly personality that you are which is your spirit. You even don't use it, but it uses you
the time, without your knowledge it tuses you.
all
The second thing, should be that you should not determine, what you are going to do. What
I have to do. Tf I have decided I must do that. Whatever you have decided is alright, but if it
is does not materialised there is nothing to worry. There is nothing to be upset. There is
nothing to be overly nervous about it, I give an example; One day I was going to America,
and all the Sahaja Yogis were worried about the flight. Time, no time, this time. I said, I have
to go to America why are you worried. Suddenly one of the Sahaja Yogi's child feel down and
broke her hand and she could not meve her fingers. As soon as she brought the child I said
alright I am not going just now to the airport. They were very upset, now she is not going to
the airport as if all the heavens are going to fall down, treated the child and the child was
alright. Alright now let us now go to the airport. They were saying "Mother, the plane must
have left" When we went to the air port, it was reported that there was something wrong with
the plane but there was another plane going to Washington, and I wanted actually to go to
Washington instead of New York. So, I was in the plane nicely going to washington.
One must know that you are not doing anything. Everything is arranged, planned and
beautifully kept for you. You decide something it is alright, if your decision is alright, if you
are to do that it will work out, If it is doesn't work out. It should not have been worked. Now,
this is the difference between a person who is realised soul and who is not a realised soul.
Realised soul is not bothered what he wants, what he likes what he is fond of. Whatever, he
gets is alright. That you can live under any circumstances, because you don't worry about your
physical comforts any moment. You only think of your own spiritual comfort. Even children
if something funny comes in T. V. immediately they close their eyes. We don't want to see.
those things. Nobody has to tell them because they have inside a built in subtle personality
which cannot stand nonsense. They may not say something. They may not be harsh, but they
shun and go away from such places automatically.
So to describe the new personality is this way, that in the nature we see very clearly. In the
nature we see that a tree grows. Now, it has to expand but if it cannot so it does not. f it
it will and also it trys to bring all the leaves exposed to the sunlight somehow. I don't think
that trees have that intelligence to organise it, but there is something that organises it. Now
that it is not only one tree, but Thousands and thousands. The one who does all that is the
can,
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
6.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-9.txt 
 one with whom you are in contact. The trees are just playing into the hands of nature, but
they cannot manipulate, maneuver, understand this Divine power. Animals cannot. Even
human beings cannot. But you can because you have crossed the limit of this human bondage
and now you are just like great citizens of the great realm of Divinity. This Divine force helps
you, works it out, and also it takes you, guides you manages you, so what you have to do is
to keep yourself open for the guidance at the same time you must act because the guidance
will also come from within, by which you will know what I have to do.
Now supposing even then you feel that this was not achieved in you, when you feel that still
I don't know why I couldn't get what I wanted, it never means that you should give up, or
that you should not desire. Sahaja Yogis desires are much more powerful than mine. The
reasons is I am disireless. I have no desires as such. I do not earnestly want anything. You
people are differently made, because you have achieved something. I have not achieved
anything. I am what I am. Because you have achieved something. You know, how you were
and what you are now. Because of your achievement, it is a boon, that whatever you desire
worksout. Because you have worked so hard, it is boon. It is a special blessing, that will be
effective and try to realise that you are no more ordinary human beings. You have crossed the
bondage and now you are not even Sahasrara, you are beyond it. Sahasrara is the limbic area
and this limbic area is closed like a lotus and when you get your Kundalini entering into it
then this lotus opens like this and that is what is written in the Bible that "I will appear before
like tounges
of flames" is the Divine. These subtle flames are nothing but nerves which are
enlightened and look like flames but these flames are not with any heat (Taap Heen)
extremely cooling, soothing, beautifully burning.
When this Sahasrara lotus opens, the Kundalini pierces through your fontanel bone and
get your
open, and there is where we fail sometimes because there are still some ingering human
feelings within us. Firstly, it is covered with the ego and conditionings, super ego, two
balloons. These two balloons again and again try to close the Sahasrara. So you have to be on
the guard that what is closing my Sahasrara. The first is ego because you want to attack your
ego, you will have to attack through ego only. That is the only vehicle. So we have this state
of Nirveechara, of thoughtless awareness, where we have to go. But the simple stäte to is very
practical. Try to understand that why you are being egoistical, with whom are you angry, why
are you angry, what makes you think to dominate someone or to control someone or to check
someone, why? The mind will not answer.
you
realisation. This is what has happened to you. Now the only thing is to keep this lotus
The simple thing if you can do that whatever things that upsets you or makes you feel very
great try to understand that compared to you nothing is great. Compared to your love nothing
is great, compared to you compassion nothing is great because in this there is light of Divine
hood. You hate someone, you get angry with someone, just know you have to love that
person. Now how will you love that person. There is no way to have any measurement of that,
love itself suggests how satisfied your feeling how happy you are. I will give an example. The
other day I received the letter from someone challenging me very much from Poland that her
mother is sick with cancer or something that if you are God you must cure my mother I said
alright. I put my attention to the case perhaps, your Mother is best. But instead of getting
angry I said she is so frustrated, she is so upset, she is so worried even if she is challenging,
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
10
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-10.txt 
 it is alright, it makes no difference. Whether she calls me God or not God makes no difference
whatever I am, I am. So, instead of getting angry, I felt tremendous compassion for her. She
is a human being and her mother is sick that is only source of her life then I understand why
she is so upset. If you just try which you can do very easily. It is not difficult, because you are
realised souls.
I am talking to saints, if you just put your attention on a person with love then you get.
Understanding of that person, you realise, as if identified with that person, then you realise
that if I was in her place as a human being what I would have felt. This desperation this anger,
if I was that, if I was the same type of person, with the same kind of problems then what
would I have do. You can penetrate, identification with another is very important and you can
do it, because you are realised souls. Just place yourself in the same position as the other
person and then you realise that you have powers of love. Identification is the only way, i
think, one can understand love. This ego will immediately get sucked in as Soon as you put
your loving attention on that person. In your life time you will get so many experiences that
you will be amazed at your self how can I do all these things, because you are a realised soul.
Also as I said, when you are identified with another person you put that person incharge of
Divinity. Just a feeling of oneness.
Sometimes we have very wrong ideas about ourselves and about others Small, small things
also we have our own ideas about somethings. Say, some sort of a living standard some people
say, I don't like it, or I like it a saint, never says that, supposing somebody has done a
I
beautiful flower arrangement, instead of appreciating and enjoying it you come and say,
identify
yourself with the gentleman who has done it, You will enjoy the way way that person enjoyed
in doing it. Because, you are just thinking of yourself, self opinionated with which you think
that this is not done so good that could have been better, Who are you to judge anyone? This
critisising nature comes from a terrible misunderstanding about oneself. What are we? Why
we should judge anybody else. Are we paid for it? So, why waste energy in judging others.
We should see what is good in others, because in the realm of realities all good, everything
is fine, every thing is first-class, but if you are trying to see what's wrong with others then you
are not in reality. You can watch, you can witness, but you do not get upset with it or you do
not even say something that would upset others. You are watching it. It is all beautifu just the
joy of the person who put it all these beautiful things unless and until you identified with
those who have done this, you might say, this should have been better that should have been
better. You can be in the same position, supposing you do something another will come and
say you could have done it this way, that way. Wasting our energy for nothing at all.
don't like, this could have been better. I don't know why, people say that but if
you
Our energy is spiritual energy. Then again you become lights in the sky. You are too greats
to bother about all these things. Wasting our energy on very, very trivar things, useless things
and just making yourself small. But, if this spiritual energy is used because, you can use it, you
are the ones only who can manipulate it, not the trees, not the flowers. Then what you will
do is to create oceans of joy.
So, then we come to Sahaj. What Sahaja has given you is alright. But what have I given to
Sahaja Yoga ? Have I created oceans of joys for others ? What kindness I have shown, what
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
11
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-11.txt 
 compassion I have shown, what love I have expressed or whatever Sahaja Yoga has given, you
have taken it for granted, once they come to Sahaja Yoga, they think it is a contract already
signed and if thing work out then what is this, we had a contract with God and we have not
been rewarded fully for whatever we have paid, whatever we have done. What have you done
in this realm of reality ? Have you enjoyed the reality? Have you felt the joy of this real love
of Divine. Are you dissolved into that or you are still standing on the shores watching it. You
can create, you are quite capable of creating tremendous joy, tremendous happiness and peace.
See the world today in what condition it is . Complete turmoil, confusion, all kinds of corrupt
and destructive things going on, so ugly, this world has become. Can you beautify it? You can,
because you can transform people, but if you are not yourself a beautiful Sahaja Yogi, How
can you? So it is our attention on ourselves when we work out, that we have to bring others
into this realm of reality. This is one side of ourselves where we have to understand our
subtleties, the other side is that we are still identified with things which we should not have
identified. We can just find out identified consciousness with ideas, identified with some sort
of a conscientiousness. All these things make may be a fool of you.
All the fools who are conditioned are really like a train which has no driver. God knows when
it is going to collide, Once in my own life, I was with some relation of mine, this gentleman
Lused to get up at 4 O'clock and would start singing some sort of a Rama-Shloka. The whole
house was sleeping, children were sleeping he would be shouting at the top of his voice. Even
Rama might be sleeping at that time, but he would shout. His bathing was another thing
everybody knew because he used to sing another shlokas. I was in the next room and heard
something like banging,banging I said what's the matter might be epilepsy or what. I rushed
to other people and told this gentleman is suffering from epilepsy. They said no, he does not
suffer he rubs that sandal wood, With such a big thud everytime he was putting that stone
on the ground. This we understand as stupidity. Then we see others. Even realised souls. You
are in the realm of reality. You do accept sometimes unreal things, Because of age-old-
conditionings. Your forefathers were like this so still continuing we call it genes, but In Sahaja
yoga these genes also change. This kind of a conditioning, which is lingering on still with your
bodies, minds with your emotions. Has to be seen and cleaned out, because that kills the joy,
that kills the full experience of the reality. If you want to have full experience of the beauty
of reality then you should shed out all these things which are really befooling you morning
till evening. People take advantage of such people very much, like you entrepreneurs who
keep changing fashions every day. We are not brainless people but also have enlightened
brains. We do not take to things which are just in the fashion. We are of our own fashion. This
is not ego. This is identification with your own spirit. You won't take anything
nonsensical if you are the wisdom of your spirit
stupid
So in the realm of reality, your all the Seven Chakras are absolutely enlightened, integrated,
nourished and at position where we see is ourselves, It has nothing limited it is absolutely
unlimited,we can penetrate, say expand or we contract. This is absolutely a flexible
personality, and a personality that creates, ease, joy and harmony
Because Sahasrara opening. The whole world would be integrated one day we will understand
the problems that are facing us because of stupidity. This integration when it takes place, you
will see the of the Divine will be absolutely shining out of light darkness of these destructive
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
12
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-12.txt 
 forces. It is going to happen. If somany Sahasraras could be opened out then why not the
Sahasraras of this world also opened out to put to reality. So today is important day, in the
history of spirituality, for it is to realise, it is very important we are enlightened, we are the
light of joy, light of Compassion, light of love like the silent flames of Sahasrara, in different
colours, beautifully dancing. Then we know what the enjoyment of reality is.
May God Bless You.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
13
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-13.txt 
 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
9 - 6 - 96, Cabella (Synopsis)
The reflection of Adi Shakti within you is the Kundalini. We can say this is the worship of the
Adi Shakti and Adi Kundalini. Whatever is created on this universe and in many universes is
the work of the Adi Shakti.
Now, many people believe that there is one God. It is true. There is one God, God Almighty,
but He Has his own powers which He can embody into someone and can get His own
manifestation expressed. So, first of all what He did was to create the power of Adi Shakti.
When it was created thern there was a sound, the sound that we call as AUM, Logos, or
anything you call it by the Primordial Sound. These three powers came out of that sound A,
U and M, AUM. The Adi Shakti is the who embodies the desire of God Almighty. The desire
of God Almighty comes out of His compassion and for His own expression, for his own
manifestation, for His own reflection. I would say that He must be tired of loneliness so He
must have thought of creating a partner, who will manifest His desires. Thus the power of
God Almighty separated from Him and formed an embodiment of His compassion, His desire
to create.
In Sanskrit they use a word Chit Vilas, it is the enjoyment of the Adi Shakti. Chit is attention.
The attention has its own joy and to manifest that joy of our attention, She created all the
Luniverses. She created this Mother Earth, She created all this nature, She created all the
animals, She created all the human beings and She created all the Sahaja Yogis. This is how
the whole creation has worked out.
At this juncture one may ask that why did She not straight forward create human beings. That
was the idea of God Almighty. Just to create human beings, without telling them anything,
something a better animals than the rest of the animals. But Adi Shakti, being the mother, She
had Her own way of expression. She thought She must create the mirrors for God Almighty
to see His face, to see His image, to see His character and that's how this long range of
evolution took place. This evolution had to work out this way because they had to know from
where they come. We must know that we come from nature. Even nature should know it
comes from the Mother Earth. Mother Earth herself has her own Kundalini. She too is not just
a dead earth but she knows, she thinks, she understands and she regulates. You can see in the
nature how every tree has got its own limitations, how every fruit is produced in a particular
tree, how it happens? What works out this kind of regulation? If this Mother Earth was
moving with a higher speed than what it is today we would not have been born even. If it
would have been less speed, it would not have worked out. See the whole plan that was made.
It's a beautiful plan that the Mother Earth has to move around the sun in such a manner that
different seasons are created. That's why the power, the Parama Chaitanya, which is the
of the Adi Shakti is also called as Ritumbhara Pragya. This is the power that does all the living
work, all the organisation, all the creation. In our human ego we start thinking that we do
something. We can create. We cannot even create a particle of dust, leave alone anything else.
Whatever is created out of that we may combine, we can put together and create something.
you see that this whole thing is nothing but beyond our any power. We cannot create
power
But if
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
14
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-14.txt 
 anything, But what do we create is our myths, for example - something is made of Gold, still
it is Gold. Now something is made of wood, whatever it is it is made of wood. The principle
is the same in everything. Whatever may be your birth, whatever may be the country you are
born, whatever may be your culture, you are human beings. Basically you all are the same.
You laugh the same, you smile the same smile, also you cry the same way. I have never seen
any body crying with his hands, tears falling out of his fingers, and that is how one has to
realize that we are all bound by some common principle of life. The common principle of life
that is bound us by the Adi Shakti is that we all have Kundalini within us. All the human
beings have Kundalini within us. It is in the animals also but it is not so developed, It's not
yet full form of Kundalini that can be awakened. But in the human form only it has evolved
as a connection, as the one that is the Divine force within us, which is the reflection of the Adi
Kundalini which is so easily awakened in this Kali Yuga. This is the common principle we all
have. So we have to respect all the people, all the human beings, whatever nation they come
from, whatever country they belong, whatever colour they have, because they all have their
Kundalini.
Then there are people as you people are who are awakened people, who are enlightened
people, who have got your realization. When you understand that this is the enjoyment of the
attention of the Adi Maa, of the primordial Mother, it's just the play and the enjoyment. Then
when you have achieved your full growth in spirituality what should happen to you? What
should we feel? How do we then exist ? This is the question many a times
Now when you ask questions itself it shows that you are not there, because once you are there
you don't ask questions.
have asked.
you
Secondly what happens to you is that you become just the existence, and that existence that
you become, then you start reflecting the character of Divinity. This Divine Character is
expressed not only nowadays but also much before. In every religion we have had people who
had this Divine Character very well developed. For example even the people who lived three
thousand, years back. In Colombia I found that in their statues they had Kundalini, and a
Kumbha also commonly. Whatever were found out they had a Kundalini being expressed,
three and a half coils. This Kundalini we have within ourselves, is now proved to you. You
know that there is this power within us. Also you come to know what happens when we
deviate from the middle path of our ascent. Here also the same Kundalini which is the
expression of the Primordial Mother tells you on your finger tips what's going wrong with
you, where are you lacking, what is your problem?
Now when we are enlightened people we have become saints and we are above all others,
what should we do, is to understand fully well, not only mentally but from your heart, that
now you have got these Divine vibrations, and these Divine vibrations can tell you where are
you, what are you? where is the problem? Also it will tell you wherever you, like I talked to
some people who went to Jerusalem and they said that, "Mother, the whole place was just,
vibrating with spiritual vibrations." Somebody went to Chindwara, and he said, "I will find
out Mothers place what is there after all it's not difficult, through vibrations Il find out." he
said, "as soon as I touched the railway platform I started jumping, I said now what to do,
where to go from here only there are vibrations, how will I reach Mothers place." then he sat
down and started wondering "now how will I find out where did Mother take Her birth?" He
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
15
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-15.txt 
 was sitting down and then he saw the star which is the Venus. He followed the Venus star and
then he went and said that's he found the place.
The whole plan, the whole thing is not done in any haphazard way. If you see a tree,every tree
has leaves and every leaf is given chance to have the sun's rays. In the nature if you see it is
so harmonious, so beautiful. We are the ones to spoil the nature, because we don't understand
that we have come from nature and we have to respect it. I have already told you many a time
about how huuman beings were formed, by different chemicals, who came, also carbon came
from the mother earth. All this leads us to understand that we have a very big responsibility.
The whole work has taken thousands and thousands'and thousands of years, and now you all
have reached a state where you have become yourself. You know your-self. This is a very big
jump in the evolutionary process. The evolutionary process started long long time
very important for you to worship the Adi Shakti and the Adi Kundalini. Absolutely you
cannot understand how you have become a saint. When you will know within yourself yoI
have got all these centres and these centres have to be awakened through the awakening of
the Kundalini and that the Kundalini expresses herself through your finger tips. Unless and
you fully identify with this knowledge there is always a possibility that you will deviate
from the path of your perfection. Many people who come to Sahaja Yoga I have seen they meet
some Sahaja Yogis who are half way and because they are mental they start arguing how is
it this is this way, how is it, it is this way. How is it he is a Sahaja Yogi, and he behaves like
that. There are so many ways of people relating to the power of the Divine. I have told
in the beginning that God felt lonely and that's why he created this Adi Shakti and through
Her the whole universe was created. But also true, that as you are seeking, also the Divine is
seeking you. Also that your seeking is absolutely rewarded if you understand the simple thing
about Divine, that it is the one that has given you intelligence. It is the one that has given you
wisdom. It is the one which has given you whatever you. If that is the case that all that you
have is given by your Kundalini, by this mother power of your Kundalini then its very
important to understand what is the need of keeping Her happy and Her satisfaction, you
must try to see what makes Her happy. There is a relationship between the realized souls and
the Divine and the Divine is happy when you are happy. We can say the Divine makes you
happy, when you are happy then the Divine is happy. Its such a relationship. Its so close, we
can say as the sun has surn's rays, or the moon has its own moonlight. It is so close. It's so
ingrained, so much built in and that should give you full control over yourself and over your
development. They describe it in various ways that you must surrender. One surrenders of
course with fear if somebody comes with a sword and says alright you surrender, you may
but as soon as that person will disappear you will take out another sword and cut his throat.
That surrender has no meaning. That surrender is a surrender which is just forced onto you.
All such surrenders have been creating problems because it has a reaction. But your surrender
to Divine is extremely joy giving like a salt which dissolves into the sea automatically, in to
the water automatically. That soluble nature is really joy giving. If you can just feel that, within
yourself, that you are one with the Divine you are dissolved in the ocean of the Divine, and
then what takes your form is nothing but extreme love, compassion and as a result extreme
joy.
It's
ago.
until
you
Many people tell Me that Mother it is very difficult to forgive someone. But I think it's very
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VII Issue 8, 9 & 10
16
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-16.txt 
 horrible not to forgive someone. There's a great joy in forgiving, a very great joy in forgiving,
and as soon as you forgive the Divine takes over, and Divine will look after you. Nobody can
disturb you. But first you must surrender to the Divine. That is what is forgiveness. Just don't
bother yourself as to punish somebody or to do something against somebody. The Divine
takes over from you and does whatever is needed, and in such a beautiful manner that it is
worth seeing how it works. Adi Shakti's power this Divine is described in every religion. In
Islam it is called Rooh'. In the Bible it is called as 'All Pervading Power', it's called as 'Alak'
that is that which cannot be seen, Niranjana' the one which is beyond any attachment. All
these words are used for this Divine power. People have heard about it, people have sung
about it but unfortunately very few people felt it and when they felt it they did not know how
to give it to others, how to make others feel it. So whatever they talked became sort of a story
or something nonsensical. Nobody could believe that they have felt anything like that or could
imagine that there is such a power really existing. Now luckily it has become quite a universal
fact for all of that you know there is this power. You are sure about this power because
you can feel it within yourself and when you feel it you feel very joyous. You can make out
whether somebody is telling you the truth or not because you can see on the vibrations, on
this, the power of Adi Shakti, She tells you the truth. If somebody has done some harm to you
for example, now you may say, that Mother if you forgive that person then, its not the truth
because he has definitely harmed and if I forgive that means I accept that he has not harmed.
This kind of argument is possible. You will be surprised that you forgive that person because
the truth is whether you forgive or you don't forgive, you don't do anything. That's the truth.
So out of compassion if you forgive someone, compassion becomes the truth. It is the
compassion that tells you the truth, so all the absolute truth that you know is through the
compassion of the Divine Power. Maybe sometimes people say we saw the vibrations Mother
and we felt this way and still it happened. It makes no difference whatever has happened, has
happened, doesn't matter you have felt the vibrations and you ask the vibrations and you
acted upon the vibrations, that's all. Whether it turned out to be that way or not is different,
because it had to be the other way round. Some drama is going on. It's the Chitvilas', is the
enjoyment of the Chitta of the Divine. It's a play going on. If you can see that play then
you
you
don't get disturbed. It's a play, how it works, how it is organised, is not your headache. You
just have to see the play of the Divine how it works out. We have seen now, all of you, which
you call as miracles have happened. "Mother, this miracle has happened, that miracle has
happened and I know is all the miracle the Divine." When you have the enlightened faith
you
don't worry about things which are very important in life. If it works out well and good if it
doesn't work out, well and good. It should not be assumed that once you are a realized soul
that the whole world can fall at your feet. Not necessarily. It's a play. It's a beautiful enjoyment
of the attention of the Adi Shakti. If you can become the witness if you can really become the
witness of the whole thing then what happens you grow spiritually much closer, you get
dissolved into the Divine power. That dissolution has to take place, and that's why Puja to Adi
Shakti is very important for you, because if it was not Adi Shakti who had taken an
incarnation this work could not have been done This could not have been done because it had
to be something that would encompass all the angularities of this human life, all the aspects
of this human life. It had to be such an incarnation that would absolutely see human being as
a whole, not only his physical self, mental self, emotional self or his particular ideologies or
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
17
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-17.txt 
 his particular domination. As a whole as a human being, and human beings inside, all of them
are just the same. Some are more sensitive and seeking genuinely. Some are not seeking
genuinely, and some are not seeking at all. But the seeking also is given to you by Adi Shakti.
Now it happens that in the evolutionary process one fish came out of the mother, out of that
sea which was like a mother to the sea and then about ten or twelve fishes came out. Then after
some time sholles of fish came out. In the same manner your evolution has worked out. As
it is we have quite a big number, and we have crossed the number what saint John had said,
it doesn't matter, it seems that its a very fertile area, very fertile time, this Kaliyuga where there
are so many people who are taking to Divinity. It is the right time to do this, yesterday, when
I saw your play, I have seen all that myself and I used to wonder what is going to happen to
these people? How are. They have, they have taken, they have taken to spirituality. All these
diverse things that you see in modern times should not disturb you much because that has to
be that way. It's a drama, it's a play, and in that drama you should know that it will work out
in such a beautiful manner that after sometime you will find nothing but the Divine
dissolving all the useless things that we have, like our conditioning and your ego. We will
have so many people in Sahaja Yoga. By the time 2000 year we will have many many Sahaja
Yogis all over the world. Once we have lots of people many would jump into it. That's human
nature also. You see they won't take to it till we have lots of people, and once we have a
multitude they will jump into it. So some people are always worried, Mother what about
others we are now in the heavens, we are enjoying life. It will all work out. But your attention
should be how I can dissolve others into this ocean of joy, of this compassion. You will be
surprised that it is your own compassion only which is going to give you strength. This
compassion within you when you will see people are getting completely drowned, completely
destroved, your compassion itself will make you powerful and you will do everything that is
needed. You will give up all nonsensical activities and you will really dedicate yourself to
emancipate other people and amazingly as you will do this your own level of spirituality will
rise. As you see I would say that when you dissolve say some salt in the water, the water rises.
In the same way the more people when they will come to Sahaja Yoga the Divine Power will
manifest much more. It is manifesting already. But the more people there will be there will be,
much more manifestation, because it will be like so many channels, that will be working it out.
At this juncture when we all know that there is Divine Power you all have got your realisation
and that you are all now saintly people, then we should see to people who were like it. Like
we had Sufis, Nath Panthis, Gnostics, all kinds of people in every religion. What did they do?
They went all out to awaken other people to the fact that there is Divine Power. They could
not give realisation. They couldn't give proof of that but they worked it out, they talked about
it, they sang about it. That's what we have to understand that nöthing should deter your
compassion to be expressed. When you know the people are getting drowned, they are in a
terrible mess, this is a kind of a huge onslaught of the evil on human beings, and if you have
that compassion within you, you will go all out to save them. That is what is the work of this
chit-vilas, of this enjoyment of your attention. Your attention itself will enjoy when you will
start bringing more people into the power of Divinity. Without Divinity there is no saving for
human beings, that everybody admits, every one says so. But they have no idea as to what is
Divinity, what is the way to achieve it. While you all have this. You have to awaken
power
Divine Cool Breeze
18
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Kundalini, you know all about Chakras, you know all the defects of the Chakras, you can find
out from the vibrations the truth about everything. The more you use this power the better it
will be. You have to go to areas where so far you have not gone. We have not got many people
from Africa. So I am thinking of going next year to Africa to work it out. Also we have so
many other areas wherel find we have to work it out that if this compassion is within you
then it will compel you also to do work that will bring solace to people who are not even
seeking. I am already busy with forming some N.G.C.s which will really create very beautiful
institutions for people who have nothing. They are starving, they are under trouble, they are
under
great ordeals. Only you can do it because coming to Sahaja Yoga you have dropped out
your greed. You have dropped out your lust. It's finished now you are so free and so
independent. With this the compassion cannot take any other form because many people I
have seen that they start this kind of work and then they start becoming leaders or they start
becoming rich or plundering others. This you will not do You are really as Christ has said
"Salt'. Salt which is completely dissolved in the Divinity and this salt is going to dissolve many
others.
I'm not saying we should be like missionaries converting people into Sahaja Yoga by force
We have to look after what they are lacking, first of all. Actually there are very few people in
this world who are honest. 1 have known people who never had any greed but as soon as they
got some powers they started showing such tremendous greed that surprisingly when you
know that person who has never done such a thing and suddenly you find he has become so
greedy, you can't believe it. But not Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yogis won't do that, they will enjoy
their compassion, not anything else, not their lust, not their greed and also the so called
deviations, like taking to drugs, drinking, and other nonsensical things. Because they know
where lies the enjoyment. Once you know where lies the enjoyment, you will try to have more
of it and more of it it's so easy now for you to do it.
no.
As the men are working it out women should work it out because women have more sense
of compassion, and forgiveness. Because they are mothers, they have children, they have
known what is love for the children. Mother dosen't expect anything, She just wants her child
to be alright and happy. She enjoys her child, that's all. If you are a woman inbuilt within you
is compassion. I have seen young girls if they find little baby they will run after that. They like
to take a little baby. They have dolls and they look after the dolls just like their own childrens.
for women it should be much easier to show compassion and to express and to manifest and
as you are married also your husbands will feel so much strengthened by your own nature of
Divinity. What so you sacrifice? Some say, I sacrifice this for God or that for God. What is there
to sacrifice for God. What does God need? He doesn't need anything. You have only sacrified
your brains, no wisdom is there.
It is He who likes change and charnges the whole scene in such a manner that you don't
understand how it has happened and worked out. What you have to do is to enjoy the play.
In the same manner Sahaja Yogis should have understanding, and enjoyment among yourself.
If a Sahaja Yogi cannot enjoy who is going to enjoy life, I can't understand the one who has
this Kundalini awakened who has felt the all Pervading Power of love, who knows what is the
truth. Who is standing on the complete oneness with the Divine, how can such a person
anyway have any kind of problem. It is to realize that you are sitting in the realm of God
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
19
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Almighty. You have entered into this kingdom and you are under the attention and
compassion of Adi Shakti But it is like this if you make a beggar who has been begging all his
life sit on a throne, he still begs sitting on the throne. That is the situation sometimes with
Sahaja Yogis. At this least state should be overcome by all of you because it has a very bad
impression also for other people. Its very important, for your own life. That you should grow
fully into the understanding of the powers that you have got and the live that your Mother
has. When you say you must surrender yourself to Mother, means what ? What do I have to
surrender? What you are surrendering is what is pervert in you whatever is destructive in you,
whatever that misleads, whatever is your ego and your conditioning that's all you are
surrendering just to purify yourself, to enjoy yourself and to know God Almighty. If you
know yourself how will you know God. Its impossible, so to know yourself you have to
evolve. I know that there are some very great Sahaja Yogis, but still I would say that there are
so many other areas where all these very greatly evolved Sahaja Yogis have to enter into, and
work out, you can do it.
don't
When I came first in Rome there was not even a single person in the hall, so I said, what is
going to happen in this country. Now we have so many Sahaja Yogis. But as it is growing
sideways it should also grow upwards. As it is growing in quantity, it should also grow in
quality, and as you grow in quality more and more people will come, because I know all the
time you are so collective that all the time you feel that mother I am still not a Sahaja yogi,
my brother is not a Sahaja Yogi. I know that feeling you have. Forget about them but those
who are seeking, approach them. They are your real relations. Then afterwards all these
people will join, your father, mother, brother, sisters, children. Till that time they will wait.
They are not seekers. Those who are seekers you should seek them, you should find out where
are they. My attention is with you and every time you think of me I will be at your service
fully. Whatever you want I will be there to help you in whichever way is possible. Anything
find
very difficult is not because you take it upon yourself but if you leave it to this All
you
Pervading Power if Divine love, to this power of Adi Shakti, Param Chaitanya then nothing
is difficult. Nothing is so bad that you cannot manage.
It is very important that this Puja musi be performed because that is how you grow. This
reflection improves and you grow more and more within yourself through the power of Adi
Shakti or through the power of Kundalini as you know that Adi Shakti has her own Kundalini
which is the Adi Kundalini and the reflection of that within you is the Kundalini, so you
to worship, and in the best way to please your own Kundalini, your own Mother who has
given you this birth.
have
May God Bless You.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VilII Issue 8, 9 & 10
20
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-20.txt 
 SCRIPTURAL REFERENCE TO SAHAJA YOGA.
INTRODUCTION
"If they (the seekers) had read some books of enlightened people-Gnostics, their scriptures, or
anything like that, they would have understood what is the Truth, and where to find it, and
how to find it."
- H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
Shri Adi Shakti Puja, June 26, 1994.
REFRENCES FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT
PSALMS
(46:4) "There is a River, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God, the holy place
of the Tabernacles of the Most High."
EZEKIEL
(47:9) "It shall come to pass that everything that liveth, which moveth wherever the River shall
come, shall live. They shall be healed, and everything shall live where the River cometh."
JOEL
(22:28) "And it shall come to pass äfterward that I will pour out My Holy Spirit upon all flesh;
and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; your old men shall dream dreams; your
young men shall see visions."
REFERENCES FROM THE NEW TESTAMENT
JOHN
(7:38) "Rivers of Living Water shall flow from their inner beings. This He spoke of the Spirit
which all should receive. For the Holy Spirit was not yet given."
(4:14) "Whosoever drinks the Water that I gave him, he will no more thirst through eternity,
but that Water shall become in him a well of Water springing up into everlasting life.'
(3:5) "Except a man be born of Water and of the Holy Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God."
(3:8) "The Wind blows where it will and you hear the sound it makes, but cannot tell where
it comes from and where it goes to. So is everyone that is born of the Spirit."
(20:22) "And when He had said this, He breathed on them and said to them, Receive the Holy
Spirit."
ACTS
(2:2) "And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing, mighty Wind, and it
filled all the house where they were sitting. Tongues of Fire appeared which divided and sank
into every one of them, and all were filled with the Holy Spirit"
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
21
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-21.txt 
 REVELATIONS
(22:1) "And he showed me a pure river of Water of Life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the
Throne of God and of the Lamb."
(33:17) "And the Holy Spirity and the Bride say, 'Come, and let him that is a thirst, come. And
whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely'.
REFERENCES FROM THE GNOSTIC SCRIPTURES
(BG 119:15) "Those drops which fell from the Light and Spirit into the chaos, represent the
judgment of the Archigenetor and manifested their forms through the Breeze as a living soul."
(BG 121:1) "These things happened through the will of the Mother, the Sophia, so that he, the
immortal human, would put into order the veils which have been there. And they welcomed
the breath of that Breeze.'
(BG 122:1) "The Mother said, 'And so I came here that they become connected with that Spirit
and that Breeze, and they both become united as from the very beginning, so that they reap
a rich harvest and ascend to the One who existed from the very begining, in inexpressible
joy'."
TRIMORPHIC PROTENNOIA
"But there is a Light that dwells hidden in Silence and it was first to come forth. Whereras She
(the Mother) alone exists as Silence, I alone am the Word, ineffable, unpolluted, immeasurable,
inconceivable. It (the Word) is a hidden Light, bearing a Fruit of Life, pouring forth a Living
Water from the invisible, unpolluted, immeasurable Spring, that is, the unreproducible Voice
of the glory of the Mother, the glory of the offspring of God, a male virgin by virtue of a
hidden intelect, that is, the silence hidden from the All, being unreproducible, an
immeasurable Light, the source of All, the Root of the entire Aeon. It is the Foundation that
supports every movement of the Aeons that belong to the might Glory. It is the Foundation
of every foundation. It is the Breath of the Powers. It is the Eye of the Three Permanences,
which exist as Voice by virtue of Thought. And it is a Word by virtue of Speech; it was sent
to illumine those who dwell in the darkness."
APOCRYPHON OF JOHN
(38) "the Holy Pneuma (Greek for Breeze or Spirit), known as Zoe (Life), the Mother of all."
(63) "So the Mother sent the Pneuma, which is Her own."
(65) "Everyone on whom the Pneuma of life falls will be saved and become complete, once
they unite themselves with the Power. They will become worth of rising to those great Lights,
because there they will be cleansed."
(67) "Whoever receives this Pneuma will in any case live, and scorn evil. For the Power flows
into all people; without it they would not even be in the position to stand straight."
(26) "The spring of Pneuma flowed out of the living Water of Light, and equipped all aeons
and worlds for every eventuality . He told us that He understands Himself in His own
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Light which is around Him, which is the source of the Waters of Life."
(34) "The Scent of the Father is something of a physical entity like cold Water"
(47) "After the invisible Pneuma (granting their wishes) had conceded, it poured Pneuma over
them, which stemmed from perfection."
(51) "They spoke to the Father, Breathe of that Pneuma which is in You, in his countenance,
and the form will arise."
UPANISHADS
CHANDOGYA AND MAITRAYANI
(4:3:4) & (6:20) "Prana is Beath"
CHANDOGYA
(5:1:17) "the Breath (of life) is everything."
MAITRAYANI
(2:26) "Prajapati made Himself like air and penetrated into the inner beings of the people, to
enlighten their consciousness... the Breath was His body"
An artery, known as Shushumna, rises, serving as the passage of the Prana. Through
(6:21)
that artery, when it has been joined by the Breath, by the sacred syllable Om, and by the mind,
let him proceed upwards; and without using any of the organs of sense, let greatness perceiNe
greatness. From thence he goes to selflessness, and through selflessness he ceases to be an
enjoyer of pleasure and pain; he obtains the Absolute."
ATHARVAVEDA
(11:4) "Whosoever is driven by the Breath of Life, he will be reborn.
TAITTIRIA
(3:3) "He perceived that Breath is Brahman, for from Breath these beings are born; by Breath,
when born, they live; into Breath they enter at their death"
SHANKAYANA
(5) "Breath is consciousness; consciousness is Breath."
DEVI MAHATMYAM
(4:20) To the Devi : "Your face resembling the moon, giving out cool Rays."
Quotations from Realised Souls
Adi Shankaracharya (Saundarya Lahari)
(61) Referring to the Devi : "Bearing in its hollow interior, pearls, kept in their places by Thy
very cool Breeze."
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
23
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-23.txt 
 GYANESHWARA (JNYANESHWARI)
(6:14) Gyaneshwara describes the Kundalini as rising through the Shushumna and spraying
out Water, which transforms into Nectar; and saves the Wind of Life, which : "rises up, giving
a cooling feeling, internally and externally."
CARL GUSTAV JUNG
(1957, P. 254) The Naassene group, the Pneumatics' (those in whom the Wind blows) were
chosen by the "living Water" which was supposed to be the "Great ocean-current, flowing
from the centre of the perfectly occomplished human being."
(Aurora Consurgens, p. 304) "Seventh and lastly, He bestowed the living Spirit.. for through
His Breath He transformed the mortal body into Spirit. And so they say: Your Breath makes
the people become spiritual.
WILLIAM BLAKE (THE EVERLASTING GOSPEL)
"Still the Breath Divine does move, and the Breath Divine is Love."
LẠo TZE (THE CHARACTER OF TAO)
"Tao is a hollow vessel, and its use is inexhaustible! Foathomless! Like the fountain-head of
all things. Its sharp edges rounded off, its tagles untied, its light tempered, its turmoil
submerged; yet dark like deep water it seems to remain. I do not know whose Son it is; an
image of what existed before God."
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH (CONCLUSION)
"Why sleeps the future, as a snake enrolled,
Coil within coil, at noon-tide? For the Word
Yields, if with unpresumptous faith explored,
Power at whose touch the sluggard shall unfold
His drowsy rings. Look forth! - that Stream behold,
That Stream upon whose bosom we have passed
Floating at ease while nations have effaced
Nations, and Death has gathered to his fold
Long Lines of mighty kings-look forth, my soul!
(Nor in this vision be though slow to trust)
The living Waters, less and less by guilt
Stained and polluted, brighten as they roll,
Till they have reached the eternal City-built
For the perfected Spirits of the just!"
AMEN
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
24
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Ode To a Loving Guru
In the northern heights of Italy
Adorns a Castle of the Golden Godess
Its Secret Chambers hold a Treasure that Universe Can't hold
Its gardens grow fruits sweeter than honey
Seekers from Three Worlds vie to glimpse Her gracious Splendour
The lucky one who crosses its threshold
Returns home as the King of the World.
With a prayer on my lips I softly knock at the lofty Door
'who is there", She asked
"Your devoted child", I replied
"Ask and I shall give" She graciously Blessed
I replied, "I have nothing to ask for what does the world own that is not your gift."
"Then why are you here", She asked.
I prayed, "To annoint your lotus feet O Mother"
She asked, "How long will you wait"
cried, "Till you call me O Divine Mother"
Suddenly the Door swung open.
A gust of cool wind quenched my thirsting soul.
The fragrance of musk, jasmine, hina and sandalwood soothed my buring senses.
Celestial music of Heavenly rymphs intoxicated me
Adorned by all the atoms of the Universe
her loving face dazzled more brilliantly than a thousand Suns.
Pearls dropped from Her enchanting Smile
I was lost in ecstasy, of eternity
When I found my senses again
I only remembered Her and forgot myself.
Yogi Mahajan
Guru Puja 96, Cabella
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
25
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-25.txt 
 GURU PUJA
Talk by H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
28 - 7- 96, Cabella, Italy (Synopsis)
This system of Puja of guru started a long time ago in India, When there were great seekers
and their Gurus were sitting in the jungles where they used to get permission to go there and
then they would get their realisation. We had many Rishis and Munis in the olden times in
India. One of the reasons why the system of Guru started is that there is no organised religion
in India. There are no popes, there is no priests.
There were priests just for worshipping in the temples but for giving realisation, for talking
about higher life they all had of go to very great realised souls and it was absolutely the
freedom of the Guru, whom to accept, whom not of accept. Everybody was tested by the Guru
thoroughly whether they were capable of receiving their self realisation or not. This test was
so hard, so difficult and alsco to a point of cruelty that very few would pass through that test.
It was not like Sahaja Yoga, everybody is a Sahaja Yogi. That of course made it a very narrow
margin for people to achieve their realisation and their Gurus never used to leave their own
seats, called Takya. All those who would like to go to him would be received only if he
allowed. You may go on for miles together, nothing. No obligations of the Guru that he would
meet you. Perhaps they didn't feel that love and compassion for the seekers. They didn't
understand that these seekers were ardently seeking the truth and they should not suffer. They
were not so much concerned. All the time they were testing the disciples. Even Ramdas who
was the Guru of Shivaji was testing Shivaji so many times though he was a born realised soul.
To get this Gurupada, this position of a Guru, they had to work very hard to achieve the state
of a saint. But in Sahaj Yoga, that is not the case. I just thought that if people get their
realisation they will see for themselves what's wrong with them. They'll introspect themselves.
They will try to correct themselves.lt is true for very many people but some of them still are
lingering behind and are going on and on, thinking they are Sahaj Yogis, they have achieved
a lot, and are very special. This delusion is all the time creating this problem this delusion
makes them
very narrow minded, selfish, selfcentered and people don't believe how they can
be Sahaj Yogis.
We have to know that Sahaja Yoga has worked out because this ParamChaitanya is transmit-
ting compassion it never did before. It never had that kind of an attitude which is there
because I am a Mother. This compassion has worked it this way, that you all have got your
realisation, you have achieved a state which you can call as self-realised souls. But still,
because you got it so easily, cheaply we didn't realise what we have got. Still we do not
practice meditation, introspection and dedication. Some are very much there, but mostly we
are living in the idea that we have already achieved it. The first thing we should introspect is,
are we concerned about ourselves? All the time do not think that we are suffering, we have
this problem, that problem, or this should be done, that should be done. If the attention is on
that, that all the time you are worried about yourselves, then you cannot break through the
shell of your being which is under the domination of your mental selfishness or of seif-
centeredness. Even self-centredness is absolutely against your growth.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
26
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-26.txt 
 For a saint any place has to be alright; you must have seen me enjoying everything. I can live
anywhere, I can sleep anywhere, I have no demands of any kind. But if you are worried about
your body comforts, your body troubles, then still you are at a bodylevel which you have to
transcend. Worried about how you look, how you dress up, whaf sort of things you have to
wear all this makes you yet not a good Sahaja Yogi. This is one style of Sahaj Yogis who still
want very great comforts. So what you have to do is if you are used to comforts, try to go
and sleep out on the streets. Do all kinds of things that are necessary for your body to under-
stand that you are not bound to the comfort of this body. This is one of the greatest things one
has to see that you are not bound by your body. Its alright if you have comfort, well and good;
do not have well and good. For a Sahaj Yogi it is very important that he should be able
if
you
to live like a saint. Not necessarily that you should become a Sanyasi, but from inside your
body should be such that you can dominate your body. How can you not sleep anywhere, why
can you not sleep anywhere. That they want to have very comfortable arrangements about
bathrooms, this, that. All these ideas are there because you are very self-conscious. But super
consciousness is not there. You want to have everything first-class and anybody, who tries to
interfere with it, you don't like it. I can understand a person who is very old, he cannot
manage things, he has to have a certain amount of body comfort. But even young people these
days are extremely comfort oriented That is not for Sahaj Yogi.
Of course I have seen, people in the west are better off in this matter. Because when they go
to India, they like 5.T. better than comfortable buses I said why? Because Mother you can
jump in the bus, nicely with all the luggage, the windows are open, you can breathe. Very
natural, very good. They wanted to go on bullock carts also. They enjoy all that. Actually if
you see, you notice, in the western world, people are taking to rustic style. They are enjoying
more the rustic style of life than of this so called comfortable artificial life. Most of the people
in the western countries I have met are really great Because they can sleep anywhere, they can
eat anything. You ask them what did eat, "I don't know, Mother"
who is not bothered as to what he is eating, what he is getting, what is his taste, I like this,
1 like that; these words stop. It is not difficult, it is not difficult, you may think that I am asking
you to do some hazardous thing, its not difficult at all. Because, if you have to impress
people around, you have to be like a saint. If you are a fussy person, if you are a fuss pot, then
you cannot impress others that you have got your self-realisation.
That is the sign of a person
the
Many people tell me, Mother, people had to do so much, to go to Himalayas, do this, do that
and then they got their realisation. How is it these people you have blessed. What right they
had to get this realisation. What have they achieved. I said only their desire. Their desire was
much there that they should get their realisation, and that's how they got it. But now to
very
go into only desire is not sufficient. You have to depend on yourself, on the light of your spirit,
you should see what is wrong. This is a very important thing Ask questions to yourself. Why
do I want this, why do I need this, what is the purpose, as you have seen the rest of the world
is mad because they are running after stupid things. They are wanting things that have no
meaning of spirituality. Spirituality is self-satisfying. If you are spiritually endowed, you are
self satisfied, this self satisfaction within you will lead you to that ocean of joy.
For Sahaja Yogis the word we use is Nirananda', Nirananda means a joyous state, where
nothing is needed. Joy itself is joy, you are enjoying only joy, nothing is needed to make you
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
27
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-27.txt 
 happy. You are happy because of the joy that you are in, this is the Nirananda, state.
If
you go and see how these saints lived, you will be amazed, how they managed their life;
you will be very much amazed. How many days they used to fast without food, never both-
ered. They never thought it was fasting. They just used to think, we have no food, so no food.
Ofcourse you don't have to go through all this you have got your realisation now you have
a power to achieve this mastery.
Another thing I have noticed about Sahaja Yogis. Some of them have grudges about others.
Sahaj Yoga is the blessings of love, blessings of compassion. There is no place for any kind of
hatred or any kind of revenge or anger amongst Sahaja Yogis. If you have that you must
conquer it. Its a good chance, if you find somebody who is hot-tempered who is very angry
and make friends with that person. Just see if you can carry on with that person or
fuss pot and see that you achieve
that will keep you above all kinds of hatered all kinds of temper. Some Sahaja Yogis
have no
type; go
not. If there is a fuss pot, also make friends with such a
that
peace
lose their temper very fast. I will say they can not be Sahaja Yogis. Because if
control over your anger then how are you powerful of compassion and love? But you don't
even love to control it, just there.
you
In the olden days the saints used to be very much angry type. They couldn't bear the stupidity
of the world. They used to run away from people. I know of a saint, Nityanand Swami, he
lived on a tree and anybody tried to come near he would throw stones at him; couldn't bear
people who were all heated up. But you don't need that. You have a way of achieving love
and affection of the people who seem to be very troublesome and grudging type. This is not
a difficult task if
you try a little bit. Mostly people when they find somebody who is a very
hot-tempered person they run away from them; those who are good natured, you can always
be friendly, what is so great about it? What is so nice about it, what is so sweet about it? But
how you speak to that person, how you talk to that person how you manage that person is
important. Your love will definitely melt him down because he is a Sahaj Yogi. You have to be
extremely affectionate compassionate and loving.
Another thing which is extremely important for us to know is that we have got this realisation
though Mother's love only by compassion. Only the power of mother's compassion could
have worked it out. Now, even if this love is flowing towards the stones or towards the
mountains or towards anything which is very solid, the ripples come back, they have to come
back. In the same way you people now who have got realisation have to know that
sion and love is the only power you have got, nothing else. If you love yourself, you care for
yourself, care for your family and care for your children then you haven't achieved much. You
are only worried about yourself because that is the limited area where you move. But if
can break that and find out places where you have to express your love you can. They say
that water finds its own level. In the same way this compassion has to flow to all the places,
all the ditches, everywhere and should find its own level. But if you are just satisfied with
yourself and are not bothered, just trying to believe that you are a great soul because you are
a Sahaj Yogi then I must say that you are sadly mistakei.
compas-
you
Now the third thing that troubles Sahaj Yogis is that, "Mother, we want God's realisation.
That makes me laugh. You see it is already there, like once you get to the sea and you say
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
28
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Mother we want to go to the bottom of the sea, you can always go, just slip and you will be
there. In the same way once you have developed self realisation and have jumped into the
ocean of this compassion there is no need to achieve anything. The source of achievement is
all coming from your human haunting. That should be over Now you are all godly people,
so you should not think I should achieve this state, I should achieve that state. Just go on
slipping, just so on giving up all the weights that you have in your heads and it wil work out.
You have to dissolve yourself into the compassion.
There are still some people who always want to be in the front, specially Indians. They should
sit whrever they get a seat with complete satisfaction. Whether you sit in front or in that corner
in the darkness, you get my vibrations. Where you are prominent is not necessary. What is it
if you are prominent, what do you get? To be lost into the crowds, to be lost into the ocean
of love is the main thing. All these are mythical that we should some how or the other
front place. Front will be the back and back will be the front.
the
get
It is very surprising how people are still trying to achieve something so nonsensical. So where
is your mind where is your attention? What are you thinking? If you are thoughtless, you will
be satisfied, you will be happy you will not ask for anything, you will not want anything.
What is there to have? What is so important? All these ideas come from ignorance. Once a
Hare Rama Hare Krishna fellow came to me and he said that we have heard that
great saint, and you have all the comforts of life, so how are you a saint? I said how are you
a saint. He said I have given up my family. I have given up my cars and have given up my
house, I have given up my children I said one mnore thing you have given up, your brains.
They said but how do you say we have given up our brains? 1 said, very simple. I have given
up nothing because I am holding nothing what is there to give up when you are not holding
anything? Now, in this house or my body anywhere you think you can find anything equal
to the dust particle of Shri Krishna, you can take it. Should be equal though. Then they started
looking here and there, I said, see what have you given up, just stones. Why are you
about giving up? They even shaved their heads. All these useless ideas that we have done this,
we have done that. Anybody in Sahaja Yoga who thinks that he has done lot of work for Sahaj
Yoga should give up completely. That's the sign of another ignorance. If you are part and parcel
of the ocean, everything is done the by ocean, you are doing nothing. To have such ideas about
yourself shows how little know about yourself. You are the ocean. If you are the ocean
how can you say I have touched this shore I have touched that shore. No more 'I' is left. When
this T ness drops out then only the universal being within you shines.
you are a
boasting
you
Some people are very identified with their country or with their worshipping style. All this
misidentifications have to be given up. It is very difficult for people because they are so
conditioned and as long as you have conditioning you cannot rise above your mind which is
a myth.
Now try to understand what your conditionings are, one of them, you go to the western
| countries, all of them only sing songs of Shri Ganesha. They know all the songs of Shri
Ganesha, Shri Ganesha's photograph, Shri Ganesha everything. Now I have they stop. Why
should Ganesha the vibrations I realised because I had said Shri Ganesha incarnated as
Christ. Their identification is with Christ and Christinity in a very subtle way. Imagine with
stops
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
29
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Shri Ganesha music we heard in one of the eastern bloc countries and all the vibrations had
stopped. They were singing all the songs of Shri Ganesha; not one song about Sahaj Yoga,
leave alone their guru. Even this is a very subtle identification.
There was one fellow in Russia, supposed to be very intelligent. He said that alright we keep
Mother's photograph and also the icons we can get the same type of vibration. You cannot
because icons are made by some artist's, imagination. These are not representing actually even
Maria, or Christ or anyone. They are all imaginary. If an Italian makes Christ, it is Italian style.
If Frenchman makes, he is thin like French. If you get somebody, from Holland he will have
a forehead like that. All of them depict Christ as they want. Then we have Maria the same way.
Her expression, photograph everything is all according to the imagination of the artist.
These artists are not free. Because all of them have a certain style. Now if it is Rembrant, it is
a style. If it is Leonardo, it is a style. Though he is born realised still he has a style. Nobody
is like this that he will make today like this, tomorrow like that; there is no freedom. They are
bound by their own style. Everybody has one style and that is the style they follow; because,
what is the reason? Reason is they must have done 3-4 types, styles but, people must have
rejected. Its all opinion of the people. So they must have taken to that one style. You can see
Christ, if he is Japanese he will have chinky eyes; if he is Chinese, he will have no nose, if its
Indian, he will be dark. How can they emit vibrations. While with my photograph, how can
they compare? Cameras were developed at this time, not before that. This loud speaker was
not developed before this, Aeroplanes were not developed before. I have been travelling for
nineteen days, one day in the plane, second day in the public programme. They could not do
all that. Nobody could do this. Neither Shri Krishna, nor anyone. They could not fly by
aeroplane those days. But it is only possible because today there are aeroplanes. Even video,
the way you are seeing my image There was that available before, science has also supported
seekers to find God. We have to be thankful to science. Even there was not a car. I could not
have gone up to Milan even. If I had been going on a bullock cart, what would have happened
to me. All these things are created today for
you.
You were also born in these times for these special things. They could not give realisation at
that time Because at that time you were not there. Very few people of your cablibre were there.
wondered if you understand your calibre. When you are sometimes groaning shows that
you do not understand your calibre. You don't know what you are. How much the whole
atmosphere has been worked out. Science has been worked out for you. Science is the gift of
nature. All this has been worked out for you to achieve the highest state in the shortest time
But for that one has to be extremely introspective. Instead of thinking what you have to
achieve be introspective. This introspection will help and you will become real gurus. When
you go to other villages people should know from your being itself that some great person has
come. You don't have to certify. It is the simplicity of your temperament itself. First time I went
to Leningrad nobody knew about me, no advertisements: They just put some posters, and
there were two thousand people in the hall, two thousand outside. In the hall they had to pay,
alright. I was wondering what's the matter. When I came out I gave them realisation but I said
you come tomorrow. two thousand from inside and two thousand from outside and about two
thousand more came and they all were sitting on the ground. I was amazed. I said what made
you come to my programme. They said Mother so obvious, your photograph. Such sensitivity
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
30
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-30.txt 
 to spirituality. So obvious, from your photograph. There were scientists, there were doctors, all
kinds of intelligent people. They could feel the spirituality from the face. That kind of a
sensibility we should have, when you don't need any discretion; nothing, you know this is
it. Don't have to judge, don't have to think. You cannot say who will be best fitted for this.
Those who have come for the first time, those who have come later on, or those who are still
coming. Younger orolder women, men or children.
Tin my lifetime if I see so many of you transformed, looking so beautiful looking so nice,
creating such a good atmosphere, it is more than satisfaction for me. Sometimes I think there's
nothing to be done now; finished. But then they invite me here they invite me there. So I just
leave. But to be very frank I am oversatisfied. Its like a mango tree. Once you have planted
the mango tree, looked after it for 34 years, thern it looks after itself. It gives fruits, it just
grows by itself. In the same way, it should happen with you. You should grow by yourself.
Of course you will find people who are stupid, who are agressive, who are not at all Sahaja
Yogis and are trying to be Sahaj Yogis, just see them, that's all.
In this Guru Puja you have to decide what are the criterias. First, a Guru has to be without
desires. Any desires, whatsoever. 'Niriccha', they say. There's one false Guru in India, who said
if I had the powers that Mother has then I would have become the king of this world. So
people said, Why doesn't Mother become like that? Why doesn't She become the king? They
said because She has no desires. A person who has no desires will not become anything. I said
and tell him if you have desires, you cannot have powers also. " Its only because" she has
go
no desires, all these powers are there. Any desire that comes to your mind you should say,
ah, forget it. Just forget it. When the desire is overpowering, you just divert your attention.
How do
become desireless is by getting to the thoughtless awareness. Any crises comes
you
in, you should be able to rise into that state of thoughtlessness.
Just be peaceful. Look at your desires with peace. Tell the desire oh, I am very much satisfied,
now don't come. I don't want. That's how you can become desireless.
There is this compassion and the compassion that becomes actually the power. Small, small
things you can express your love. In very sweet ways you can express your love Its very
important the world needs today love and peace. You have to give peace and love to everyone
that is possible. Ofcourse for a Sahaj Yogi it is very easy. But even non Sahaj Yogi you must
treat them with respect and love. But you should not have desire that should get back
anything from them. Its alright. Whatever they are its alright. You have known so many Sahaj
Yogis who have gained so much and have betrayed us. Doesn't matter. Not important. Because
they are going to be losers not we. There is nothing to be bothered about these things.
you
Then, another thing is try to see that your mind doesn't react. Some people have a habit to
react. You tell them something they will put their own one tail with it. Never will they accept.
If somebody says something if you are reacting what will go into your heads what will go into
your heart what will go into your attention. The reaction itself is sign of not proper develop-
ment within yourself. This attention which is trying to go into all the areas of your mind and
a body and every
act. You cannot see anything just for seeing sake. You react. This is not good, that is not good,
if I
where. It cannot enter. Because as soon as it tries to enter, you shut it by the
say it is 5'O clock they say, no it is five past tow minutes two seconds. This comes with
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
31
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_8,9,10.pdf-page-31.txt 
 terrible conditioning which has to go away. Why should you react. Then the argument starts,
then fight starts then wars come. If you tell your mind, nothing doing, you are a myth and I
am not going to react to it, 99.99% problems will be solved.
Then the last, but not the least is the ego. I can't understand a saint having a ego. Its so stupid
to have ego. Its a kind of a domination. If somebody says something you get angry. That
means your power of love and compassion is still not full. You can ofcourse correct people
when they have to be corrected but for that you should have that power within yourself. The
person should know that you are correcting that person because you love that person, Not for
selfishness. Not for any gain. But this ego is a very big problem and that comes by, not from
any ignorance but stupid ideas about yourself. If you thìnk that you are something great
already then what can you do? Ego makes you very arrogant, but if you are humble really not
to have the humility of a businessmen but if you are humble from within yourself, from your
heart, enjoying your humility then this ego can run away. You have to ask yourself, now what
are you angry for? Again, I come back to the same point, introspection. Because you are not
here to carry on some jobs but you are here to become saints. Then this ego should be made
into a great instrument of love and joy. You can, it's not difficult. This is what is ego is reaction
to things. You can react to things in a sweet way or you can react to things in a deadly way.
Then, humour comes in. Also you speak as if there is fragrant flowers, which are coming out.
Then every action of yours, every thing becomes very gentle and sweet. Have this ego that
we will be gentle, we will be kind, we will be sweet, we will be forgiving, we will be loving,
lets have this ego. Start with this kind of a ego, the other way around. You will be surprised
how you can really conquer the whole world.
On this day of Guru Puja, the Guru is supposed to tell something to his disciples about
correcting themselves. In my own sweet way I have said to you which you shouldn't mind3;
I don't mean to condemn you by any chance but to give you a proper sense of introspection
by which you all get your Guru Pada. My only vision is that I should see all the Sahaj Yogis
drenched in the power of Love. Enjoying each other's Love, enjoying each others's relationship
and improving relationships. I know there are problematic people, I know they are problems.
But if you cannot solve the problem what is the use of your becoming masters. I leave it to
you to solve your own problems which you are facing and introspection with love and com-
passion, Not by conditioning yourself. I am sure you can manage It.
May God Bless You.
:Yogi Mahajan
Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029
Golden Arts, B- 2/11 Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029.
Edited by
Published by
Printed by
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 8, 9 & 10
32
