DIVINE COOL BREEZE Issue 11 & 12 00 Vol VIII c00000000000000000 0000000000000000000 "For spread of Sahaja Yoga, everyone must cooperate, nobody is going to force you, nobady is going to be compelled, but it's for your Own satisfaction, Everybody should feel responsible for Sahaja Yoga. H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Sydney, Australia, 5 March 1996 90000000000000 000000

 108 Thank You 's to Shri Mataji The following are the 108 " Thank You's" to our Divine Mother Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi offered at this year's Sahasrara Puja. They have been composed of our deep love and eternal gratitude and can be recited at occasions of prayer and worship. They are meant to express what is beyond expression. 108 Thank You's Shri Mataji. Thank You for descending from your heavenly abode Mata Dwipa to bring light in to 1) the darkness of Kali Yuga ThankYou for delivering Sahaja Yoga to a confused and self destructive humanity. 2) Thank You for revealing the meaning of creation and evolution to us. 3) Thank You for revealing the actual existence of God to us. 4) Thank You for giving Divine meaning to human life. 5) Thank You for revealing the reflection of the Vishawarupa Within the human body to 6) US Thank You for revealing primordial principles of creation to us 7) Thank You for revealing the reality of human nature of us. 8) Thank You for revealing the meaning of true religion to us. 9) Thank You for teaching the Divine Knowledge of Sahaja Yoga to us. 10) Thank You for fulfilling the promise of Jesus Christ. 11) Thank You for lifting the veil of illusion for us. Thank You for revealing the true meaning of good and evil to us. 12) 13) Thank You for awakening Mother Kundalini in us. 14) Thank You for opening the dimension of collective consciousness to us. 15) Thank You for giving us self realization. 16) Thank You for establishing vibratory awareness on our central nervous system. 17) Thank You for nourishing us with the all pervading power of god. 18) Thank You for revealing the meaning of the " Last Judgement " to us. Thank You resurrecting the tree of life from its slumber of joyful anticipation. 19) 20) Thank You for crowning the work of all avatars and prophets. 21) Thank You for fulfilling the dreams of all saints and seekers. 22) Thank You for giving meaning to all those who have sacrificed their lives for the 23) emancipation of mankind. Thank You for re-establishing hope, belief and confidence in our heads. Thank You for lifting human self - determination beyond the concept of race, caste system and religion. Thank You for giving divine meaning to the idea of freedom, equality and brotherhood. 24) 25) 26)

 Thank You for uniting mankind at the feet of one God, one experience and one 27) truth Thank You for inviting mankind into the realms of the Absolute. 28) Thank You for liberating us from the illusion of a dualistic world. 29) Thank You for liberating us from ignorance, confusion and solitude. 30) Thank you for exposing the demonic force of the materialistic world. Thank You for exposing the inefficiency of linear thinking. Thank You for exposing the cruelty and danger of patriarchal politics. 31) 32) 33) Thank You for destroying enslaving personal and social patterns and conditionings. 34) Thank You for liberating humanity from the suffocating chains of the catholic church. 35) Thank You for liberating humanity from the abuse of religious authority by the Islamic 36) government. Thank You for revealing the falsehood offake gurus and all religious institution to us 37) Thank You for liberating humanity from blind faith and superfical religious 38) conditionings. shortcomings of a scientific approach to Thank You tor exposing the limitations and 39) reality. Thank You for destroying the illusion of the Western value system. 40) Thank You for introducing us to the relationship with the Divine. 41) Thank You for finding us worthy. Thank You for letting us participate in the salvation of mankind. 43) Thank You for giving us the joy of introducing a yearning seeker to your redeeming 42) 44) motherly love. Thank You for inviting all of us to the court of the Goddess. 45) Thank You for establishing the Kingdom of God on earth. 46) Thank You for accepting our offers and prayers. 47) Thank You for showering Your blessings endlessly on us. 48) Thank You for opening the gateway to heaven within us. 49) Thank You for bestowing the gift of yoga onto us. 50) Thank You for making us. 51) Thank You for baptising us. 52) Thank You for healing us. Thank You for purifying us. 53) 54) 55) Thank You for cleansing us. Thank You for transforming us. 56) Thank You for enlightening us. 57) Thank You for nourishing us. 58) Thank You for elating us. 59)

 Thank You for being with us. Thank You for laving us. Thank You for forgiving us. 60) 61) 62) Thank You for helping us. 63) Thank You for protecting us. 64) Thank You for encouraging us. 65) Thank You for guiding us. 66) Thank You for comforting us. 67) Thank You for counselling us. 68) Thank You for correcting us. 69) Thank You for never abandoning us. 70) Thank You for saving us. 71) Thank You for gathering us. 72) Thank You for teaching us. 73) Thank You for opening our hearts. 74) Thank You for caring for us. 75) Thank You for accommodating us. 76) Thank You for trusting us. 77) Thank You for counting us. 78) 79) Thank You for taking us into your Divine body. Thank You for giving us collectivity. Thank You for giving us friendship. Thank You for waiting for us. 80) 81) 82) Thank You for giving us families. 83) Thank You for giving us position in life. Thank You for giving us wealth. Thank You for giving us spiritual authority. 84) 85) 86) Thank You for giving us self - esteem. 87) Thank You for giving us discrimination. 88) Thank You for giving us wisdom. 89) Thank You for giving us success. 90) Thank You for giving us meditation. 91) Thank You for giving us inner peace. 92) Thank You for giving us inner joy. 93) Thank You for giving us enlightened attention. 94) Thank You for giving us detachment. 95) Thank You for equipping us with divine weapons. 96) Thank You for submitting us to the benevolent attention of Deities and all celestial 97) beings.

 98) Thank You for giving us concern for others. 99) Thank You for giving us the power to help others . 100) Thank You for giving us the satisfaction of spreading Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. 101) Thank You for Your continuous attention. 102) Thank You for being the mirror. 103) Thank You for being gentle. 104) Thank You for being wonderful. 105) Thank You for being in our heart. 106) Thank You for being our Guru. 107) Thank You for being our Mother. 108) Thank You for ever and ever and ever!

 SHRIKRISHNA PUJA SYNOPSIS H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Today we are going to worship Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna did little mischief with Indra; Indra is the semi-God for looking after the rain. So Indra got very angry. All such semi- gods are very sensitive. At the smallest thing, they get angry and they start using their powers to express their anger. So he started pouring rain on all the gopas. The rain was so heavy that they thought that the whole land will be completely submerged. Indra was very happy to spoil the game of Shri Krishna and he thought he was very successful. Shri Krishna lifted a mountain on his finger and all the people went under that mountain. This is Shri Krishna's style. My style is different. I told Indra that you can't misbehave with me. You can't. So far I have not harmed you in any way or irritated you. Of course its going to be Shri Krishna's puja but that dosen't mean that you should try to show-off your power in front of me. Sometimes I wonder why do they get angry like this for small things.whatever it is, things could be reconciled and now it has become warm with Sahaja Yoga you can do many things. But you must know what you can do. For that Krishna is a very good example.He started Sahaj culture. He did'nt give realisation to anyone but he gave the idea of Sahaj culture. Before him came Shri Ram who was maryada purushottam. He was very particular about everything. Later he threw out his wife because he was a king and a king cannot have a scandal, especially from his wife. His father ordered him to go to the forest. He loved his father so much that he agreed. After all, he was Maryada Purushottam, whatever his father said he agreed, whatever his mother said, he agreed. So he went in the forest and stayed there for 14 years. His is the obedience to the father, there was no need to obey his father. His father was not God (but he was god). But in those days it was important to make people not only respect the parents but also to obey them. That was the time there were many Munis, many Saints and also many Hatha Yogis. They used to make people practice very strict discipline. Those who did not practice the discipline they had to do lot of penance and so many people who tried also did not reach the goal because of strictness and complete discipline about following the path of spirituality. Recently I was reading a book called peaceful warrior where they have described an American, seeking the truth. The guru of that follower really took him through a horrible difficult task. Ultimately he finds that he is the existence. That was the practise followed after Shri Rama. People would leave their wives, children,go to the Himalayas and sit there and practise meditation. It was very rigorously followed, a very moral society. But it was out of fear. The whole morality came from fear, which is also repeated in so many other religions. I would say that Islam today has taken that form. It's the fear. They are not doing it out of freedom. Also christians, the same thing, Hindus -I don't know half way this side and half way that side. Sikhs, there is terrible disciplining, punishment, that they have to clean the shoes of people. If you really go through the rituals of Hindu religion, then out of one week you will be fasting for 6 days, and at least one day you might eat some food. then you'll have to visit all kinds of places. Recently they had to go to Amarnath, and so many died. Now they 5.

 are saying we have got nirvana. We died doing this so we have got nirvana . This kind of very funny idea were existing. That we have a nirvana now; we have achieved whatever we wanted and now we are dead; so many are dead and those who were not dead were requesting why we are not dead. Even in this kaliyuga these ideas are prevalent. Even in India people are very severe type, especially in the south, they do all kinds of nonsense for the atonement or maybe for something they were asking for. All this nonsense was too much for Shri Krishna. He could not understand that they are going to waste all their lives with this kind of ritualism then what will remain out of them for sahaj yoga, so He,' the one who started Sahaj culture. He said let us enjoy, we must have enjoyment, Nirmala Anand, Pure Joy. How do we have pure joy? We had this rakhi bandhan by which everybody except for your wife is either your sister or mother. He started also this Holi which you should play with colours, maybe to get rid of the colour barriers we have. In America it is a very good idea to play with colours and some white on the black and black on the whites and thay can see how stupid it is to fight in the name of colour. He used to play with children who were looking after cows just like a very ordinary person. He never tried to show off his power, never tried to stand out, never would dress up in a special way. He was just like an ordinary cow herd and his relationship with his Mother Yeshoda, she was not his Mother, who was also extremely beautiful. There were so many beautiful poems written about his childhood that he is the one who is incharge of the whole universe. As a little boy he used to put his finger in his mouth wondering how can a divine virata do that. Thinking like a child, all his actions were of children. All these actions are described very well especially by another very great poet Surdas, who was blind. His childhood description of his relationship with his Mother is very natural and sweet. It was not like in modern times, this carpet you have spoiled. I'll hit you hard. They have more interest in their things than in their own children. But according to our culture if a child breaks anything you have to say very good that it is broken and some badha has gone away. I don't know how their imagination reached that beautiful height of pure joy. Towards our children also we have to be extremely sweet, nice and forgiving. But some chilidren of course, are difficult. Shri Krishna went to school of a Guru. The Guru' s wife was very kind but the guru was strict and his wife used to look after him, They would go and bring some wood from the forest. It's very subtle; his friend was carrying the food and Shri Krishna was busy cutting the wood. Imagine Shri Krishna was cutting the wood for the mother. Imagine, he was God, no work for the mother was menial or lower. But his friend was very hungry and he ate the food and nothing was left. So when he came down he was very much worried. He went and told his guru that I ate all the food, I did not share it with Shri Krishna. The guru got very angry. He said "Now you will be cursed with permanent poverty." But the mother said "No not permanent, till you meet Shri Krishna again". That's how she tried to do, We call it uppan shrap. In that you give another curse to "neutralise," partly. The friend was Sudama, and he was very poor. Now see the Sahaja ways of Krishna. He always used to remember Sudama, He told His wife that "I really don't know, he is cursed. I don't know what must be his condition. Where he must be." He was the king, such feelings of intimacy with a friend. He says "I used to go with him, I used to collect the wood" I cannot now imagine these little-little things had such a big importance for him. He was not.only worried about the whole world, but also about Sudama." When will I meet him, when will I see him

 again, where must be his house. How he must be living." All these very delicate feelings he had for his friend. It is just like a sahaja Yogi. In the sahaj style we are worried about the whole world and also individually we are worried. We come to know about one person who has fallen sick and has a problem, something is serious, all the sahaj yogis think about him and are worried about him. They may have everything, but still they are all worried about him; what has happened to such and such person. How many of us know each others names, how we care for them, how we respect them. How we love them and how we have pure relationships? Today is also the day of raksha bandhan, which is a very great thing that we should have pure relationship. I have seen in Maharashtra, men won't go and talk to women and women and women won't go and talk to men. Once somebody remarked - then what are you women doing, talking to women only. So I said" what are we to talk to you, you are talking about your office, we are talking about our houses. What is there to talk to you." In the western culture it is different, they will force you, they will make one man sit here and next to him should be a woman, somebody else's wife. Then another man, and somebody else's wife. How can you have intimacy? This kind of idea, which is not sahaj, has slipped into morality. There is no need for man & woman to sit like that. What is the need? I had a bad time, with my husband's job. What is there to talk to these men? I don't know anything about banking. I don't know shares, don't know stock-exchange. I don't know profits men talk about, whenever I said something, I really dropped a brick. Once in a party, they were offering drinks and I said I will have a soft drink. The valet come and gave me a soft drink. The valet was having a bow with a white shirt, black pant, all dressed the same; whether empty glass is an Ambassador or a valet. I cannot make out, who is who.? So I drank and when it was finished I gave it to an ambassador. To me there was no difference at all. Well, they looked just the same. Waiting the same way, talking the same way. So sahaj the whole thing was. They have so many embassies for whatI don't know, and then they have always drinks, parties, shake hands - your hands will break, most asahaj method is to shake hands, why not say namaste? It is better. Sometimes I used to get such heat. Mostly they were very hot people, and l didn't know what to do. I used to stand on one side, feeling very shy. This method of hand shaking is absolutely asahaj. But worse than that is the French method to be kissed, whether you like it or not, or to hug somebody. First time I gave realisation to one English gentleman, he just lifted me up. I said "Alright, it is just out of joy he has done it, it is alright" But then, there is no openness of heart. You go to a party, you have to be dressed up like this only. If you go for a death also the dress is same. Somebody died, a great friend, a nice man. I was told to wear a black saree, black blouse, everything black. I said I have no black saree without border, so they said you don't come. I said "Very good idea," because I don't know these asahaja methods. You are not supposed to cry or weep there, you have to keep quite. When you go then the body is lying there, and after the prayer is said, you are supposed to drink champagne. I cannot imagine it. How can you. No feelings for that body which is lying there. Then everybody is very happy. If anyone looked unhappy, someone would ask, what's wrong. Are you alright? consciousness that we have lost a friend here. No We have to be sahaj, in the sense that whatever we do, we do it spontaneously. and not

 with deliberations. We have some very anglocised people in India also. The lady of the house died so they were discussing what to do. What time to start the funeral. One lady, who is very well known person in India, said you should not do it before 12 o'clock I said "Why"? She said, because I have to wear white and I have to go to the Bank to get the diamonds to match the white saree. I said what is this, such filth of materialism. It is going too far, we are going away from our feelings from, our emotions which are genuine, which are there all the time you don't have to think about them. They exist all the time: But you think, now should I cry or not, should I laugh or not, which are spontaneous things. If you have joy you are spontaneous, you express your joy spontaneously. Of course not in an uncultured way but in a very cultured way. Now, what is the meaning of sahaj culture. It is something that you are groomed. You are brought up in a very simple natural manner, that you develop a culture. It is more like a child-like innocent behaviour. it is Shri Krishna's introduction of idea of pure joy, Nirmal anand, which came as a great relief to Indian people, because they were following Shri Ramchandra. Then, abandonment started. The problem is that if you make them strict, they become like starched clothes. I think you cannot wear them or if you allow them to do what they like, then they start doing all kinds of things. In India, we had all kinds of horrible things which I dare not even tell you, in the name of enjoyment, but Shri Krishna has been very much misrepresented by stupid people like Vidyaparthi. He was a poet, and he used Krishna and Radha as Romeo and Juliet. This is the greatest insult to the purity of their relationship. You must have seen many pictures like that in kangra shaili. They could not show the reality of their relationship, but some sort of a very vulgur expression. Because I think these poets and artists at that time had some hidden suppressed feelings within themselves, and they used Shri Krishna for that. All kinds of romanticism has developed. Sometimes I feel that people have not understood Shri Krishna. There is a nice story about him, that he had many wives-that is also another controversial part. He had many wives because they were the 16,000 powers of Shri Krishna who had taken birth and were captured by one king and kept in the prison. So he had to release them, they were released. Now, how were they to live with Shri Krishna. He was a young man. So he married all of them. That also for a young man to keep 16,000 women as a harem, what would people have thought about him. So he married all of them. He also had 5 wives. These 5 wives were the actual 5 elements. Once the 5 wives wanted to go to see a great saint, and the river which was there was flooded. So they came to Shri Krishna and asked how are we to cross, because it is overflowing. Shri Krishna said you go and tell her that "oh river if Shri Krishna is a complete celibate personality, perfect brahmachari, if that is the truth then you go down." The river went down and they crossed over. After worshipping the saint, when they came back to the bank of the river, it was agian very much flooded, so they went to that saint and asked him now how are we to go back so he asked how did they come. They said this is what Shri Krishna asked us to tell river. The saint said, "Alright, you go and tell the river that this saint has not eaten any food whatsoever," While they saw him eating plates after plates. If this is the truth then you better recede. Accordingly they went and told the river, and the river went down. They were amazed that this man ate such a lot of things and this river has gone down thinking

 this is the truth. That means that what has been their character - they are"abhogis. Means they do not get indulged into it. They eat alright, but they don't care, they don't have that feeling of eating, the feeling of enjoying the food and all that. They are just doing. The gentleman with sixteen thousand and five wives is called brahmachari, because he was not involved. This is Sahaja state For America, 1 think they have gone too far with their freedom. As people with Shri Krishna's blessings have become free from all the rules and regulations and got abandoned but America has gone much worse. The films they are producing are very dangerous and damaging for the whole world. They don't know what sin they are committing. Thousands and thousands of people in the world have taken to all kinds of very destructive and ugly ideas. Freud is ousted, finished, he has done already great harm. But what about these films. Our Indian directors, I think, are now very impressed by them. All these directors are guiding Indians to hell. The whole thing is so absured, so dirty; for an Indian mind it is really inconceivable. Even Americans cannot bear it. It has gone that bad. All the junk has gone all over the world - selling also in Moscow. Selling in all developing countries. Until it was discovered that they have AlIDS. Now they are carrying AIDS and drugs all over. It is destructive force, which is very active in this Kaliyuga and so we have many Sahaj Yogis to fight this destructive force. When they are destructive they are not hypocrite. They think it is a very great quality but atleast with hypocrites you can save some people. But when it is just an open thing everybody starts doing that. When you think of the time that Shri Krishna lived and the beautiful time they had of such a clean life and how he killed all those demons it is something so beautiful, so energy giving, but how many demons there are nowadays in this world. If one is finished another one comes up like a mushroom. The most fertile land is America. So you all have to pay attention to this Lord of America. Specially Shri Krishna should really start using his Sudarshan chakra. It will be a good idea. The time has come, that 's why I gave you the conch to declare that the time has come to clean America. That is the thing we have to do. When you worship Shri Krishna you must awaken within yourself that consciousness that now Shri Krishna is within all of you and by your communication, because he is collective, by your speech, by your songs, by all that you use to communicate with others must carry that message of peace, truth, love and compassion and above all Sahaj Yoga. May God Bless You 9.

 SRI GANESHA PUJA TALK BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI (SYNOPSIS) ON 15TH SEPTEMBER AT CABELA Today we are going to worship Sri Ganesha. It is a very oppourtune time today Ifeel when the innocence specially in the European & American countries is under attack. There's no respect for the innocence, they don't understand how important it is for human fife, to have innocence being repected within themselves & also without. The human life is different from that of the animal life. Animals are controlled all the time or we can say they are under the will of Lord Shiva. That's why he is called pashupatinath but human beings have been given freedom to choose there ascent, to choose the right, to choose the truth. Only through innocence they can achieve that. Only innocence is the source of joy. Without innocence you cannot enjoy anything fully. This innocence is today completely under challenge. To finish the innocence in a very subtle way, they are very negative, cruel, criminal type of people who are working it out. Their minds you can say are possessed, it does not work like that because otherwise they are quite intelligent. They are also in a way creative of horrible things, so you cannot say that they are not intelligent, but from where do they get this knowledge of creating something so horrifying? In this Kal- Yuga, as in Sahaj Yoga everybody can take birth. There is freedom; It was not so earlier that all kinds of evil people have taken birth. These evil people generate evil thoughts & people catch them and start moving with than. Even a good personi can get swayed by it. Even a saint can get swayed by it. First of all, we have to understand that we are born in very precarious times. At the time of Chirst there were very few people who followed him and they din't understand much about Kundalini either. They had no knowledge that Christ was the incarnation of Shri Ganesha. In the christian country only you find the insult of Christ, the insult of innocence openly, sometimes legally accepted. So when we are caught under such horrible circumstances we have to build up a great force ourselves of spirituality. When I came today there was no breeze, no leaf was moving, but when you were singing songs tremendous breeze was coming from you all and that made me understand that this divine force has come into being. It is there, its working. Not only that, its very powerful. Normally breeze dosen't come to me, it goes the other way round. But it was such a tremondous breeze that I had to hold somebody's hand. This collective force that you have, you must remember that you have to fight, not to let it run away, or escape.You have to prove that innocence is to be respected. Adi Shakti first made Sri Ganesha. It was created - why? Because she started to fill the whole atmosphere with chaitanya, holiness and auspiciousness, it is still there, its still everywhere, you can feel, Chaitanya is working but it does not penetrate into the modern minds because modern mind does not know what this innocence is. It has no idea at all about innocence. With innocence comes moral life. Morality is the expression of innocence. 10

 Innocence shows a person that he is incapable of being immoral. Once I had gone to Russia and I was coming out of the customs. They asked, did you get anything from the ship I said yes, of course. They were shocked to know. What did you get?. Some cheese; and what else; and some books. Books! you are not supposed to get any books from there; I said why not: he said you have to pay customs. You didn't read any rule about it, I said, no, I was innocent. I never read anything that you money for books also. They said no no you are joking. They thought this woman is so simple, then I was the wife of the chairman of the shipping corporation going in a very big car and they coundn't understand this woman is so simple that she is saying that she has. have to pay taken some cheese, and she has taken some books. All these laws and regulations bind people. They have also come from our idea of Dharma. But the root of Dharma is innocence. All laws are made to protect the innocent, punish the criminals. If somebody is proved to be innocent your innocence protects you. I have seen many times in my life because I am so simple, I should say that I had no problem, never anything. This is a kind of very powerful vibration that comes from an innocent person. Small children, if you see their vibrations, 100 grown- up Sahaj Yogis might not have the vibrations of a little one, but once they start growing, then they become very intelegent, like grown ups, mature and as if they have lost their innocence. There is no growth in being clever, to be very intelligent, so called, it is very self destructive. All those who have committed such mistakes have to ask forgiveness from Sada Shiva or from the Adi Shakti. But Ganesha doesn't forgive that is one thing wrong with him, he doesn't forgive. If you have hurt him he will hit you back. As a result we have diseases like Aids all because of the fact that people have been living as if they have a permission from God Almighty to do what they like. People are so proud, such vanity that they think whatever they do, after all that, nothing can happen to them. With all these things happening in this world people are still taking to immorality very openly, boastfully and T have seen that people who are elite they crack such dirty jokes and they are just like loafers on the streets sometimes. so this disease has spread more among older people than among younger people, among children. I think people are jealous of the little children otherwise why should they attack younger children? what do they get out of it? In this jealous attitude they try to attack in a very dirty funny manner. Sri Ganesha, he will never forgive this. First of all he will expose them, then he will punish them for several lives. Their families will be cursed, they themselves will be cursed; that is the commandment. But if his mother says alright forgive, or if his father says alright forgive, he obeys, he obeys his mother absolutely. Never questions her, never answers back. Whatever he is told, though he is in command of all the ganas, he is Ganadheesha; but before his mother he is just like a little baby. He dosen't challenge the mother. Even if the mother tried to test him or tries to get him puzzled, he never doubts her. He cannot fall to in her Maya because he is so innocent. He is like butter churned out of the butter milk. So this butter can never get dissolved back. In the same way this child which is pure innocence, can never get contaminated by the Maya of the mother. Maya is the process by which you test people, you have to test them You see these days people are so clever, so intelligent that it is even beyond Adi Shakti; the way they try to cheat you. So many have cheated me but they are back on their seats; that's not done by me, but by Shri Ganesha. He is just 11

 standing on all sides. If you try to do anything like that he'll hit you hard, I can't help it. Now this one came to this earth as Lord Jesus Christ. Christ is more active than Sri Ganesha who is fat, has a big belly and that he takes time to hit you. Christ is the one who asked forgiveness for the people who had killed him, but he is so active. I tell people don't talk ill of him, its dangerous don't talk against me. One side is the Ganesha, another side is Christ. There are two other people, St. Michael, and Gabriel. We call them in sanskrit language Bhairava and Hanumana and they are incarnated as Mahavira & Buddha. Buddha said you shouldn't get attached to anything. You should not get attached to your money, wealth, family or anyone. That time the attachement was very great, and this attachment, he wanted them to remove from the minds of the people. You cannot, detatch by removing those clothes by wearing those saffron clothes, by shaving your head or by walking barefoot; no you cannot, that's all outside. That's not detachment. They said you should get detached from within. To get detached from within is very different than to get detached from outside. Its not how much you starve that you become Christ or whether you move like Mahavir that you become like. Him or you wear saffron clothes like Buddha that you become Buddha. What a misconception they have, of whatever was taught to people. That was the time of tapasya or penance; that's why they said to do penance is best to get rid of all these things and so you will develop into your being. Even in the Christian religion they started the nuns; the father and the mother. This is another artificial thing; by doing this do you think you can become innocent? Those priests, you must have heard about them, the way they are attacking the innocence of people. Buddhists are the worst, I shoOuld say, because they say renounce everything. Alright, renounce everything and beg for gold. What do you say to this kind of contradiction? People like if someone is begging because their ego is pampered. Such incarnation come just to tell us to be detached. Just to develop morality. If you are detached about your sex life, If you are datached about your financial side, if you are detached even from your country then a detached personality of that kind will become innocent and there will be no quarrel. But it's happenng the ather way round. Same in the Islam, it's taken to the other side. Mohammed sahib was only insisting on morality. Any kind of immoral behaviour he didn't want to have. He did say at that time, you can marry more then once because there were more women, but he never said you become prostitute or lead a life of sin. that was just a Samayachar. That was that time when there was problem, divorce was not allowed at that time. but in Sahaj Yoga we do allow divorce. In modern times, I have seen that without divorce they can't live because women also are sometimes cruel and men sometimes are extremely peevish. Under these circumstances how can they become companions? More women are immoral in this matter. The women also are not only innocent, but Shakti, but now the women are trying to get into some sort of a shamelessness. They dont care for their own innocence, how can she have Shakti? If she is leading an immoral life then her Shakti will be finished, only her morality is her Shakti Sri Ganesha emits this purity in her. The way people are pumping our heads with ideas specially from Hollywood, we accept them and we forget that we are just hurting Shri Ganesha and he will come back on us. It starts at a very low level, when we start hating 12

 our children. The problem starts when we don't understand our children. I went to England, they say two children are killed every week by parents. This kind of attitude towards childern! first of all they should not produce, if they have produced then they are Shri Ganeshas, they have to respect, they have to love and have to encourage. But to spoil the children also is another kind of a negative force, some people spoil their children but Ganesha can never be spoilt, because He is beyond Maya, but the way people run after their children sometimes is shocking. To them that is the greatest achievement that they have got a child. Even in a place like India, where there is over population, to them their children are, like I don't know what, so attached. This is a new attachment that has started which gives you also kind of an immoral life because you are sahaj yogis. For people who are Sahaj Yogis all the children of the world are their own. Not only your own children whom you love, all of them are Sri Ganesha's. Of course, if there is someone who is not a good child, or you find him diffiecult alright; treat otherwise all the children of the world are your own children and you have to love then as you world love your own children. Christ has said love thy neighbour as thyself. I don't know why he said this because in all the christian nations neighbours are the biggest problem, Love other children as thy children. Let us start at that point. Normally there are places where they won't allow you to take a flat because you have children., Imagine, only unmarried people or barren people can live there. If you have a child, then you are ousted. Can you imagine? Only about 30 years back, people had 10 children. 12 childreni. SahajYogis go to another extreme they are struck to their children. I am not saying you should neglect your child in any way, or you should in any way beat them, or trouble them. You must love them in such a manner that they should know if they do anything wrong, they will lose your love. Because for children, love is the most important thing; they should know this. What you don't like, you should tell them. You'll be amazed how children will not do anything that will make you unhappy. Now, that is a trick I think one has got to learn. This is the best way to grow your children. I'll tell the story of my own daughter. She went to Delhi and all the girls were having sleeveless blouses. So, she asked me, I want slaveless blouses. She was grown up, going to college, So I said, alright have it, whatever you like. They said by the way, why don't you wear sleeveless, I said I feel shy. Then why should you allow me. This is not the criteria. Whatever I ask, you say yes to me l am not that gown up. Even my grand daughter she was here. she asked me," Nani, why do you always wear blouses with sleeves?" I said do you know these are very important chakras. The most important chakras of your body, if you keep them open then you'll have problems. My goodness!I must wear now full sleeves. Immediately they understood. So something deep if you tell them, in a deep manner while respecting their inner sense they will improve. For example a child becomes a spoilt child, he does very bad in the class and all that. Now one way is to beat him up, shout at him, scold him. Another simple thing is to talk to him, see, supposing you stood first, supposing you get good marks you become a great man; how proud I will be, everybody will be proud of you, but supposing you do not, they'll say oh he's a useless fellow, he'll have to beg on the street. The handling of the children is very important. Inner sense is to be handled in a very delicate manner as you would handla beautiful flower. As a flower has fragrance. Innocence has fragrance too. Now, this Ganesha was made out of the Mother Earth. Mother Earth is the essence of 13

 innocence. See this Mother Earth, we don't look after her we don't give her water, we don't do anything for her but how she is trying to enrich our life. How she is tryiing to cool us down. How she works out for us things which normally cannot be improved. To respect this Mother Earth is very important for all the innocent people. I have seen children, they respect the Mother Earth, they like to play on sands. They want to build casties, and all kinds of things. But they are not-attached. They build a castle, finished, then they go to the airport, they find something they all join to make it a joy. Wherever they go they find it easy to make that thing for there enjoyment. To them enjoyment is important. Yestersday I said to them, time is not important, time is a headache for the grown ups. Children don't worry, you take them somewhere in a nice place, so they don't want to come out. yes ask them let us go home - why? For what? Why should we go home? They can't understand. They love all that is nature, all that is beautiful. They don't know the value in the money form. They know the value of something in the form of love. Now I have seen myself, if you give something to children they keep it with them but sahaj Yogis go runing and they will show you see, I pure love, of this Mother Earth created Sri Ganesha. Adi shakti created him out of the pure love. But surprisingly Sri Ganesha was created before the Mother Earth. So how it is? have got it. The essence of Sri Ganesha's pure love.the Fisrt he was created only as the Logo we call it the Bramhanand, Omkar. He was created only as the sound of Omkara. Then this Omkara was covered with Mother Earth to make Sri Ganesha. So Omkara is important because it has got in it all the 3 powers A, U, M, A, U, M, stands for the Mahakali, Maha Saraswati and Mahalakshmi. All these 3 powers. exist in this omkara in a dormant from; we can say powers exist in Sri Ganesha. When we try to harm him we are harming the shakti within us which is Omkara. Omkara- which fills the whole universe with all the vibrations. In vibrations, these powers move. These 3 powers fill up every vibration. That's why they know, they understand and work out the whole thing in such a manner that supposing somebody has broken his legs. Take it like that. now I sit down her with and give a bandhan immediately a power is set, It's faster than all your communication immediately things work out. How it works out is a very complicate stuff. But it is also very uncomlicated, it is the work of Shri Ganesha he's not interested if there's any problem, like making a little port on the sea-shore, he'll make if, finish, back again. He's not attached, so what should we do to show our gratitude to this little child. Supposing you say to a child thank you; he'll say ah, what word did you say? Won't understand. Children don't understand why should I thank him. We teach them, say thank you. So even if they have to say sorry they'll say thank you Because they know only the word 'thank you, so they say 'thank you'. Now these children, how will they play in the same way this Omakara plays. Most detached, as they call Nishkriya to the power. Means dosen't do anything. For nothing just by paying attention if somebody gets cured, gets saved, gets vibrations who does it? Sri Ganesha. But he is not attached, he dosen't want any credit for it, it's his job. He will send one gana, alright go fast. They will run fast, more then any one of the most modern vehicles; just as if you press the button, it does. But on some people it does not if they are surrounded by people who have no faith, if they themselves have faith or something he is the judge of your faith in his Mother, because he has absolute faith. In the same way those who have absolute faith in his Mother he looks after them. He really looks after them. Also he destroys. 14

 Once a person told me about a minister in India. A very nasty fellow, corrupt, immoral, everything put together, but he was a nice Sahaj Yogi, a very good Sahaj Yogi who told me this man has now started troubling him and wants him to do something dishonest. I said "really'; then and there this great minister had to resign and go away. He never doubts and he is not attached. So many people say Mother you know we did this, we went there we had to climb up so much, and then we gave realisation only to one person. Finished. What's the use don't give any realisation. Thave told 100 times to people if you think you are doing any work, better not do it. It's no good doing such work. if you are attached to it better not do it. Do it for fun, just for joy, just for faith, with absolute faith you never feel fatiqued or tired. You see Sri Ganesha. All these bandhans who carries? Sri Ganesha Mahodaya. He with his big belly just order and these ganas are the most competent people. No person or scientist, no one can beat them. How they cure a person A lady had a son in Mexico, who was sick and he had a fatal disease which was in theire family and they always used to get it at any age when they were very old but he was a young boy studying in Harward. She wrote to me 3 letters and in these 3 letters she said Mother what should I do, should I send him to you. And I just thought of it. And 4th truth letter comes in that she took him to a hospital in Harward university and then she took him to some other hospital and all the hospital declared that he is absolutely alright, he is completely cured. But her faith worked. It is the Mother's faith that worked for the sonn. Its very easy to doubt me its a slippery ground to doubt me. people doubt me Because people say they are. Children, you will be surprised, they feel very pleased, if you do something that they like, they are very, I shouldn't say, intelligent because I don't like that word but I should say very subtly understanding. what THE One of my grand daughters, eldest one, she is a gem of a gem I took for her a wendeys house and she built it up and my daughter is quite tall, she called her mummy, come to my house; so this daughter of mine went there. She entered inside the house and she broke the whole thing. So my grand- daughter came to me, see look at your daughter you have taught her no manners of any kind. I said why, what happend? she comes in to my hoLIse and such an unmannerly question what have you got for me to eat. Do you do that when you are going to somebody's house, do you asks such an unmannely question and when I said you can't ask such a question in somebody else's house she langhed so much that she broke my house. You see so innocent, so innocent the whole thing was, that even small thing if you do, please her please them, very simple. Now, this power is kundalini, is the power of Sri Ganesha and without him she won't rise, what a complication! Like if my child says you can't go out of this house without asking me, so you can't just do anything, you are bound to the house, in the same way without taking the permission of Shri Ganesha the Kundalini won't rise. It's very difficult. Impossible ! should say. Of course the Mooladhara will go on, just like that pumping a heart, but it won't come up. Because Kundalini would like to rise but he won't allow her to. Those who are immoral, those who have done immoral things and those who are spoiling them. Ganesha principles of others are very difficult for realisation. But I have seen some people who have asked for forgivness and the Mother has told Sri Ganesha to forgive and they have got realisation. That's the point. That if you approach through the Mother he will forgive you definetely he will forgive you. That's such a nice relationship between the Mother and son That's something good otherwise this fellow would have killed at least 15

 90% of the people in the modern times. So, it is such a blessing also, such a promise that if we look after our Sri Ganesha principle, keep ourselves, clean, keep our eyes clean and develop pure realtionship among selves our we have no problem of any kind. You have proper relations with your children and proper relation in the society, proper relation in the politics, economic and all various areas which your inner sense will help. You might think that people are trying to befool me Let them try and you see what happens. Let them try to: attack your innocence and see what they get out of it. It is such a blessing you all have as human being that your Mooladhara is so well developed and Sri Ganesha is nicely settled there. You all have got your realisation and now whatever you were enijoying yesterday, just like children don't you think so we had forgotten our age, everything, we were just like children enjoying everything. Whether the dance was rythmic, unrythmic, inconsistent, we didn't mind. Everything we enjoyed, no rules, regulations are needed for enjoyment. The source of this enjoyment comes from the innocence that we have. Without innocence you carnot enjoy anything from this mind, and with this heart. Because in the heart resides the father- Shiva, if you can stand on your feet for 15 years and go on saying 'Om Namah Shivaya, Om Namah Shivaya' then may be Shiva might grant you some boon. The most difficult deity to please is Shiva. Though he is very innocent himself. He is too innocent, so much so, just like a white cloth you can say any bit of spot on your character; finished, condemned. Even a Rakshasa stands on his leg for 25 years and goes on praising him, then he may forgive, Sahaj Yogi dosen't forgive. So the only person left to you is your Mother who just forgive. I don't want to have any headache of not forgiving, it's a big headache if you don't forgive somebody you get a headache, so I don't want my self to do that. I forgive all the Sahaj Yogis all the time. There have been some horrible nasty fellows. I don't want to be with them because Ganesha will just finish them. Automatically Ganesha is doing it angry but atleast he dosen't do it so fast. Because they have called me Mother and I respect them, of course they have been very troublesame,I know why you are angry with them. Forgivness is the best punishment by which they realise their mistakes, and out of 100,99 people will enjoy forgiveness then punishment. All this is done by Sri Ganesha and he is all the time with you. Your Ganesha is awakened, but some people have vibration, they get realisation, then they are busy, say if they are women, busy with their children, they have no time for Sahaj Yoga. At the most cleaning they will do but for what; supposing this glass is cleansed & cleansed, and never used. What is the point? They meditate just for themselve, cleanse for themselves, but never use their vibrations. How can that be? You have to give vibrations. If you don't give vibrations: to others, if you don't transform other people, if you don't cure other people, if you don't teach them how to have pure love, what's the use of cleansing, coming to puja? feeling nice, joyous, these are useless Sahaj Yogis, Ganesha is not like that. This puja is to give realisation. That is his puja. Suppose he is waiting there for you to ask for his blessing; what is his blessing? is to give realisation, allow the Kundalini to rise, you ask for it and what you get, you ask for health, ask for this ask for that why not ask Sri Ganesha, make us good instruments of Sahaj Yoga. Give us strength to give realisation to people and to talk about Sahaj Yoga. People don't 16

 even talk about Sahaj Yoga. I am feeling shy, for what you are feeling shy. One day I was travelling by train, I met a lady, she sat next to me, and she was following some cult, the whole time she was boring me. I started feeling sleepy. Whenever I got up she was still talking about that cult. I said Sahaj Yogis will never do that. you must talk about it, must go around,you must tell people. Don't be afraid. Ganesha will protect you, will help you, will be very happy. He'll work out everything for you. All problems can be solved. Everything can be done. Believe in his power. Have faith in your Mother. That is the message for Sri Ganesha. May God Bless You 17

 SHRI MATAJI'S TALK ON HOLLAND On a few occasions Shri Mataji has spoken about the nature and qualities of the country. During her first visit in 1985 Shri Mataji granted a Trigunatmika Puja to be performed to Her. On that occasion She said," Holland is the holy land of Europe. " She explained that in Holland the relationship between the Earth Mother and water, the sea, the Guru is very significant as you may know a large part of Holland is below sea level. It is protected from the sea by dunes and dams, and geographically speaking there are a number of very large bays through which the sea penetrates deep into the country. Shri Mataji has often indicated that countries have certain qualities or have to work out particular things within the Great Divine Being, the Virata. We know at France is the liver, England the Heart, Australia the Moodladhara, and so forth. However, our knowledge of the more subtle qualities and aspects, especially of smaller countries, is perhaps rather limited. In this new feature in the divine cool Breeze, all countries will present themselves one by one giving an overview of what Shri Mataji has said about the specific qualities of the subtle role the country plays in the Virata. This not only gives us a chance to discover more about each other, it also gives us a better idea about the working and principles that are active in the Virata itself. This is the second installment of this series. Referring to this situation, Shri Mataji said, " The sea cleanses and the Mother Earth blesses the people of Holland .. The Mother Earth has allowed the sea to flow in, the sea has taken refuge in the Mother. The Guru has bound itself with the Motherly qualities. She added that the Earth contains the sea and it is, therefore, always greater than the sea. Therefore " Holland is a special place where the Guru has surrendered to the Mother. "Shri Mataji added that to be holy means that we must allow the Guru Tatwa to be controlled, guided and beautified by the Mother principle. By taking to the motherly qualities and " binding our guru principle through the motherly and beautiful creative power, our presence becomes very agreeable. " During the Puja Shri Mataji also spoke in detail about the division of labour and solutions for unemployment. During a visit in 1986, Shri Mataji explained that Holland and Belgium are related to each other in the play of the Virata. Both countries are part of the left Nabhi. Whereas, Belgium stands for world peace,Holland stands for justice. These two qualities are interdependent and cannot do without each other. Wherever there is injustice there cannot be peace. Also in countries where there is no peace the principle of injustice is challenged and corrupted. The principle of justice is manifested in the presence of the International High court of justice in the Hague. Shri Mataji also explained the laws in Holland are very crooked and anti-divine. A lat of things Holland has tolerated, sometimes to the dismay of neighbouring countries. The Dutch drug policy is a well known example of this. Being in a country which represents the left Nabhi, Shri Mataji explained in great detail, how wives have to be good housewives. There are many forms of Shri Lakshmi, and housewife is the most powerful manifestation of them. The left Nabhi is governed by the spleen and the pancreas. As the spleen is the speedometer, it is important to have a proper timing and rhythm in lite, therefore, the housewife regulates the rhythm of her 18

 husband's life, creating the right mood by not discussing troublesome affairs that might be upsetting, ecpecially in the morning. She will create a state of peace in the house hold by bearing and absorbing all problems, just like the Mother Earth. She is very mature person who sees the uslessness of arguments. She is so powerful that the only thing she does is to give. This gives her so much joy that she derives all her energy from that. Holland is famous for it's flowers. Each springtime, very large areas are set ablaze with magnificent colours when field after field of flowers are blooming. Onie day someone asked Shri Mataji how it is that in spite of momentous neagativities the country has not yet had its deluge or sunk into the seat. Shri Mataji smilingly answered, "Because Holland is producing the flowers for the Adi Shakti and knows that she is very fond of flowers." SYDNEY AIRPORT TALK - SYNOPSIS Sydney, Australia, March 5, 1996 "It is always a pleasure to meet you all, "but this time I felt you are very much in the Ocean of joy, enjoying your selves. That is the greatest satisfaction for Me. the best way to feel your joy is to give realization to others. That is the real echo you get of your voice of truth. As in other countries, you are also going to different places, to villages, to different neighbourhoods, and talking with full conviction about Sahaja Yoga, how it has changed your life and how you have been benefited, with geunineness, you can do a lot for your country by transforming people. Sahaja Yoga has grown up in Australia. Sometimes there have been individuals who have tried to harm us, but no one has tried to harm Sahaj Yoga. Those who have tried to cause trouble have quietly left Sahaj Yoga and disappeared. This time someone did try to cause trouble. Everybody must cooperate....... Nobody is going to force you, nobody is going to be compelled..but it's for your own satisfaction.... Everybody should feel responsible for Sahaja there's no joy for Sahaja Yogis; only in collective feeling you can have it." Yoga...if you don't feel responsible individually you cannot enjoy. Individally When the Ajanta caves were built, it took eleven centuries to make them. One generation after another enthusiastically kept building it despite the fact that they had never even seen Buddha, or talked or written to Him, but they were very dedicated. They stayed in that remote place, generation after generation, creating what is now one of the wonders of the world. So you have to understand, as realized souls, you can do a lot through your desire and dedication. You have to always ask yourselves what you are doing for Sahaja Yoga, and realize how much Sahaja Yoga has done for you. So the way you will enjoy is by knowing that you are working something out for Shaja Yoga. The leader has been very careful, sensible and kind, but now there should be very dynamic leader because many will be coming to Sahaja Yoga. " you'll have to deal with thenm, and 19

 when you are dealing with them remember that you are Sahaja Yogis-not to lose temper, not to get angry with them. Be kind to them and also try to talk less and do more, raising their Kundalini. Don't touch them. That's not necessary. Shri Mataji then spoke in Hindi to the Indian ladies." I was just correcting them and telling them that they should keep to their own culture. "Some have started talking like American women, very rude. In India women are especially humble, and the language is very compassionate and docile which makes others feel comfortable, but the American culture drives people mad and those who adopt it will also become mad. We don't want that culture. " We want a very compassionate, good, kind and beautful culture. " through which others can learn, and our children can grow properly. " in every way it's much helpful if you are humble. " It is a joy to see how very humble the Australians have become. Australians used to be horrible, drinking so much and speking in a way no one could understand. Now you are beautiful like lotusflowers which have " come out of this mixed - up confused culture, and you should be the ones who should represent this, our Sahahaj culture. "I wish all of you a very good, prosperous, healthy Sahaja life, and to your children..Sahaja Yoga has taken very good roots in Australia because it is Shri Ganesha's country. His blessings are working. you should help those who are sick or need help. " Try to understand how to cure them.... Don't touch them. You can take bandhans before doing anything and you'll be protected. So may God bless you all NEWS FROM AROUND THE WORLD Shri Mataji Wins International Laplejade Peace Award On May 2, the judges of the 10th edition of the International Award " La Plejade" proclaimed Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi as the 1996 award winner. The judges included professors and doctors from different countries. Patronage for the award was provided by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers," the European Parliament office in Italy, the Planning Institue for Quality of Life and Unipaz both U. N. associated, the Cosmos International Association, the Art Events Association, with the collaboration of the 3M Italy Group. The following motivations were provided as the basis for selecting Shri Mataji to receive this award: " In a world where one can feel the urgent need to find new solution to the problems of individual and of humanity at large, searching for something that can allow one to go deep into the awareness of existence itself, Shri Mataji who is presently a candidate for the next Noble prize for Peace, founder of Sahaja Yoga, is proposing new directions on the path of human evalution through meetings and initiatives, guiding us to meditate on the deepest dimension of ourselves, and helping the foundation of a balanced and serene society where peace can be actualized, starting in the deep self of each individual. The award was received by Guido on behalf of Shri Mataji. He briefly thanked them while making the point in a very respectful and gentle way that it was an honour for them to give it to Her. 20



----------------------

1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Issue 11 & 12
00
Vol VIII
c00000000000000000
0000000000000000000
"For spread of Sahaja Yoga, everyone must cooperate, nobody is going to force you,
nobady is going to be compelled, but it's for your Own satisfaction,
Everybody should feel responsible for Sahaja Yoga.
H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Sydney, Australia, 5 March 1996
90000000000000
000000
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-1.txt 
 108 Thank You 's to Shri Mataji
The following are the 108 " Thank You's" to our Divine Mother Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
offered at this year's Sahasrara Puja.
They have been composed of our deep love and eternal gratitude and can be recited at
occasions of prayer and worship. They are meant to express what is beyond expression.
108 Thank You's Shri Mataji.
Thank You for descending from your heavenly abode Mata Dwipa to bring light in to
1)
the darkness of Kali Yuga
ThankYou for delivering Sahaja Yoga to a confused and self destructive humanity.
2)
Thank You for revealing the meaning of creation and evolution to us.
3)
Thank You for revealing the actual existence of God to us.
4)
Thank You for giving Divine meaning to human life.
5)
Thank You for revealing the reflection of the Vishawarupa Within the human body to
6)
US
Thank You for revealing primordial principles of creation to us
7)
Thank You for revealing the reality of human nature of us.
8)
Thank You for revealing the meaning of true religion to us.
9)
Thank You for teaching the Divine Knowledge of Sahaja Yoga to us.
10)
Thank You for fulfilling the promise of Jesus Christ.
11)
Thank You for lifting the veil of illusion for us.
Thank You for revealing the true meaning of good and evil to us.
12)
13)
Thank You for awakening Mother Kundalini in us.
14)
Thank You for opening the dimension of collective consciousness to us.
15)
Thank You for giving us self realization.
16)
Thank You for establishing vibratory awareness on our central nervous system.
17)
Thank You for nourishing us with the all pervading power of god.
18)
Thank You for revealing the meaning of the " Last Judgement " to us.
Thank You resurrecting the tree of life from its slumber of joyful anticipation.
19)
20)
Thank You for crowning the work of all avatars and prophets.
21)
Thank You for fulfilling the dreams of all saints and seekers.
22)
Thank You for giving meaning to all those who have sacrificed their lives for the
23)
emancipation of mankind.
Thank You for re-establishing hope, belief and confidence in our heads.
Thank You for lifting human self - determination beyond the concept of race, caste
system and religion.
Thank You for giving divine meaning to the idea of freedom, equality and brotherhood.
24)
25)
26)
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Thank You for uniting mankind at the feet of one God, one experience and one
27)
truth
Thank You for inviting mankind into the realms of the Absolute.
28)
Thank You for liberating us from the illusion of a dualistic world.
29)
Thank You for liberating us from ignorance, confusion and solitude.
30)
Thank you for exposing the demonic force of the materialistic world.
Thank You for exposing the inefficiency of linear thinking.
Thank You for exposing the cruelty and danger of patriarchal politics.
31)
32)
33)
Thank You for destroying enslaving personal and social patterns and conditionings.
34)
Thank You for liberating humanity from the suffocating chains of the catholic church.
35)
Thank You for liberating humanity from the abuse of religious authority by the Islamic
36)
government.
Thank You for revealing the falsehood offake gurus and all religious institution to us
37)
Thank You for liberating humanity from blind faith and superfical religious
38)
conditionings.
shortcomings of a scientific approach to
Thank You tor exposing the limitations and
39)
reality.
Thank You for destroying the illusion of the Western value system.
40)
Thank You for introducing us to the relationship with the Divine.
41)
Thank You for finding us worthy.
Thank You for letting us participate in the salvation of mankind.
43)
Thank You for giving us the joy of introducing a yearning seeker to your redeeming
42)
44)
motherly love.
Thank You for inviting all of us to the court of the Goddess.
45)
Thank You for establishing the Kingdom of God on earth.
46)
Thank You for accepting our offers and prayers.
47)
Thank You for showering Your blessings endlessly on us.
48)
Thank You for opening the gateway to heaven within us.
49)
Thank You for bestowing the gift of yoga onto us.
50)
Thank You for making us.
51)
Thank You for baptising us.
52)
Thank You for healing us.
Thank You for purifying us.
53)
54)
55)
Thank You for cleansing us.
Thank You for transforming us.
56)
Thank You for enlightening us.
57)
Thank You for nourishing us.
58)
Thank You for elating us.
59)
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Thank You for being with us.
Thank You for laving us.
Thank You for forgiving us.
60)
61)
62)
Thank You for helping us.
63)
Thank You for protecting us.
64)
Thank You for encouraging us.
65)
Thank You for guiding us.
66)
Thank You for comforting us.
67)
Thank You for counselling us.
68)
Thank You for correcting us.
69)
Thank You for never abandoning us.
70)
Thank You for saving us.
71)
Thank You for gathering us.
72)
Thank You for teaching us.
73)
Thank You for opening our hearts.
74)
Thank You for caring for us.
75)
Thank You for accommodating us.
76)
Thank You for trusting us.
77)
Thank You for counting us.
78)
79)
Thank You for taking us into your Divine body.
Thank You for giving us collectivity.
Thank You for giving us friendship.
Thank You for waiting for us.
80)
81)
82)
Thank You for giving us families.
83)
Thank You for giving us position in life.
Thank You for giving us wealth.
Thank You for giving us spiritual authority.
84)
85)
86)
Thank You for giving us self - esteem.
87)
Thank You for giving us discrimination.
88)
Thank You for giving us wisdom.
89)
Thank You for giving us success.
90)
Thank You for giving us meditation.
91)
Thank You for giving us inner peace.
92)
Thank You for giving us inner joy.
93)
Thank You for giving us enlightened attention.
94)
Thank You for giving us detachment.
95)
Thank You for equipping us with divine weapons.
96)
Thank You for submitting us to the benevolent attention of Deities and all celestial
97)
beings.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-4.txt 
 98) Thank You for giving us concern for others.
99) Thank You for giving us the power to help others .
100) Thank You for giving us the satisfaction of spreading Vishwa Nirmala Dharma.
101) Thank You for Your continuous attention.
102) Thank You for being the mirror.
103) Thank You for being gentle.
104) Thank You for being wonderful.
105) Thank You for being in our heart.
106) Thank You for being our Guru.
107) Thank You for being our Mother.
108) Thank You for ever and ever and ever!
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-5.txt 
 SHRIKRISHNA PUJA
SYNOPSIS
H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Today we are going to worship Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna did little mischief with Indra;
Indra is the semi-God for looking after the rain. So Indra got very angry. All such semi-
gods are very sensitive. At the smallest thing, they get angry and they start using their
powers to express their anger. So he started pouring rain on all the gopas. The rain was
so heavy that they thought that the whole land will be completely submerged. Indra was
very happy to spoil the game of Shri Krishna and he thought he was very successful.
Shri Krishna lifted a mountain on his finger and all the people went under that mountain.
This is Shri Krishna's style. My style is different. I told Indra that you can't misbehave with
me. You can't. So far I have not harmed you in any way or irritated you. Of course its
going to be Shri Krishna's puja but that dosen't mean that you should try to show-off your
power in front of me.
Sometimes I wonder why do they get angry like this for small things.whatever it is, things
could be reconciled and now it has become warm with Sahaja Yoga you can do many
things. But you must know what you can do. For that Krishna is a very good example.He
started Sahaj culture. He did'nt give realisation to anyone but he gave the idea of Sahaj
culture. Before him came Shri Ram who was maryada purushottam. He was very particular
about everything. Later he threw out his wife because he was a king and a king cannot
have a scandal, especially from his wife. His father ordered him to go to the forest. He
loved his father so much that he agreed. After all, he was Maryada Purushottam, whatever
his father said he agreed, whatever his mother said, he agreed. So he went in the forest
and stayed there for 14 years. His is the obedience to the father, there was no need to
obey his father. His father was not God (but he was god). But in those days it was
important to make people not only respect the parents but also to obey them. That was
the time there were many Munis, many Saints and also many Hatha Yogis. They used to
make people practice very strict discipline. Those who did not practice the discipline they
had to do lot of penance and so many people who tried also did not reach the goal because
of strictness and complete discipline about following the path of spirituality.
Recently I was reading a book called peaceful warrior where they have described an
American, seeking the truth. The guru of that follower really took him through a horrible
difficult task. Ultimately he finds that he is the existence. That was the practise followed
after Shri Rama. People would leave their wives, children,go to the Himalayas and sit
there and practise meditation. It was very rigorously followed, a very moral society. But it
was out of fear. The whole morality came from fear, which is also repeated in so many
other religions. I would say that Islam today has taken that form. It's the fear. They are not
doing it out of freedom. Also christians, the same thing, Hindus -I don't know half way this
side and half way that side. Sikhs, there is terrible disciplining, punishment, that they
have to clean the shoes of people.
If you really go through the rituals of Hindu religion, then out of one week you will be
fasting for 6 days, and at least one day you might eat some food. then you'll have to visit
all kinds of places. Recently they had to go to Amarnath, and so many died. Now they
5.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-6.txt 
 are saying we have got nirvana. We died doing this so we have got nirvana . This kind of
very funny idea were existing. That we have a nirvana now; we have achieved whatever
we wanted and now we are dead; so many are dead and those who were not dead were
requesting why we are not dead. Even in this kaliyuga these ideas are prevalent. Even in
India people are very severe type, especially in the south, they do all kinds of nonsense
for the atonement or maybe for something they were asking for. All this nonsense was too
much for Shri Krishna. He could not understand that they are going to waste all their lives
with this kind of ritualism then what will remain out of them for sahaj yoga, so He,' the one
who started Sahaj culture. He said let us enjoy, we must have enjoyment, Nirmala Anand,
Pure Joy.
How do we have pure joy? We had this rakhi bandhan by which everybody except for your
wife is either your sister or mother. He started also this Holi which you should play with
colours, maybe to get rid of the colour barriers we have. In America it is a very good idea
to play with colours and some white on the black and black on the whites and thay can see
how stupid it is to fight in the name of colour. He used to play with children who were
looking after cows just like a very ordinary person. He never tried to show off his power,
never tried to stand out, never would dress up in a special way. He was just like an
ordinary cow herd and his relationship with his Mother Yeshoda, she was not his Mother,
who was also extremely beautiful. There were so many beautiful poems written about his
childhood that he is the one who is incharge of the whole universe. As a little boy he used
to put his finger in his mouth wondering how can a divine virata do that. Thinking like a
child, all his actions were of children. All these actions are described very well especially
by another very great poet Surdas, who was blind. His childhood description of his
relationship with his Mother is very natural and sweet. It was not like in modern times, this
carpet you have spoiled. I'll hit you hard. They have more interest in their things than in
their own children. But according to our culture if a child breaks anything you have to say
very good that it is broken and some badha has gone away. I don't know how their
imagination reached that beautiful height of pure joy. Towards our children also we have
to be extremely sweet, nice and forgiving. But some chilidren of course, are difficult.
Shri Krishna went to school of a Guru. The Guru' s wife was very kind but the guru was
strict and his wife used to look after him, They would go and bring some wood from the
forest. It's very subtle; his friend was carrying the food and Shri Krishna was busy cutting
the wood. Imagine Shri Krishna was cutting the wood for the mother. Imagine, he was
God, no work for the mother was menial or lower. But his friend was very hungry and he
ate the food and nothing was left. So when he came down he was very much worried. He
went and told his guru that I ate all the food, I did not share it with Shri Krishna. The
guru
got very angry. He said "Now you will be cursed with permanent poverty." But the mother
said "No not permanent, till you meet Shri Krishna again". That's how she tried to do, We
call it uppan shrap. In that you give another curse to "neutralise," partly. The friend was
Sudama, and he was very poor. Now see the Sahaja ways of Krishna. He always used to
remember Sudama, He told His wife that "I really don't know, he is cursed. I don't know
what must be his condition. Where he must be." He was the king, such feelings of intimacy
with a friend. He says "I used to go with him, I used to collect the wood" I cannot now
imagine these little-little things had such a big importance for him. He was not.only worried
about the whole world, but also about Sudama." When will I meet him, when will I see him
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-7.txt 
 again, where must be his house. How he must be living." All these very delicate feelings
he had for his friend. It is just like a sahaja Yogi. In the sahaj style we are worried about
the whole world and also individually we are worried. We come to know about one person
who has fallen sick and has a problem, something is serious, all the sahaj yogis think
about him and are worried about him. They may have everything, but still they are all
worried about him; what has happened to such and such person. How many of us know
each others names, how we care for them, how we respect them. How we love them and
how we have pure relationships?
Today is also the day of raksha bandhan, which is a very great thing that we should have
pure relationship. I have seen in Maharashtra, men won't go and talk to women and
women and women won't go and talk to men. Once somebody remarked - then what are
you women doing, talking to women only. So I said" what are we to talk to you, you are
talking about your office, we are talking about our houses. What is there to talk to you." In
the western culture it is different, they will force you, they will make one man sit here and
next to him should be a woman, somebody else's wife. Then another man, and somebody
else's wife. How can you have intimacy? This kind of idea, which is not sahaj, has slipped
into morality. There is no need for man & woman to sit like that. What is the need? I had
a bad time, with my husband's job. What is there to talk to these men? I don't know
anything about banking. I don't know shares, don't know stock-exchange. I don't know
profits men talk about, whenever I said something, I really dropped a brick. Once in a
party, they were offering drinks and I said I will have a soft drink. The valet come and gave
me a soft drink. The valet was having a bow with a white shirt, black pant, all dressed the
same; whether empty glass is an Ambassador or a valet. I cannot make out, who is who.?
So I drank and when it was finished I gave it to an ambassador. To me there was no
difference at all. Well, they looked just the same. Waiting the same way, talking the same
way. So sahaj the whole thing was.
They have so many embassies for whatI don't know, and then they have always drinks,
parties, shake hands - your hands will break, most asahaj method is to shake hands, why
not say namaste? It is better. Sometimes I used to get such heat. Mostly they were very
hot people, and l didn't know what to do. I used to stand on one side, feeling very shy.
This method of hand shaking is absolutely asahaj. But worse than that is the French method
to be kissed, whether you like it or not, or to hug somebody. First time I gave realisation
to one English gentleman, he just lifted me up. I said "Alright, it is just out of joy he has
done it, it is alright" But then, there is no openness of heart. You go to a party, you have
to be dressed up like this only. If you go for a death also the dress is same. Somebody
died, a great friend, a nice man. I was told to wear a black saree, black blouse, everything
black. I said I have no black saree without border, so they said you don't come. I said
"Very good idea," because I don't know these asahaja methods. You are not supposed to
cry or weep there, you have to keep quite. When you go then the body is lying there, and
after the prayer is said, you are supposed to drink champagne. I cannot imagine it. How
can you. No feelings for that body which is lying there. Then everybody is very happy. If
anyone looked unhappy, someone would ask, what's wrong. Are you alright?
consciousness that we have lost a friend here.
No
We have to be sahaj, in the sense that whatever we do, we do it spontaneously. and not
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-8.txt 
 with deliberations. We have some very anglocised people in India also. The lady of the
house died so they were discussing what to do. What time to start the funeral. One lady,
who is very well known person in India, said you should not do it before 12 o'clock I said
"Why"? She said, because I have to wear white and I have to go to the Bank to get the
diamonds to match the white saree. I said what is this, such filth of materialism. It is going
too far, we are going away from our feelings from, our emotions which are genuine, which
are there all the time you don't have to think about them. They exist all the time: But you
think, now should I cry or not, should I laugh or not, which are spontaneous things. If you
have joy you are spontaneous, you express your joy spontaneously. Of course not in an
uncultured way but in a very cultured way.
Now, what is the meaning of sahaj culture. It is something that you are groomed. You are
brought up in a very simple natural manner, that you develop a culture. It is more like a
child-like innocent behaviour. it is Shri Krishna's introduction of idea of pure joy, Nirmal
anand, which came as a great relief to Indian people, because they were following Shri
Ramchandra. Then, abandonment started. The problem is that if you make them strict,
they become like starched clothes. I think you cannot wear them or if you allow them to do
what they like, then they start doing all kinds of things.
In India, we had all kinds of horrible things which I dare not even tell you, in the name of
enjoyment, but Shri Krishna has been very much misrepresented by stupid people like
Vidyaparthi. He was a poet, and he used Krishna and Radha as Romeo and Juliet. This
is the greatest insult to the purity of their relationship. You must have seen many pictures
like that in kangra shaili. They could not show the reality of their relationship, but some
sort of a very vulgur expression. Because I think these poets and artists at that time had
some hidden suppressed feelings within themselves, and they used Shri Krishna for that.
All kinds of romanticism has developed. Sometimes I feel that people have not understood
Shri Krishna.
There is a nice story about him, that he had many wives-that is also another controversial
part. He had many wives because they were the 16,000 powers of Shri Krishna who had
taken birth and were captured by one king and kept in the prison. So he had to release
them, they were released. Now, how were they to live with Shri Krishna. He was a young
man. So he married all of them. That also for a young man to keep 16,000 women as a
harem, what would people have thought about him. So he married all of them. He also
had 5 wives. These 5 wives were the actual 5 elements. Once the 5 wives wanted to
go
to see a great saint, and the river which was there was flooded. So they came to Shri
Krishna and asked how are we to cross, because it is overflowing. Shri Krishna said you
go and tell her that "oh river if Shri Krishna is a complete celibate personality, perfect
brahmachari, if that is the truth then you go down." The river went down and they crossed
over. After worshipping the saint, when they came back to the bank of the river, it was
agian very much flooded, so they went to that saint and asked him now how are we to go
back so he asked how did they come. They said this is what Shri Krishna asked us to tell
river. The saint said, "Alright, you go and tell the river that this saint has not eaten any food
whatsoever," While they saw him eating plates after plates. If this is the truth then you
better recede. Accordingly they went and told the river, and the river went down. They
were amazed that this man ate such a lot of things and this river has gone down thinking
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-9.txt 
 this is the truth. That means that what has been their character - they are"abhogis.
Means they do not get indulged into it. They eat alright, but they don't care, they don't
have that feeling of eating, the feeling of enjoying the food and all that. They are just doing.
The gentleman with sixteen thousand and five wives is called brahmachari, because he
was not involved. This is Sahaja state
For America, 1 think they have gone too far with their freedom. As people with Shri
Krishna's blessings have become free from all the rules and regulations and got abandoned
but America has gone much worse. The films they are producing are very dangerous and
damaging for the whole world. They don't know what sin they are committing. Thousands
and thousands of people in the world have taken to all kinds of very destructive and ugly
ideas. Freud is ousted, finished, he has done already great harm. But what about these
films. Our Indian directors, I think, are now very impressed by them. All these directors
are guiding Indians to hell. The whole thing is so absured, so dirty; for an Indian mind it is
really inconceivable. Even Americans cannot bear it. It has gone that bad. All the junk
has gone all over the world - selling also in Moscow. Selling in all developing countries.
Until it was discovered that they have AlIDS. Now they are carrying AIDS and drugs all
over. It is destructive force, which is very active in this Kaliyuga and so we have many
Sahaj Yogis to fight this destructive force. When they are destructive they are not hypocrite.
They think it is a very great quality but atleast with hypocrites you can save some people.
But when it is just an open thing everybody starts doing that. When you think of the time
that Shri Krishna lived and the beautiful time they had of such a clean life and how he killed
all those demons it is something so beautiful, so energy giving, but how many demons
there are nowadays in this world. If one is finished another one comes up like a mushroom.
The most fertile land is America. So you all have to pay attention to this Lord of America.
Specially Shri Krishna should really start using his Sudarshan chakra. It will be a good
idea. The time has come, that 's why I gave you the conch to declare that the time has
come to clean America. That is the thing we have to do.
When you worship Shri Krishna you must awaken within yourself that consciousness that
now Shri Krishna is within all of you and by your communication, because he is collective,
by your speech, by your songs, by all that you use to communicate with others must carry
that message of peace, truth, love and compassion and above all Sahaj Yoga.
May God Bless You
9.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-10.txt 
 SRI GANESHA PUJA
TALK BY H. H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI (SYNOPSIS)
ON 15TH SEPTEMBER AT CABELA
Today we are going to worship Sri Ganesha. It is a very oppourtune time today Ifeel when
the innocence specially in the European & American countries is under attack. There's no
respect for the innocence, they don't understand how important it is for human fife, to
have innocence being repected within themselves & also without.
The human life is different from that of the animal life. Animals are controlled all the time
or we can say they are under the will of Lord Shiva. That's why he is called pashupatinath
but human beings have been given freedom to choose there ascent, to choose the right, to
choose the truth. Only through innocence they can achieve that. Only innocence is the
source of joy. Without innocence you cannot enjoy anything fully. This innocence is today
completely under challenge.
To finish the innocence in a very subtle way, they are very negative, cruel, criminal type of
people who are working it out. Their minds you can say are possessed, it does not work
like that because otherwise they are quite intelligent. They are also in a way creative of
horrible things, so you cannot say that they are not intelligent, but from where do they get
this knowledge of creating something so horrifying?
In this Kal- Yuga, as in Sahaj Yoga everybody can take birth. There is freedom; It was not
so earlier that all kinds of evil people have taken birth. These evil people generate evil
thoughts & people catch them and start moving with than. Even a good personi can get
swayed by it. Even a saint can get swayed by it.
First of all, we have to understand that we are born in very precarious times. At the time of
Chirst there were very few people who followed him and they din't understand much about
Kundalini either. They had no knowledge that Christ was the incarnation of Shri Ganesha.
In the christian country only you find the insult of Christ, the insult of innocence openly,
sometimes legally accepted. So when we are caught under such horrible circumstances
we have to build up a great force ourselves of spirituality. When I came today there was no
breeze, no leaf was moving, but when you were singing songs tremendous breeze was
coming from you all and that made me understand that this divine force has come into
being. It is there, its working. Not only that, its very powerful. Normally breeze dosen't
come to me, it goes the other way round. But it was such a tremondous breeze that I had
to hold somebody's hand. This collective force that you have, you must remember that you
have to fight, not to let it run away, or escape.You have to prove that innocence is to be
respected.
Adi Shakti first made Sri Ganesha. It was created - why? Because she started to fill the
whole atmosphere with chaitanya, holiness and auspiciousness, it is still there, its still
everywhere, you can feel, Chaitanya is working but it does not penetrate into the modern
minds because modern mind does not know what this innocence is. It has no idea at all
about innocence. With innocence comes moral life. Morality is the expression of innocence.
10
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Innocence shows a person that he is incapable of being immoral.
Once I had gone to Russia and I was coming out of the customs. They asked, did you get
anything from the ship I said yes, of course. They were shocked to know. What did you
get?. Some cheese; and what else; and some books. Books! you are not supposed to get
any books from there; I said why not: he said you have to pay customs. You didn't read
any rule about it, I said, no, I was innocent. I never read anything that you
money for books also. They said no no you are joking. They thought this woman is so
simple, then I was the wife of the chairman of the shipping corporation going in a very big
car and they coundn't understand this woman is so simple that she is saying that she has.
have to pay
taken some cheese, and she has taken some books.
All these laws and regulations bind people. They have also come from our idea of Dharma.
But the root of Dharma is innocence. All laws are made to protect the innocent, punish the
criminals. If somebody is proved to be innocent your innocence protects you. I have seen
many times in my life because I am so simple, I should say that I had no problem, never
anything. This is a kind of very powerful vibration that comes from an innocent person.
Small children, if you see their vibrations, 100 grown- up Sahaj Yogis might not have the
vibrations of a little one, but once they start growing, then they become very intelegent,
like grown ups, mature and as if they have lost their innocence. There is no growth in
being clever, to be very intelligent, so called, it is very self destructive.
All those who have committed such mistakes have to ask forgiveness from Sada Shiva or
from the Adi Shakti. But Ganesha doesn't forgive that is one thing wrong with him, he
doesn't forgive. If you have hurt him he will hit you back. As a result we have diseases
like Aids all because of the fact that people have been living as if they have a permission
from God Almighty to do what they like. People are so proud, such vanity that they think
whatever they do, after all that, nothing can happen to them. With all these things happening
in this world people are still taking to immorality very openly, boastfully and T have seen
that people who are elite they crack such dirty jokes and they are just like loafers on the
streets sometimes. so this disease has spread more among older people than among
younger people, among children. I think people are jealous of the little children otherwise
why should they attack younger children? what do they get out of it? In this jealous
attitude they try to attack in a very dirty funny manner. Sri Ganesha, he will never forgive
this. First of all he will expose them, then he will punish them for several lives. Their
families will be cursed, they themselves will be cursed; that is the commandment. But if
his mother says alright forgive, or if his father says alright forgive, he obeys, he obeys his
mother absolutely. Never questions her, never answers back. Whatever he is told, though
he is in command of all the ganas, he is Ganadheesha; but before his mother he is just like
a little baby. He dosen't challenge the mother. Even if the mother tried to test him or tries
to get him puzzled, he never doubts her. He cannot fall to in her Maya because he is so
innocent. He is like butter churned out of the butter milk. So this butter can never get
dissolved back. In the same way this child which is pure innocence, can never get
contaminated by the Maya of the mother. Maya is the process by which you test people,
you have to test them You see these days people are so clever, so intelligent that it is
even beyond Adi Shakti; the way they try to cheat you. So many have cheated me but
they are back on their seats; that's not done by me, but by Shri Ganesha. He is just
11
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-12.txt 
 standing on all sides. If you try to do anything like that he'll hit you hard, I can't help it.
Now this one came to this earth as Lord Jesus Christ. Christ is more active than Sri
Ganesha who is fat, has a big belly and that he takes time to hit you. Christ is the one who
asked forgiveness for the people who had killed him, but he is so active. I tell people don't
talk ill of him, its dangerous don't talk against me. One side is the Ganesha, another side
is Christ. There are two other people, St. Michael, and Gabriel. We call them in sanskrit
language Bhairava and Hanumana and they are incarnated as Mahavira & Buddha.
Buddha said you shouldn't get attached to anything. You should not get attached to your
money, wealth, family or anyone. That time the attachement was very great, and this
attachment, he wanted them to remove from the minds of the people. You cannot, detatch
by removing those clothes by wearing those saffron clothes, by shaving your head or by
walking barefoot; no you cannot, that's all outside. That's not detachment.
They said you should get detached from within. To get detached from within is very
different than to get detached from outside. Its not how much you starve that you become
Christ or whether you move like Mahavir that you become like. Him or you wear saffron
clothes like Buddha that you become Buddha. What a misconception they have, of
whatever was taught to people. That was the time of tapasya or penance; that's why they
said to do penance is best to get rid of all these things and so you will develop into your
being. Even in the Christian religion they started the nuns; the father and the mother. This
is another artificial thing; by doing this do you think you can become innocent? Those
priests, you must have heard about them, the way they are attacking the innocence of
people. Buddhists are the worst, I shoOuld say, because they say renounce everything.
Alright, renounce everything and beg for gold. What do you say to this kind of contradiction?
People like if someone is begging because their ego is pampered. Such incarnation
come just to tell us to be detached. Just to develop morality. If you are detached about
your sex life, If you are datached about your financial side, if you are detached even from
your country then a detached personality of that kind will become innocent and there will
be no quarrel. But it's happenng the ather way round. Same in the Islam, it's taken to the
other side. Mohammed sahib was only insisting on morality. Any kind of immoral behaviour
he didn't want to have. He did say at that time, you can marry more then once because
there were more women, but he never said you become prostitute or lead a life of sin. that
was just a Samayachar. That was that time when there was problem, divorce was not
allowed at that time. but in Sahaj Yoga we do allow divorce.
In modern times, I have seen that without divorce they can't live because women also
are sometimes cruel and men sometimes are extremely peevish. Under these
circumstances how can they become companions? More women are immoral in this matter.
The women also are not only innocent, but Shakti, but now the women are trying to get
into some sort of a shamelessness. They dont care for their own innocence, how can she
have Shakti? If she is leading an immoral life then her Shakti will be finished, only her
morality is her Shakti
Sri Ganesha emits this purity in her. The way people are pumping our heads with ideas
specially from Hollywood, we accept them and we forget that we are just hurting Shri
Ganesha and he will come back on us. It starts at a very low level, when we start hating
12
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-13.txt 
 our children. The problem starts when we don't understand our children. I went to England,
they say two children are killed every week by parents. This kind of attitude towards
childern! first of all they should not produce, if they have produced then they are Shri
Ganeshas, they have to respect, they have to love and have to encourage. But to spoil the
children also is another kind of a negative force, some people spoil their children but
Ganesha can never be spoilt, because He is beyond Maya, but the way people run after
their children sometimes is shocking. To them that is the greatest achievement that they
have got a child. Even in a place like India, where there is over population, to them their
children are, like I don't know what, so attached. This is a new attachment that has started
which gives you also kind of an immoral life because you are sahaj yogis. For people who
are Sahaj Yogis all the children of the world are their own. Not only your own children
whom you love, all of them are Sri Ganesha's. Of course, if there is someone who is not a
good child, or you find him diffiecult alright; treat otherwise all the children of the world are
your own children and you have to love then as you world love your own children. Christ
has said love thy neighbour as thyself. I don't know why he said this because in all the
christian nations neighbours are the biggest problem, Love other children as thy children.
Let us start at that point. Normally there are places where they won't allow you to take a
flat because you have children., Imagine, only unmarried people or barren people can live
there. If you have a child, then you are ousted. Can you imagine? Only about 30 years
back, people had 10 children. 12 childreni. SahajYogis go to another extreme they are
struck to their children. I am not saying you should neglect your child in any way, or you
should in any way beat them, or trouble them. You must love them in such a manner that
they should know if they do anything wrong, they will lose your love. Because for children,
love is the most important thing; they should know this. What you don't like, you should tell
them. You'll be amazed how children will not do anything that will make you unhappy.
Now, that is a trick I think one has got to learn. This is the best way to grow your children.
I'll tell the story of my own daughter. She went to Delhi and all the girls were having sleeveless
blouses. So, she asked me, I want slaveless blouses. She was grown up, going to
college, So I said, alright have it, whatever you like. They said by the way, why don't you
wear sleeveless, I said I feel shy. Then why should you allow me. This is not the criteria.
Whatever I ask, you say yes to me l am not that gown up. Even my grand daughter she
was here. she asked me," Nani, why do you always wear blouses with sleeves?" I said do
you know these are very important chakras. The most important chakras of your body, if
you keep them open then you'll have problems. My goodness!I must wear now full sleeves.
Immediately they understood. So something deep if you tell them, in a deep manner while
respecting their inner sense they will improve. For example a child becomes a spoilt child,
he does very bad in the class and all that. Now one way is to beat him up, shout at him,
scold him. Another simple thing is to talk to him, see, supposing you stood first, supposing
you get good marks you become a great man; how proud I will be, everybody will be proud
of you, but supposing you do not, they'll say oh he's a useless fellow, he'll have to beg on
the street. The handling of the children is very important. Inner sense is to be handled in
a very delicate manner as you would handla beautiful flower. As a flower has fragrance.
Innocence has fragrance too.
Now, this Ganesha was made out of the Mother Earth. Mother Earth is the essence of
13
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-14.txt 
 innocence. See this Mother Earth, we don't look after her we don't give her water, we don't
do anything for her but how she is trying to enrich our life. How she is tryiing to cool us
down. How she works out for us things which normally cannot be improved. To respect this
Mother Earth is very important for all the innocent people. I have seen children, they
respect the Mother Earth, they like to play on sands. They want to build casties, and all
kinds of things. But they are not-attached. They build a castle, finished, then they go to
the airport, they find something they all join to make it a joy. Wherever they go they find it
easy to make that thing for there enjoyment. To them enjoyment is important. Yestersday
I said to them, time is not important, time is a headache for the grown ups. Children don't
worry, you take them somewhere in a nice place, so they don't want to come out. yes ask
them let us go home - why? For what? Why should we go home? They can't
understand. They love all that is nature, all that is beautiful. They don't know the value in
the money form. They know the value of something in the form of love. Now I have seen
myself, if you give something to children they keep it with them but sahaj Yogis go runing
and they will show you see, I
pure love, of this Mother Earth created Sri Ganesha. Adi shakti created him out of the pure
love. But surprisingly Sri Ganesha was created before the Mother Earth. So how it is?
have got it. The essence of Sri Ganesha's pure love.the
Fisrt he was created only as the Logo we call it the Bramhanand, Omkar. He was created
only as the sound of Omkara. Then this Omkara was covered with Mother Earth to make
Sri Ganesha. So Omkara is important because it has got in it all the 3 powers A, U, M, A,
U, M, stands for the Mahakali, Maha Saraswati and Mahalakshmi. All these 3 powers.
exist in this omkara in a dormant from; we can say powers exist in Sri Ganesha. When we
try to harm him we are harming the shakti within us which is Omkara. Omkara- which fills
the whole universe with all the vibrations. In vibrations, these powers move. These 3
powers fill up every vibration. That's why they know, they understand and work out the
whole thing in such a manner that supposing somebody has broken his legs. Take it like
that. now I sit down her with and give a bandhan immediately a power is set, It's faster than
all your communication immediately things work out. How it works out is a very complicate
stuff. But it is also very uncomlicated, it is the work of Shri Ganesha he's not interested if
there's any problem, like making a little port on the sea-shore, he'll make if, finish, back
again. He's not attached, so what should we do to show our gratitude to this little child.
Supposing you say to a child thank you; he'll say ah, what word did you say? Won't
understand. Children don't understand why should I thank him. We teach them, say thank
you. So even if they have to say sorry they'll say thank you Because they know only the
word 'thank you, so they say 'thank you'. Now these children, how will they play in the
same way this Omakara plays. Most detached, as they call Nishkriya to the power. Means
dosen't do anything. For nothing just by paying attention if somebody gets cured, gets
saved, gets vibrations who does it? Sri Ganesha. But he is not attached, he dosen't want
any credit for it, it's his job. He will send one gana, alright go fast. They will run fast, more
then any one of the most modern vehicles; just as if you press the button, it does. But on
some people it does not if they are surrounded by people who have no faith, if they
themselves have faith or something he is the judge of your faith in his Mother, because he
has absolute faith. In the same way those who have absolute faith in his Mother he looks
after them. He really looks after them. Also he destroys.
14
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Once a person told me about a minister in India. A very nasty fellow, corrupt, immoral,
everything put together, but he was a nice Sahaj Yogi, a very good Sahaj Yogi who told me
this man has now started troubling him and wants him to do something dishonest. I said
"really'; then and there this great minister had to resign and go away. He never doubts and
he is not attached. So many people say Mother you know we did this, we went there we
had to climb up so much, and then we gave realisation only to one person. Finished.
What's the use don't give any realisation. Thave told 100 times to people if you think you
are doing any work, better not do it. It's no good doing such work. if you are attached to it
better not do it. Do it for fun, just for joy, just for faith, with absolute faith you never feel
fatiqued or tired. You see Sri Ganesha. All these bandhans who carries? Sri Ganesha
Mahodaya. He with his big belly just order and these ganas are the most competent
people. No person or scientist, no one can beat them. How they cure a person A lady had
a son in Mexico, who was sick and he had a fatal disease which was in theire family and
they always used to get it at any age when they were very old but he was a young boy
studying in Harward. She wrote to me 3 letters and in these 3 letters she said Mother what
should I do, should I send him to you. And I just thought of it. And 4th truth letter comes
in that she took him to a hospital in Harward university and then she took him to some
other hospital and all the hospital declared that he is absolutely alright, he is completely
cured. But her faith worked. It is the Mother's faith that worked for the sonn. Its very easy to
doubt me its a slippery ground to doubt me. people doubt me Because people say
they are. Children, you will be surprised, they feel very pleased, if you do something that
they like, they are very, I shouldn't say, intelligent because I don't like that word but I should
say very subtly understanding.
what
THE
One of my grand daughters, eldest one, she is a gem of a gem I took for her a wendeys
house and she built it up and my daughter is quite tall, she called her mummy, come to my
house; so this daughter of mine went there. She entered inside the house and she broke
the whole thing. So my grand- daughter came to me, see look at your daughter you have
taught her no manners of any kind. I said why, what happend? she comes in to my hoLIse
and such an unmannerly question what have you got for me to eat. Do you do that when
you are going to somebody's house, do you asks such an unmannely question and when
I said you can't ask such a question in somebody else's house she langhed so much that
she broke my house. You see so innocent, so innocent the whole thing was, that even
small thing if you do, please her please them, very simple.
Now, this power is kundalini, is the power of Sri Ganesha and without him she won't rise,
what a complication! Like if my child says you can't go out of this house without asking me,
so you can't just do anything, you are bound to the house, in the same way without taking
the permission of Shri Ganesha the Kundalini won't rise. It's very difficult. Impossible !
should say. Of course the Mooladhara will go on, just like that pumping a heart, but it
won't come up. Because Kundalini would like to rise but he won't allow her to. Those who
are immoral, those who have done immoral things and those who are spoiling them.
Ganesha principles of others are very difficult for realisation. But I have seen some people
who have asked for forgivness and the Mother has told Sri Ganesha to forgive and they
have got realisation. That's the point. That if you approach through the Mother he will
forgive you definetely he will forgive you. That's such a nice relationship between the
Mother and son That's something good otherwise this fellow would have killed at least
15
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-16.txt 
 90% of the people in the modern times. So, it is such a blessing also, such a promise that
if we look after our Sri Ganesha principle, keep ourselves, clean, keep our eyes clean and
develop pure realtionship among selves our we have no problem of any kind. You have
proper relations with your children and proper relation in the society, proper relation in the
politics, economic and all various areas which your inner sense will help. You might think
that people are trying to befool me Let them try and you see what happens. Let them try to:
attack your innocence and see what they get out of it. It is such a blessing you all have as
human being that your Mooladhara is so well developed and Sri Ganesha is nicely settled
there.
You all have got your realisation and now whatever you were enijoying yesterday, just like
children don't you think so we had forgotten our age, everything, we were just like children
enjoying everything. Whether the dance was rythmic, unrythmic, inconsistent, we didn't
mind. Everything we enjoyed, no rules, regulations are needed for enjoyment. The source
of this enjoyment comes from the innocence that we have. Without innocence you carnot
enjoy anything from this mind, and with this heart. Because in the heart resides the father-
Shiva, if you can stand on your feet for 15 years and go on saying 'Om Namah Shivaya,
Om Namah Shivaya' then may be Shiva might grant you some boon. The most difficult
deity to please is Shiva. Though he is very innocent himself. He is too innocent, so much
so, just like a white cloth you can say any bit of spot on your character; finished, condemned.
Even a Rakshasa stands on his leg for 25 years and goes on praising him, then he may
forgive, Sahaj Yogi dosen't forgive. So the only person left to you is your Mother who just
forgive. I don't want to have any headache of not forgiving, it's a big headache if you don't
forgive somebody you get a headache, so I don't want my self to do that. I forgive all the
Sahaj Yogis all the time. There have been some horrible nasty fellows. I don't want to be
with them because Ganesha will just finish them. Automatically Ganesha is doing it
angry
but atleast he dosen't do it so fast. Because they have called me Mother and I respect
them, of course they have been very troublesame,I know why you are angry with them.
Forgivness is the best punishment by which they realise their mistakes, and out of 100,99
people will enjoy forgiveness then punishment.
All this is done by Sri Ganesha and he is all the time with you. Your Ganesha is awakened,
but some people have vibration, they get realisation, then they are busy, say if they are
women, busy with their children,
they have no time for Sahaj Yoga. At the most cleaning they will do but for what; supposing
this glass is cleansed & cleansed, and never used. What is the point? They meditate just
for themselve, cleanse for themselves, but never use their vibrations. How can that be?
You have to give vibrations. If you don't give vibrations: to others, if you don't transform
other people, if you don't cure other people, if you don't teach them how to have pure love,
what's the use of cleansing, coming to puja? feeling nice, joyous, these are useless Sahaj
Yogis, Ganesha is not like that. This puja is to give realisation. That is his puja. Suppose
he is waiting there for you to ask for his blessing; what is his blessing? is to give realisation,
allow the Kundalini to rise, you ask for it and what you get, you ask for health, ask for this
ask for that why not ask Sri Ganesha, make us good instruments of Sahaj Yoga.
Give us strength to give realisation to people and to talk about Sahaj Yoga. People don't
16
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-17.txt 
 even talk about Sahaj Yoga. I am feeling shy, for what you are feeling shy. One day I was
travelling by train, I met a lady, she sat next to me, and she was following some cult, the
whole time she was boring me. I started feeling sleepy. Whenever I got up she was still
talking about that cult. I said Sahaj Yogis will never do that. you must talk about it, must go
around,you must tell people. Don't be afraid. Ganesha will protect you, will help you, will
be very happy. He'll work out everything for you. All problems can be solved. Everything
can be done. Believe in his power. Have faith in your Mother. That is the message for Sri
Ganesha.
May God Bless You
17
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-18.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI'S TALK ON HOLLAND
On a few occasions Shri Mataji has spoken about the nature and qualities of the country.
During her first visit in 1985 Shri Mataji granted a Trigunatmika Puja to be performed to
Her. On that occasion She said," Holland is the holy land of Europe. " She explained that
in Holland the relationship between the Earth Mother and water, the sea, the Guru is
very significant as you may know a large part of Holland is below sea level. It is protected
from the sea by dunes and dams, and geographically speaking there are a number of very
large bays through which the sea penetrates deep into the country.
Shri Mataji has often indicated that countries have certain qualities or have to work out
particular things within the Great Divine Being, the Virata. We know at France is the liver,
England the Heart, Australia the Moodladhara, and so forth. However, our knowledge of
the more subtle qualities and aspects, especially of smaller countries, is perhaps rather
limited. In this new feature in the divine cool Breeze, all countries will present themselves
one by one giving an overview of what Shri Mataji has said about the specific qualities of
the subtle role the country plays in the Virata. This not only gives us a chance to discover
more about each other, it also gives us a better idea about the working and principles that
are active in the Virata itself. This is the second installment of this series.
Referring to this situation, Shri Mataji said, " The sea cleanses and the Mother Earth
blesses the people of Holland .. The Mother Earth has allowed the sea to flow in, the
sea has taken refuge in the Mother. The Guru has bound itself with the Motherly qualities.
She added that the Earth contains the sea and it is, therefore, always greater than the
sea. Therefore " Holland is a special place where the Guru has surrendered to the Mother.
"Shri Mataji added that to be holy means that we must allow the Guru Tatwa to be controlled,
guided and beautified by the Mother principle. By taking to the motherly qualities and "
binding our guru principle through the motherly and beautiful creative power, our presence
becomes very agreeable. " During the Puja Shri Mataji also spoke in detail about the
division of labour and solutions for unemployment.
During a visit in 1986, Shri Mataji explained that Holland and Belgium are related to each
other in the play of the Virata. Both countries are part of the left Nabhi. Whereas, Belgium
stands for world peace,Holland stands for justice. These two qualities are interdependent
and cannot do without each other. Wherever there is injustice there cannot be peace. Also
in countries where there is no peace the principle of injustice is challenged and corrupted.
The principle of justice is manifested in the presence of the International High court of
justice in the Hague. Shri Mataji also explained the laws in Holland are very crooked and
anti-divine. A lat of things Holland has tolerated, sometimes to the dismay of neighbouring
countries. The Dutch drug policy is a well known example of this.
Being in a country which represents the left Nabhi, Shri Mataji explained in great detail,
how wives have to be good housewives. There are many forms of Shri Lakshmi, and
housewife is the most powerful manifestation of them. The left Nabhi is governed by the
spleen and the pancreas. As the spleen is the speedometer, it is important to have a
proper timing and rhythm in lite, therefore, the housewife regulates the rhythm of her
18
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-19.txt 
 husband's life, creating the right mood by not discussing troublesome affairs that might be
upsetting, ecpecially in the morning. She will create a state of peace in the house hold by
bearing and absorbing all problems, just like the Mother Earth. She is very mature person
who sees the uslessness of arguments. She is so powerful that the only thing she does is
to give. This gives her so much joy that she derives all her energy from that.
Holland is famous for it's flowers. Each springtime, very large areas are set ablaze with
magnificent colours when field after field of flowers are blooming. Onie day someone asked
Shri Mataji how it is that in spite of momentous neagativities the country has not yet had its
deluge or sunk into the seat. Shri Mataji smilingly answered, "Because Holland is producing
the flowers for the Adi Shakti and knows that she is very fond of flowers."
SYDNEY AIRPORT TALK - SYNOPSIS
Sydney, Australia, March 5, 1996
"It is always a pleasure to meet you all, "but this time I felt you are very much in the Ocean
of joy, enjoying your selves. That is the greatest satisfaction for Me. the best way to feel
your joy is to give realization to others. That is the real echo you get of your voice of truth.
As in other countries, you are also going to different places, to villages, to different
neighbourhoods, and talking with full conviction about Sahaja Yoga, how it has changed
your life and how you have been benefited, with geunineness, you can do a lot for your
country by transforming people.
Sahaja Yoga has grown up in Australia. Sometimes there have been individuals who have
tried to harm us, but no one has tried to harm Sahaj Yoga. Those who have tried to cause
trouble have quietly left Sahaj Yoga and disappeared. This time someone did try to cause
trouble.
Everybody must cooperate....... Nobody is going to force you, nobody is going to be
compelled..but it's for your own satisfaction.... Everybody should feel responsible for
Sahaja
there's no joy for Sahaja Yogis; only in collective feeling you can have it."
Yoga...if you don't feel responsible individually you cannot enjoy. Individally
When the Ajanta caves were built, it took eleven centuries to make them. One generation
after another enthusiastically kept building it despite the fact that they had never even
seen Buddha, or talked or written to Him, but they were very dedicated. They stayed in that
remote place, generation after generation, creating what is now one of the wonders of the
world.
So you have to understand, as realized souls, you can do a lot through your desire and
dedication. You have to always ask yourselves what you are doing for Sahaja Yoga, and
realize how much Sahaja Yoga has done for you. So the way you will enjoy is by knowing
that you are working something out for Shaja Yoga.
The leader has been very careful, sensible and kind, but now there should be very dynamic
leader because many will be coming to Sahaja Yoga. " you'll have to deal with thenm, and
19
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-20.txt 
 when you are dealing with them remember that you are Sahaja Yogis-not to lose temper,
not to get angry with them. Be kind to them and also try to talk less and do more, raising
their Kundalini. Don't touch them. That's not necessary.
Shri Mataji then spoke in Hindi to the Indian ladies." I was just correcting them and telling
them that they should keep to their own culture. "Some have started talking like American
women, very rude. In India women are especially humble, and the language is very
compassionate and docile which makes others feel comfortable, but the American culture
drives people mad and those who adopt it will also become mad. We don't want that
culture. " We want a very compassionate, good, kind and beautful culture. " through which
others can learn, and our children can grow properly. " in every way it's much helpful if
you are humble. "
It is a joy to see how very humble the Australians have become. Australians used to be
horrible, drinking so much and speking in a way no one could understand. Now you are
beautiful like lotusflowers which have " come out of this mixed - up confused culture, and
you should be the ones who should represent this, our Sahahaj culture.
"I wish all of you a very good, prosperous, healthy Sahaja life, and to your children..Sahaja
Yoga has taken very good roots in Australia because it is Shri Ganesha's country. His
blessings are working. you should help those who are sick or need help. " Try to understand
how to cure them.... Don't touch them. You can take bandhans before doing anything and
you'll be protected. So may God bless you all
NEWS FROM AROUND THE WORLD
Shri Mataji Wins International Laplejade Peace Award
On May 2, the judges of the 10th edition of the International Award " La Plejade" proclaimed
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi as the 1996 award winner. The judges included professors and
doctors from different countries. Patronage for the award was provided by the Presidency
of the Council of Ministers," the European Parliament office in Italy, the Planning Institue
for Quality of Life and Unipaz both U. N. associated, the Cosmos International Association,
the Art Events Association, with the collaboration of the 3M Italy Group.
The following motivations were provided as the basis for selecting Shri Mataji to receive
this award: " In a world where one can feel the urgent need to find new solution to the
problems of individual and of humanity at large, searching for something that can allow
one to go deep into the awareness of existence itself, Shri Mataji who is presently a
candidate for the next Noble prize for Peace, founder of Sahaja Yoga, is proposing new
directions on the path of human evalution through meetings and initiatives, guiding us to
meditate on the deepest dimension of ourselves, and helping the foundation of a balanced
and serene society where peace can be actualized, starting in the deep self of each
individual.
The award was received by Guido on behalf of Shri Mataji. He briefly thanked them while
making the point in a very respectful and gentle way that it was an honour for them to give
it to Her.
20
