DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOLUME VIII ISSUE 4 Be innocent and God looks after all the innocent people. You don't have to worry. H. H. Shri. Mataji Nirmala Devi Christmas Puja Ganapatipule, 1995

 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi DELHI 5-12-1995 (synopsis) The first aspect of the shakti is that she has brilliace, lustre ad full of magnificence when this Shakti will manifest itself in its full form then all the wrong type of people will get exposed. All their misdeeds will get exposed. Their misdeeds which were going on secretly will be exposed. Every kind of defects, deeds whether they are mental, pertaining to one's duty, terrorism, or any kind of thing that is not liked by truth, will not be able to save itself because the light of truth will fall on it. In the light of this truth you will see the special nature and form of this Shakti. The Kreta Yuga has started and Sat Yuga will come after this. This has also been told that the Sun of the Sat Yuga has risen on the horison. You will get the proof of it. Whoever will bring untruth in the path of truth, he will be caught. Then it doesn't matter if he is a Sahaja Yogi. He call himself a Sahaja Yogi and then if he does wring things then he cannot be saved. may Till now the truth has saved him, supported him, looked after him and protected him but then after this he does not have the Shakti that in front of truth it can save such people who go against the truth. The greatest power it is Shakti is the power of love. Love means egoless and without expectations, to spread the kingdom of love. The shakti will do this work. But this shakti which is the power of Chaitanya (vibrations) will work only there through you. If Chaitanya could do this work by itself then today you people would not have been Sahaja yogis and the ?? would have been no need for Sahaja Yogis. Now you can understand how much one needs the Sahaja Yoga as you see that Sahaja Yogis are getting ready in collectivity. The reason for this is that you are the channels for the Chaitanya. Now these vibrations which spread through these channels you must understand that you should not even raise your eyes towards anything that is wrong, because you are yourselves filled with this Shakti. You have all kinds of powers which are being conveyed through you. Then the same power will make you powerful, complete and healthy. You do not need the support of anything else. Just as soon as you will take the support of anything else you will fall down. Like I have seen big people who call themselves important they send me messages that we want to meet Shri Mataji. We want to meet her specially. If you say no to them then people say that they will trouble a lot so you might as well meet them. When they come, they will get realisation and will get alright and after that they will vanish, because they do not understand that the power of truth is so tremendous. you Once if you come into Sahaja Yoga then it is better that you go deep into Sahaja Yoga, otherwise you cannot be saved. Every time man thinks what's my benefit by coming to Sahaja Yoga my son is still sick, my money got stolen, I had income-tax problem etc etc. But all these problems of yours got solved at once, first of all if satisfaction comes and peace of mind has not come into a person then Sahaja Yoga is useless for him. When satisfaction comes then the thought comes that one needs nothing else, one needs nothing more. There is no need to do Vol. VIII Issue 4 Divine Cool Breeze 1

 anything wrong which is destructive for the society, to others and to yourself, after Sahaja Yoga. If such is the case then you will have to suffer the consequences. I saw in the beginning many people came into Sahaja Yoga who made money, fought, created problems and then they finished off. Because the Shakti of Sahaja Yoga is such that it threw such people. If they get alright and come back then its a different thing. Like in the ocean away there are two powers by one the high tide comes and by another the low tide comes. In the same way this Shakti has a pulsating action, it means that the beat or pulsation opens out and shrinks once. That is how the heart beats. Adi Shankaracharya has called vibrations as "Spanda' pulsations. Pulsations means that once it will lift you and the next time it can throw you down as well. People are coming to Sahaja Yoga because there is a lot of benefit from Sahaja Yoga. Some get good health, wealth, some get children. All get some benefit or the other. To some it is a lot to some less. But the greatest benefit of Sahaja Yoga is peace of mind and satisfaction (Samadhan), that after this we need nothing else. I need nothing else, I have got everything. When this state of yours will come then know that you are a Sahaja Yogi. Then without any difficulty, whether you want or not Sahaja Yoga will look after you. It will make you completely satisfied. People will say what has happened to him. How come he has become desireless? Because one is not bothered anymore. Once I went to America and gave realisation to a woman shopkeeper she said "After realisation L just don't remember anything, first I needed to remember everything in my shop, and I used to write each thing, but I was always running at a loss. After Sahaja Yoga, I neither count the things in my shop, nor I remember what I have there and the most amazing thing is that now I am making profits. Sahaja Yoga has taken me in her lap and all my problems of weighing, selling etc, are all finished. Somebody is running my shop. I don't run the shop anymore" When things happen like this then man understands that he has reached the seventh plane of Satisfaction. He does not even need to think about it. It is beyond thoughts. The reason is this that before Sahaja Yoga we live in our thoughts. In Sahaj everything just happens spontaneously. You will get this experience slowly, The day you will become fully dependent on Sahaja and you will hot need to interfere in any way. Once there was a break in our house and all my saris got stolen. One silk sari was left behind I used to wear that and go to parties my husband also thought that she weares only one sari to get satisfactions is the greatest thing. Suppose I like something and I am running for it that I want this or that even if one takes loans for tat. Once you get it then the attention goes to other things. Whatever you have you cannot enjoy it. If your attention is on the Spirit then it will show you what the spirit sees. Then it will show you what is joy giving, and bliss giving. Then when you know the meaning of Sva - self, you see that only 'Swarth' when you go on seeking here and there and go crazy then only will you go towards the self. Yoga then the whole of your life will become innundated in a very beautiful manner When you come to Sahaja Yoga you should know that the one who is looking after you, has crores of hands. If you go under her protection then why would you do wrong things by which you get catches and become uselessly troubled. If you are caught up then it gets cleared just like that. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 4

 We see that people get uselessly worried over trivial things. The reason for this worrying is that there is no innocence. The aspects of the Shakti are firstly light, secondly Truth, thirdly love and fourthly, peace of mind. If a person gets agitated then he is not a Sahaja Yogi. You have heard of Socrates, Hazrat Nizamuddin. Hazrat Nizamuddin they told that if bow your head before the king, then we will cut off your head. But the king who said this, his head got cut off in the night. do not you There are two movements in Sahaja Yoga like in the sea. In the same way in Sahaja yoga you are under the influence of two Shaktis. First power is your upliftment and by the second power you are thrown out of Sahaja Yoga. Once you are out of Sahaja Yoga then there is no connection between you and me. You have no right over me. If you want privilegs from me then you first have to get involved in Sahaja Yoga like Suvarna is heated and becomes kundan then such a Shakti comes in him that it can catch a diamond. If you put a dianmond into kundan then you don't need to stitch it or set it, or needs any thing else to catch it. Kundan is so soft but it catches the diamond. There is nothing harder than the diamond. In the same way you can also become a Kundan. You will see that you will get the power of satisfaction and peace of mind (Samadhan). It is beyond thought. In Sahaja Yoga you go beyond mind and emotions beyond the gunas and you go into such a state where there arise no thoughts. You can look at anybody in a thoughtless state. You just watch. This habit of thoughtlessness is called as anything happened and immediately thoughts arise. Anything you see and immediately thoughts arise. People go crazy just thinking and thinking. One man told me in Switzerland that even if you cut off my head but please save me from the storm of my thoughts. He was a doctor. These thoughts come into us because of ego or conditionings, and also there are many people who feed these into our brain like reading books, going to some Guru, meeting various people, or having big discussions. Ramadas Swami has said "Speak of that by which your arguments and debates will finish off." Even after coming to Sahaja Yoga, we think about everything. But we do not know the miracles of Sahaja Yoga, that when we have fully put ourselves under the protective wings of Sahaja then Sahaja will also do the thinking for you and Sahaja will also solve the problems of the questions which are around us and of what we know nothing. Many one man thinks that he has forgotten his way and he remains worried. How to find the way, whom to ask If you have lost your way then also it is Sahaja. May be you have to meet someone, or you have to pass through something or you have to experience something, that is why you have lost your way. What is the need to worry about it. You are not going for some war even if Sahaja Yogis go for war they will win the war without fighting. In whichever countries people have done lots of thinking like America, then a crazy person like freud has been accepted and worshipped like a God. All the time they are looking for pleasures, and every joy has been made in such a way that people get destroyed by it Everything of theirs has destruction built into it, till they do not destroy themselves they do not think that their is a limit to their enjoyments. See their games they will go to mountains for skiing and break their legs and bones. Where we lived there was a church and next door to it was a pub. The people from the pub would come todling and fall on the ground. Whatever man has done through his brains with his ego they have all been wrong. But when Vol. VIII Issue 4 Divine Cool Breeze

 you do anything in the light of Spirit, then that work will always be very beautifully, properly and with understanding. But if there is no understanding then this thought does not have that consciousness. Now that the time of Truth has come when we walk on the path of truth then we should not look back, because your biggest power is the light and such a light where you will not see your shadow. There is light in front and on all sides and behind. But you have to be fully enlightened by the flame of the light. For this I tell you a small path, that all of you should do meditation. But you cannot even do that, especially for women. All their attention is on making food, children or here and there. Women should be the first to do meditation because they are the Shaktis of the society. The greatest role of the woman is that she makes the society. Your work is to make the society alright and make it grow and for that there should be balance, understanding and wisdom, and with it there should be the humility and modesty of a women. If a woman is not modest and humble then she is a man. If she becomes aggressive and thinks that she must compete with man on every front then it is wrong. In this some thing to compete for ? You are yourselves very powerful, why do you need to compete with anyone. I am saying this again and again because in whichever countries women have not taken the weight of the society's problems on their heads, those countries are now sinking and will finish off. A woman should look after her children, it is a very big work. It is necessary for a woman that she should enlighten her powers. The society today in this countries is alright because of the women of this society. Not with forcing, but with love. Also a love without expectations. In this country there have been such women like Panna who put her son to be killed to save the crown prince. Queen Padmini committed Jouhar (Sati) along with three thousand women to save their chastity, our society today is saved because of such women, because the kind of darkness that has spread on this country it would have finished long ago. It is their Punyas that has saved us. Their Punyas will take on a special form in this Sat Yuga. The miracles of it will be seen. You saw how the young boys of Romania were singing. They have never even read the notations of Indian music, they have had no formal training. The artists were saying that even after doing tapasya for years together this condition of singing doesn't come but how could they do this? It is a miracle. In Your life also many miracies will come after coming to Sahaja Yoga. But even then you are still lost on the train of your thoughts. When you drown in Sahaja, it is a great intoxication when you are intoxicated then what else is there to say" Come into that intoxication. Then it doesn't mean that you roam around like a mad person. In this intoxication you become intently devoted to your duties and for that you have got the powers. If you want powers then for that firstly you must get settled in Sahaja Yoga fully. Leave all other things of the world. Now someone wants money, someone wants power, this or that. The one who says "I don't need anything. All my desires are finished." Then Param Chaitanya thinks that I will fulfill desires. Then his desire is your desire. Then it will take you to such things that you will your be surprised, that we never thought how it happened. All problems and worries of the world will go away. Then giver. What is there to ask for? Only those will ask who have some want. But those who have drowned themselves in the ocean of satisfaction, what will they ask for? This does not mean that you become ascetics and live in forests. Raja Janak was called Videhi. He was a king you will not need to ask for anything. You become the giver. Just the Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 4 4.

 Dance, Drama and Music used to be presented before him. There used to big processions for him. But people called him Videhi. So Nachiketa asked his Guru that when Raja Janak comes why do you stand up. The Guru said " He is a much higher person than me" How? The guru We have left the world and taken sanyas but he without leaving the would is sanyasi." The question of leaving something arises only when you have caught on to a said something then you say I left this or that. But when you have caught nothing what will you leave? This catch within us, has come from thoughts. May.be because of conditionings or ego. If it doesn't go then it means that you have not descended into Sahaja Yoga. To be caught on anything is there only when we think that thing to be very important. There is no catch of the Spirit. It is a giver. It is going to spread the light in all four directions. It gives powers and such a power that people become powerful, mighty and great. You get total oneness in it. So much love that all this aggression and wars finish off. One Muslim from Algeria whose parents said we are going for Haj. The son told them to go to London. They said, "Why London?" He said, "I came to Haj to London because there only I parents camne to London and told me that their son said that the Haj has come to London. So we came here. Now this understanding and wisdom came into that one boy and his listened to him. I asked his parents, "Why did you listen to him?" They said, intelligent boy. He has changed so much that we cannot believe how such a miracle happened to him. So many people go for Haj and nothing happens to them. They are the same. They drink, beat their wives and whatever they have been doing they continue to do that. But this boy has changed completely. That is why we come to London." it." The got parents He is a very The second power of Truth is that Truth is so powerful and enlightened and so full of love that its effect come on many people. People can see it and say that how did this happen to this man. In Maharashtra one person who came to Sahaja Yoga went to the collector's office. He was sitting peacefully. Everyone was in a hurry and he was in no hurry. In Maharashtra there is a great importance of Guru. They asked him who was his Guru? He said I will not tell. When he went home four people followed him. They asked himn who his Guru was. Then he said my name. When I went there I was surprised to see so many people in Sahaja Yoga. All because of the character of one man. It was due to his behaviour he was not good looking but the radiant quality he had. So to say, " What can we do the country has gone to the dogs, has been destroyed." Even if one good man can come forward, The World will bow, all that is needed is a person to make it bow. If so many of you can become like that then what else is needed. But first you must experience that you are sitting in the Sat Yuga, and the Shakti of Truth is moving with you. One needs nothing else. Everything will happen by itself. Now just to be amazed what else in left. The way things are happening you are seeing. You must know that you have now come in Sat Yuga. This Shakti will enlighten in a thousand ways. It can give you countless qualities within yourself. You need only one thing, which Shirdi Sai Nath had said, " One needs patience" But this patience is not what comes with thinking. This patience is a state in which everything happens. If you go into that state then no one needs to speak or to tell anyone. It will happen that one cannot even think of it and it will happen. Besides this there is one more thing, every important. That you have been born Vol. VII Issue 4 Divine Cool Breeze

 in India. It is a very great thing. It is due to many punyas of past lives that you have been born in this land of Yoga. The Sat Yuga will first come from this country and the world will see what is the Sat Yuga. The miracle of it will be seen. But you are the torches, you are the lights. You have to give this light. It has to be experienced, should be understood and should make it your own, because there is a very great responsibility on you. Here also Sahaja Yoga is spreading very fast what is the reason that it is spreading so fast. The reason is that you have been born in this land of Yoga. All around there is nothing but Chaitanya. Even from the earth the maximum vibrations flow in this country. But ahead of this you have to see that you are the vehicles of it. You can only carry this forward. But still I see that there is still something lacking even now. Make it alright. Get after it and make it alright. Make it alright somehow or the other. I have to make myself such that I have to completely purify my body, mind, ego etc. Only then will this country rise. This country has tremendous future. Those who say that this country has really gone bad, but I say that in the most difficult sea only that ship can said which is strong. You have to become even stronger. One side you see there is terrible darkness and the other side there should be a tremendous enlightened life that people see. To get this greatness with devotion and love you have to meditate. Then in Bhakti you will see that these people from where have they come? From heaven? This is your potential. You must understand that within you is such a glorified life. Awaken that. Leave all this worldly things. He has a car and I don't have one. What do want with all this? I know nothing about the color, make or number of my car. I can't do anything. I am absolutely non engaged in work, but still all the work is getting done. you If the understanding of this gets awakened in you then you can cleanse yourself within. You can clear your Chakars. From this only the benevolence of the world, will happen. You are the foundations of it. Today you on this path then how will the truth help you? If you are still wandering about in the lanes and by lanes and getting stuck in the traffic then how will truth help you? You must take decision that we will make the future of this country bright By your character and by the power of Sahaja. If you can decide this much within yourself and leave all the wrong things. The whole world is one. But because of the human mind different countries have come up. It is the same with Religion, and every thing else with human mind, man has got separated into separateness. Sahaja yoga is not only the togetherness and union but is the entirety. stand on the path of Truth. See how many miracles are taking place. If you are not The one who tries the Tattwa of everyone together, this shakti today is movable, and it is upto you because it will appear from within you. May God Bless You. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 4

 CHRISTMAS PUJA TALK GANAPATIPULE 25-12-95 (SYNOPSIS) Christ came on this earth and he was specially created to come down as a human being to work out the salvation of the people. It is said that he came to India in Kashmir and he met the king Shalivahan, who was a great devotee of the mother. He asked him, "What is your name?" Christ said I come from a country where people believe in filth and I think this is my own country. Shalivahana said that you are such a great person who has come on this earth so you should go back to those countries to save them and to tell them about the pure principle of life. In Sanskrit he called it as 'Nirmala Tattwa'. Christ went back and after three and a half years only he was crucified. Those were special days. I call them the days of "Tapasya'. Buddha and Mahavira were born at the same time and at the same level of the Virata's forehead. According to Vedas there are seven awarenesess. That is the subtle qualities we have within ourselves. The first one was the Bhu, where Ganèsha was created, second is Bhoorva or Antariksha means all that is created around. The third one is Svaha at Nabhi Chakra. Swaha is the one where we consume everything. In modern times people go on consuming everything, all kinds of books they will read. They will go to all kinds of things. If you tell them why?, they will say, " what's is wrong? " wrong?" Just consumption of everything goes on. Also there is another great thing within us called as 'Svaha' where we sustain the Dharma within us. Those people who say that there should be no blind faith. That is not blind but it's an inner urge. Why do we love our own parents because of the Dharma within us. Why do we love our country because there is a Dharma within us. Why does a wife love her husband and vice-versa because there is Dharma. Once it is sustained within ourselves it becomes 'Svaha'. That's our capacity or quality, an innate understanding. Some of them are even in the animals, like attachment to parents and "Why do you dress up like this " "What's masters. Then comes the higher awareness where your Mana' (it is not mind) Mana means by which we have emotions. They are talking now not only about IQ but EQ. That means a person who has only intelligence is not alright, he must also have the balance of emotions. They are realising that only through intelligence how people have created chaos, violence, all kinds of destruction on this earth. Now they are talking about a higher capacity within us called as EQ. ie. emotions. This emotional capacity comes to you as an inner urge, an inner capability, which you cannot avoid. A person may be anything in life but if he has no love, if he has no emotional feelings then he is not complete. These emotional feelings also could be very limited. They could be that one gets attached to somebody. Also the IQ where we get attached to some idea, like Hitler had some idea and he believed it was the truth and he had to do it. When you get attached to one idea like that you can do things which are not at all helpful nourishing, or supportive to reality. All these things like wars destruction, are coming now as anti-feelings, where the 'Mana' has developed a domination of the intelligence where emotions are dominated by intelligence and rationality. Divine Cool Breeze 7. Vol. VIII Issue 4

 There is an other awareness, capability urge innately built within us is the Jana' means the people, the communication. You cannot live alone. You see a man who goes to jail is quite happy, comfortable, he does not have to do anything, everything is done for him. He lives very well, much better than he would do outside, but the only thing is that he cannot meet other people, or communicate when his capacity of communication, which is within us, which is a part and parcel of human existence is taken away, a person who is in jail feels absolutely frustrated and unhappy. He doesn't mind doing all kinds of menial work as long as he is not in jail and cutout of the communications with others. So this communication is also an inner within us. In that also people sometimes go too far and neglect other Dharmas. They are urge more worried about communication than about other Dharmas which are within them. So there is no balance in a person. Then comes the sixth awareness which is very interesting One is that we take to conditionings. Say if I am an Indian then I am very proud of it. I can never see anything or I see everything wrong. It can be both ways. How you have been conditioned. This conditioning comes to us through our sixth centre the Agnya. Another thing that we develop when somebody tries to condition and control us. We try to get out of it or sometimes we try to dominate. This dominating capacity is also within us innately built. Both things are innately built within us that we go on getting ourselves conditioned. For example I would say that in a very stupid silly manner we build up conditioning. It is impossible to get out of it. It always comes out as self contempt that a person has no value for understanding, For Example suppose you go to somebody's house. Then will not eat in a utensil in which meat is cooked. Then you drink only well water so you send your servant to get only well water. The servant must be absolutely drenched. Doesn't matter if the servant dies of pneumonia. All such stupid conditionings, are not only in the east but you find them in the west also. For example they have clubs where people wear particular types of clothes. If they wear something else then everybody laughs at them, or how to use a spoon and fork is very important. If somebody uses a fork and spoon in a wrong way, its finished. He is nowhere, he is not sophisticated. The idea of sophistication comes through conditioning of ages because may be they were primitive and had no clothes to wear. Might be they were covering themselves with some leaves. Now they have jumped to the other side. They are very particular about their dress, fork, and spoon they just can't bear something that is different. you "I don't like" is a very common word. They came to India and said "we don't like" "What don't you like?" "We don't like the way Indians dress up". Alright, dress up the way you like and let Indians dress up the way they like why do you think that your dress in England will suit here in India which is such a hot country. This conditioning goes on into such a deep manner that nobody see stupidity behind it for example if the king has invited you, you must wear a tail- coat. Its very experience to have a tail coat. One has to go to a particular shop to hire it. Sometimes they are loose and sometimes they are tight. I have seen people coming to the Queen's party and I could never recognize them because some of them looked like Charlie Chaplin or Laurel and Hardy. They cannot walk straight because of the clothes which are so tight. But you have to wear it. All these formal ideas come to us as a kind of part and Divine Cool Breeze 8. Vol. VII Issue 4

 parcel of you because you accept all these conditionings. The other side goes to abandoning all this. We don't want all this. We are anti culture. I met a gentleman who was wearing a pant with lots of holes in it. Imagine in the cold of London to wear a pant like that. Such stupid people are not only uneducated but also very well educated, highly placed. They are so conditioned, and this conditioning has caused so much damage to human being. For example to accept Freud had become a complete religion. Freud became Christ at that level though he was a Jew. He dominated the western culture so much, he would have been thrown in the sea if he had come to India. They accepted this man so much that the culture of the west became absolutely self destructive. No respect, no morality all value systems was shattered because they accepted this kind of nonsense. Even today you are here. In that book such and such thing is written in this book such and such thing is written, this is terrible conditioning. For example it is written in the Bible that Jews crucified Christ. Just use your brains how can Jews crucifiy Christ? They were in the multitude. In any country have you heard that anyone can be crucified with the general opinion of the people. The Roman government did that. But to put the blame on the Jews was done by a very cunning man called Mr. Paul. People accepted that to hate the Jews. All such conditioning also have reactions these conditionings then build and once they build up their reactions also build up you have a country full of all kinds of chaos, fear, violence and destruction. up The conditioning is more also with the idea of possessions. This is my land. This positions is mine etc. Like this it goes up to a point where people who believe in the formless God also fight over land. Why should they. They believe in the formless God so why should they fight for the land, but they will go on fighting for the land, this fighting for the land can go extent of cruelty. Conditionings of every kind, are blinding your eye. For example they believe in Koran. Simple thing is that Koran was never written by Mohammed Sahib, he never knew how to read and write. For forty years it was not there. There was a fellow who killed Hazarat and his sons. Then he killed the third and fourth Calipah, just to become the Calipah himself. And the liver of the fourth Calipah was eaten by the mother of this horrible fellow who hated women. He put down in the Koran all the things against women, and people accepted because it is in the Koran. to any Mohammed Sahib is the one who is the incarnation of Dattatreya. It should be told that he never wrote the Koran but people after him wrote it. This conditioning can be removed if know what sort of life Christ led. you First of all he was born in a To be born in a Manger means to be born in poor circumstances. That means he showed that there is no need to have money or to have big properties or anything to be impressive. Those were the days where the people accepted the "Tapasvis'. That was the time to do tapasya. So he came on this earth and lived like a Tapasvi. On the contrary the Christians are the most self-indulgent people you can think of. You go to any Christion nation and you will be amazed how they are just slaves of money and watches. How they are living in very shocking way. If you see the Catholic and protestant Church you will be shocked as to how they are following Christ. Catholic is nothing but money-oriented. The only thing they picked up from Christ is when he went to a wedding and created wine out of water. This wine is just juice of grapes. It is also called wine in the Hebrew language. manger. Vol. VIII Issue 4 Divine Cool Breeze 9.

 Because you cannot create alcohol instantly. It has to rot and rot now if somebody dies they take champagne to celebrate what? The good riddance of bad rubbish? On Christmas day after coming from church don't go to any Christian's house. Even the Indian Christians have started following the western people, because Indian people believe that Christ was born in England. All such ideas have come from the English, French and Portuguese who brought Christianity to India. This drinking has come also from the Muslim. They don't openly drink. Imagine in the church when they give you communion they give you some sort of dirty smelling wine. Today we are talking about Christ. He is sitting in a position of Agnya Chakra controlling pineal and pituitary glands. By that he controls our conditioning. If we follow him then we cannot be conditioned by anyone because he talked of Spirit only. Spirit cannot be conditioned by anything. Whatever you that will be accepted which is good and congenial to the Spirit. It's a different attitude of a person who is spiritual. Like we had people here and know that they were not very comfortable. Some of them were put into the tents. But they were enjoying because they are enjoying the spiritual atmosphere. They don't care where they sleep they live. This is all because you have entered into the kingdom of God. But there are others who are so much worried. This is not good. I want this they seek, trouble everybody, criticize, get angry, but actually they haven't got spiritual joy, and they can never really enjoy unless and until they become fully spiritual. where way that way. All material happiness Christ has openly said that you have to know yourself. Same in Koran, Mohammed Sahib has said that unless and until you know yourself you will not know God. Actually we have to understand that Christ never started any exclusive religion. Specially Mohammed Sahib has talked about Ibrahim, Moses, and Christ and his mother, much more than in the Bible. He respected her. He said there have been more than one lakh Valies - realised souls before but still the Muslims are some sort of unique people because they call themselves Muslims. Whether they drink or womanise, doesn't matter. They kill people, they run things which are forbidden to them but still they are Muslims. Same with the Christians. If you can find a man who is a real Christian who follows Christ before realisation. After realisation ofcourse different. But for that you have to cross the Agnya. Agnya is there which has to control ego. Christ in his lifetime showed how ego worked. His own crucification itself, showed what people are like, what they did to him. How he was troubled by these stupid people. you are your Christ has said 'Know thyself' he said "knock at the door". To knock at the door you must have Shudhha Ichha. Otherwise it won't work out, nobody can force you. He controls the ego He is the one who gives you the balance. Christ has said in his last prayer " Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them who trespass against us." What a big thing to say. But in west people don't know how to forgive. They are full of hatred. They cannot ask for forgiveness because they are full of ego. Though they will feel guilty they will never ask for forgiveness. They will never say that 'O God forgive me for what I have done. For example the Nazis killed so many people and still these neo-Nazis are coming up even in Italy. They are not ashamed as to what they have done. This happens because there is no real connection with Christ. Firstly if you have connection with Christ your ego has to be finished. This ego which comes to you from various sources is a myth with this ego people try to befool us and show off. For. example a man came to the king and started boasting that he is a great architect, and I will Vol. VIII Issue 4 Divine Cool Breeze 10

 build a big palace for you. The way he posed the king believed him and said "alright, go ahead, I will send you so much money". Now with this whole attitude and the way he was describing himself with all his gestures full of such ego that this king also got completely lost. He gave him lots of money, and in six months time he came back and said "I have built your palace" It was just the same land and there was no palace. Immediately the King realised that his ego has befooled him. He made the architect enter his 'palace' and sit in the throne which never existed. He made him sit in a sitting position on the throne for three hours. Ultimately the architect fell at the king's feet and said there is no palace, no throne. But the king had lost all his money. This ego can take you to such heights of stupidity. The culture where it is pampered is the worst culture. I have seen advertisements where they say that you must smoke this particular cigarette because it expresses your ego. But according to Indian culture to express yoür ego is something very stupid. People laugh at such people. If they develop then they are corrected. Specially in Maharashtra, it's very difficult to develop any ego. ego, As soon as you start talking big about yourself immediately you are punctured. But in the north it was a little bit allowed. People talk big there. We are great politicians. I am going to do this or that. I am going to have this project or that project. If you read Christ's sermons they are so deep and so enlightened. He gave them different ways of explaining what happens after realisation, how a seed is sprouted and how it can get spoilt. He explained to people very beautifully. His life was so charming and so beautiful, like a shooting star he came on this earth. He left such a remarkable impression on people. His crucification was part of the game because he had to make the way in the Agnya Chakra. To cross the agnya chakra he was crucified, but his message is not crucification. People wear the cross and I feel very very hurt about it. He crucified himself. That's not what you should celebrate. You have to celebrate his resurrection. Resurrection because human beings are to be resurrected. In Sahaja Yoga nobody is crucified but is resurrected because of one crucification of Christ. That was enough. You can't carry the cross on your shoulder. He carried it for you. He has done everything for you. He said also he died for all the sinners and it is a fact. If he had not done that it would have been more difficult to open your agya because of two problems this conditioning and crucification has helped the loosening of these two horrible capacities of human beings. His life is to be understood in a very very deep sense but if you are like a journalist and say why did he crucify himself? How to tell the journalists who don't know anything about Chakras. Because it was the era or time of tapasya, sacrifice and so all these people Buddha, Mahavira and Christ went into complete renunciation. They led a life of a great tapasvi. They did it for us not for themselves. They didn't want but they had to do it to cleanse us and give us a proper 'medha', Ekadasa Rudra had to be cleared out His ego. Why they sacrificed their lives and all the pleasures of life? For them it was not a sacrifice. It was a kind of a life they wanted to have. For such people there is no question of sacrifice but is a question of doing something that will help to open the chakras of the people in the future. Without that we could not have worked it out. That's why today Sahaja Yoga is so beautifully spread and is working out. We have to thank them very much. Ofcourse all other incarnations have helped and are responsible in our evolutionary process to create these ladders for us. Vol. VIII Issue 4 Divine Cool Breeze 11

 Ultimately you reach the state of Tapa on the sixth centre and then in the state of Truth. Then the Truth comes to you through Sahaja Yoga in the brain, in the Limbic area the Kundalini enters. She puts light there and creates enlightened personalities. Then she joins this all pervading power of Divine Love and with this Divine Love you are completely changed and transformed. Their contribution to the ascent of human beings has been great and that of Christ has been the greatest, when we say we have to follow Christ we should try to see how much detachment we have. When his Brothers and sister came to see him. He said, "who are my brothers?" These are my brothers, these are my relations, "Gyaneshwara has said the same thing that they will become your relations. They will be your brothers and sisters and not those who are not enlightened. They are not enlightened because they don't understand you. They don't have entry into the kingdom of God. In this lifetime he led a life of a person who is very simple. He didn't bother about clothes or anything. All the conditionings of the worldly things were not. Even about Mahavira there is a big misconception. He was once praying in a garden where there were lots of bushes and he had only one cloth on himself. This cloth got caught up so he cut half of it covering himself. Shri Krishna went to test him. He said I am just nude, why don't you give me your cloth because after all you are a king. So he took out his cloth and it to Shri Krishna and got some leaves to cover himself in his garden and in his own palace. Now if you see the Jains they make everything so horrible and insult him all the time: Most of the people who follow all these great incarnations are really all the time insulting them. By their behavior we form such a bad opinion of them. gave Imet one gentleman in Chicago and it was very cold. He was the head of the Hare Rama Hare Krishna. He was wearing a Dhoti which was so thin he was shaking before me. He said, "I am feeling very cold" I asked him, "why are you wearing this dhoti?" He said "My Guru has told me of you wear a dhoti you will go to heaven." I said "In India eighty percent people wear Dhotis are they all going to go to heaven?" I said, "Why have you shaved your hair and put this 'bodi" He said, "My Guru told me that I must shave my head and have this bodi". Maybe he will be tied to some rope and pulled into heaven. Kabir was one of them who tried to slash out all your conditioning. He said, "By shaving your head if you are going to go to heaven then what about the lamb which is shaved twice a year." He will be there earlier than you. All your limitations are because of thinking. By thinking what do we do? We move in a linear way and there is no truth in it so the whole thing comes back like a boomerang. We have to go beyond this mind. Christ has done this so that we can go beyond. If you don't know how to go beyond the mind then better sit down and meditate are work it out. With this mind all kinds of things will come. Temper, intrigue, jealousies. All the six enemies will come to us through this mind. Everything can be rationalized. Why did you murder your wife? Because I hated her. She was this, she was that. But cannot murder. Why did you murder your you husband. Because of this because of that. Because of this mind you start doing things that are absolutely wrong. Then you try to rationalize it, you go against Agnya you go against reality and then use your conditionings use your ego to explain why you did it. All the time when we are doing like that we don't go beyond mind. We are so self satisfied about it. We think Divine Cool Breeze Vol. VIII Issue 4 12

 no end of ourselves. Now how are we to get out of it. Introspection. But it's very difficult because people are afraid of themselves. They don't want to introspect, because once they start infrospecting they will know how sinful they have been, what wrong things they have been doing, and then they will hate themselves. They don't want to introspect, But its very important that we should introspect. That introspection is very helpful for you to overcome these two hurdles of your agnya Chakra. I have told you many times don't argue with anything because the other is asking for argument, when one has lots of ego that ego starts acting on you. So action reaction starts, and you develop the habit of reacting to everything. Specially in the west they react to everything. For example this cloth is spread out here. They will say why could it not be better. Why is it so thin. They are walking across they will say, "see this man, what sort of person he is." There is a beggar then they will start criticizing They will criticize the government, and everyone, but what about yourself? Instead of that why don't you start doing something about it. You can't help it. If you are not going to do anything about it why react? This is the worst habit we have developed that is to react, and we think we have every right to react. You have. But this right is self destructive. To react on everything is not proper. You have no authority to react. It is to that extent. You have to just witness the whole thing. Once you start witnessing you will be amazed that you will start seeing the play of the maya and you will see where you stand in it. Witnessing should be developed all the time. Am I witnessing witnessing. Everything is recorded within me like a picture and then when I have to say something or correct something all that I have witnessed comes to help. person Many people say that I have very good memory because I am all the time Some people are attached to money they react. They will not give any money. They will keep all the money with themselves. In Sahaja Yoga also it happens. Other ones are who try to please others. Then they will waste their money on lavish things for nothing at all. Reaction can come through anything. Seeing something you can react and you become so engrossed with it that you don't realize that you are wasting all your brain on nonsersical things. This reaction comes when you have lost all complete sense of judgement. You don't know what you are losing or gaining by this kind of reaction. This reaction is going to destroy your inner being completely. All the time you are there and there, but you are nowhere here. If you are a very criticizing type of a person try to stop it completely. Direct that energy towards your self. Who am I to criticize others. Who am I to react to others. Put a challenge to yourself and you will see that your ego will subside. One day someone came and told me, "Mother, I feel so angry, I feel like beating everyone" I said, "Do one thing take a slipper and hit on your head" that's the only way you can get rid of this habit if you want to beat others. Now conditioning also should be seen. Am La conditioned person? If my conditioning is there is it a good conditioning or a bad conditioning. But even that if you go to extremes can create a problem for yourself. Most of these rituals etc. started as a good conditioning. Then it became like a trap. Then what should we do, we should not react Just see the drama and you will be surprised that without paying anything or going to any theatre, every moment you can see the drama going on, which is so enjoyable, whether it is ridiculous or alright, you just see Vol. VIII Issue 4 13 Divine Cool Breeze

 it and you do not react. Anything that you think is very perverse, ugly, immoral, don't see it. It is finished, gone so don't tax your mind with it because in the so called mind in actually the Agnya chakra in the centre of your optic Chiasma. Just imagine what a central place it has and any disturbance to your agnya, what it can do to your brain which is nothing but a lump of fat. So how this agya can affect you, and how it works and gets perverted images that is to be really seen. nature of Christ is innocence. He is Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is an eternal child. The pure Christ is also complete innocence because he doesn't react, because he is not conditioned. Children are not conditioned so much as we are. If you speak with children you will be amazed how innocent they are and how innocently they talk. Once my grand daughter asked, "What do you think of the poor children of the tiger? You know their father tells them that you eat human beings, and what can they do, they have to eat human beings." I told her that they are under the complete control of God and whatever they are doing they are not going to be held responsible. Its only for human beings that God has given their freedom. Its only human beings who can react in this manner. The animals are completely under the control of the God Almighty. This is their nature. A serpent will be a serpent a tiger will be tiger, lion will be lion. But human being can be serpent at the same time could be a scorpion, could be a lion, could be anything. Suddenly you find a small little bug like man coming up like a lion roaring at you. You don't know which way they will come and which way the camel will sit. When man is in connection with the Divine he sees the drama and he leaves everything to the Divine He can solve all the problems by just one bandhan. But he should be in full connection with the Divine. It works. This is the timne where this Param Chaitanya has gone into action. It is activated. Its working out everything. Now they asked me about this Shri Ganesha, whether he drank milk or not. I said anything is possible. These days this Param Chaitanya is doing such unbelievable things which we cannot understand. Everything is a miracle. When everything is done by this Param Chaitanya I never asked them to do anything. For example in Brisbane when I was there, I was sleeping in the Ashram and a rainbow appeared. Imagine that picture of Mother and Child appears in the sky. I didn't tell them to show that profile. I was sleeping. But at this time the halo that was around the head of Mary comes up on Her head. It does all this just to convince you about Sahaja Yoga. Because even now there are many who are supposed to be very rational, intelligent, educated who don't want to accept. After all if there is a Divine Power, there is something like that and is active. How can you challenge it? How can you say no to it? Because the powers are unlimited, that have gone into every atom and every molecule. It doesn't do tricks like moving this from there to there. But what it does is to do something which is absolutely impossible. So for us to believe in this activated Param Chaitanya is the only solution so you have it in the ocean of bliss and let this great power handle all the situation. Don't react yourself. It is so efficient, so quick, so fast. It moves all over and understands everything. It loves you and respects you because you are Sahaja Yogis. This is what it is today we should know at the time we are celebrating Christmas that what we are celebrating is really our own ascent. Our own achievements. Our own lofty heights. which we have achieved and which we have to achieve. We should have only aspirations as Vol. VIII Issue 4 Divine Cool Breeze 14

 far as our spiritual side is concerned. All aspirations should be left to this Param Chaitanya. The more you become the more you develop this non reacting attitude through your proper agnya. Not anger, not violence but a very pleasant temperament. That means people think I have told you not to speak. You must speak, talk to people, laugh, enjoy. But all this should be full of joyous feelings. That's what they say Christmas is for a very joyous atmosphere. They can't do that way, so they drink. They think by drinking they will become joyous. Now our understanding about ourselves has to be very clear. Specially people who don't meditate. They don't want to grow. They are Sahaja Yogis but they don't meditate. It's very surprising. I can make out who meditates and who does not. Because they have no depth. They want to have this and that. What about meditation. If you don't meditate your agya will be completely covered with thoughts and you will be lost. So you have to meditate. If you don't meditate I also suffer. If you have no aspirations in Sahaja Yoga it is better to leave, because you are like seeds which are sprouted but which will be wasted. Some people are here because they want some sort of a platform, some publicity. Some are here who want to make money out of Sahaja Yoga. There are some who want to have a kind of a communication to go around the whole world without paying a single pie. All such people are of no use to themselves. Now here you have the complete wealth. All that celestial wealth is before and you are not going to accept it. You don't have to crucify yourself. You don't have to give up anything. You don't have to live like 'Christ who had to live, or be born in a manger. Alli that's done for you. But if you are coming in the darbar of the Divine then be worthy of it. You will be surprised that all your problems will be solved. Your self respect will be maintained. So many things have happened like that. But if you have no self-respect and you don't respect your realisation, you are not deeply involved as to your own ascent and the help to others it will not work out. you am here to tell you all these things which Christ could not tell, and to fulfill what he wanted to say. All those things I am saying to you. It has already worked. You have all got realisation. But then have respect for others as Sahaja Yogis. Don't have funny ideas about yourself. Just know that you are a Sahaja Yogi. That's what is needed for a person if he is today celebrating the birth of Christ. He came on this earth who was actually Christ. Full of innocence who was the one who came as the embodiment of Shri Ganesha. I have given the proof of it to you. Be innocent and God looks after all the innocent people. You don't have to worry. I have seen children falling from seven stories. Nothing happens to them. They are perfectly alright. How? Who looks after them? The angels. You have seen photographs of angels around you. So try to be simple, innocent, not reacting and keep quiet and peaceful because here we are talking about the global transformation where people will find their peace in their heart and will establish new world of peace, joy, and spirituality. May God Bless You. Vol. VIII Issue 4 Divine Cool Breeze 15

 Edited by : Yogi Mahajan Published by: Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029 Printed by : Golden Arts, B - 2/11 Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029. Vol. VIII Issue 4 Divine Cool Breeze 16



----------------------

1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
VOLUME VIII
ISSUE 4
Be innocent and God looks after all the innocent people.
You don't have to worry.
H. H. Shri. Mataji Nirmala Devi
Christmas Puja
Ganapatipule, 1995
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-1.txt 
 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
DELHI 5-12-1995 (synopsis)
The first aspect of the shakti is that she has brilliace, lustre ad full of magnificence when this
Shakti will manifest itself in its full form then all the wrong type of people will get exposed.
All their misdeeds will get exposed. Their misdeeds which were going on secretly will be
exposed. Every kind of defects, deeds whether they are mental, pertaining to one's duty,
terrorism, or any kind of thing that is not liked by truth, will not be able to save itself because
the light of truth will fall on it. In the light of this truth you will see the special nature and
form of this Shakti.
The Kreta Yuga has started and Sat Yuga will come after this. This has also been told that the
Sun of the Sat Yuga has risen on the horison. You will get the proof of it. Whoever will bring
untruth in the path of truth, he will be caught. Then it doesn't matter if he is a Sahaja Yogi.
He
call himself a Sahaja Yogi and then if he does wring things then he cannot be saved.
may
Till now the truth has saved him, supported him, looked after him and protected him but then
after this he does not have the Shakti that in front of truth it can save such people who go
against the truth.
The greatest power it is Shakti is the power of love. Love means egoless and without
expectations, to spread the kingdom of love. The shakti will do this work. But this shakti
which is the power of Chaitanya (vibrations) will work only there through you. If Chaitanya
could do this work by itself then today you people would not have been Sahaja yogis and the
?? would have been no need for Sahaja Yogis. Now you can understand how much one needs
the Sahaja Yoga as you see that Sahaja Yogis are getting ready in collectivity. The reason for
this is that you are the channels for the Chaitanya. Now these vibrations which spread through
these channels you must understand that you should not even raise your eyes towards
anything that is wrong, because you are yourselves filled with this Shakti. You have all kinds
of
powers which are being conveyed through you. Then the same power will make you
powerful, complete and healthy. You do not need the support of anything else. Just as soon
as you
will take the support of anything else you will fall down. Like I have seen big people
who call themselves important they send me messages that we want to meet Shri Mataji. We
want to meet her specially. If you say no to them then people say that they will trouble
a lot so you might as well meet them. When they come, they will get realisation and will get
alright and after that they will vanish, because they do not understand that the power of truth
is so tremendous.
you
Once if you come into Sahaja Yoga then it is better that you go deep into Sahaja Yoga,
otherwise you cannot be saved. Every time man thinks what's my benefit by coming to Sahaja
Yoga my son is still sick, my money got stolen, I had income-tax problem etc etc. But all these
problems of yours got solved at once, first of all if satisfaction comes and peace of mind has
not come into a person then Sahaja Yoga is useless for him. When satisfaction comes then the
thought comes that one needs nothing else, one needs nothing more. There is no need to do
Vol. VIII Issue 4
Divine Cool Breeze
1
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-2.txt 
 anything wrong which is destructive for the society, to others and to yourself, after Sahaja
Yoga. If such is the case then you will have to suffer the consequences.
I saw in the beginning many people came into Sahaja Yoga who made money, fought, created
problems and then they finished off. Because the Shakti of Sahaja Yoga is such that it threw
such
people. If they get alright and come back then its a different thing. Like in the ocean
away
there are two powers by one the high tide comes and by another the low tide comes. In the
same way this Shakti has a pulsating action, it means that the beat or pulsation opens out and
shrinks once. That is how the heart beats. Adi Shankaracharya has called vibrations as
"Spanda' pulsations. Pulsations means that once it will lift you and the next time it can throw
you down as well.
People are coming to Sahaja Yoga because there is a lot of benefit from Sahaja Yoga. Some get
good health, wealth, some get children. All get some benefit or the other. To some it is a lot
to some less. But the greatest benefit of Sahaja Yoga is peace of mind and satisfaction
(Samadhan), that after this we need nothing else. I need nothing else, I have got everything.
When this state of yours will come then know that you are a Sahaja Yogi. Then without any
difficulty, whether you want or not Sahaja Yoga will look after you. It will make you
completely satisfied. People will say what has happened to him. How come he has become
desireless? Because one is not bothered anymore. Once I went to America and gave realisation
to a woman shopkeeper she said "After realisation L just don't remember anything, first I
needed to remember everything in my shop, and I used to write each thing, but I was always
running at a loss. After Sahaja Yoga, I neither count the things in my shop, nor I remember
what I have there and the most amazing thing is that now I am making profits. Sahaja Yoga
has taken me in her lap and all my problems of weighing, selling etc, are all finished.
Somebody is running my shop. I don't run the shop anymore"
When things happen like this then man understands that he has reached the seventh plane of
Satisfaction. He does not even need to think about it. It is beyond thoughts. The reason is this
that before Sahaja Yoga we live in our thoughts. In Sahaj everything just happens
spontaneously. You will get this experience slowly, The day you will become fully dependent
on Sahaja
and you will hot need to interfere in any way. Once there was a break in our house and all
my saris got stolen. One silk sari was left behind I used to wear that and go to parties my
husband also thought that she weares only one sari to get satisfactions is the greatest thing.
Suppose I like something and I am running for it that I want this or that even if one takes loans
for tat. Once you get it then the attention goes to other things. Whatever you have you cannot
enjoy it. If your attention is on the Spirit then it will show you what the spirit sees. Then it
will show you what is joy giving, and bliss giving. Then when you know the meaning of Sva
- self, you see that only 'Swarth' when you go on seeking here and there and go crazy then
only will you go towards the self.
Yoga then the whole of your life will become innundated in a very beautiful manner
When you come to Sahaja Yoga you should know that the one who is looking after you, has
crores of hands. If you go under her protection then why would you do wrong things by
which you get catches and become uselessly troubled. If you are caught up then it gets cleared
just like that.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 4
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-3.txt 
 We see that people get uselessly worried over trivial things. The reason for this worrying is
that there is no innocence. The aspects of the Shakti are firstly light, secondly Truth, thirdly
love and fourthly, peace of mind. If a person gets agitated then he is not a Sahaja Yogi. You
have heard of Socrates, Hazrat Nizamuddin. Hazrat Nizamuddin they told that if
bow your head before the king, then we will cut off your head. But the king who said this,
his head got cut off in the night.
do not
you
There are two movements in Sahaja Yoga like in the sea. In the same way in Sahaja yoga you
are under the influence of two Shaktis. First power is your upliftment and by the second
power you are thrown out of Sahaja Yoga. Once you are out of Sahaja Yoga then there is no
connection between you and me. You have no right over me. If you want privilegs from me
then you first have to get involved in Sahaja Yoga like Suvarna is heated and becomes kundan
then such a Shakti comes in him that it can catch a diamond. If you put a dianmond into
kundan then you don't need to stitch it or set it, or needs any thing else to catch it. Kundan
is so soft but it catches the diamond. There is nothing harder than the diamond. In the same
way you can also become a Kundan. You will see that you will get the power of satisfaction
and peace of mind (Samadhan). It is beyond thought. In Sahaja Yoga you go beyond mind and
emotions beyond the gunas and you go into such a state where there arise no thoughts. You
can look at anybody in a thoughtless state. You just watch. This habit of thoughtlessness is
called as anything happened and immediately thoughts arise. Anything you see and
immediately thoughts arise. People go crazy just thinking and thinking. One man told me in
Switzerland that even if you cut off my head but please save me from the storm of my
thoughts. He was a doctor. These thoughts come into us because of ego or conditionings, and
also there are many people who feed these into our brain like reading books, going to some
Guru, meeting various people, or having big discussions. Ramadas Swami has said "Speak of
that by which your arguments and debates will finish off." Even after coming to Sahaja Yoga,
we think about everything. But we do not know the miracles of Sahaja Yoga, that when we
have fully put ourselves under the protective wings of Sahaja then Sahaja will also do the
thinking for you and Sahaja will also solve the problems of the questions which are around
us and of what we know nothing.
Many one man thinks that he has forgotten his way and he remains worried. How to find the
way, whom to ask If you have lost your way then also it is Sahaja. May be you have to meet
someone, or you have to pass through something or you have to experience something, that
is why you have lost your way. What is the need to worry about it. You are not going for some
war even if Sahaja Yogis go for war they will win the war without fighting.
In whichever countries people have done lots of thinking like America, then a crazy person
like freud has been accepted and worshipped like a God. All the time they are looking for
pleasures, and every joy has been made in such a way that people get destroyed by it
Everything of theirs has destruction built into it, till they do not destroy themselves they do
not think that their is a limit to their enjoyments. See their games they will go to mountains
for skiing and break their legs and bones. Where we lived there was a church and next door
to it was a pub. The people from the pub would come todling and fall on the ground.
Whatever man has done through his brains with his ego they have all been wrong. But when
Vol. VIII Issue 4
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-4.txt 
 you do anything in the light of Spirit, then that work will always be very beautifully, properly
and with understanding. But if there is no understanding then this thought does not have that
consciousness.
Now that the time of Truth has come when we walk on the path of truth then we should not
look back, because your biggest power is the light and such a light where you will not see your
shadow. There is light in front and on all sides and behind. But you have to be fully
enlightened by the flame of the light. For this I tell you a small path, that all of you should
do meditation. But you cannot even do that, especially for women. All their attention is on
making food, children or here and there. Women should be the first to do meditation because
they are the Shaktis of the society. The greatest role of the woman is that she makes the society.
Your work is to make the society alright and make it grow and for that there should be
balance, understanding and wisdom, and with it there should be the humility and modesty of
a women. If a woman is not modest and humble then she is a man. If she becomes aggressive
and thinks that she must compete with man on every front then it is wrong. In this some thing
to compete for ? You are yourselves very powerful, why do you need to compete with anyone.
I am saying this again and again because in whichever countries women have not taken the
weight of the society's problems on their heads, those countries are now sinking and will
finish off. A woman should look after her children, it is a very big work. It is necessary for a
woman that she should enlighten her powers. The society today in this countries is alright
because of the women of this society. Not with forcing, but with love. Also a love without
expectations. In this country there have been such women like Panna who put her son to be
killed to save the crown prince. Queen Padmini committed Jouhar (Sati) along with three
thousand women to save their chastity, our society today is saved because of such women,
because the kind of darkness that has spread on this country it would have finished long ago.
It is their Punyas that has saved us. Their Punyas will take on a special form in this Sat Yuga.
The miracles of it will be seen. You saw how the young boys of Romania were singing. They
have never even read the notations of Indian music, they have had no formal training. The
artists were saying that even after doing tapasya for years together this condition of singing
doesn't come but how could they do this? It is a miracle.
In Your life also many miracies will come after coming to Sahaja Yoga. But even then you are
still lost on the train of your thoughts. When you drown in Sahaja, it is a great intoxication
when you are intoxicated then what else is there to say" Come into that intoxication. Then
it doesn't mean that you roam around like a mad person. In this intoxication you become
intently devoted to your duties and for that you have got the powers. If you want powers then
for that firstly you must get settled in Sahaja Yoga fully. Leave all other things of the world.
Now someone wants money, someone wants power, this or that. The one who says "I don't
need anything. All my desires are finished." Then Param Chaitanya thinks that I will fulfill
desires. Then his desire is your desire. Then it will take you to such things that you will
your
be surprised, that we never thought how it happened. All problems and worries of the world
will go away. Then
giver. What is there to ask for? Only those will ask who have some want. But those who have
drowned themselves in the ocean of satisfaction, what will they ask for? This does not mean
that you become ascetics and live in forests. Raja Janak was called Videhi. He was a king
you will not need to ask for anything. You become the giver. Just the
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 4
4.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Dance, Drama and Music used to be presented before him. There used to big processions for
him. But people called him Videhi. So Nachiketa asked his Guru that when Raja Janak comes
why do you stand up. The Guru said " He is a much higher person than me" How? The guru
We have left the world and taken sanyas but he without leaving the would is
sanyasi." The question of leaving something arises only when you have caught on to
a
said
something then you say I left this or that. But when you have caught nothing what will
you
leave? This catch within us, has come from thoughts. May.be because of conditionings or ego.
If it doesn't go then it means that you have not descended into Sahaja Yoga.
To be caught on anything is there only when we think that thing to be very important. There
is no catch of the Spirit. It is a giver. It is going to spread the light in all four directions. It gives
powers and such a power that people become powerful, mighty and great. You get total
oneness in it. So much love that all this aggression and wars finish off. One Muslim from
Algeria whose parents said we are going for Haj. The son told them to go to London. They
said, "Why London?" He said, "I came to Haj to London because there only I
parents camne to London and told me that their son said that the Haj has come to London. So
we came here. Now this understanding and wisdom came into that one boy and his
listened to him. I asked his parents, "Why did you listen to him?" They said,
intelligent boy. He has changed so much that we cannot believe how such a miracle happened
to him. So many people go for Haj and nothing happens to them. They are the same. They
drink, beat their wives and whatever they have been doing they continue to do that. But this
boy has changed completely. That is why we come to London."
it." The
got
parents
He is a very
The second power of Truth is that Truth is so powerful and enlightened and so full of love
that its effect come on many people. People can see it and say that how did this happen to this
man.
In Maharashtra one person who came to Sahaja Yoga went to the collector's office. He was
sitting peacefully. Everyone was in a hurry and he was in no hurry. In Maharashtra there is
a great importance of Guru. They asked him who was his Guru? He said I will not tell. When
he went home four people followed him. They asked himn who his Guru was. Then he said my
name. When I went there I was surprised to see so many people in Sahaja Yoga. All because
of the character of one man. It was due to his behaviour he was not good looking but the
radiant quality he had. So to say, " What can we do the country has gone to the dogs, has been
destroyed." Even if one good man can come forward, The World will bow, all that is needed
is a person to make it bow. If so many of you can become like that then what else is needed.
But first you must experience that you are sitting in the Sat Yuga, and the Shakti of Truth is
moving with you. One needs nothing else. Everything will happen by itself.
Now just to be amazed what else in left. The way things are happening you are seeing. You
must know that you have now come in Sat Yuga. This Shakti will enlighten in a thousand
ways. It can give you countless qualities within yourself. You need only one thing, which
Shirdi Sai Nath had said, " One needs patience" But this patience is not what comes with
thinking. This patience is a state in which everything happens. If you go into that state then
no one needs to speak or to tell anyone. It will happen that one cannot even think of it and
it will happen. Besides this there is one more thing, every important. That you have been born
Vol. VII Issue 4
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-6.txt 
 in India. It is a very great thing. It is due to many punyas of past lives that you have been born
in this land of Yoga. The Sat Yuga will first come from this country and the world will see
what is the Sat Yuga. The miracle of it will be seen. But you are the torches, you are the lights.
You have to give this light. It has to be experienced, should be understood and should make
it your own, because there is a very great responsibility on you. Here also Sahaja Yoga is
spreading very fast what is the reason that it is spreading so fast. The reason is that you have
been born in this land of Yoga. All around there is nothing but Chaitanya. Even from the earth
the maximum vibrations flow in this country. But ahead of this you have to see that you are
the vehicles of it. You can only carry this forward. But still I see that there is still something
lacking even now. Make it alright. Get after it and make it alright. Make it alright somehow
or the other. I have to make myself such that I have to completely purify my body, mind, ego
etc. Only then will this country rise. This country has tremendous future. Those who say that
this country has really gone bad, but I say that in the most difficult sea only that ship can said
which is strong. You have to become even stronger. One side you see there is terrible darkness
and the other side there should be a tremendous enlightened life that people see. To get this
greatness with devotion and love you have to meditate. Then in Bhakti you will see that these
people from where have they come? From heaven? This is your potential. You must
understand that within you is such a glorified life. Awaken that. Leave all this worldly things.
He has a car and I don't have one. What do want with all this? I know nothing about the
color, make or number of my car. I can't do anything. I am absolutely non engaged in work,
but still all the work is getting done.
you
If the understanding of this gets awakened in you then you can cleanse yourself within. You
can clear your Chakars. From this only the benevolence of the world, will happen. You are the
foundations of it.
Today you
on this path then how will the truth help you? If you are still wandering about in the lanes
and by lanes and getting stuck in the traffic then how will truth help you? You must take
decision that we will make the future of this country bright By your character and by the
power of Sahaja. If you can decide this much within yourself and leave all the wrong things.
The whole world is one. But because of the human mind different countries have come up. It
is the same with Religion, and every thing else with human mind, man has got separated into
separateness. Sahaja yoga is not only the togetherness and union but is the entirety.
stand on the path of Truth. See how many miracles are taking place. If you are not
The one who tries the Tattwa of everyone together, this shakti today is movable, and it is upto
you because it will appear from within you.
May God Bless You.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 4
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-7.txt 
 CHRISTMAS PUJA TALK
GANAPATIPULE 25-12-95
(SYNOPSIS)
Christ came on this earth and he was specially created to come down as a human being to
work out the salvation of the people. It is said that he came to India in Kashmir and he met
the king Shalivahan, who was a great devotee of the mother. He asked him, "What is your
name?" Christ said I come from a country where people believe in filth and I think this is my
own country. Shalivahana said that you are such a great person who has come on this earth
so you should go back to those countries to save them and to tell them about the pure
principle of life. In Sanskrit he called it as 'Nirmala Tattwa'. Christ went back and after three
and a half years only he was crucified. Those were special days. I call them the days of
"Tapasya'. Buddha and Mahavira were born at the same time and at the same level of the
Virata's forehead.
According to Vedas there are seven awarenesess. That is the subtle qualities we have within
ourselves. The first one was the Bhu, where Ganèsha was created, second is Bhoorva or
Antariksha means all that is created around. The third one is Svaha at Nabhi Chakra. Swaha
is the one where we consume everything. In modern times people go on consuming
everything, all kinds of books they will read. They will go to all kinds of things. If you tell
them why?, they will say, " what's is wrong? "
wrong?" Just consumption of everything goes on. Also there is another great thing within us
called as 'Svaha' where we sustain the Dharma within us. Those people who say that there
should be no blind faith. That is not blind but it's an inner urge. Why do we love our own
parents because of the Dharma within us. Why do we love our country because there is a
Dharma within us. Why does a wife love her husband and vice-versa because there is Dharma.
Once it is sustained within ourselves it becomes 'Svaha'. That's our capacity or quality, an
innate understanding. Some of them are even in the animals, like attachment to parents and
"Why do you dress up like this " "What's
masters.
Then comes the higher awareness where your Mana' (it is not mind) Mana means by which
we have emotions. They are talking now not only about IQ but EQ. That means a person who
has only intelligence is not alright, he must also have the balance of emotions. They are
realising that only through intelligence how people have created chaos, violence, all kinds of
destruction on this earth. Now they are talking about a higher capacity within us called as EQ.
ie. emotions. This emotional capacity comes to you as an inner urge, an inner capability, which
you cannot avoid. A person may be anything in life but if he has no love, if he has no
emotional feelings then he is not complete. These emotional feelings also could be very
limited. They could be that one gets attached to somebody. Also the IQ where we get attached
to some idea, like Hitler had some idea and he believed it was the truth and he had to do it.
When you get attached to one idea like that you can do things which are not at all helpful
nourishing, or supportive to reality. All these things like wars destruction, are coming now as
anti-feelings, where the 'Mana' has developed a domination of the intelligence where emotions
are dominated by intelligence and rationality.
Divine Cool Breeze
7.
Vol. VIII Issue 4
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-8.txt 
 There is an other awareness, capability urge innately built within us is the Jana' means the
people, the communication. You cannot live alone. You see a man who goes to jail is quite
happy, comfortable, he does not have to do anything, everything is done for him. He lives very
well, much better than he would do outside, but the only thing is that he cannot meet other
people, or communicate when his capacity of communication, which is within us, which is a
part and parcel of human existence is taken away, a person who is in jail feels absolutely
frustrated and unhappy. He doesn't mind doing all kinds of menial work as long as he is not
in jail and cutout of the communications with others. So this communication is also an inner
within us. In that also people sometimes go too far and neglect other Dharmas. They are
urge
more worried about communication than about other Dharmas which are within them. So
there is no balance in a person.
Then comes the sixth awareness which is very interesting One is that we take to conditionings.
Say if I am an Indian then I am very proud of it. I can never see anything or I see everything
wrong. It can be both ways. How you have been conditioned. This conditioning comes to us
through our sixth centre the Agnya.
Another thing that we develop when somebody tries to condition and control us. We try to
get out of it or sometimes we try to dominate. This dominating capacity is also within us
innately built. Both things are innately built within us that we go on getting ourselves
conditioned. For example I would say that in a very stupid silly manner we build up
conditioning. It is impossible to get out of it. It always comes out as self contempt that a person
has no value for understanding, For Example suppose you go to somebody's house. Then
will not eat in a utensil in which meat is cooked. Then you drink only well water so you send
your servant to get only well water. The servant must be absolutely drenched. Doesn't matter
if the servant dies of pneumonia. All such stupid conditionings, are not only in the east but
you find them in the west also. For example they have clubs where people wear particular
types of clothes. If they wear something else then everybody laughs at them, or how to use
a spoon and fork is very important. If somebody uses a fork and spoon in a wrong way, its
finished. He is nowhere, he is not sophisticated. The idea of sophistication comes through
conditioning of ages because may be they were primitive and had no clothes to wear. Might
be they were covering themselves with some leaves. Now they have jumped to the other side.
They are very particular about their dress, fork, and spoon they just can't bear something that
is different.
you
"I don't like" is a very common word. They came to India and said "we don't like" "What
don't you like?" "We don't like the way Indians dress up". Alright, dress up the way you
like and let Indians dress up the way they like why do you think that your dress in England
will suit here in India which is such a hot country. This conditioning goes on into such a deep
manner that nobody see stupidity behind it for example if the king has invited you, you must
wear a tail- coat. Its very experience to have a tail coat. One has to go to a particular shop
to hire it. Sometimes they are loose and sometimes they are tight. I have seen people coming
to the Queen's party and I could never recognize them because some of them looked like
Charlie Chaplin or Laurel and Hardy. They cannot walk straight because of the clothes which
are so tight. But you have to wear it. All these formal ideas come to us as a kind of part and
Divine Cool Breeze
8.
Vol. VII Issue 4
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-9.txt 
 parcel of you because you accept all these conditionings. The other side goes to abandoning
all this. We don't want all this. We are anti culture. I met a gentleman who was wearing a pant
with lots of holes in it. Imagine in the cold of London to wear a pant like that. Such stupid
people are not only uneducated but also very well educated, highly placed. They are so
conditioned, and this conditioning has caused so much damage to human being. For example
to accept Freud had become a complete religion. Freud became Christ at that level though he
was a Jew. He dominated the western culture so much, he would have been thrown in the sea
if he had come to India. They accepted this man so much that the culture of the west became
absolutely self destructive. No respect, no morality all value systems was shattered because
they accepted this kind of nonsense. Even today you are here. In that book such and such thing
is written in this book such and such thing is written, this is terrible conditioning. For example
it is written in the Bible that Jews crucified Christ. Just use your brains how can Jews crucifiy
Christ? They were in the multitude. In any country have you heard that anyone can be
crucified with the general opinion of the people. The Roman government did that. But to put
the blame on the Jews was done by a very cunning man called Mr. Paul. People accepted that
to hate the Jews. All such conditioning also have reactions these conditionings then build
and once they build up their reactions also build up you have a country full of all kinds of
chaos, fear, violence and destruction.
up
The conditioning is more also with the idea of possessions. This is my land. This positions is
mine etc. Like this it goes up to a point where people who believe in the formless God also
fight over land. Why should they. They believe in the formless God so why should they fight
for the land, but they will go on fighting for the land, this fighting for the land can go
extent of cruelty. Conditionings of every kind, are blinding your eye. For example they believe
in Koran. Simple thing is that Koran was never written by Mohammed Sahib, he never knew
how to read and write. For forty years it was not there. There was a fellow who killed Hazarat
and his sons. Then he killed the third and fourth Calipah, just to become the Calipah himself.
And the liver of the fourth Calipah was eaten by the mother of this horrible fellow who hated
women. He put down in the Koran all the things against women, and people accepted because
it is in the Koran.
to
any
Mohammed Sahib is the one who is the incarnation of Dattatreya. It should be told that he
never wrote the Koran but people after him wrote it. This conditioning can be removed if
know what sort of life Christ led.
you
First of all he was born in a To be born in a Manger means to be born in poor
circumstances. That means he showed that there is no need to have money or to have big
properties or anything to be impressive. Those were the days where the people accepted the
"Tapasvis'. That was the time to do tapasya. So he came on this earth and lived like a Tapasvi.
On the contrary the Christians are the most self-indulgent people you can think of. You go to
any Christion nation and you will be amazed how they are just slaves of money and watches.
How they are living in very shocking way. If you see the Catholic and protestant Church you
will be shocked as to how they are following Christ. Catholic is nothing but money-oriented.
The only thing they picked up from Christ is when he went to a wedding and created wine
out of water. This wine is just juice of grapes. It is also called wine in the Hebrew language.
manger.
Vol. VIII Issue 4
Divine Cool Breeze
9.
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Because you cannot create alcohol instantly. It has to rot and rot now if somebody dies they
take champagne to celebrate what? The good riddance of bad rubbish? On Christmas day after
coming from church don't go to any Christian's house. Even the Indian Christians have started
following the western people, because Indian people believe that Christ was born in England.
All such ideas have come from the English, French and Portuguese who brought Christianity
to India. This drinking has come also from the Muslim. They don't openly drink. Imagine in
the church when they give you communion they give you some sort of dirty smelling wine.
Today we are talking about Christ. He is sitting in a position of Agnya Chakra controlling
pineal and pituitary glands. By that he controls our conditioning. If we follow him then we
cannot be conditioned by anyone because he talked of Spirit only. Spirit cannot be conditioned
by anything. Whatever you that will be accepted which is good and congenial to the Spirit. It's
a different attitude of a person who is spiritual. Like we had people here and know that they
were not very comfortable. Some of them were put into the tents. But they were enjoying
because they are enjoying the spiritual atmosphere. They don't care where they sleep
they live. This is all because you have entered into the kingdom of God. But there are others
who are so much worried. This is not good. I want this
they seek, trouble everybody, criticize, get angry, but actually they haven't got spiritual joy,
and they can never really enjoy unless and until they become fully spiritual.
where
way that way. All material happiness
Christ has openly said that you have to know yourself. Same in Koran, Mohammed Sahib has
said that unless and until you know yourself you will not know God. Actually we have to
understand that Christ never started any exclusive religion. Specially Mohammed Sahib has
talked about Ibrahim, Moses, and Christ and his mother, much more than in the Bible. He
respected her. He said there have been more than one lakh Valies - realised souls before but
still the Muslims are some sort of unique people because they call themselves Muslims.
Whether they drink or womanise, doesn't matter. They kill people, they run things which are
forbidden to them but still they are Muslims. Same with the Christians. If you can find a man
who is a real Christian who follows Christ before realisation. After realisation ofcourse
different. But for that you have to cross the Agnya. Agnya is there which has to control
ego. Christ in his lifetime showed how ego worked. His own crucification itself, showed what
people are like, what they did to him. How he was troubled by these stupid people.
you are
your
Christ has said 'Know thyself' he said "knock at the door". To knock at the door you must
have Shudhha Ichha. Otherwise it won't work out, nobody can force you. He controls the ego
He is the one who gives you the balance. Christ has said in his last prayer " Forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive them who trespass against us." What a big thing to say. But in west
people don't know how to forgive. They are full of hatred. They cannot ask for forgiveness
because they are full of ego. Though they will feel guilty they will never ask for forgiveness.
They will never say that 'O God forgive me for what I have done. For example the Nazis killed
so many people and still these neo-Nazis are coming up even in Italy. They are not ashamed
as to what they have done. This happens because there is no real connection with Christ.
Firstly if you have connection with Christ your ego has to be finished. This ego which comes
to you from various sources is a myth with this ego people try to befool us and show off. For.
example a man came to the king and started boasting that he is a great architect, and I will
Vol. VIII Issue 4
Divine Cool Breeze
10
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-11.txt 
 build a big palace for you. The way he posed the king believed him and said "alright, go
ahead, I will send you so much money". Now with this whole attitude and the way he was
describing himself with all his gestures full of such ego that this king also got completely lost.
He gave him lots of money, and in six months time he came back and said "I have built your
palace" It was just the same land and there was no palace. Immediately the King realised that
his ego
has befooled him. He made the architect enter his 'palace' and sit in the throne which
never existed. He made him sit in a sitting position on the throne for three hours. Ultimately
the architect fell at the king's feet and said there is no palace, no throne. But the king had lost
all his money. This ego can take you to such heights of stupidity. The culture where it is
pampered is the worst culture. I have seen advertisements where they say that you must
smoke this particular cigarette because it expresses your ego. But according to Indian culture
to express yoür ego is something very stupid. People laugh at such people. If they develop
then they are corrected. Specially in Maharashtra, it's very difficult to develop any ego.
ego,
As soon as you start talking big about yourself immediately you are punctured. But in the
north it was a little bit allowed. People talk big there. We are great politicians. I am going to
do this or that. I am going to have this project or that project.
If you read Christ's sermons they are so deep and so enlightened. He gave them different ways
of explaining what happens after realisation, how a seed is sprouted and how it can get spoilt.
He explained to people very beautifully.
His life was so charming and so beautiful, like a shooting star he came on this earth. He left
such a remarkable impression on people. His crucification was part of the game because he
had to make the way in the Agnya Chakra. To cross the agnya chakra he was crucified, but
his message is not crucification. People wear the cross and I feel very very hurt about it. He
crucified himself. That's not what you should celebrate. You have to celebrate his resurrection.
Resurrection because human beings are to be resurrected. In Sahaja Yoga nobody is crucified
but is resurrected because of one crucification of Christ. That was enough. You can't carry the
cross on your shoulder. He carried it for you. He has done everything for you. He said also
he died for all the sinners and it is a fact. If he had not done that it would have been more
difficult to open your agya because of two problems this conditioning and
crucification has helped the loosening of these two horrible capacities of human beings. His
life is to be understood in a very very deep sense but if you are like a journalist and say why
did he crucify himself? How to tell the journalists who don't know anything about Chakras.
Because it was the era or time of tapasya, sacrifice and so all these people Buddha, Mahavira
and Christ went into complete renunciation. They led a life of a great tapasvi. They did it for
us not for themselves. They didn't want but they had to do it to cleanse us and give us a
proper 'medha', Ekadasa Rudra had to be cleared out
His
ego.
Why they sacrificed their lives and all the pleasures of life? For them it was not a sacrifice. It
was a kind of a life they wanted to have. For such people there is no question of sacrifice but
is a question of doing something that will help to open the chakras of the people in the future.
Without that we could not have worked it out. That's why today Sahaja Yoga is so beautifully
spread and is working out. We have to thank them very much. Ofcourse all other incarnations
have helped and are responsible in our evolutionary process to create these ladders for us.
Vol. VIII Issue 4
Divine Cool Breeze
11
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Ultimately you reach the state of Tapa on the sixth centre and then in the state of Truth. Then
the Truth comes to you through Sahaja Yoga in the brain, in the Limbic area the Kundalini
enters. She puts light there and creates enlightened personalities. Then she joins this all
pervading power of Divine Love and with this Divine Love you are completely changed and
transformed. Their contribution to the ascent of human beings has been great and that of
Christ has been the greatest, when we say we have to follow Christ we should try to see how
much detachment we have.
When his Brothers and sister came to see him. He said, "who are my brothers?" These are my
brothers, these are my relations, "Gyaneshwara has said the same thing that they will become
your relations. They will be your brothers and sisters and not those who are not enlightened.
They are not enlightened because they don't understand you. They don't have entry into the
kingdom of God. In this lifetime he led a life of a person who is very simple. He didn't bother
about clothes or anything. All the conditionings of the worldly things were not.
Even about Mahavira there is a big misconception. He was once praying in a garden where
there were lots of bushes and he had only one cloth on himself. This cloth got caught up so
he cut half of it covering himself. Shri Krishna went to test him. He said I am just nude, why
don't you give me your cloth because after all you are a king. So he took out his cloth and
it to Shri Krishna and got some leaves to cover himself in his garden and in his own palace.
Now if you see the Jains they make everything so horrible and insult him all the time: Most
of the people who follow all these great incarnations are really all the time insulting them. By
their behavior we form such a bad opinion of them.
gave
Imet one gentleman in Chicago and it was very cold. He was the head of the Hare Rama Hare
Krishna. He was wearing a Dhoti which was so thin he was shaking before me. He said, "I
am feeling very cold" I asked him, "why are you wearing this dhoti?" He said "My Guru has
told me of you wear a dhoti you will go to heaven." I said "In India eighty percent people
wear Dhotis are they all going to go to heaven?" I said, "Why have you shaved your hair and
put this 'bodi" He said, "My Guru told me that I must shave my head and have this bodi".
Maybe he will be tied to some rope and pulled into heaven. Kabir was one of them who tried
to slash out all your conditioning. He said, "By shaving your head if you are going to go to
heaven then what about the lamb which is shaved twice a year." He will be there earlier than
you.
All your limitations are because of thinking. By thinking what do we do? We move in a linear
way and there is no truth in it so the whole thing comes back like a boomerang. We have to
go beyond this mind. Christ has done this so that we can go beyond. If you don't know how
to go beyond the mind then better sit down and meditate are work it out. With this mind all
kinds of things will come. Temper, intrigue, jealousies. All the six enemies will come to us
through this mind. Everything can be rationalized. Why did you murder your wife? Because
I hated her. She was this, she was that. But cannot murder. Why did you murder
your
you
husband. Because of this because of that. Because of this mind you start doing things that are
absolutely wrong. Then you try to rationalize it, you go against Agnya you go against reality
and then use your conditionings use your ego to explain why you did it. All the time when
we are doing like that we don't go beyond mind. We are so self satisfied about it. We think
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. VIII Issue 4
12
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-13.txt 
 no end of ourselves.
Now how are we to get out of it. Introspection. But it's very difficult because people are afraid
of themselves. They don't want to introspect, because once they start infrospecting they will
know how sinful they have been, what wrong things they have been doing, and then they will
hate themselves. They don't want to introspect, But its very important that we should
introspect. That introspection is very helpful for you to overcome these two hurdles of your
agnya Chakra. I have told you many times don't argue with anything because the other
is asking for argument, when one has lots of ego that ego starts acting on you. So action
reaction starts, and you develop the habit of reacting to everything. Specially in the west they
react to everything. For example this cloth is spread out here. They will say why could it not
be better. Why is it so thin. They are walking across they will say, "see this man, what sort
of person he is." There is a beggar then they will start criticizing They will criticize the
government, and everyone, but what about yourself? Instead of that why don't you start doing
something about it. You can't help it. If you are not going to do anything about it why react?
This is the worst habit we have developed that is to react, and we think we have every right
to react. You have. But this right is self destructive. To react on everything is not proper. You
have no authority to react. It is to that extent. You have to just witness the whole thing. Once
you start witnessing you will be amazed that you will start seeing the play of the maya and
you will see where you stand in it. Witnessing should be developed all the time. Am I
witnessing
witnessing. Everything is recorded within me like a picture and then when I have to say
something or correct something all that I have witnessed comes to help.
person
Many people say that I have very good memory because I am all the time
Some people are attached to money they react. They will not give any money. They will keep
all the money with themselves. In Sahaja Yoga also it happens. Other ones are who try to
please others. Then they will waste their money on lavish things for nothing at all. Reaction
can come through anything. Seeing something you can react and you become so engrossed
with it that you don't realize that you are wasting all your brain on nonsersical things. This
reaction comes when you have lost all complete sense of judgement. You don't know what
you are losing or gaining by this kind of reaction. This reaction is going to destroy your inner
being completely. All the time you are there and there, but you are nowhere here. If you are
a very criticizing type of a person try to stop it completely. Direct that energy towards your
self. Who am I to criticize others. Who am I to react to others. Put a challenge to yourself and
you will see that your ego will subside.
One day someone came and told me, "Mother, I feel so angry, I feel like beating everyone"
I said, "Do one thing take a slipper and hit on your head" that's the only way you can get rid
of this habit if you want to beat others.
Now conditioning also should be seen. Am La conditioned person? If my conditioning is there
is it a good conditioning or a bad conditioning. But even that if you go to extremes can create
a problem for yourself. Most of these rituals etc. started as a good conditioning. Then it
became like a trap. Then what should we do, we should not react Just see the drama and
you
will be surprised that without paying anything or going to any theatre, every moment you can
see the drama going on, which is so enjoyable, whether it is ridiculous or alright, you just see
Vol. VIII Issue 4
13
Divine Cool Breeze
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-14.txt 
 it and you do not react. Anything that you think is very perverse, ugly, immoral, don't see it.
It is finished, gone so don't tax your mind with it because in the so called mind in actually the
Agnya chakra in the centre of your optic Chiasma. Just imagine what a central place it has and
any disturbance to your agnya, what it can do to your brain which is nothing but a lump of
fat. So how this agya can affect you, and how it works and gets perverted images that is to
be really seen.
nature of Christ is innocence. He is Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is an eternal child.
The
pure
Christ is also complete innocence because he doesn't react, because he is not conditioned.
Children are not conditioned so much as we are. If you speak with children you will be
amazed how innocent they are and how innocently they talk. Once my grand daughter asked,
"What do you think of the poor children of the tiger? You know their father tells them that
you eat human beings, and what can they do, they have to eat human beings." I told her that
they are under the complete control of God and whatever they are doing they are not going
to be held responsible. Its only for human beings that God has given their freedom. Its only
human beings who can react in this manner. The animals are completely under the control of
the God Almighty. This is their nature. A serpent will be a serpent a tiger will be tiger, lion
will be lion. But human being can be serpent at the same time could be a scorpion, could be
a lion, could be anything. Suddenly you find a small little bug like man coming up like a lion
roaring at you. You don't know which way they will come and which way the camel will sit.
When man is in connection with the Divine he sees the drama and he leaves everything to the
Divine He can solve all the problems by just one bandhan. But he should be in full connection
with the Divine. It works. This is the timne where this Param Chaitanya has gone into action.
It is activated. Its working out everything. Now they asked me about this Shri Ganesha,
whether he drank milk or not. I said anything is possible. These days this Param Chaitanya
is doing such unbelievable things which we cannot understand. Everything is a miracle.
When everything is done by this Param Chaitanya I never asked them to do anything. For
example in Brisbane when I was there, I was sleeping in the Ashram and a rainbow appeared.
Imagine that picture of Mother and Child appears in the sky. I didn't tell them to show that
profile. I was sleeping. But at this time the halo that was around the head of Mary comes up
on Her head. It does all this just to convince you about Sahaja Yoga. Because even now there
are many who are supposed to be very rational, intelligent, educated who don't want to
accept. After all if there is a Divine Power, there is something like that and is active. How can
you challenge it? How can you say no to it? Because the powers are unlimited, that have gone
into every atom and every molecule. It doesn't do tricks like moving this from there to there.
But what it does is to do something which is absolutely impossible. So for us to believe in this
activated Param Chaitanya is the only solution so you have it in the ocean of bliss and let this
great power handle all the situation. Don't react yourself. It is so efficient, so quick, so fast.
It moves all over and understands everything. It loves you and respects you because you are
Sahaja Yogis.
This is what it is today we should know at the time we are celebrating Christmas that what
we are celebrating is really our own ascent. Our own achievements. Our own lofty heights.
which we have achieved and which we have to achieve. We should have only aspirations as
Vol. VIII Issue 4
Divine Cool Breeze
14
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-15.txt 
 far as our spiritual side is concerned. All aspirations should be left to this Param Chaitanya.
The more you become the more you develop this non reacting attitude through your proper
agnya. Not anger, not violence but a very pleasant temperament. That means people think I
have told you not to speak. You must speak, talk to people, laugh, enjoy. But all this should
be full of joyous feelings. That's what they say Christmas is for a very joyous atmosphere.
They can't do that way, so they drink. They think by drinking they will become joyous.
Now our understanding about ourselves has to be very clear. Specially people who don't
meditate. They don't want to grow. They are Sahaja Yogis but they don't meditate. It's very
surprising. I can make out who meditates and who does not. Because they have no depth.
They want to have this and that. What about meditation. If you don't meditate your agya will
be completely covered with thoughts and you will be lost. So you have to meditate. If you
don't meditate I also suffer. If you have no aspirations in Sahaja Yoga it is better to leave,
because you are like seeds which are sprouted but which will be wasted. Some people are here
because they want some sort of a platform, some publicity. Some are here who want to make
money out of Sahaja Yoga. There are some who want to have a kind of a communication to
go around the whole world without paying a single pie. All such people are of no use to
themselves. Now here you have the complete wealth. All that celestial wealth is before
and you are not going to accept it. You don't have to crucify yourself. You don't have to give
up anything. You don't have to live like 'Christ who had to live, or be born in a manger. Alli
that's done for you. But if you are coming in the darbar of the Divine then be worthy of it.
You will be surprised that all your problems will be solved. Your self respect will be
maintained. So many things have happened like that. But if you have no self-respect and you
don't respect your realisation, you are not deeply involved as to your own ascent and the help
to others it will not work out.
you
am here to tell you all these things which Christ could not tell, and to fulfill what he wanted
to say. All those things I am saying to you. It has already worked. You have all got realisation.
But then have respect for others as Sahaja Yogis. Don't have funny ideas about yourself. Just
know that you are a Sahaja Yogi. That's what is needed for a person if he is today celebrating
the birth of Christ. He came on this earth who was actually Christ. Full of innocence who was
the one who came as the embodiment of Shri Ganesha. I have given the proof of it to you.
Be innocent and God looks after all the innocent people. You don't have to worry. I have seen
children falling from seven stories. Nothing happens to them. They are perfectly alright.
How? Who looks after them? The angels. You have seen photographs of angels around you.
So try to be simple, innocent, not reacting and keep quiet and peaceful because here we are
talking about the global transformation where people will find their peace in their heart and
will establish new world of peace, joy, and spirituality.
May God Bless You.
Vol. VIII Issue 4
Divine Cool Breeze
15
 1996_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Edited by
: Yogi Mahajan
Published by: Divine Cool Breeze, 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc., Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029
Printed by : Golden Arts, B - 2/11 Bandal Complex, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411 029.
Vol. VIII Issue 4
Divine Cool Breeze
16
