Diwali Puja Date 2nd November 1997 : Place Lisbon : Type Puja Speech Language English CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 08 English Hindi Marathi || Translation English Hindi 09 - 12 Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK Today we have gathered here to worship Shri Lakshmi. In Diwali, in India, they worship Lakshmi because a great rakshasa called Narakasura was killed. Also that Lakshmi came out of the sea, at the same time - long time back. I mean, I should say, this is like Her different appearances on the same [SOUNDS LIKE jeokijen ?]. Lakshmi is the Goddess which gives us wealth, gives us prosperity. She is very blissful - no doubt. She gives you protection and also She's very humble, because She stands on the Lotus. She's very light, means does not put her pressure on anyone. These are symbols of Shri Lakshmi. But also She is a part of Mahamaya in the modern times. When people get Lakshmi - the money - they don't understand that She is their Mother also and She is to be respected. When this kind of a perverse idea of Shri Lakshmi comes in, such countries, such people meet their last end and destruction of the worst type comes in. So this Lakshmi has to be used with a big balance, like standing on a Lotus and not get into the pond, where there are all kind ofcreatures to eat you all. You have to stand on the Lotus - that means, that you are above all the lures of this Maya. Also in Sanskrit and in our languages, we call Lakshmi as the Maya. If somebody gets lot of money they would say - "He got lot of maya." Now this maya plays the tricks. If money, prosperity, was the salvation, then there would have been no problems in this world because those people who have money always get ruined. If they're not ruined, their children, their grandchildren get ruined. This principle of Lakshmi within us is very dubious and the allurement is so much that people see somebody having a good car these days, they think - "Ah, what a man he is!" - in any case he's not going to give you the car. If somebody is having lots of, what you can call, palaces or buildings, people start admiring. This is Kali Yuga. They start admiring, "See - this man is so rich." Even clothes, people see you wearing clothes which are very good tailored, might be from some designers, say - they think no end of that man. For example in England, there is another befooling place called Saville Row. So if you want to buy one suit you have to pay sometimes three thousand pounds. Now people are so stupid, that now if they wear a suit from Saville Row, they put the brand outside -"Saville Row". All such tomfoolery is going on all over the world. The clothes have no meaning, their lifestyle has no meaning, ultimately they end up in Swiss Bank. The Lakshmi tattwa of Swiss Bank is also now showing its teeth, and (Shri Mataji laughing) if you read what's happening to them, I mean, they are shaking, they don't know. They went to this limit that they took the teeth, golden teeth of the Jews. I mean, it's going too far, all this tomfoolery has been going on. Their military services - why, who's going to conquer that country? Even Napolean didn't do that. And they have made big caves to keep their weapons there, who's going to attack them, stupid people - suffering from ego. But the attack has come and this attack is so serious that they might be completely shattered and destroyed. 99 Now who falls for this kind of thing, you should see, are the people who are crooks, who are dishonest, who are absolutely Adharmis. They can be Mafia-dons, or they can be some thugs, some black marketeers, some smugglers. So going against the Lakshmi principle are so many done these days. One fellow who was thrown out of Sahaja Yoga, because he was trying to be very dominating and all that. He said, "That's better." I said "Why?" He's doing now smuggling, making money out of smuggling and he's become very rich - according to him. But it comes to an end and a very tragic, bad end. Money is such a lure for human beings that it kills all sense of decency, of higher values, everything. A brother say, who is very nice and good fellow, if he gets money out of proportion by all doing the hanky panky, he neglects his mother, father, brother, sisters, everyone. So I would say then it

 Original Transcript : English comes to that point, that Lakshmiji becomes a bhoot then. And She - all Her blessings become sort of a challenge to your dignity. Now certain countries, like America - which is the area for Shri Krishna, because He's Kubera - they have no money as such, I've seen, they are all poor, they are all indebted. So many Indians went to America and they can't come to India now - "Why?" "We're indebted." "Why are you indebted?" - "Oh we get everything free now, see the bank gives us loan, we can have the best lifestyle." So they will have 3 Mercedes - is nothing, 3 Mercedes is nothing, we should have Rolls Royces, we should have this. For what? What do you get out of it? Now of course - little bit they are shaken up, with the stock exchange and all that nonsense they had started. All this joke and all these very big, I should say, camouflages - all now are coming out. So this is no Lakshmi, because Lakshmi must give you dignity, prosperity and respect. I think Americans understood about it so they became philanthropists, means they are giving money to people. Whom did they give money? All the names these people took from South Africa - were all given money by the philanthropists of America. What has happened to their wisdom? That 16 year old boy, he went there, and then all ages went there and made a very big money. All this money-making proposition. Aside : Can you give some seat to those musicians? [Hindi...] 99 So what is the matter? If there's a blessing of Lakshmi, why a man who gets the blessing of Lakshmi becomes so funny, so stupid, and ultimately ends up his life that people are not there even to pick up his dead body. [Hindi aside...] What is the difference between money and Lakshmi? She gives you money all right, agreed, but when She's giving the money what happens to that money which comes to you - is a very subtle thing one should understand. In India if you give, say hundred rupees to a servant, immediately he'll go to drink somewhere. First idea will come, what he should do, he'll go for a drink, of the hard ones, I mean, your Vodka is nowhere near that - such hard ones they make in India you know, it is called as Hatbati - means made with hands. So in hundred rupees they are willing to go. I mean, that means any money you give to them, it spoils their life completely. Lakshmi has been given, all right, so what happens to this Lakshmi? She changes Her form and Her form is so bad that you are completely ruined with that. So now, we have to understand what is the way we can use the Lakshmi. Supposing I get money, supposing, then I will go to the market say, and I'll see something nice - “Ah, this is very good for this Sahaja Yogi." Or I will say, "This will be very handy for our Ashram". Immediately the mind starts working in a very socialistic way I should say, not individualistic. 99 For example, I went to Rajasthan and I saw such a lot of sand, just like a big desert, big dunes, everything - and people starving. So I said, "How to get money to these people?" So I said, "Let Me start a factory." A factory with the unbreakable glass which they make only in France. They make it very cheap and regard it as very cheap thing - not in India. In India if you go to some elite's house they'll offer you tea, in (Shri Mataji laughing) these unbreakable things. (Shri Mataji laughing) They think it's very elite, you know, it depends on what you think about what. They're proud of it. So I said if we make these things in India, these poor people, you know, because there is so much sand, and the sand is needed by trucks, so I will utilise this to make this beautiful factory here. And then give them some support to live well. Now, when I went to one place called Warna - you all had come also once - there's a gentleman who was a disciple of Gandhiji and he's organised this Warna company for distributing milk. It became so very rich, so very rich, it's a co-operative - so he started giving money to all the co- operative people, those who had laboured there. Now this labour had never seen that money. So he came to Me, touched My feet and he said "Mother, You tell me now, what should I do? I'm so unhappy with the development of this Warna because there are prostitutes who have arrived from Bombay. There are all kinds of hard drinks which have come from Bombay, and these people are smoking like 3

 Original Transcript : English hell, they are taking drugs." "Why?" “Yes, wherever there is money the drug goes there. And the children are becoming absolutely useless, they don't want to study, they will slap their parents." So he said, "This was not Gandhiji's idea, now what has happened?" He said, "This is a curse of money" and he was crying. Now how can Lakshmi become a curse? It does, it is in the Nabhi, what a central position it has. And when this Nabhi starts working it is a very remarkable thing, that you feel gobbling the food all the time, with this Nabhi. You go on eating, go on eating like mad, and then some bhoot comes in to eat also with you, inside the Nabhi. Then you can eat so much that no human beings can eat like that except for the people who are rich. Then you start a big science, or what you can call etiquettes. I don't want to hurt anybody, I mean if you are eating well I don't mind - eat well. But the first part is, because today is Diwali I'm trying to tell you all these interesting stories. I went many a times for dinner with French Diplomats - My goodness. Now Me and My husband don't drink. So 45 minutes they were only discussing what they will have today. Then they remembered yesterday they had that, the day before they had that, so there should be variety. So then they came down to something, not all of them drinking the same, different, different. So they came (Shri Mataji laughing) to some point – all right we'll have this, but some people asked for something which was not available, so they said, "You have to have it" and they shouted at them. My goodness, they took 45 minutes to decide what they are going to drink. It's regarded as French etiquettes, I think, and we two chief guests, Myself and My husband, looking at this man and looking at that woman didn't know what to do with these etiquettes, so we were thinking, "Now better go. Then it came to food, they are so particular: “I like this, and I like that", they are worse than Indians, I tell you. And they took at least, 80 minutes to decide what they will eat. Ultimately they found something nice, each different and the restaurant people were trying to pamper their ego, “oh what a thing you have chosen - this is the best .wow wow...." So they started serving. The cheese was smelling so awful, I tell you, (Laughter) we couldn't bear it, you know, both of us. So My husband told them, "Today is Our fasting day, for both of Us." He said, "Why is it a fasting day?" "In India we have, you know, fasting like this, sometimes we have to fast, today is ours." (Laughter) But I told him, "Here one day you are saying 'today is our fasting', but We have to go to so many dinners, what will you do?" He said, "Everywhere better to say that We are fasting." (Laughter) Such a horrible cheese they brought, and they started boasting that they have 200 types of cheese – wow, wow! I said, "200 types - of the smelly ones? From where did you get?" (Laughter) They said, "This is French perfection! heese." I said, "What is this French perfection?" But then you know, tears came into My eyes, C.P. said, "Why are you crying?" - “Not crying, but I think, what will happen to these people with their cheese, where will they go? - Even if they go to hell people will throw them away with the smell of the cheese!!" (Laughter and applause) 99 66 99 99 99 Then I read how this cheese came in, so they said - there was a big snowfall, and they had put some big, big containers in a cave, of milk. And people forgot about it - snowfall was there for 20 days, whatever it was, and they just forgot about it. So after one year they got the smell, you see, coming out of it. So they went and saw the cheese being formed – can you imagine? This is the beginning of the end. (Laughter) Actually one should never eat anything that is kept overnight, normally, but now they have got fridges so you can keep it for 2 days, 3 days at the most. Like on the ship they keep it. But this I couldn't understand that this cheese, which is, they told Me, is very old, I said, "Really"? And they sell it by that, what old it is. And their wines, if they are say 200 years old, it is 200 times more expensive. So it's such a bhootish thing to eat all that. So when the Lakshmi goes into the hands of bhoots on a very less level, I should say, is this, then it goes into the heads of people who want to exploit money, exploit poor people, exploit countries which are down-trodden - go on like this collecting money you know, looting, looting, looting. When English came to India, we didn't know they used to take bribes. On Diwali day if you went there 4

 Original Transcript : English without any present they say "baksheesh". You must give some present, and what they liked was our country liquor. I never knew this, but later on I came to know because My husband became a collector of merit - and there were bottles of country liquors kept in that house and that house was itself more than a hundred years old. A long time back it was kept there still, some of them you see, and we could have sent them to England to sell - would have been a good idea. So the older it is, it's better. This Lakshmi I think becomes old and dies and there is A-Lakshmi. A-Lakshmi means when you have money and you don't have the qualities of a person who should have money. In that quality ofA-Lakshmi you become very miserly, you don't even want to help your brothers and sisters, you don't want to give any money to anyone. And even if you give it, you give it to false gurus and wrong things. This is up to, we can say, is A-Lakshmi, the behaviour becomes very arrogant. So arrogant that you behave like horses, you know. People look like horses, they walk like horses - but I don't know if the horses have ego. If you see these people you just don't understand what's gone wrong with them, you see. There was one gentleman who started an aeroplane business, aeroplane business in India. I won't take his name, but say some "Majidhia" or someone. And My granddaughter met him with My grandson-in-law, and they were walking like this, talking like this, you see, they can't understand these two persons. So they came and talked to them, who you are and all. And then they said, "We are this Majidhia." So My granddaughter said, "Who is Majidhia?" My goodness, they fell from heavens, "You don't know who are Majidhias! Do you read newspapers or not?" Then her husband came in. He said, "I do. Now what do you want to say?""We are Majidhias!" He said, "Who are Majidhias?" “You don't know? What sort of business you do, what is this?" Such stupid things they did that these children felt that there's no use having any business, if business means this kind of behaviour, very indecent, very arrogant, they don't know how to relate to people, they don't know. And after some time I heard that their business was completely finished - it was a flop they call it, flop. So now, we have to realise that this Lakshmi, how it takes us to wrong things. Firstly, She makes you very egoistical, somehow. When a man who has money starts behaving like that - one cannot understand how a person who was normal, suddenly becomes like this, starts talking like this. He might earn money even in the horse races. Around the Lakshmi is the valency of Dharma. There is - around the Lakshmi - is the Dharma. And this Dharma if you cross that's the best place where they can cross, the Dharma. Then you can do whatever you like which is Adharmic, which is irreligious, which is hideous. You have to just cross that limit of Dharma, you have to just deviate from Dharma. Now as I have said on many a times that there are ten valencies human beings have got. But apart from that, there are many Dharmas which are surrounding us - like angels. Like first Dharma is your Love for humanity, is the first Dharma. But if you say from that end when you start, it starts with Sree Dharma, is the Dharma of the woman - how she should live, how she should get married, how she should look after her children, what should be her behaviour, all is Sree Dharma. And then is Patni Dharma, is the wife, wife's Dharma, what should be her Dharma? In her Dharma she looks nice, if she gives up her Dharma then she is a prostitute. So then is Pathi Dharma, how should be a husband? How should he behave towards his family, how should he pay attention towards his wife, about the whole, entire family, the whole, you can say, Parivara they call it the whole, all the relations and everything. That is his Dharma. But beyond that is the Dharma of Satya Dharma, how much he sticks to truth. Then the Dharma for Creativity. In creativity as you know very well these days, with money people are standing on their heads or I don't know how, what they are doing, because the amount of nonsense they are producing all over the world in the name of modernism, is no way is Khala Dharma, no way. Then we have also what you call politics, Rajkaran Dharma. This also Dharma is there. Now 5

 Original Transcript : English taking bribes, I mean, the kind of things that are going on, corruption, all kinds of things that are going on, competition and fighting and all that. They are falling from their Dharma of Rajkaran. 6. Education same thing, we call it as Shikhshada - Shikhshada. All such things are dharmas, there's a kind of a principle which we have to keep, otherwise you can topple down from the Lotus and that's what happens. Now we have also Rashtra Dharma. The Rashtra Dharma is that your country, you must, their's a Dharma of your Rashtra. When you have to fight for your country you should, but you should not be aggressive on other countries, not try to dominate other countries, nor you should bring bad name to your country. It's very important. Sahaja Yogis have all these intact, absolutely, because you are standing on the lotuses already. You don't have this problem, normally not. Once in a while there are people who behave like that, but mostly Sahaja Yogis don't fall into these traps. That's why their Lakshmi tattwa will definitely improve. They'll have little problems here and there, but without problems if you get Lakshmi you'll not have value for Her. So with little problems you get the Lakshmi. But Lakshmi it doesn't give you all this imbalance. Such a man has to be extremely balanced because beyond that is the step of Mahalakshmi, where your seeking starts, where you become a seeker. You go beyond Lakshmi principle and this Mahalakshmi principle starts coming into you. I would say in the western countries this consumerism has started and it's such a funny one. In America one lady was married to an Indian and he used to tell Me how this consumerism works. I said, "How?" He said, "I gave my wife money to buy two shirts for me because I had no shirts. So she went and bought five skirts. So I said, “You have so many skirts, why did you buy the skirts?" "Because with this money I could buy five skirts instead of two shirts, so I bought five skirts". So he said “I can't wear skirts. (Laughter) So how should I correct her?", he said. I said, “You do one thing: tell her I want to buy some skirts for her, and go and buy five shirts". Then she will realise that if the money was given to her for one purpose, it should be used for that. 99 This is a very subtle principle which I follow because I don't understand money. So what I do - whatever money I get I put packets. This is for this, this is for this, this is for this - into packets. But I don't understand you know and I don't write accounts, you know. I'm very bad at all that, somebody else does that. Now, if I spend some money from one pocket for some emergency, then I again fill it back, it's written there, so much is there, so much is there. So the money is available at the right time for whatever I want to do, and the money is in the packet. It is, not in the, sort of a open thing, that I can just want to buy a Mercedes, I want to buy a Rolls Royce, no, nothing doing, it is for something, some purpose, and there is no need. So when you go to the shop and you see something you won't buy it because that money is not kept for that particular thing. For Sahaja Yogis it's very easy to handle their money with respect. So you go to any shop, you won't buy anything, but My nature also is spontaneous. So I went to Frankfurt changing, they said, "Mother, there's a very nice watch shop". I just thoughtI'm going to get three son- in-laws, and what will I give them. So I went to that shop and I found such beautiful, beautiful things, but I had not kept any money for the watch. But I said, "I must buy." One of the watches turned out to be a very unique one, I must tell you, which is no more available. Because of My eyes, I saw this something unique and My son-in-law is so, I mean, overwhelmed, so overwhelmed, he's quite rich, he has no problems, but he said, “This watch you cannot get." Then an article came about that particular watch, so he's kept it with him. You see, so to have something - it should have a value behind it, that is the Dharma part, value behind it. What is the value? When you want to buy something just don't buy because you're mad, I mean instead of shirts you buy skirts, not that way. But anything that has an artistic value or some special value - then you should buy that. Now this Sari I'm wearing - it has a special value, why? Not that it is made with hands, is a very beautiful design it has, no. This was made in a place called Paithan, which was the capital of a 6.

 Original Transcript : English kingdom, which belonged to My forefathers Shalivahanas. And these Saris were made there, Paithan and they used to sell it to people. Now they have become expensive, in those days they were cheap. Now it has that value. They're very honest, very religious, they were called Shalivahanas, because they used to give shawl to the Goddess. They spread their kingdom very much and also there is a calendar in their name, but the kind of life they led. They were just very generous people and they have made beautiful temples, beautiful places for people to rest near the river, I mean so many beautiful things they have done. Apart from that, Rama and Sita when they went to Dhandakaranya they went to this place and you have the place where Sita took Her bath - Her bathing place, there's a little river flowing there. And how it was covered from all the sides and how the light was coming, so beautiful. But whatever Rama had done they redecorated it with the Rajput style art. Then also there was a very beautiful temple I saw that they had made. Also I don't know how there was some water flowing. And there was Shri Mahadeva's, a big thing, Pindha - very big. And also there was a Parvati's statue, so old as that. I don't know if it was put by Rama or by these days, My own - you can call them, the great, great, great grandparents. But the beauty about that place that it shows that Sita used to worship Mahadeva. The water was flowing somehow by nature, inside up there in a stream, and She used to take the water and put it on that Pindha. How deep these people were, those who built that temple. Such a beautiful temple they have built. See so many temples are built like this in India, by people who had money, and they believed that if you spend your money in this kind of work you are blessed. I bought a land near the River Neera, that's My home name, Neera. And this land, I just bought it just like that without thinking. And what they told that their Guru - Shalivahanas - Guru was Shandilya and this place belonged to him long time back, which was an ashram of Shandilya - exactly the same. And that land I bought very surprisingly, then in the newspaper it came out everything about that land, and that - this land was the place where a great devotee of Shri Vishnu, Pralahda, was praying. So you must have heard about Pralahda. His mother had a husband, in a long time, Hiranyakashapu was her husband, a horrible rakshasa. So she ran away from there and who helped was Indra. He brought this lady to the place of Guru Shandilya and Shandilya told Him, Indra that, "You don't put any effort for her, I'll look after her, and the child that is going to be born to this lady is going to get the Avatara of Narasimha" - you know Narasimha is the man and the lion. He said, "How can that be?" He said, "It is so." So Indra left her there, the child was born, till 5 years that child used to play in that land which I have bought. But I didn't know about it, but I just saw it, I was surprised. But when the child grew up after 5 years he had to go back to his father. I don't know how many of you read about Pralhada, raise your hands, I would like to know. The little boy Pralhad, let me see, who was killed and, I mean, his father tried to kill him and torture him, but he had certain boons so Shri Vishnu appeared as Narasimha, means the lion and the human form. And then he killed this Hiranyakashapu, the father. Now imagine, how much - big it was, that thousands of years back this must have happened, and that I should purchase that land only. And there is a very beautiful temple built about 300 years back by Maharashtrians. So the story is that Pralhada came into the dream of the people who wanted to build the temple and told them that, "I have already made the statue of Narasimha along the river Neera", - imagine the name of the river is also Mine – "and if you can walk along the banks of Neera river very close to the temple, I have made the statue in sand." It's a miracle, so when there they went there and they saw that statue, they brought it back and installed it in that temple, and it's still there, made of sand. Also they say there's a kind of a river or a water flow up to, very small one just like the finger, flows down from the top, God knows how. I 6. 6. So, now see the value, the value of money which was collected to build this temple had such an old value. So the value is not money - this one should understand. What is the value of the thing? You want to give to something to others, then the feelings you have in your heart is the value, and that value

 Original Transcript : English is the real Lakshmi. When you are, say, building a house, the plans you make and things you do, what is the idea behind and what you are trying to express through that house is the value of that house. Once you understand that you have to buy, with this Lakshmi, or you have to use this Lakshmi for certain value, and not for showing off or for money. This superficialness that we have about money itself is like an ordinary glass, but if you put behind the glass the mercury, you can see the value. So when you start buying something, what is the purpose, why are you buying it - this will determine the value. Like, last time I came to Portugal and I said, “This year we'll go and buy some Terracotta", but they are very expensive. I said, “This is the price", but I wanted to buy Terracotta from Portugal, because it's very rich in that. So we went to one factory, and the factory was quite far out, none of them could find out, but I told them, "It's here only just go and see." And then we bought the Terracotta. But on our way I told, "Stop, stop here, stop." So they stopped, there was a shop. I had to buy some things for Sahaja Yogis in India, and also for some people in Cabella. And that shop had such beautiful cottons. They were Sahaja Yogis from here who saw it, such beautiful clothes and I bought lot of it. I said, “Thank God the problem presents are finished now for India." So joy-giving it was, everybody was surprised - why, suddenly in a place where never had been Mother there, suddenly She finds them. It has a value, because I wanted to buy something for Indians to be given as present. 99 99 99 99 So if your Lakshmi is, say, this much, once you add to it value it becomes so big. The sign of a person who is Lakshmipathi is this - he should have a house like the lotus in the hands of the Goddess, he should protect people who are depending on him, and from the left hand he should give. This is the image of the Lakshmi. This is what the Lakshmi is within you, if you have these four things in balance, without conditioning, without ego, then you are a Sahaja Yogi - otherwise you are not. On a Diwali day we have to promise ourselves that whatever we are going to get now as Lakshmi principle or as a Lakshmi's prasad should be used in getting things which has value. And thus you will learn that you have used your Lakshmi very well, and with that your Mahalakshmi principle become very strong. Will become very strong by which you'll ascend very fast. Today is the day for us to celebrate the Lakshmi Puja, but Lakshmi Puja doesn't mean that worship money. Money as it is, is the most dangerous thing, and I think it is the hidden Lakshmi Devi. See, if you try to misuse Her, She goes on punching with it. With when one punch if you don't realise then She gives you another punch, like that. Then She might little bit twist you, to suggest. She'll try everything, to convince you that what you are doing is nonsense - ultimately She sees your destruction completely. So, Lakshmi, though She is the one who is a giver of boons, giver of everything, you should not be mislead by her Mahamaya character. I'm your Mother so I better tell you to be very careful. you of weapon Thank you very much! 8.

 MARATHI TRANSLATION (English Talk) सारांश (Excerpt) Scanned from Marathi Chaitanya Lahari खुलास होणार आहेत. न्यांच्या जाळयात अइकणार लोकही सारे भ्रष्टाचारी, पापी, अप्रामाणिक असे अधरमी लोकच: त्याच्यात आज आपण शी लक्ष्मीपूजेसाठी एकत्र जमली आहीन भारतामध्ये दिवाळीला श्री नक्ष्मीची पूजा केली जाते. कारण त्या दिवशी तिने नरकासुर श्रीक्ष्मी समुद्मधनातून वाहेर आली तिची अनंक रूपे आहेत. लक्ष्मी आपल्याला संपत्ती वे समृद्धी देणारी देवता आहे, ती फार कृपाल आहे: ती कमळामध्ये उभी असल्यामुळे अल्येत नम्र आहे. आपला भार कुणावरही टाकत नाही. सध्याच्या यगातील महामाचचा ती एक प्रत्यग आहे. लोकानी ती पैसा देते पण ती प्रथम माता आहे है ल्याना समजत नाही. श्रीलक्ष्मीबद्दल जेव्हा स्हणता पण याचा शेव्ट फार भवानक होत असतो. पेसा ही लीक विकृत कल्पना करून धेनात तेव्हा ने लोक वे तसे देश वीचा विनाशकाल सुरू होती. म्हणजे लक्ष्मासारखे कमळावर तोल संभाळून आपल्याला उभे राहता आले पाहिजे नाही नर खाली चिलात पड़ायची आणि त्यातील किड्यामुख्याच्या भक्षस्थानी पड़ायची बेळ बेईन. कमळावर उभे राहणे म्हणजे मावेमबून उल्पन्न होणाया सर्व माहापासून अलिप्त होणे. संस्कृतमध्ये रतुक्षमाला माया असही म्हणतातः न्याच अर्थाने एखाद्याजवळ प्रेसा असला की त्याच्याकडे बरीच मावा आहे अशी भाषा बोलली जाते. ही माया पण जादू करते. पैसा हैच जर सर्व प्रश्नांचे उत्तर असते तर जगात प्रश्नच उरले नसत. ज्योच्याजवळ पैसा आहे त्याचा अखेर नाशच झालेला दिसती किंया त्याच्या एक-दोन पिढयांत ने एय्य संपून जाते आपल्यामधील लक्ष्मीतत्त्व एका अर्थनि विचित्र आहे. म्हणने एखाद्याजवळ महागी कार असली तर लोक लगेच म्हणतान, "वा, केवढा मोठा माणूस! तसेच एखाद्याजयळ अनेक बंगले, इस्टेट असली नर त्याला समाजात मान दिला जाना. कारण है कन्नियुग आहे. तीच गांष्ट ऐटवाज, शरीमती सारी नावे दकषण आफ्रिकेतील: त्यांच्यात सुज्ञता उरलीच नसायी. पेहराव करणाया व्यक्तीवहल, इंग्नंडमध्ये "Saville Row" नावाचा एक भाग आहे. निधे सूट ध्याबचा असंल तर ३००० कमावता. मंग ल्मीचे आशीर्वाद मिळणचात कार्य मोटेसे? नसे पाड लागतात, वर त्या सुटावर Saville Row है लेबल चिक्रटबतात. असला आचरटपणा जगात सगळीकई चालला पण बैणारच ट, काळा बाजारवाल, स्मगलस है . आजकाल लक्ष्मी-नत्वाच्या विरोधी वागण्याची प्रवृती बळावत आहे. सहजयोगामध्येही असा एक माणूस सर्वावर नेहमी दवाव दखिवणीरा होता, शेवटी न्याला सहजयीगातून काढून टाकण्यात. आले आणि आता त्याने स्मगलिंगमध्ये नम बसवून खुप पसा मिळवला आहे आणि है चांगलेच झाले असेही तो . नावाच्या राक्षसाला टार मारले या ग्वुप माणसाला लागणारी कीड असते; जी न्याच्या जीवनातील सर्व सभ्यता, उच्च मूल्ये इ. ना खाऊन आकते. मुलाला गैरधदे करून खप पसा मिळू लागला की तो आई बडील बहीण-भाऊ सर्वांना विसरती. म्हणजे एका अर्थानि लक्ष्मी अशा वेळी भूत बनते असे मी म्हणेन आण तिच सर्व आशी्वाद तुमच्या सभ्वेतेला आव्हान देऊ लागतात. अमेरिका हा थीकृष्णांचा वैश- ते कुबेरच आहेत. पण मी पाहते की त्वांच्याजवळ पैसा नसता कारण ते सर्व उधारीवर चालचतान. भारतातून तिकडे गले्या लाकानां भारतीत परते वेणे अवघड जाते कारण त्यांनी तिथे बरेच कर्ज काढलेले असने. बंका वीना कसलेही कर्ज नाबडनीब देतात, सगळी खरेदी उथारीचर म्हणून चैनीत रहावरची त्यांना सबये होते दोन-दोन तीन तीन गाड्या, त्यासुद्धा महागड्या, इतके सर्व जमवाबचे कशासाठी? द्याला लक्ष्मी म्हणत नाही; लक्ष्मी तुम्हाला सभ्यता समूद्धी व सन्मान देते. कदाचित अमेरिकन लोकांना है समजने असेल म्हणून न टान करू लागले. टान कुपाला दिले पाहिले तर पण म्हणून सोळा वर्षांचा मुलगाही निथे जानी आणि खुप पैसा असेल तर लक्ष्मीची कृपा असलेला माणूस वैडयासारखा मूखर्खासारखा वागू लागती आणि शेवटी त्याची स्थिती कुत्राही स्वाच्याकडे पाहणार नाही अशी होते असे का होते? पसा आणि लक्ष्मी बात काय फरक आहे? लक्ष्मी तुम्डाला पेसा देते हैं टीक आहे; पण त्या पैशाचे पूढे कार्य होते ह? ही फार रुक्ष्म गांष्ट आहे. भारतात नोकराला शेंभर रूपये दिले, की चाललाच तो हातभर्टीकडे! याचा अर्थ पैसा मिळाला. की त्याचा गएवापर, अपायकारक वापर सुरू मग ती लक्ष्मी कुटे गेली ? तर निने आपले रूप बदलले आणि ते इतके बाईट झाले की बरबाद करु लागले स्हणजे लक्ष्मी कशी वापरावची हेहि कळले अहे, कपड्याना, रहने-सहनला काही अधच उरला नाही, बा सर्वांची अखेर म्हणजे स्विस-बंक: तिथले लक्ष्मी- तत्व उग्र रूप धारण करू लागले आहे आणि ते लोक भवभीत झाले आहेत. ज्यू लोकचि सोन्याचे दात मागण्यापर्यंत बाची मना गेली आहे. आणि ल्यांनी फार मोटे सैन्य ननान कखून टेवले आहे. त्यांना ते जमले नाही. तुम्हाला कोण पादाक्रांत करणार आहे? नेपात्तयनलाही हे सर्व त्यांच्या अहंकाराचे परिणाम आहेत. पण आना न्यांच्याबर हलला होणार आहे आणि तो फार भयंकर असल्यामळे त्यात ते पाहिजे मला जर पसा मिळाला तर मी का करते? मी बाजारात 9.

 Marathi Translation (English Talk) त्यांना अमचा उपास असल्यामुळे काही खाणार नाहीं असे माझया पनीन सांगितले मा गमतान त्यांना म्हटल का आपल्याला इतक्या टिकाणी जेवाबला योलाकले आहे नर उपास-उपास असे कितींदा सांगणार? त म्हणाले, राज नसे सांगाव लागले नरी हरकत नाही, पग तेच बरे. इतके घाणेरड चाज पण ने ्हणतात की दोनशे वर्षांचे नने आहे म्हणून स्पेशल आहे. नी विचित्र आवड व वास पाहून माझ्या डोळान पाणीच आने. कारण मला बाटले की मेल्यावर या लोकांना नरकातही जागा मिलणार नाही, त्याचा वास आल्यावर तिथुनही आकलतील मग त्या चीजवी कहाणी मी बाचली नी अशी पूर्वी खुप वर्फ पडले होते तेव्हा लोकांनी दूधाचे माटे-मोटे हेंड र त लपवून टेवले होते. पंधरा-बीस दिवस बर्फ पड़त होते आणि चा दुधाचा लोकांना विसर पडला. एक वर्ष गल्ावर तिथुन वास बेज लागला आणि जाऊन पाहतात नर व्या दुधाच जाणार, चांगल्या वस्तू निवडणार, है अमक्या सहजयोग्याला देणयासाठी, हे अमक्या आश्रमाला देग्यासाटी; म्हणजे मन कसे एक प्रकारे सामाजिक बनू लागने पहा. मी सजस्थानात गले होते. सगळीकईे बाळूच वाळू आणि अर्धपोरटी रजोक संग या लोकांनी पैसा कमावण्यासाठी काय करावे असा विचार मी करू लागले. मला वादले की यांना न तुटणारीः न फुटणारीच काच (जी फक्त फ्रान्समधेच बनते) बनवण्याची फैक्टरी काढून देऊ. आजकाल अशा काचव्या कप-बशातून चहा देणे हैं उच्चभ्ू जातीचे लक्ष्ण मानंतीन. तर इथे वाळू भरपूर आहे आणि ती या कारखान्याला खुप लागणार, म्हणून या गरीब लोकांचा उदरनिर्वाह होईल म्हणून अशी फंक्टरी काढप्याचे मी टरकले. मी एकदा वारणाला गेले होते. तुम्हीपण एकदा तेथे आला होतात. तिथे एक गांधीजींचा शिष्य होता: त्यानेच वारणाची दूध- कंपनी चालू केली; को-ऑपरेटिव्ह संस्था सुरु केली आणि न्यांचा धेंदा बांगला चालून खूप पैसा मिळवला. मग त्यांने कंपनीनल्या इथून सारा सन्यानाश सुरु झाला. साधारणतः आदल्या दिवशीचे मजूर लोकांना कर्ज देणवास सुरुवात केली. मी तिथे गेल्यावर तो माझवाकडे आला आणि पाया पड़न म्हणाला माताजी, मी दोन-नीन दिवस ठेवले तरी चालते बारणा संस्था एवढी धडपड करून बाढवली पण नरीडी मी असमाधानी आहे. काय करावे कळत नाही. इथली परिस्थिती नीच ्रकार दारूचा. किती वर्षांची जुनी आहे यालाच महत्त्व फार बिवडली आहे. मुंबईच्या वैश्या इथे वेऊन धेदा करू लागल्या, मुंबईच्या लोकांनी इथे येऊन दारुची दुकाने चालू केली लोकांना सिगारेट मादक संबन यांची सवय लागली; मुले फार बिघडली आहेत, आईवाइलानाही मारतात. हे सर्व गांधीजीव्या शिकवणुकीविरुद्ध रहायचे आहे. हा सर्व जक्ष्मीचा शाप आहे." इतके बोलून तो रड लागला लक्ष्मीकडन हा शाप कसा आला? लक्ष्मी नाभीमध्ये आहे. आणि ती जैव्हा कार्य करु लागते तेव्हा खा-खा सुटुन माणूस सारखें खात सुटनो, वेड्यासारधा खात सुटनो, नाभीवर कुणी भूत बेऊन जेवायला मागत असल्यासारखा खात राहता मग तुम्ही साधारण साणूस खाऊ शकणार नाही इतके खाता- अर्थात श्रीमंत माणसांची सबय तशीच आहे. वर मग आहाराच्या शास्वाची चर्चा सुरु करतात. खाण्याच्या एटिकेटसुबर भर देतान. आज दिवाळी आहे म्हणून या गमतीदार विषयावर मी बोलणार आहे फ्रेंच राजदूतीवरोबर मी बच्याच पाट्यांना गेले आहे. तिथे योग्यता नाही त्याच्या हातात पैसा येणेः अशा वेळी त्या माणसाला मजाच असते. मी आणि माझे पर्ती डिक घत नाही. पार्टीला जेमल्यावर आज कुठले डिक ध्यावचे याच्यावर चर्चा करण्यात पाऊण तास बालवतात. मग त्यात एकमत होतच नाही कारण व्हरावरटी हवी ना! मग प्रत्वेकजण वेगवेगळे मागत राहती. बाला ते एटिकेटस् समज़तात. आम्ही दोघेजण नुसने त्यांच्याकडे बघत राहतो, निथून जावेसे वाटू लागते. मग जेवणाची सुरुवात. तिथेही गोष्टीकडे कसा वळतो है लक्षात व्या. सर्वप्रथम तुमचा अहंकार प्रत्येकजण वेग-वैगळे मागत राहती. या बाबतीत भारतीय बरे बळावती: विशेषनतः व्याला रेसा मिळाला नी व्यक्ति अहंकारी असे ते तहेवाईकपणा करतात. आणि पाहुणचार करणारा न्वाचे कौतुक करते राहतो. जेवणातील चीजला धाणेरडा वास येत होता. आम्हाला ओकारी आल्यासारखे वाटू लागले म्हणून आम्ही चीज बनून गंलले अन्न सया दिवशी खाऊ नये, पण आजकाल किज असल्यामुळे . ज पण चीजचा हो प्रकार मला क्रळेना पया न्यांना त्याचेच भूषण दुसर्या हाजांवर हेच करावे लागते जितकी जुनी तितकी किमतही जास्त आअसा हा भूताटकीचा प्रकार म्हणून लक्ष्मीच्या स्थानावर जव्हा अशी भुते बेतात तैळा सारा लुबाडण्याचा हव्यास सुरु होना; पसा, लोक, देश, भुकनती जनता सायांना बिनादिककत लुटायचे आणि पशाच्या माग धावत आंजबात करीत नाहीत अभ्यास ईंग्रेज लोक भारतात आले त्हा ते लाघ ध्यावचे दिवाळीच्या दिवशी व्यांना भेटाला जाणााला काही बक्षिस (भेट) घेऊन जाबलाच लागायचे, आणि त्यांची सवांत आवडती गोष्ट म्हणजे देशी दवारु, माझे परती मीरतला कलेक्टर म्हणून आले ता आम्ही आमच्या बंगल्यावर प्रथम गला नर नि्ध दारूच्या बाटल्या पडलेल्या माझ्या मनात आले की बा बादर्या ईग्लइला पाटवून विकाव्या स्हणजे पैसे मिळतील! म्हणजे जितके जुने तितके चांगले. एकदरीत लक्ष्मी पण अशोच म्हातारी होऊन नहीशी होते आणि तिथे अलक्ष्मी येते. म्हणजे ज्या माणासाची तशी लायकी व टानत नसते, दूस्याला मदन करण्याची तबारी नसने आणि दिलेच तर अनाटाची गोष्टींसाटी, आण वर ते उद्दाम बनतात; जनावरसारखे वागू लागतात. त्यांच्याकडे पाहले नर त्यांची ही अवस्था का झाली समजणार नाही त्नकष्मी तत्चवीचा आदर न केल्यास माणूस चुकाच्या बनते. आधी अगरदी साधासुधा बाटणारा मनुष्य एकदम असा कसा बोलावला लागतो, जदट बनती समजत नाही. रेसेसचा नाद ग की पैसा हानी बेना. नाभीच्या भोवताली धर्माचे स्थान 10

 Marathi Translation (English Talk) थे, हणजे तिला ज्याच्यासाटी पसे मयादी तुम्हाला आलांडाव्या असे चाटत असेले तर तुम्ही कसेही दिले या कामासाठीच ते चापरावे है समजेल मला पैशाबहल काहीही समजत नाही म्हणून मी हाच निवम पाळते. मी अशी उन्लंधन केन्यावरच है जोणार मानवाला दहा मूलभूत धर्मान्ञा पत्द्धन वापरते की पैसे चापरतांना मी ते वेगवेगळवा पाकिटामध्ये बादन टेवने आणि प्रलत्येक पारकटावर व्या पशातुन काय चिक्त मानवाबद्दल ग्रेम ही पहिला धर्म, किंवा दुसया बाजूने बघितले व्यावचे ते लिहनू टेबते, एऐखादे बेलस एका पाकिटातले पैसे दूसया क्टिल्वा जरूरीच्या कामासाठी चापरले तर पुन्हा त्यात तेवढे पैसे परत टवने. न्हणजे मला जेव्हा खरेदी करायची असते आहेत. तसाचे पति-धर्म: नवत्याने कटुबात कसे वागावे. त्याचे तेव्हा त्याचे विशिष्ट पार्कीट बेत व तो खर्च करते. आता तुम्ही ्हाणाल की मसिहीज गाडी वर्गरे साटीही असेच करते असेन तर नसे नाही. बाजारात गेल्वावर एरादी बस्तु कणाला देण्यासाठी आवइली नर त्याचे पैसे पाकिटात बालून टेवने व मग केव्हातरी नी खरेरदी करते असे केल्याने द्कानात गेले आणि खरेदी करने लीमामुळे कलेच्चा बावतीतही बेेवाकई प्रकार वालले आहेत. जे सुटले असे होन नाही. सहजयास्याना पेशाचा चापर आदराने कसा करायचा है चांगले समजत. टूकानात जातील पण काहीच देचानही भ्रष्टाचार, स्पर्धा. हेर्वे-द्ावे बा प्रकारमिले इथही खरदी न करता बाहेर पड़नील. माझा स्वभाव मा्च सहज आहे फ्रेंकफुर्टमध्ये मी होते तेव्हा तिथे घड़थाळाचे चांगले दुकान आहे असे लीकांनी सांगितले. माझे तीन जावई येणार होते होत्या. आहे. लक्ष्मीने लिथे धर्म प्रस्थापित केला हे आणि या धर्माच्या सांगून स्वतंःसाटी पाच शर्टस बागा. पण तो अधर्म होईल, हीन प्रव्ती होईल. पण धर्माचे दिल्या आहेत पण त्याशिवाय तुमच्या भोवनी अनेक धर्म आहेत. तर स्त्री धर्म हा प्रथम स्त्रीने कस बोलाये चालावे. विवाहित. स्ट्रीन कसे रहावे, मुलांबाळाना करे वागवाचे, इ. सर्व स्त्री धर्म कर्तव्य कार्य इ स्हरणाजे कटुंब व नातेवाईक यांच्याबरीवर बागण्याचे धर्म पुण या म्हणजे सत्य-धर्म तो सल्यायरावर किनी प्रामाणिक असती ही धर्म, त्यानंतर निर्मितीचा कलाधर्म अजकाला पेशाच्या सर्व धर्माहन त्याचा महत्त्वाचा धर्म चा धर्माच्या युर्णपणे विरोधान आहे. तसेव राजकारण धर्म या पति गैरम्रकार चालले आहेत. नेही या धर्माचे उत्नंघन आहे. तोच प्रकार शिक्षण-थ्मवहल, आपला आणखी एक बर्म हणजे राष्ट्र धर्म, राष्ट्राच्या संरक्षणासाठी बुन्धाला नवार असणेः अर्थान दूसरे डेश पाटाक्रांत करणे त्यांच्याबर आक्रमण म्हणुन मा न्या दुकानात गेले: नि्े खुप छान छान बस्तु करणे, वर्चस्व पण घडाळासाठी मी पैसे घेतले नव्हते, निथले एक धड्याळ गाजवणे, आपल्या राष्ट्राची बदनामी होल असे वागणे. इ. सर्व फार छान होते. आता नसे मिळणार नाही. ते माइया इोळ्यांनी राष्ट्र-धर्माला मान्य नाही असे अनेक अर्म आहेत आणि त्यातील बरोबर दाखवले, ते दिल्यावर माझ्या जाययाला आनंद झालाच पणे ल्या घड्याळाचे फार कौतुक वाटले कारण तसे घड़याळ मिळणे शक्य नव्हते; तसा ्याच्याजवळ पसा करमी नाही पण सहजयीरगी लीकाना आधीच कमळावर स्थान मिळाले आहे म्हणून ्याने ते ठेऊन बेनले. काही विकत ध्यायचे असेल तर त्याच्यामागे काहीतरी अर्थ असला पाहिजे हा अर्थ असणे हाच हजयोगी खराब असेल पण साधारण सहजयोगी या मोहांना धर्म, तुम्ही जे घेता त्या वस्तूमध्ये विशेष अशी कलात्मकता किंवा तसच काही खास वैशिष्ट्य असलेले चागले. आता माझी ही साडी पहा, तिचे वैशिष्ट्य है की तिब्यावरचे डिझाईन फार संदर आहे. नुसनीच हाताने बनवलेली आहे म्हाणून नवे, ती पैटणची आहे. पेटण माइ्या पूर्वज राजघराण्याची-शालिचाहन-राजधानी प्रॉब्वेम्समधुनच तुम्ही लक्ष्मीला नाणू शकाल, नक्ष्म तुमचे संतुलन डोती, तिथल्या साड्या बाजारात विकायला असत. आता फार महाग झाल्या आहेत. त्याकाळी न्यामानाने स्वस्त होत्या. ने धार्मिक होने. शालीबाहन म्हणजे देवीला त्वाचे पालन करणे महन्वाचे व जरुरीचे आहे; नाहीतर तुमचा नाल जाऊन केळा खाली पड़ाल याचा नम नाही. तुम्हा या सर्व धर्माचे पालन करण्यास तुम्ही समये आहात एखाद टुसरी वळी पडणार नाहीत आणि न्यांचे गष्ष्मातत्व सुधारणारच आहे. आता थोई फार प्रॉवनेम्स असणार, पण काहीही प्रश्न बा अडचणी न येता लक्ष्मीतन्त्वात उतरलात तर त्याची गख़री किमत म्हणजे हान-सहान समजणार नाही अशा ल तुम्हाला बिधड देत नाही. ज्याला नक्ष्मी-तन्च मिळाल बा अन्यत संतुलित असलाच पाहिजे कारण त्याच्या पुढच्या पायरीवर महालक्ष्मी आहे आणि इथुन पुढे तुम्ही साधक बनता. लक्ष्मीतन्वातृनच तन्व तुमव्यामध्ये प्रस्थापित होते असते. आता या पात्र्चात्य देशमध्ये ग्राहक जागरुक व्हायला लागले आहेत. याची एक गंमत सांगते. अमेरिकेतील एक सहजबीगी मला तक्रार करत होता की त्याने त्याच्या पत्नीला, जी भारतीय योगिनी आहे, न्याच्यासाठी डोन शर्टसु आणाचला पैसे दिले त तिने बाजारात जाऊन स्वतःसाठी पाच स्कटस बेतले. कारण म्हणून तिने सांगितले की दीन शटसच्या पेशांतच प्ाच स्वटंस सिळाले मस काय चाईट आहे? है कस ठीक समजवायचे असे न्याने लोक फार प्रामाणिक व . शाल देणारे न्यनी आपले राज्य खुप वाढवने: त्यंच्या नावाने महाल्ष्मी- कालगणना होते. ते लोक उदार अंतःकरणाचे होते. त्यांनी बंधलेली मंदिरे, नदीकाटी लोकांच्या निवासासाठी बांधणेले प्रसाद प्रसिद्ध आहेत: श्रीराम देडकारण्यात बनवासात होते तेव्हा सीता ईथे स्नानासाठी आली होती; तिथे एक लहानशो पण छान नदी होती. चारी बाजूंनी बेढलेली असल्यामुळे निर्वान होनी श्रीरामानी जे काही केले त्याला लोकांनी राजपूत कलैचा साज दिला. तिथे महादेवाचे फार सुंदर मंदिर मी पाहिते, तिथे पाचनीचा पुतळा होता आणि विचारल्यावर मी साँगिनले की तिच्यासाठी स्वक्टस् ध्यावचे असे विशेष म्हणजे तिथे पाणी कुटून सोडण्बाल आले होते कुणालाच 11

 Marathi Translation (English Talk) माहीत नाही. त्या स्थानाचे वैशिष्ट्य म्हणजे सीता तिथे महादिवांची पूजा करायला येत असे, तनेथील एका ओढ्यातील पाणी नेऊन ती महादेवाच्या पिंडीला स्नान घालावची. भारतामध्ये श्रीमंत लोकांनी अरशी खूप सुंदर सुंदर मंदिरे बांधलेली आहेत: असे कार्य केनले की परमेश्वराचे आशीर्वाद मिळतात असा त्यांचा विश्वास होता, तिथेच नीरा नदीच्या काटी मी काही जमीन विकत घेतली. नीरा हे माझेच नाव- काही खास उद्देश नव्हता पण लोकांनी सांगितले की ती जमीन शालीवाहनांचा याची होती; त्यांचा तिथे आशमही होता म्हणे, तीच जमीन मला विकत घ्यायची इच्छा व्हावी है आश्चर्यकारक होते. नंनर पेपरामधून बातमी आली की थ्री विष्णूचा भक्त प्रल्हादनेही तिथे तपश्चर्या केली होती. त्याच्या आईचे हिरण्यकश्यपू या भयानक राक्षसाबरोबर लग्न झाले पण नवचाच्या त्रासाने ती निथून पळून गेल्यावर इंद्राने तिला आधार दिला व शांइिल्य ऋषीच्या आथमात आणून त्यांच्याजवळ टेवले. शांडिल्या ऋषींनी तिची व तिला प्रेमाची व सदृभावनेची होणाया बालकावी सर्व काळजी घेण्याचे बचन दिले कारण तिच्या पोटी विष्णूचा अवतार जन्म घेणार असल्याचे त्यांना ज्ञात होते. नंतर मुलाचा जन्म झाला वे पाच वर्षापर्यत तो आश्रमातच- जी जमिन मी आता विकत वेतली आहे तिथे वाढला. मग तो प्रल्हाद आपल्या बइिलांकडे रहायला गैला, निथे वाडलानी-हिरण्यकश्यपुने त्याचा खुप छळ केला य त्रास दिला शेवटी विष्णूने नरसिंहरुय धारण केले व हिरण्यकश्यपूला ठार केले. हे सर्व हजार वर्षापूर्वी घड़ले आणि तीच जमीन मी आता विकत वेतली आहे. हा योगायोग बघा. तिथेच महाराष्ट्रीयन ्लोकांनी बांधलेले एक सुंदर मंदिरही आहे. त्याची कहाणी अशी सांगतात की ते मंदिर बांधणाच्या लोकांच्या स्वप्नामध्ये प्रत्हाद आला व त्याने त्यांना सांगितले की पुतळा केला आहे आणि तुम्ही या नीरा नदीच्या किनाय्याने चालत पेशाची पूजा करणे असा अर्थ नाही. पैसा ही फार धातक गोष्ट गेलात तर मंदिराच्या जवळच तो सायडेल," त्याप्रमाणे लोकांना तो पुतळा मिळाला आणि तो मंदिरात आणून त्याची स्थापना केली. असेही म्हणतात की त्या पुतळ्यावर करंगळीएवढी पाण्याची धार पड़त राहते आणि ते पाणी कुटून येते कुणाला माहीत नाही. यावरुन पैंशाला कशी किंमत असते बधा. त्या मंदिराकरता जरी नेहमी बरदान दणारी असली, सर्व इंच्छा तृप्न] करणारी जो पैसा जमवला त्या या पार्श्वभूमीचे मूल्य होते. म्हणजे पैशाला ्हणून तसे मूल्य नसते हे लक्षात घ्या. तुम्ही जे्हा दुसर्याला मेट तुमची आई आहे स्हणुन तुम्हाला सांगावेसे वाटते की सांभाळून দ्हणून काही वस्तू देता तेव्हा त्या वस्तुमागील तुमच्या प्रेमाला किंसत असते, महत्त्व असते. आणि हेच तुमच्यामधील खरे रनक्ष्मी-तत्त्व. तुम्ही घर बांधताना नकाशे बनवता, नर्षाकाम सजावट बगैरे करता त्याच्या पाठीमागच्या कल्पना व त्यामधून तुम्ही काय सुचर्वात आहात याला किमत असते. म्हणजे तुम्हाला लक्ष्मीकडून है सर्व मिळाले आहे आणि लक्ष्मीचा उपयोग तुम्ही संपतीचे प्रदर्शन न करता दुसर्या चांगल्या उदिष्टांसाठी करत आहात है तुम्हाला समजते. पैशाबहल माणसांना ज्या पीकळ. वरवरच्या भावना असतात न्या काचेसारख्या असतातः पण त्याच काचेला तुम्ही पारटीमागून पारा लावला तर त्यांची खरी किमत तुम्हाला समजते. तुम्ही काही खरेदी करता तेव्हा ते कशासाठी खरेदी करता याच्यावरुन त्याचे मौल टरत असते. मी जिथे जाते तिथे बाहेरच्या सहजयोग्यांसाठी काही ना काही भेट-बस्तु देण्यासाठी खरेदी करते असते. मी पो्तुगालसा गेले होते तिथे टेराकोटाच्या फार सुंदर वस्तु असतात त्या बेतल्या. कवेला आणि भारतातील सहजयीगयाना भेट देण्यासाठी वस्तु खरेंदी केल्या. लोक म्हणून लागले माताज़ी इथे कथीच आधी आल्या नव्हत्या त्यांना एकदम चांगल्या वस्तूचे दुकान कसे समजते मी स्वतःहूनच टुकानासमोर धांबायला सांगितले होते मग मी सांगिते मला भेटी द्यावला शांडिल्य गुरु संगळबाबरीबरच चालत असताना त्यांना त्या आवडते आणि हीच त्या वस्तूंची खरी किंमत आहे. अशा तहेने तुमच्यामधील लक्ष्मी, तुमच्या अंतःकरणातील जोड मिळाल्यावर बळकट होते. नक्ष्मीपति" हा शब्द याच अर्थाचा दयोतक आहे. लक्ष्मीच्या हातातील कमळासारखे न्यांचे घर असावे, त्याच्यायर अवलेबून असनेल्यांचे त्याने रक्षण केले पाहिजे आणि इाव्या हातातून दान तीच े आहे करत असावे. लक्ष्मीचे रूप असेच आहे; तुमच्यामः अहंकार आणि कन्डिशनिंग बांना थारा न देता या चार गीष्टी तुमच्यामध्ये रुजल्या तरच तुम्ही सहजयोगी एरवी नाही दिवाळीच्या वा शुभ वेळी आपण आसा निश्वय कर या की लक्ष्मी-तत्त्व किंवा लक्ष्मीप्रसाद म्हणून आपल्याला जे काही मिळेल त्याचा उपयोग आपण चांगल्या (ज्याला value आहे) गोष्टींसाठी करु, म्हणजेच तुम्ही लक्ष्मीतत्वाचा आदर करता है सिद्ध होईल. त्यातूनच तुमचे महालक्ष्मी तत्त्व सुधारेल आणि तुम्ही अधिक उन्नति करुन घ्याल आज लक्ष्मी पूजा करायची म्हणजे मी नरसिंहाचा बाळूचा , "म आहे आणि लक्ष्मीचेच ते गुप्त हन्चारे आहे. तुम्ही त्यावा दुरुपयोग केलात तर लक्ष्मी तुम्हाला विमटे वेतल्वासारखे जागे] करल, बेगवेगळ्या प्रकारे तुम्ही चूका करता आहात आणून द्यायचा प्रयत्न करेल आणि नराही तुम्ही समजू शकला नाही तर तुम्हाला चिनाशाच्या याटेवर साडन देईल. म्हणून नक्ष्मी है तुमच्या लक्षान असली तरी तिच्या महामाया स्वरूपाला तुम्ही भुलू नका. मी रहा. सर्वांचे आभार, 12



----------------------

19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page0.txt 
 Diwali Puja
Date
2nd November 1997
:
Place
Lisbon
:
Type
Puja
Speech
Language
English
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 08
English
Hindi
Marathi
||
Translation
English
Hindi
09 - 12
Marathi
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
Today we have gathered here to worship Shri Lakshmi. In Diwali, in India, they worship
Lakshmi because a great rakshasa called Narakasura was killed. Also that Lakshmi came out of the
sea, at the same time - long time back. I mean, I should say, this is like Her different appearances on the
same [SOUNDS LIKE jeokijen ?].
Lakshmi is the Goddess which gives us wealth, gives us prosperity. She is very blissful - no
doubt. She gives you protection and also She's very humble, because She stands on the Lotus. She's
very light, means does not put her pressure on anyone. These are symbols of Shri Lakshmi. But also
She is a part of Mahamaya in the modern times. When people get Lakshmi - the money - they don't
understand that She is their Mother also and She is to be respected. When this kind of a perverse idea
of Shri Lakshmi comes in, such countries, such people meet their last end and destruction of the worst
type comes in. So this Lakshmi has to be used with a big balance, like standing on a Lotus and not get
into the pond, where there are all kind ofcreatures to eat you all. You have to stand on the Lotus - that
means, that you are above all the lures of this Maya. Also in Sanskrit and in our languages, we call
Lakshmi as the Maya. If somebody gets lot of money they would say - "He got lot of maya." Now this
maya plays the tricks. If money, prosperity, was the salvation, then there would have been no
problems in this world because those people who have money always get ruined. If they're not ruined,
their children, their grandchildren get ruined.
This principle of Lakshmi within us is very dubious and the allurement is so much that people see
somebody having a good car these days, they think - "Ah, what a man he is!" - in any case he's not
going to give you the car. If somebody is having lots of, what you can call, palaces or buildings, people
start admiring. This is Kali Yuga. They start admiring, "See - this man is so rich." Even clothes, people
see you wearing clothes which are very good tailored, might be from some designers, say - they think
no end of that man. For example in England, there is another befooling place called Saville Row. So if
you want to buy one suit you have to pay sometimes three thousand pounds. Now people are so stupid,
that now if they wear a suit from Saville Row, they put the brand outside -"Saville Row". All such
tomfoolery is going on all over the world. The clothes have no meaning, their lifestyle has no
meaning, ultimately they end up in Swiss Bank. The Lakshmi tattwa of Swiss Bank is also now
showing its teeth, and (Shri Mataji laughing) if you read what's happening to them, I mean, they are
shaking, they don't know. They went to this limit that they took the teeth, golden teeth of the Jews. I
mean, it's going too far, all this tomfoolery has been going on. Their military services - why, who's
going to conquer that country? Even Napolean didn't do that. And they have made big caves to keep
their weapons there, who's going to attack them, stupid people - suffering from ego. But the attack has
come and this attack is so serious that they might be completely shattered and destroyed.
99
Now who falls for this kind of thing, you should see, are the people who are crooks, who are
dishonest, who are absolutely Adharmis. They can be Mafia-dons, or they can be some thugs, some
black marketeers, some smugglers. So going against the Lakshmi principle are so many done these
days. One fellow who was thrown out of Sahaja Yoga, because he was trying to be very dominating
and all that. He said, "That's better." I said "Why?" He's doing now smuggling, making money out of
smuggling and he's become very rich - according to him. But it comes to an end and a very tragic, bad
end.
Money is such a lure for human beings that it kills all sense of decency, of higher values,
everything. A brother say, who is very nice and good fellow, if he gets money out of proportion by all
doing the hanky panky, he neglects his mother, father, brother, sisters, everyone. So I would say then it
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
comes to that point, that Lakshmiji becomes a bhoot then. And She - all Her blessings become sort of a
challenge to your dignity.
Now certain countries, like America - which is the area for Shri Krishna, because He's Kubera -
they have no money as such, I've seen, they are all poor, they are all indebted. So many Indians went to
America and they can't come to India now - "Why?" "We're indebted." "Why are you indebted?" -
"Oh we get everything free now, see the bank gives us loan, we can have the best lifestyle."
So they will have 3 Mercedes - is nothing, 3 Mercedes is nothing, we should have Rolls Royces,
we should have this. For what? What do you get out of it? Now of course - little bit they are shaken up,
with the stock exchange and all that nonsense they had started. All this joke and all these very big, I
should say, camouflages - all now are coming out. So this is no Lakshmi, because Lakshmi must give
you dignity, prosperity and respect. I think Americans understood about it so they became
philanthropists, means they are giving money to people. Whom did they give money? All the names
these people took from South Africa - were all given money by the philanthropists of America. What
has happened to their wisdom? That 16 year old boy, he went there, and then all ages went there and
made a very big money. All this money-making proposition.
Aside : Can you give some seat to those musicians? [Hindi...]
99
So what is the matter? If there's a blessing of Lakshmi, why a man who gets the blessing of
Lakshmi becomes so funny, so stupid, and ultimately ends up his life that people are not there even to
pick up his dead body. [Hindi aside...]
What is the difference between money and Lakshmi? She gives you money all right, agreed, but
when She's giving the money what happens to that money which comes to you - is a very subtle thing
one should understand. In India if you give, say hundred rupees to a servant, immediately he'll go to
drink somewhere. First idea will come, what he should do, he'll go for a drink, of the hard ones, I
mean, your Vodka is nowhere near that - such hard ones they make in India you know, it is called as
Hatbati - means made with hands. So in hundred rupees they are willing to go. I mean, that means any
money you give to them, it spoils their life completely. Lakshmi has been given, all right, so what
happens to this Lakshmi? She changes Her form and Her form is so bad that you are completely ruined
with that.
So now, we have to understand what is the way we can use the Lakshmi. Supposing I get money,
supposing, then I will go to the market say, and I'll see something nice - “Ah, this is very good for this
Sahaja Yogi." Or I will say, "This will be very handy for our Ashram". Immediately the mind starts
working in a very socialistic way I should say, not individualistic.
99
For example, I went to Rajasthan and I saw such a lot of sand, just like a big desert, big dunes,
everything - and people starving. So I said, "How to get money to these people?" So I said, "Let Me
start a factory." A factory with the unbreakable glass which they make only in France. They make it
very cheap and regard it as very cheap thing - not in India. In India if you go to some elite's house
they'll offer you tea, in (Shri Mataji laughing) these unbreakable things. (Shri Mataji laughing) They
think it's very elite, you know, it depends on what you think about what. They're proud of it. So I said if
we make these things in India, these poor people, you know, because there is so much sand, and the
sand is needed by trucks, so I will utilise this to make this beautiful factory here. And then give them
some support to live well.
Now, when I went to one place called Warna - you all had come also once - there's a gentleman
who was a disciple of Gandhiji and he's organised this Warna company for distributing milk. It
became so very rich, so very rich, it's a co-operative - so he started giving money to all the co-
operative people, those who had laboured there. Now this labour had never seen that money. So he
came to Me, touched My feet and he said "Mother, You tell me now, what should I do? I'm so unhappy
with the development of this Warna because there are prostitutes who have arrived from Bombay.
There are all kinds of hard drinks which have come from Bombay, and these people are smoking like
3
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
hell, they are taking drugs." "Why?" “Yes, wherever there is money the drug goes there. And the
children are becoming absolutely useless, they don't want to study, they will slap their parents." So he
said, "This was not Gandhiji's idea, now what has happened?" He said, "This is a curse of money" and
he was crying.
Now how can Lakshmi become a curse? It does, it is in the Nabhi, what a central position it has.
And when this Nabhi starts working it is a very remarkable thing, that you feel gobbling the food all
the time, with this Nabhi. You go on eating, go on eating like mad, and then some bhoot comes in to eat
also with you, inside the Nabhi. Then you can eat so much that no human beings can eat like that
except for the people who are rich. Then you start a big science, or what you can call etiquettes.
I don't want to hurt anybody, I mean if you are eating well I don't mind - eat well. But the first part
is, because today is Diwali I'm trying to tell you all these interesting stories.
I went many a times for dinner with French Diplomats - My goodness. Now Me and
My husband don't drink. So 45 minutes they were only discussing what they will have today.
Then they remembered yesterday they had that, the day before they had that, so there should be
variety. So then they came down to something, not all of them drinking the same, different, different.
So they came (Shri Mataji laughing) to some point – all right we'll have this, but some people asked
for something which was not available, so they said, "You have to have it" and they shouted at them.
My goodness, they took 45 minutes to decide what they are going to drink. It's regarded as French
etiquettes, I think, and we two chief guests, Myself and My husband, looking at this man and looking
at that woman didn't know what to do with these etiquettes, so we were thinking, "Now better go.
Then it came to food, they are so particular: “I like this, and I like that", they are worse than Indians, I
tell you. And they took at least, 80 minutes to decide what they will eat. Ultimately they found
something nice, each different and the restaurant people were trying to pamper their ego, “oh what a
thing you have chosen - this is the best .wow wow...." So they started serving. The cheese was
smelling so awful, I tell you, (Laughter) we couldn't bear it, you know, both of us. So My husband told
them, "Today is Our fasting day, for both of Us." He said, "Why is it a fasting day?" "In India we have,
you know, fasting like this, sometimes we have to fast, today is ours." (Laughter) But I told him, "Here
one day you are saying 'today is our fasting', but We have to go to so many dinners, what will you do?"
He said, "Everywhere better to say that We are fasting." (Laughter) Such a horrible cheese they
brought, and they started boasting that they have 200 types of cheese – wow, wow! I said, "200 types -
of the smelly ones? From where did you get?" (Laughter) They said, "This is French perfection!
heese." I said, "What is this French perfection?" But then you know, tears came into My eyes, C.P.
said, "Why are you crying?" - “Not crying, but I think, what will happen to these people with their
cheese, where will they go? - Even if they go to hell people will throw them away with the smell of the
cheese!!" (Laughter and applause)
99
66
99
99
99
Then I read how this cheese came in, so they said - there was a big snowfall, and they had put
some big, big containers in a cave, of milk. And people forgot about it - snowfall was there for 20 days,
whatever it was, and they just forgot about it. So after one year they got the smell, you see, coming out
of it. So they went and saw the cheese being formed – can you imagine? This is the beginning of the
end. (Laughter) Actually one should never eat anything that is kept overnight, normally, but now they
have got fridges so you can keep it for 2 days, 3 days at the most. Like on the ship they keep it. But this
I couldn't understand that this cheese, which is, they told Me, is very old, I said, "Really"? And they
sell it by that, what old it is. And their wines, if they are say 200 years old, it is 200 times more
expensive. So it's such a bhootish thing to eat all that.
So when the Lakshmi goes into the hands of bhoots on a very less level, I should say, is this, then
it goes into the heads of people who want to exploit money, exploit poor people, exploit countries
which are down-trodden - go on like this collecting money you know, looting, looting, looting. When
English came to India, we didn't know they used to take bribes. On Diwali day if you went there
4
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page4.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
without any present they say "baksheesh". You must give some present, and what they liked was our
country liquor. I never knew this, but later on I came to know because My husband became a collector
of merit - and there were bottles of country liquors kept in that house and that house was itself more
than a hundred years old. A long time back it was kept there still, some of them you see, and we could
have sent them to England to sell - would have been a good idea.
So the older it is, it's better. This Lakshmi I think becomes old and dies and there is A-Lakshmi.
A-Lakshmi means when you have money and you don't have the qualities of a person who should
have money. In that quality ofA-Lakshmi you become very miserly, you don't even want to help your
brothers and sisters, you don't want to give any money to anyone. And even if you give it, you give it to
false gurus and wrong things. This is up to, we can say, is A-Lakshmi, the behaviour becomes very
arrogant. So arrogant that you behave like horses, you know. People look like horses, they walk like
horses - but I don't know if the horses have ego. If you see these people you just don't understand
what's gone wrong with them, you see.
There was one gentleman who started an aeroplane business, aeroplane business in India. I won't
take his name, but say some "Majidhia" or someone. And My granddaughter met him with My
grandson-in-law, and they were walking like this, talking like this, you see, they can't understand
these two persons. So they came and talked to them, who you are and all. And then they said, "We are
this Majidhia." So My granddaughter said, "Who is Majidhia?" My goodness, they fell from heavens,
"You don't know who are Majidhias! Do you read newspapers or not?" Then her husband came in. He
said, "I do. Now what do you want to say?""We are Majidhias!" He said, "Who are Majidhias?" “You
don't know? What sort of business you do, what is this?" Such stupid things they did that these
children felt that there's no use having any business, if business means this kind of behaviour, very
indecent, very arrogant, they don't know how to relate to people, they don't know. And after some time
I heard that their business was completely finished - it was a flop they call it, flop.
So now, we have to realise that this Lakshmi, how it takes us to wrong things. Firstly, She makes
you very egoistical, somehow. When a man who has money starts behaving like that - one cannot
understand how a person who was normal, suddenly becomes like this, starts talking like this. He
might earn money even in the horse races. Around the Lakshmi is the valency of Dharma. There is -
around the Lakshmi - is the Dharma. And this Dharma if you cross that's the best place where they can
cross, the Dharma. Then you can do whatever you like which is Adharmic, which is irreligious, which
is hideous. You have to just cross that limit of Dharma, you have to just deviate from Dharma.
Now as I have said on many a times that there are ten valencies human beings have got. But apart
from that, there are many Dharmas which are surrounding us - like angels. Like first Dharma is your
Love for humanity, is the first Dharma.
But if you say from that end when you start, it starts with Sree Dharma, is the Dharma of the
woman - how she should live, how she should get married, how she should look after her children,
what should be her behaviour, all is Sree Dharma.
And then is Patni Dharma, is the wife, wife's Dharma, what should be her Dharma? In her
Dharma she looks nice, if she gives up her Dharma then she is a prostitute.
So then is Pathi Dharma, how should be a husband? How should he behave towards his family,
how should he pay attention towards his wife, about the whole, entire family, the whole, you can say,
Parivara they call it the whole, all the relations and everything. That is his Dharma.
But beyond that is the Dharma of Satya Dharma, how much he sticks to truth.
Then the Dharma for Creativity. In creativity as you know very well these days, with money
people are standing on their heads or I don't know how, what they are doing, because the amount of
nonsense they are producing all over the world in the name of modernism, is no way is Khala Dharma,
no way.
Then we have also what you call politics, Rajkaran Dharma. This also Dharma is there. Now
5
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page5.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
taking bribes, I mean, the kind of things that are going on, corruption, all kinds of things that are going
on, competition and fighting and all that. They are falling from their Dharma of Rajkaran.
6.
Education same thing, we call it as Shikhshada - Shikhshada. All such things are dharmas, there's
a kind of a principle which we have to keep, otherwise you can topple down from the Lotus and that's
what happens. Now we have also Rashtra Dharma. The Rashtra Dharma is that your country, you
must, their's a Dharma of your Rashtra. When you have to fight for your country you should, but you
should not be aggressive on other countries, not try to dominate other countries, nor you should bring
bad name to your country.
It's very important. Sahaja Yogis have all these intact, absolutely, because you are standing on the
lotuses already. You don't have this problem, normally not. Once in a while there are people who
behave like that, but mostly Sahaja Yogis don't fall into these traps. That's why their Lakshmi tattwa
will definitely improve. They'll have little problems here and there, but without problems if you get
Lakshmi you'll not have value for Her. So with little problems you get the Lakshmi. But Lakshmi it
doesn't give you all this imbalance. Such a man has to be extremely balanced because beyond that is
the step of Mahalakshmi, where your seeking starts, where you become a seeker. You go beyond
Lakshmi principle and this Mahalakshmi principle starts coming into you.
I would say in the western countries this consumerism has started and it's such a funny one. In
America one lady was married to an Indian and he used to tell Me how this consumerism works. I said,
"How?" He said, "I gave my wife money to buy two shirts for me because I had no shirts. So she went
and bought five skirts. So I said, “You have so many skirts, why did you buy the skirts?" "Because
with this money I could buy five skirts instead of two shirts, so I bought five skirts". So he said “I can't
wear skirts. (Laughter) So how should I correct her?", he said. I said, “You do one thing: tell her I want
to buy some skirts for her, and go and buy five shirts". Then she will realise that if the money was
given to her for one purpose, it should be used for that.
99
This is a very subtle principle which I follow because I don't understand money. So what I do -
whatever money I get I put packets. This is for this, this is for this, this is for this - into packets. But I
don't understand you know and I don't write accounts, you know. I'm very bad at all that, somebody
else does that. Now, if I spend some money from one pocket for some emergency, then I again fill it
back, it's written there, so much is there, so much is there. So the money is available at the right time
for whatever I want to do, and the money is in the packet. It is, not in the, sort of a open thing, that I can
just want to buy a Mercedes, I want to buy a Rolls Royce, no, nothing doing, it is for something, some
purpose, and there is no need.
So when you go to the shop and you see something you won't buy it because that money is not
kept for that particular thing. For Sahaja Yogis it's very easy to handle their money with respect. So
you go to any shop, you won't buy anything, but My nature also is spontaneous. So I went to Frankfurt
changing, they said, "Mother, there's a very nice watch shop". I just thoughtI'm going to get three son-
in-laws, and what will I give them. So I went to that shop and I found such beautiful, beautiful things,
but I had not kept any money for the watch. But I said, "I must buy." One of the watches turned out to
be a very unique one, I must tell you, which is no more available. Because of My eyes, I saw this
something unique and My son-in-law is so, I mean, overwhelmed, so overwhelmed, he's quite rich, he
has no problems, but he said, “This watch you cannot get." Then an article came about that particular
watch, so he's kept it with him.
You see, so to have something - it should have a value behind it, that is the Dharma part, value
behind it. What is the value? When you want to buy something just don't buy because you're mad, I
mean instead of shirts you buy skirts, not that way. But anything that has an artistic value or some
special value - then you should buy that.
Now this Sari I'm wearing - it has a special value, why? Not that it is made with hands, is a very
beautiful design it has, no. This was made in a place called Paithan, which was the capital of a
6.
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page6.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
kingdom, which belonged to My forefathers Shalivahanas. And these Saris were made there, Paithan
and they used to sell it to people. Now they have become expensive, in those days they were cheap.
Now it has that value. They're very honest, very religious, they were called Shalivahanas, because
they used to give shawl to the Goddess. They spread their kingdom very much and also there is a
calendar in their name, but the kind of life they led. They were just very generous people and they have
made beautiful temples, beautiful places for people to rest near the river, I mean so many beautiful
things they have done. Apart from that, Rama and Sita when they went to Dhandakaranya they went to
this place and you have the place where Sita took Her bath - Her bathing place, there's a little river
flowing there. And how it was covered from all the sides and how the light was coming, so beautiful.
But whatever Rama had done they redecorated it with the Rajput style art.
Then also there was a very beautiful temple I saw that they had made. Also I don't know how
there was some water flowing. And there was Shri Mahadeva's, a big thing, Pindha - very big. And
also there was a Parvati's statue, so old as that. I don't know if it was put by Rama or by these days, My
own - you can call them, the great, great, great grandparents. But the beauty about that place that it
shows that Sita used to worship Mahadeva. The water was flowing somehow by nature, inside up
there in a stream, and She used to take the water and put it on that Pindha. How deep these people
were, those who built that temple. Such a beautiful temple they have built. See so many temples are
built like this in India, by people who had money, and they believed that if you spend your money in
this kind of work you are blessed.
I bought a land near the River Neera, that's My home name, Neera. And this land, I just bought it
just like that without thinking. And what they told that their Guru - Shalivahanas - Guru was
Shandilya and this place belonged to him long time back, which was an ashram of Shandilya - exactly
the same. And that land I bought very surprisingly, then in the newspaper it came out everything about
that land, and that - this land was the place where a great devotee of Shri Vishnu, Pralahda, was
praying. So you must have heard about Pralahda. His mother had a husband, in a long time,
Hiranyakashapu was her husband, a horrible rakshasa. So she ran away from there and who helped
was Indra. He brought this lady to the place of Guru Shandilya and Shandilya told Him, Indra that,
"You don't put any effort for her, I'll look after her, and the child that is going to be born to this lady is
going to get the Avatara of Narasimha" - you know Narasimha is the man and the lion. He said, "How
can that be?" He said, "It is so." So Indra left her there, the child was born, till 5 years that child used to
play in that land which I have bought. But I didn't know about it, but I just saw it, I was surprised. But
when the child grew up after 5 years he had to go back to his father. I don't know how many of you read
about Pralhada, raise your hands, I would like to know. The little boy Pralhad, let me see, who was
killed and, I mean, his father tried to kill him and torture him, but he had certain boons so Shri Vishnu
appeared as Narasimha, means the lion and the human form. And then he killed this Hiranyakashapu,
the father. Now imagine, how much - big it was, that thousands of years back this must have
happened, and that I should purchase that land only. And there is a very beautiful temple built about
300 years back by Maharashtrians.
So the story is that Pralhada came into the dream of the people who wanted to build the temple
and told them that, "I have already made the statue of Narasimha along the river Neera", - imagine the
name of the river is also Mine – "and if you can walk along the banks of Neera river very close to the
temple, I have made the statue in sand." It's a miracle, so when there they went there and they saw that
statue, they brought it back and installed it in that temple, and it's still there, made of sand. Also they
say there's a kind of a river or a water flow up to, very small one just like the finger, flows down from
the top, God knows how.
I
6.
6.
So, now see the value, the value of money which was collected to build this temple had such an
old value. So the value is not money - this one should understand. What is the value of the thing? You
want to give to something to others, then the feelings you have in your heart is the value, and that value
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page7.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
is the real Lakshmi.
When you are, say, building a house, the plans you make and things you do, what is the idea
behind and what you are trying to express through that house is the value of that house. Once you
understand that you have to buy, with this Lakshmi, or you have to use this Lakshmi for certain value,
and not for showing off or for money. This superficialness that we have about money itself is like an
ordinary glass, but if you put behind the glass the mercury, you can see the value. So when you start
buying something, what is the purpose, why are you buying it - this will determine the value.
Like, last time I came to Portugal and I said, “This year we'll go and buy some Terracotta", but
they are very expensive. I said, “This is the price", but I wanted to buy Terracotta from Portugal,
because it's very rich in that. So we went to one factory, and the factory was quite far out, none of them
could find out, but I told them, "It's here only just go and see." And then we bought the Terracotta. But
on our way I told, "Stop, stop here, stop." So they stopped, there was a shop. I had to buy some things
for Sahaja Yogis in India, and also for some people in Cabella. And that shop had such beautiful
cottons. They were Sahaja Yogis from here who saw it, such beautiful clothes and I bought lot of it. I
said, “Thank God the problem presents are finished now for India." So joy-giving it was, everybody
was surprised - why, suddenly in a place where never had been Mother there, suddenly She finds
them. It has a value, because I wanted to buy something for Indians to be given as present.
99
99
99
99
So if your Lakshmi is, say, this much, once you add to it value it becomes so big. The sign of a
person who is Lakshmipathi is this - he should have a house like the lotus in the hands of the Goddess,
he should protect people who are depending on him, and from the left hand he should give. This is the
image of the Lakshmi. This is what the Lakshmi is within you, if you have these four things in balance,
without conditioning, without ego, then you are a Sahaja Yogi - otherwise you are not.
On a Diwali day we have to promise ourselves that whatever we are going to get now as Lakshmi
principle or as a Lakshmi's prasad should be used in getting things which has value. And thus you will
learn that you have used your Lakshmi very well, and with that your Mahalakshmi principle become
very strong. Will become very strong by which you'll ascend very fast.
Today is the day for us to celebrate the Lakshmi Puja, but Lakshmi Puja doesn't mean that
worship money. Money as it is, is the most dangerous thing, and I think it is the hidden
Lakshmi Devi. See, if you try to misuse Her, She goes on punching with it. With when one punch if
you don't realise then She gives you another punch, like that. Then She might little bit twist you, to
suggest. She'll try everything, to convince you that what you are doing is nonsense - ultimately She
sees your destruction completely.
So, Lakshmi, though She is the one who is a giver of boons, giver of everything, you should not
be mislead by her Mahamaya character. I'm your Mother so I better tell you to be very careful.
you
of
weapon
Thank you very much!
8.
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page8.txt 
 MARATHI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
सारांश (Excerpt)
Scanned from Marathi Chaitanya Lahari
खुलास होणार आहेत. न्यांच्या जाळयात अइकणार लोकही सारे
भ्रष्टाचारी, पापी, अप्रामाणिक असे अधरमी लोकच: त्याच्यात
आज आपण शी लक्ष्मीपूजेसाठी एकत्र जमली आहीन
भारतामध्ये दिवाळीला श्री नक्ष्मीची पूजा केली जाते. कारण त्या
दिवशी तिने नरकासुर
श्रीक्ष्मी समुद्मधनातून वाहेर आली तिची अनंक रूपे आहेत.
लक्ष्मी आपल्याला संपत्ती वे समृद्धी देणारी देवता आहे, ती फार
कृपाल आहे: ती कमळामध्ये उभी असल्यामुळे अल्येत नम्र आहे.
आपला भार कुणावरही टाकत नाही. सध्याच्या यगातील
महामाचचा ती एक प्रत्यग आहे. लोकानी ती पैसा देते पण ती
प्रथम माता आहे है ल्याना समजत नाही. श्रीलक्ष्मीबद्दल जेव्हा स्हणता पण याचा शेव्ट फार भवानक होत असतो. पेसा ही
लीक विकृत कल्पना करून धेनात तेव्हा ने लोक वे तसे देश
वीचा विनाशकाल सुरू होती. म्हणजे लक्ष्मासारखे कमळावर तोल
संभाळून आपल्याला उभे राहता आले पाहिजे नाही नर खाली
चिलात पड़ायची आणि त्यातील किड्यामुख्याच्या भक्षस्थानी
पड़ायची बेळ बेईन. कमळावर उभे राहणे म्हणजे मावेमबून
उल्पन्न होणाया सर्व माहापासून अलिप्त होणे. संस्कृतमध्ये
रतुक्षमाला माया असही म्हणतातः न्याच अर्थाने एखाद्याजवळ प्रेसा
असला की त्याच्याकडे बरीच मावा आहे अशी भाषा बोलली
जाते. ही माया पण जादू करते. पैसा हैच जर सर्व प्रश्नांचे उत्तर
असते तर जगात प्रश्नच उरले नसत. ज्योच्याजवळ पैसा आहे
त्याचा अखेर नाशच झालेला दिसती किंया त्याच्या एक-दोन
पिढयांत ने एय्य संपून जाते
आपल्यामधील लक्ष्मीतत्त्व एका अर्थनि विचित्र आहे.
म्हणने एखाद्याजवळ महागी कार असली तर लोक लगेच
म्हणतान, "वा, केवढा मोठा माणूस! तसेच एखाद्याजयळ
अनेक बंगले, इस्टेट असली नर त्याला समाजात मान दिला
जाना. कारण है कन्नियुग आहे. तीच गांष्ट ऐटवाज, शरीमती सारी नावे दकषण आफ्रिकेतील: त्यांच्यात सुज्ञता उरलीच नसायी.
पेहराव करणाया व्यक्तीवहल, इंग्नंडमध्ये "Saville Row"
नावाचा एक भाग आहे. निधे सूट ध्याबचा असंल तर ३००० कमावता. मंग ल्मीचे आशीर्वाद मिळणचात कार्य मोटेसे? नसे
पाड लागतात, वर त्या सुटावर Saville Row है लेबल
चिक्रटबतात. असला आचरटपणा जगात सगळीकई चालला
पण बैणारच
ट, काळा बाजारवाल, स्मगलस है .
आजकाल लक्ष्मी-नत्वाच्या विरोधी वागण्याची प्रवृती
बळावत आहे. सहजयोगामध्येही असा एक माणूस सर्वावर नेहमी
दवाव दखिवणीरा होता, शेवटी न्याला सहजयीगातून काढून
टाकण्यात. आले आणि आता त्याने स्मगलिंगमध्ये नम बसवून
खुप पसा मिळवला आहे आणि है चांगलेच झाले असेही तो
.
नावाच्या राक्षसाला टार मारले
या
ग्वुप
माणसाला लागणारी कीड असते; जी न्याच्या जीवनातील सर्व
सभ्यता, उच्च मूल्ये इ. ना खाऊन आकते. मुलाला गैरधदे करून
खप पसा मिळू लागला की तो आई बडील बहीण-भाऊ सर्वांना
विसरती. म्हणजे एका अर्थानि लक्ष्मी अशा वेळी भूत बनते असे
मी म्हणेन आण तिच सर्व आशी्वाद तुमच्या सभ्वेतेला आव्हान
देऊ लागतात.
अमेरिका हा थीकृष्णांचा वैश- ते कुबेरच आहेत. पण मी
पाहते की त्वांच्याजवळ पैसा नसता कारण ते सर्व उधारीवर
चालचतान. भारतातून तिकडे गले्या लाकानां भारतीत परते वेणे
अवघड जाते कारण त्यांनी तिथे बरेच कर्ज काढलेले असने. बंका
वीना कसलेही कर्ज नाबडनीब देतात, सगळी खरेदी उथारीचर
म्हणून चैनीत रहावरची त्यांना सबये होते दोन-दोन तीन तीन
गाड्या, त्यासुद्धा महागड्या, इतके सर्व जमवाबचे कशासाठी?
द्याला लक्ष्मी म्हणत नाही; लक्ष्मी तुम्हाला सभ्यता समूद्धी व
सन्मान देते. कदाचित अमेरिकन लोकांना है समजने असेल
म्हणून न टान करू लागले.
टान कुपाला दिले पाहिले तर
पण
म्हणून सोळा वर्षांचा मुलगाही निथे जानी आणि खुप पैसा
असेल तर लक्ष्मीची कृपा असलेला माणूस वैडयासारखा
मूखर्खासारखा वागू लागती आणि शेवटी त्याची स्थिती कुत्राही
स्वाच्याकडे पाहणार नाही अशी होते असे का होते?
पसा आणि लक्ष्मी बात काय फरक आहे? लक्ष्मी तुम्डाला
पेसा देते हैं टीक आहे; पण त्या पैशाचे पूढे कार्य होते ह? ही फार
रुक्ष्म गांष्ट आहे. भारतात नोकराला शेंभर रूपये दिले, की
चाललाच तो हातभर्टीकडे! याचा अर्थ पैसा मिळाला. की त्याचा
गएवापर, अपायकारक वापर सुरू मग ती लक्ष्मी कुटे गेली ? तर
निने आपले रूप बदलले आणि ते इतके बाईट झाले की
बरबाद करु लागले स्हणजे लक्ष्मी कशी वापरावची हेहि कळले
अहे, कपड्याना, रहने-सहनला काही अधच उरला नाही, बा
सर्वांची अखेर म्हणजे स्विस-बंक: तिथले लक्ष्मी- तत्व उग्र रूप
धारण करू लागले आहे आणि ते लोक भवभीत झाले आहेत.
ज्यू लोकचि सोन्याचे दात मागण्यापर्यंत बाची मना गेली आहे.
आणि ल्यांनी फार मोटे सैन्य ननान कखून टेवले आहे. त्यांना
ते जमले नाही.
तुम्हाला
कोण पादाक्रांत करणार आहे? नेपात्तयनलाही
हे सर्व त्यांच्या अहंकाराचे परिणाम आहेत. पण आना न्यांच्याबर
हलला होणार आहे आणि तो फार भयंकर असल्यामळे त्यात ते पाहिजे मला जर पसा मिळाला तर मी का करते? मी बाजारात
9.
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page9.txt 
 Marathi Translation (English Talk)
त्यांना अमचा उपास असल्यामुळे काही खाणार नाहीं असे माझया
पनीन सांगितले मा गमतान त्यांना म्हटल का आपल्याला इतक्या
टिकाणी जेवाबला योलाकले आहे नर उपास-उपास असे कितींदा
सांगणार? त म्हणाले, राज नसे सांगाव लागले नरी हरकत नाही,
पग तेच बरे. इतके घाणेरड चाज पण ने ्हणतात की दोनशे
वर्षांचे नने आहे म्हणून स्पेशल आहे. नी विचित्र आवड व वास
पाहून माझ्या डोळान पाणीच आने. कारण मला बाटले की
मेल्यावर या लोकांना नरकातही जागा मिलणार नाही, त्याचा वास
आल्यावर तिथुनही आकलतील
मग त्या चीजवी कहाणी मी बाचली नी अशी पूर्वी खुप
वर्फ पडले होते तेव्हा लोकांनी दूधाचे माटे-मोटे हेंड र त लपवून
टेवले होते. पंधरा-बीस दिवस बर्फ पड़त होते आणि चा दुधाचा
लोकांना विसर पडला. एक वर्ष गल्ावर तिथुन वास बेज
लागला आणि जाऊन पाहतात नर व्या दुधाच
जाणार, चांगल्या वस्तू निवडणार, है अमक्या सहजयोग्याला
देणयासाठी, हे अमक्या आश्रमाला देग्यासाटी; म्हणजे मन कसे
एक प्रकारे सामाजिक बनू लागने पहा. मी सजस्थानात गले होते.
सगळीकईे बाळूच वाळू आणि अर्धपोरटी रजोक संग या लोकांनी
पैसा कमावण्यासाठी काय करावे असा विचार मी करू लागले.
मला वादले की यांना न तुटणारीः न फुटणारीच काच (जी फक्त
फ्रान्समधेच बनते) बनवण्याची फैक्टरी काढून देऊ. आजकाल
अशा काचव्या कप-बशातून चहा देणे हैं उच्चभ्ू जातीचे लक्ष्ण
मानंतीन. तर इथे वाळू भरपूर आहे आणि ती या कारखान्याला
खुप लागणार, म्हणून या गरीब लोकांचा उदरनिर्वाह होईल म्हणून
अशी फंक्टरी काढप्याचे मी टरकले.
मी एकदा वारणाला गेले होते. तुम्हीपण एकदा तेथे आला
होतात. तिथे एक गांधीजींचा शिष्य होता: त्यानेच वारणाची दूध-
कंपनी चालू केली; को-ऑपरेटिव्ह संस्था सुरु केली आणि न्यांचा
धेंदा बांगला चालून खूप पैसा मिळवला. मग त्यांने कंपनीनल्या इथून सारा सन्यानाश सुरु झाला. साधारणतः आदल्या दिवशीचे
मजूर लोकांना कर्ज देणवास सुरुवात केली. मी तिथे गेल्यावर तो
माझवाकडे आला आणि पाया पड़न म्हणाला माताजी, मी दोन-नीन दिवस ठेवले तरी चालते
बारणा संस्था एवढी धडपड करून बाढवली पण नरीडी मी
असमाधानी आहे. काय करावे कळत नाही. इथली परिस्थिती नीच ्रकार दारूचा. किती वर्षांची जुनी आहे यालाच महत्त्व
फार बिवडली आहे. मुंबईच्या वैश्या इथे वेऊन धेदा करू
लागल्या, मुंबईच्या लोकांनी इथे येऊन दारुची दुकाने चालू केली
लोकांना सिगारेट मादक संबन यांची सवय लागली; मुले फार
बिघडली आहेत,
आईवाइलानाही मारतात. हे सर्व गांधीजीव्या शिकवणुकीविरुद्ध रहायचे
आहे. हा सर्व जक्ष्मीचा शाप आहे." इतके बोलून तो रड लागला
लक्ष्मीकडन हा शाप कसा आला? लक्ष्मी नाभीमध्ये आहे. आणि
ती जैव्हा कार्य करु लागते तेव्हा खा-खा सुटुन माणूस सारखें
खात सुटनो, वेड्यासारधा खात सुटनो, नाभीवर कुणी भूत बेऊन
जेवायला मागत असल्यासारखा खात राहता मग तुम्ही साधारण
साणूस खाऊ शकणार नाही इतके खाता- अर्थात श्रीमंत
माणसांची सबय तशीच आहे. वर मग आहाराच्या शास्वाची चर्चा
सुरु करतात. खाण्याच्या एटिकेटसुबर भर देतान. आज दिवाळी
आहे म्हणून या गमतीदार विषयावर मी बोलणार आहे
फ्रेंच राजदूतीवरोबर मी बच्याच पाट्यांना गेले आहे. तिथे योग्यता नाही त्याच्या हातात पैसा येणेः अशा वेळी त्या माणसाला
मजाच असते. मी आणि माझे पर्ती डिक घत नाही. पार्टीला
जेमल्यावर आज कुठले डिक ध्यावचे याच्यावर चर्चा करण्यात
पाऊण तास बालवतात. मग त्यात एकमत होतच नाही कारण
व्हरावरटी हवी ना! मग प्रत्वेकजण वेगवेगळे मागत राहती. बाला
ते एटिकेटस् समज़तात. आम्ही दोघेजण नुसने त्यांच्याकडे बघत
राहतो, निथून जावेसे वाटू लागते. मग जेवणाची सुरुवात. तिथेही गोष्टीकडे कसा वळतो है लक्षात व्या. सर्वप्रथम तुमचा अहंकार
प्रत्येकजण वेग-वैगळे मागत राहती. या बाबतीत भारतीय बरे बळावती: विशेषनतः व्याला रेसा मिळाला नी व्यक्ति अहंकारी
असे ते तहेवाईकपणा करतात. आणि पाहुणचार करणारा न्वाचे
कौतुक करते राहतो. जेवणातील चीजला धाणेरडा वास येत
होता. आम्हाला ओकारी आल्यासारखे वाटू लागले म्हणून आम्ही
चीज
बनून गंलले
अन्न सया दिवशी खाऊ नये, पण आजकाल किज असल्यामुळे
. ज
पण चीजचा हो प्रकार मला क्रळेना पया न्यांना त्याचेच भूषण
दुसर्या
हाजांवर हेच करावे लागते
जितकी जुनी तितकी किमतही जास्त आअसा हा भूताटकीचा
प्रकार म्हणून लक्ष्मीच्या स्थानावर जव्हा अशी भुते बेतात तैळा
सारा लुबाडण्याचा हव्यास सुरु होना; पसा, लोक, देश, भुकनती
जनता सायांना बिनादिककत लुटायचे आणि पशाच्या माग धावत
आंजबात करीत नाहीत
अभ्यास
ईंग्रेज लोक भारतात आले त्हा ते लाघ ध्यावचे
दिवाळीच्या दिवशी व्यांना भेटाला जाणााला काही बक्षिस (भेट)
घेऊन जाबलाच लागायचे, आणि त्यांची सवांत आवडती गोष्ट
म्हणजे देशी दवारु, माझे परती मीरतला कलेक्टर म्हणून आले ता
आम्ही आमच्या बंगल्यावर प्रथम गला नर नि्ध दारूच्या बाटल्या
पडलेल्या माझ्या मनात आले की बा बादर्या ईग्लइला पाटवून
विकाव्या स्हणजे पैसे मिळतील! म्हणजे जितके जुने तितके
चांगले. एकदरीत लक्ष्मी पण अशोच म्हातारी होऊन नहीशी होते
आणि तिथे अलक्ष्मी येते. म्हणजे ज्या माणासाची तशी लायकी व
टानत नसते, दूस्याला मदन करण्याची तबारी नसने आणि
दिलेच तर अनाटाची गोष्टींसाटी, आण वर ते उद्दाम बनतात;
जनावरसारखे वागू लागतात. त्यांच्याकडे पाहले नर त्यांची ही
अवस्था का झाली समजणार नाही
त्नकष्मी तत्चवीचा आदर न केल्यास माणूस चुकाच्या
बनते. आधी अगरदी साधासुधा बाटणारा मनुष्य एकदम असा
कसा बोलावला लागतो, जदट बनती समजत नाही. रेसेसचा नाद
ग की पैसा हानी बेना. नाभीच्या भोवताली धर्माचे स्थान
10
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page10.txt 
 Marathi Translation (English Talk)
थे, हणजे तिला ज्याच्यासाटी पसे
मयादी तुम्हाला आलांडाव्या असे चाटत असेले तर तुम्ही कसेही दिले या कामासाठीच ते चापरावे है समजेल मला पैशाबहल
काहीही समजत नाही म्हणून मी हाच निवम पाळते. मी अशी
उन्लंधन केन्यावरच है जोणार मानवाला दहा मूलभूत धर्मान्ञा पत्द्धन वापरते की पैसे चापरतांना मी ते वेगवेगळवा पाकिटामध्ये
बादन टेवने आणि प्रलत्येक पारकटावर व्या पशातुन काय चिक्त
मानवाबद्दल ग्रेम ही पहिला धर्म, किंवा दुसया बाजूने बघितले व्यावचे ते लिहनू टेबते, एऐखादे बेलस एका पाकिटातले पैसे
दूसया क्टिल्वा जरूरीच्या कामासाठी चापरले तर पुन्हा त्यात
तेवढे पैसे परत टवने. न्हणजे मला जेव्हा खरेदी करायची असते
आहेत. तसाचे पति-धर्म: नवत्याने कटुबात कसे वागावे. त्याचे तेव्हा त्याचे विशिष्ट पार्कीट बेत व तो खर्च करते. आता तुम्ही
्हाणाल की मसिहीज गाडी वर्गरे साटीही असेच करते असेन तर
नसे नाही. बाजारात गेल्वावर एरादी बस्तु कणाला देण्यासाठी
आवइली नर त्याचे पैसे पाकिटात बालून टेवने व मग केव्हातरी
नी खरेरदी करते असे केल्याने द्कानात गेले आणि खरेदी करने
लीमामुळे कलेच्चा बावतीतही बेेवाकई प्रकार वालले आहेत. जे सुटले असे होन नाही. सहजयास्याना पेशाचा चापर आदराने
कसा करायचा है चांगले समजत. टूकानात जातील पण काहीच
देचानही भ्रष्टाचार, स्पर्धा. हेर्वे-द्ावे बा प्रकारमिले इथही खरदी न करता बाहेर पड़नील. माझा स्वभाव मा्च सहज आहे
फ्रेंकफुर्टमध्ये मी होते तेव्हा तिथे घड़थाळाचे चांगले दुकान
आहे असे लीकांनी सांगितले. माझे तीन जावई येणार होते
होत्या.
आहे. लक्ष्मीने लिथे धर्म प्रस्थापित केला हे आणि या धर्माच्या
सांगून स्वतंःसाटी पाच शर्टस
बागा. पण तो अधर्म होईल, हीन प्रव्ती होईल. पण धर्माचे
दिल्या आहेत पण त्याशिवाय तुमच्या भोवनी अनेक धर्म आहेत.
तर स्त्री धर्म हा प्रथम स्त्रीने कस बोलाये चालावे. विवाहित.
स्ट्रीन कसे रहावे, मुलांबाळाना करे वागवाचे, इ. सर्व स्त्री धर्म
कर्तव्य कार्य इ स्हरणाजे कटुंब व नातेवाईक यांच्याबरीवर
बागण्याचे धर्म पुण या
म्हणजे सत्य-धर्म तो सल्यायरावर किनी प्रामाणिक असती ही धर्म,
त्यानंतर निर्मितीचा कलाधर्म अजकाला पेशाच्या
सर्व धर्माहन त्याचा महत्त्वाचा धर्म
चा धर्माच्या युर्णपणे विरोधान आहे. तसेव राजकारण धर्म या
पति
गैरम्रकार चालले आहेत. नेही या धर्माचे उत्नंघन आहे. तोच
प्रकार शिक्षण-थ्मवहल, आपला आणखी एक बर्म हणजे राष्ट्र
धर्म, राष्ट्राच्या संरक्षणासाठी बुन्धाला नवार असणेः अर्थान दूसरे
डेश पाटाक्रांत करणे त्यांच्याबर आक्रमण
म्हणुन मा न्या दुकानात गेले: नि्े खुप छान छान बस्तु
करणे, वर्चस्व पण घडाळासाठी मी पैसे घेतले नव्हते, निथले एक धड्याळ
गाजवणे, आपल्या राष्ट्राची बदनामी होल असे वागणे. इ. सर्व फार छान होते. आता नसे मिळणार नाही. ते माइया इोळ्यांनी
राष्ट्र-धर्माला मान्य नाही असे अनेक अर्म आहेत आणि त्यातील बरोबर दाखवले, ते दिल्यावर माझ्या जाययाला आनंद झालाच
पणे ल्या घड्याळाचे फार कौतुक वाटले कारण तसे घड़याळ
मिळणे शक्य नव्हते; तसा ्याच्याजवळ पसा करमी नाही पण
सहजयीरगी लीकाना आधीच कमळावर स्थान मिळाले आहे म्हणून ्याने ते ठेऊन बेनले. काही विकत ध्यायचे असेल तर
त्याच्यामागे काहीतरी अर्थ असला पाहिजे हा अर्थ असणे हाच
हजयोगी खराब असेल पण साधारण सहजयोगी या मोहांना धर्म, तुम्ही जे घेता त्या वस्तूमध्ये विशेष अशी कलात्मकता किंवा
तसच काही खास वैशिष्ट्य असलेले चागले. आता माझी ही
साडी पहा, तिचे वैशिष्ट्य है की तिब्यावरचे डिझाईन फार संदर
आहे. नुसनीच हाताने बनवलेली आहे म्हाणून नवे, ती पैटणची
आहे. पेटण माइ्या पूर्वज राजघराण्याची-शालिचाहन-राजधानी
प्रॉब्वेम्समधुनच तुम्ही लक्ष्मीला नाणू शकाल, नक्ष्म तुमचे संतुलन डोती, तिथल्या साड्या बाजारात विकायला असत. आता
फार महाग झाल्या आहेत. त्याकाळी न्यामानाने स्वस्त होत्या. ने
धार्मिक होने. शालीबाहन म्हणजे देवीला
त्वाचे पालन करणे महन्वाचे व जरुरीचे आहे; नाहीतर तुमचा
नाल जाऊन केळा खाली पड़ाल याचा नम नाही. तुम्हा
या सर्व धर्माचे पालन करण्यास तुम्ही समये आहात एखाद टुसरी
वळी पडणार नाहीत आणि न्यांचे गष्ष्मातत्व सुधारणारच आहे.
आता थोई फार प्रॉवनेम्स असणार, पण काहीही प्रश्न बा
अडचणी न येता लक्ष्मीतन्त्वात उतरलात तर त्याची गख़री किमत
म्हणजे
हान-सहान
समजणार नाही
अशा ल
तुम्हाला
बिधड देत नाही. ज्याला नक्ष्मी-तन्च मिळाल बा अन्यत संतुलित
असलाच पाहिजे कारण त्याच्या पुढच्या पायरीवर महालक्ष्मी आहे
आणि इथुन पुढे तुम्ही साधक बनता. लक्ष्मीतन्वातृनच
तन्व तुमव्यामध्ये प्रस्थापित होते असते. आता या पात्र्चात्य
देशमध्ये ग्राहक जागरुक व्हायला लागले आहेत. याची एक
गंमत सांगते. अमेरिकेतील एक सहजबीगी मला तक्रार करत
होता की त्याने त्याच्या पत्नीला, जी भारतीय योगिनी आहे,
न्याच्यासाठी डोन शर्टसु आणाचला पैसे दिले त तिने बाजारात
जाऊन स्वतःसाठी पाच स्कटस बेतले. कारण म्हणून तिने
सांगितले की दीन शटसच्या पेशांतच प्ाच स्वटंस सिळाले मस
काय चाईट आहे? है कस ठीक समजवायचे असे न्याने
लोक फार प्रामाणिक व .
शाल देणारे न्यनी आपले राज्य खुप वाढवने: त्यंच्या नावाने
महाल्ष्मी-
कालगणना होते.
ते लोक उदार अंतःकरणाचे होते. त्यांनी बंधलेली मंदिरे,
नदीकाटी लोकांच्या निवासासाठी बांधणेले प्रसाद प्रसिद्ध आहेत:
श्रीराम देडकारण्यात बनवासात होते तेव्हा सीता ईथे स्नानासाठी
आली होती; तिथे एक लहानशो पण छान नदी होती. चारी
बाजूंनी बेढलेली असल्यामुळे निर्वान होनी श्रीरामानी जे काही
केले त्याला लोकांनी राजपूत कलैचा साज दिला. तिथे महादेवाचे
फार सुंदर मंदिर मी पाहिते, तिथे पाचनीचा पुतळा होता आणि
विचारल्यावर मी साँगिनले की तिच्यासाठी स्वक्टस् ध्यावचे असे विशेष म्हणजे तिथे पाणी कुटून सोडण्बाल आले होते कुणालाच
11
 19971102_Diwali Puja_Lisbon.pdf-page11.txt 
 Marathi Translation (English Talk)
माहीत नाही. त्या स्थानाचे वैशिष्ट्य म्हणजे सीता तिथे
महादिवांची पूजा करायला येत असे, तनेथील एका ओढ्यातील
पाणी नेऊन ती महादेवाच्या पिंडीला स्नान घालावची. भारतामध्ये
श्रीमंत लोकांनी अरशी खूप सुंदर सुंदर मंदिरे बांधलेली आहेत:
असे कार्य केनले की परमेश्वराचे आशीर्वाद मिळतात असा त्यांचा
विश्वास होता, तिथेच नीरा नदीच्या काटी मी काही जमीन
विकत घेतली. नीरा हे माझेच नाव- काही खास उद्देश नव्हता
पण लोकांनी सांगितले की ती जमीन शालीवाहनांचा
याची होती; त्यांचा तिथे आशमही होता म्हणे, तीच जमीन मला
विकत घ्यायची इच्छा व्हावी है आश्चर्यकारक होते. नंनर
पेपरामधून बातमी आली की थ्री विष्णूचा भक्त प्रल्हादनेही तिथे
तपश्चर्या केली होती. त्याच्या आईचे हिरण्यकश्यपू या भयानक
राक्षसाबरोबर लग्न झाले पण नवचाच्या त्रासाने ती निथून पळून
गेल्यावर इंद्राने तिला आधार दिला व शांइिल्य ऋषीच्या आथमात
आणून त्यांच्याजवळ टेवले. शांडिल्या ऋषींनी तिची व तिला प्रेमाची व सदृभावनेची
होणाया बालकावी सर्व काळजी घेण्याचे बचन दिले कारण
तिच्या पोटी विष्णूचा अवतार जन्म घेणार असल्याचे त्यांना ज्ञात
होते. नंतर मुलाचा जन्म झाला वे पाच वर्षापर्यत तो
आश्रमातच- जी जमिन मी आता विकत वेतली आहे तिथे
वाढला. मग तो प्रल्हाद आपल्या बइिलांकडे रहायला गैला, निथे
वाडलानी-हिरण्यकश्यपुने त्याचा खुप छळ केला य त्रास दिला
शेवटी विष्णूने नरसिंहरुय धारण केले व हिरण्यकश्यपूला ठार
केले. हे सर्व हजार वर्षापूर्वी घड़ले आणि तीच जमीन मी आता
विकत वेतली आहे. हा योगायोग बघा. तिथेच महाराष्ट्रीयन
्लोकांनी बांधलेले एक सुंदर मंदिरही आहे. त्याची कहाणी अशी
सांगतात की ते मंदिर बांधणाच्या लोकांच्या स्वप्नामध्ये प्रत्हाद
आला व त्याने त्यांना सांगितले की
पुतळा केला आहे आणि तुम्ही या नीरा नदीच्या किनाय्याने चालत पेशाची पूजा करणे असा अर्थ नाही. पैसा ही फार धातक गोष्ट
गेलात तर मंदिराच्या जवळच तो सायडेल," त्याप्रमाणे लोकांना
तो पुतळा मिळाला आणि तो मंदिरात आणून त्याची स्थापना
केली. असेही म्हणतात की त्या पुतळ्यावर करंगळीएवढी
पाण्याची धार पड़त राहते आणि ते पाणी कुटून येते कुणाला
माहीत नाही.
यावरुन पैंशाला कशी किंमत असते बधा. त्या मंदिराकरता जरी नेहमी बरदान दणारी असली, सर्व इंच्छा तृप्न] करणारी
जो पैसा जमवला त्या या पार्श्वभूमीचे मूल्य होते. म्हणजे पैशाला
्हणून तसे मूल्य नसते हे लक्षात घ्या. तुम्ही जे्हा दुसर्याला मेट तुमची आई आहे स्हणुन तुम्हाला सांगावेसे वाटते की सांभाळून
দ्हणून काही वस्तू देता तेव्हा त्या वस्तुमागील तुमच्या प्रेमाला
किंसत असते, महत्त्व असते. आणि हेच तुमच्यामधील खरे
रनक्ष्मी-तत्त्व. तुम्ही घर बांधताना नकाशे बनवता, नर्षाकाम
सजावट बगैरे करता त्याच्या पाठीमागच्या कल्पना व त्यामधून
तुम्ही काय सुचर्वात आहात याला किमत असते. म्हणजे तुम्हाला
लक्ष्मीकडून है सर्व मिळाले आहे आणि लक्ष्मीचा उपयोग तुम्ही
संपतीचे प्रदर्शन न करता दुसर्या चांगल्या उदिष्टांसाठी करत
आहात है तुम्हाला समजते. पैशाबहल माणसांना ज्या पीकळ.
वरवरच्या भावना असतात न्या काचेसारख्या असतातः पण त्याच
काचेला तुम्ही पारटीमागून पारा लावला तर त्यांची खरी किमत
तुम्हाला समजते. तुम्ही काही खरेदी करता तेव्हा ते कशासाठी
खरेदी करता याच्यावरुन त्याचे मौल टरत असते. मी जिथे जाते
तिथे बाहेरच्या सहजयोग्यांसाठी काही ना काही भेट-बस्तु
देण्यासाठी खरेदी करते असते. मी पो्तुगालसा गेले होते तिथे
टेराकोटाच्या फार सुंदर वस्तु असतात त्या बेतल्या. कवेला आणि
भारतातील सहजयीगयाना भेट देण्यासाठी वस्तु खरेंदी केल्या.
लोक म्हणून लागले माताज़ी इथे कथीच आधी आल्या नव्हत्या
त्यांना एकदम चांगल्या वस्तूचे दुकान कसे समजते मी स्वतःहूनच
टुकानासमोर
धांबायला सांगितले होते मग मी सांगिते मला भेटी द्यावला
शांडिल्य
गुरु
संगळबाबरीबरच चालत असताना त्यांना
त्या
आवडते आणि हीच त्या वस्तूंची खरी किंमत आहे.
अशा तहेने तुमच्यामधील लक्ष्मी, तुमच्या अंतःकरणातील
जोड मिळाल्यावर बळकट होते.
नक्ष्मीपति" हा शब्द याच अर्थाचा दयोतक आहे. लक्ष्मीच्या
हातातील कमळासारखे न्यांचे घर असावे, त्याच्यायर अवलेबून
असनेल्यांचे त्याने रक्षण केले पाहिजे आणि इाव्या हातातून दान
तीच े आहे
करत असावे. लक्ष्मीचे रूप असेच आहे;
तुमच्यामः
अहंकार आणि कन्डिशनिंग बांना थारा न देता या चार गीष्टी
तुमच्यामध्ये रुजल्या तरच तुम्ही सहजयोगी एरवी नाही
दिवाळीच्या वा शुभ वेळी आपण आसा निश्वय कर या की
लक्ष्मी-तत्त्व किंवा लक्ष्मीप्रसाद म्हणून आपल्याला जे काही मिळेल
त्याचा उपयोग आपण चांगल्या (ज्याला value आहे)
गोष्टींसाठी करु, म्हणजेच तुम्ही लक्ष्मीतत्वाचा आदर करता है
सिद्ध होईल. त्यातूनच तुमचे महालक्ष्मी तत्त्व सुधारेल आणि तुम्ही
अधिक उन्नति करुन घ्याल आज लक्ष्मी पूजा करायची म्हणजे
मी नरसिंहाचा बाळूचा
, "म
आहे आणि लक्ष्मीचेच ते गुप्त हन्चारे आहे. तुम्ही त्यावा दुरुपयोग
केलात तर लक्ष्मी तुम्हाला विमटे वेतल्वासारखे जागे] करल,
बेगवेगळ्या प्रकारे तुम्ही चूका करता आहात
आणून द्यायचा प्रयत्न करेल आणि नराही तुम्ही समजू शकला
नाही तर तुम्हाला चिनाशाच्या याटेवर साडन देईल. म्हणून नक्ष्मी
है
तुमच्या लक्षान
असली तरी तिच्या महामाया स्वरूपाला तुम्ही भुलू नका. मी
रहा.
सर्वांचे आभार,
12
