DIVINE COOL BREEZE Volume IX 1997 Issue 5 & 6 "It is very important to understand how valuable you are, how remarkably important you are realisation for what? To emancipate this world, to transform human beings to take the whole of this world into the realm of God. That is what you are here for" born at this time, got your аге H.H Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 Divine Cool Breeze 00 Issue 5- 6 1997 Volume IX Contents Sahasrara Pooja Guru Pooja '97 17 The Will of God Edited by: Yogi Mahajan Published by: Divine Cool Breeze 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud Pune 411 029 Printed by: Printek Phototypesetters 4A/1, Rajinder Nagar New Delhi 110 060 Phones 5784866, 5710529

 SAHASRARA POOJA Talk By H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Cabella - 4th May, 1997 Today we all have assembled here to worship the Sahasrara, as you have realised that Sahasrara is a very important part of the subtle system. Of course this is a great day. In 1970 this Chakra was opened by that what you have achieved, we have to see it. First of all when the Kundalini rises she gues to your Void where is your dharma, and your dharma gets established at the Nabhi Chakra. We can say, around the Nabhi Chakra your dharma gets established which is the innate Pure Universal Religion, but then the Kundalini rises higher Despite the establishment of the dharma we start becoming little aloof from other societies because we find they are amiss, they have no dharma. Also, I think we are afraid that we might get caught up with their adharmas. At that stage we don't want to cross the limits of Sahaja Yoga. we want to keep to Sahaja Yogis, to Sahaja Yoga programme, and to our personal Sahaj life. Of course, it IS important because first this Chakra must be fully nourished, and this Chakra actually moves around the Nabhi Chakra which we know as Swadhisthana Chakra. This Swadhistana Chakra is in a way very important because it supplies energy to the brain, so when dharma is established the subtle energy pushes through the Kundalini more energy for the Sahasrara, and also the energy for dharma which was in the Swadhistana starts flowing with it. It crosses over and starts rising in the Sahasrara. Till then we are not yet full Sahaja Yogis because one can become fanatic about Sahaja Yoga. I have seen people who are so fanatic that they cannot even meet people who are not Sahaja Yogis, they cannot even talk to people who are not Sahaja Yogis, and all the time they are frightened of meeting people who are not Sahaja Yogis. Of course you need not meet people who are evil, people who area against Sahaja Yoga, who talk against it, but those who are seeking the truth, it is our duty that we have to go to them. So whern it reaches the state where it is established in the brain, that time wwe go beyond dharma. Dharmateet- we become beyond. but up, Dharma means that dharma becomes part and parcel of our being, we cannot lose it. Sahaja dharma becomes within us a part and parcel which is a very great achievement because then you don't have to do any rituals, you don't have to worry about meeting other people, you don't have to worry that your vibrations will be harmed. Then you don't catch from anyone, you don't catch also other negative forces. No one can harm you. That I call as the completion of your Shradha. That time Sahasrara is so fully enlightened that you become dharma. We stoned, Now Christ had nothing to do with the prostitute, just the opposite of it. When he saw she was stoned he took a stone in his hand, and he says that those who think who have not sinned at all car throw a stone to me. And everyone was stunned. Why is he taking the side of a prostitute? He is a religious marn. He should also put stones on her. But he was standing on truth. That's exactly what happens to you when it is established in Sahasrara that you stand on truth. There is a little difference in dharma and in truth. A dharmic person might become too dharmic, illogically dharmic and go to the right or to the left. A dharmic person might think he is the superior person to others that why should he try to save anybody else, let them go to hell, who cares. This kind of an attitude can come in a person who is dharmic. Also I have seen some Sahaja Yogis who start new methods is Sahaja Yoga. You do like this it will be alright, you do like that it will be alright, because they are not strengthened at the point of dharma, so they start telling people that you do this way, do that way But when you rise to the point of uth, then you don't do any rituals, you don't need any rituals, you are not bothered because you are in dharma and here you are standing on the truth and truth is much greater than dharma. For example, a person who is standing on truth-he doesn't care for any absurd ideas about religion even about Sahaj religion. He doesn't care that after all this is Sahaj this is not Sahaj, he goes beyond. In the sense he sees can give the example of Christ Christ saw a prostitute being Divine Cool Breeze Vol IX Issue 5-6.

 a global truth within himself. He sees the truth which is all pervading, not only sees but he know and he feels that he is in that truth. So when dharma flowers into truth it's a very beautiful happening and that should happen to all of you. So many things can linger on if you are only on the dharma level. I have seen people going into ego, making money. Sometimes they don't even ask me and go on doing things which they should not do. They do wrong things which are not good for Sahaja Yoga. There is no humility about it and they den't understand that whether this dharma is standing on truth or untruth. We have to go to the foundation of dharma which is truth. As deseribed before it's a tree of life which has got its roots in the brain and the branches in the body. So you have to go to the roots ofeverything and that is the place where you reach when you are absolutely established in Sahasrara. In the Sahasrard are the roots of all these ideas we have or all these swarupas we have taken. We have now become dharmic. What is root of dharma? Why should we be dharmic? What is the need to be dharrmie? There are many people in this world who are extremely adharmic living very well. According to outvard expression we feel that they are very happy people, they are alright they are enjoying themselves while we are deprived perhaps of all the so-called enjoyments of this world. So at the state of only dharma things become very important to us which may not be standing on truth. There are so many things like that I can point out to you that how Sahaja Yogis falter, even after reaching dharma state they falter. I have seen people giving up their drugs, alcoholism, giying up other kinds of addictions, ever their language improves, their behaviour is charged, they become humbler people no doubt, but still they are conscious that they are standing on dharma. This consciousness has to disappear. At the state of Sahastara this consciousness disappears becaLIse truth is love and love is truth. That is the point where the Kundalini meets the Heart Chakra. As you know the Seat (Pitha) of heart is in the Sahasrara. When the Kundalini pierces through that Heart Chakra, what starts flowing in the brain, in the Sahasrara is the truth but truth that is love. There's a difference between truth as itself and truth that is love. It was out of love for that prostitute that Christ stood by her. He stood on the roots of truth no doubt, but what was flowing through FHis heart was the love, and the pure love. So now when we have pure love for someone, we see the whole thing in manner and it becomes very sweet. Otherwise truth can be very bitter, can be very painful, but truth which is adorned with love is just like a flower without the thorns. It's very interesting how a person who is pouring with love and is standing on truth-that's the personality you have to become. Now in the expression of love we can take an example to understand : Supposing I meet somebody and he is telling all kinds of horrible things about another person. I feel tremendous love for him as well as for the person about whom he is telling all these things. I take to lie, a complete lie, which is a truth, also in a way. I tell that person, see what are you talking. The person about whom you are saying all this has been just praising you all the time and here you are talking like this. Now this is not the truth actually, but you take the help of the lie, the other side of the truth, to bring out a friendship between the two persons. This is what is the work of love, that it tries to bring people closer to each other: to say things by which they become one, united. So all the divisive methods that we have used so far just disappear and we try to understand what is the method by which we can join people's heart. As it is, you are in collective consciousness, but this collective consciousness, if it is superficial voI can achieve great results like as you have done-may be you can build beautiful ashrams, vou can do all this. But when it is filled with love, then the joy is complete of collective consciousness. a different manner, we see a person in a different Now people talk of peace. You cannot have peace without this new awareness, we call collective consciousness, but in that also there has to be the main tatwa, principal of love. For example now, say Sahaja Yogis from Germany and Austria are going to Israel - It is very fulfilling. I was happy that they have chosen for this Puja, people from Israel, and then I found Israelies coming to Egypt, forgetting all that Moslems had done to them. It's really remarkable how people get attracted towards expression of Divine Cool Breeze Vol IX Issuc 5-6

 their lowe, to their fellow men, to other Sahaja Yogis, and once it starts growing you will be surprisud huw we can change this world. Most of the problems, human problems, are due to hatred and it is very commonly used-"I hate, I hate", it's absurdity, it's a sin to hate someone. Why do you hate someone? You can hate the sin, you can hate the evil, but you should not hate people just for hating sake. This hatred that we have is responsible for all the problems we have had so far. Because one person becomes very powerful, by dividing people he becomes very powerful, and these divisive things have really Crushed so many countries. For example our country was divided by the British, now they are having the division. This doesn't stop. By dividing us what has happened? All the countries that have gone away from India are suffering very much. Those people who tried to divide the country thought thhat they 'd become Prime Ministers, this that. Most of them have been murdered by their own peoaple. Yuu ean see clearly how hatred manifests itself! It starts from a small point and it manifests all over, very clearly it can be seen in any country being divided. There's no need to divide any country more hatred and more trouble. that creates In the same way in Sahaja Yoga we should not think of having divisions, Now we have got a beautitul land near to Ganges. Now people are thinking if they can have separate houses, separate compounds Why? You kriow how to live collectively, Vou enjoy collective life, So why do you want to haye separate houses? What sUcrets are we going to have from each other? After all whatever we do is known on the vibrations you cannot hide anything, so why have separate houses. Why do you want to have some. because in Sahaja Yoga there is no privacy. We know about everyone, what they ate put to, what NoeNLid are their problems, what chakras they are catching. Isn'tit? So there is no secret about anything in Sahaja Yoga. Everyone knows abou?everyone, so what's the use of having privacy - alsol can't understand. It's like this you see - still the mind is working like that. Then they are thinking of inheritance. I was saying that you can have inheritance, but if vour son is ot at Sahaja Yogi, what to do. We cannot keep a culprit there to trouble everyone. It is not the rules and regulations that are going to keep you happy and joined together, but it is the pure collective consciousness and its love. Because as vou know we have no proper organisations, we havE no clergvship, we hove nothing like that. Leaders also can shift more times than Ganges River can shift its course. So there is nothing like that. It's all on a shifty sand we are standing and, all the time, and your Mother is another one who tries all kinds of tricks. The reason is I want you to stand on rocks and this rock is emitting love is emitting that Divine Love, and the joy of that love is really so beautiful. For example, people would like to have their separate bathrooms, specially Indians, suddenly they have become British and British have become Indians. Indians want to have their separate bathrooms-Ldon't know why, and this is a Verv.common discase with Indians. And itis also spreading to other people want to have their separate bathrooms. In a collective life there is no need You don't even know, and it you ask me won't even know if I lhave been to bathroom or not, just go there and come back. finished. 1 have no time for all that. In the same way you also should have a concept of a societv which is living like an ocean, it the ocean rises they rise, it falls they fall-just one unison of Love. Iam expecting that kind of society at the foothills of the Himalayas, and I am sure all of vou realise that Himalaya being the Sahasrara of the world. Luckily I wanted it to be done before the Sahasrara Puja and it is done, with blessings of Himalayas. -I feel sometimes that they The Himalaya is also like the Sahasrara where the Kundalini has risen, where the vibration have cone Out, and in the sky you can see the vibrations. But this Himalayas is ruled by a wrathful Gud called Shiva that's the dangerous part of it. Sowe have to be very, very careful. lf we try to play around, if we try to take to hatred among ourselves, take to divisive methods, take to something that is not Sahaj, this wrathful God is sitting on pur head. He's also in Mecca, this is Macceshwar Shiva there. If you try to misbehave he comes out with his wrathfulness. Anywhere where you are you have to be that this Shiva is everywhere. Like one of these Lingas of Shiva is in Parli Baijnath in Maharashtra, and very careful Divnie Cool Breee Vol EX Tssne 5.0

 there people started another kind of Sahaja Yoga, also they were drinking on the day of the Shri Ganesha's celebrations, so the wrath of Shivalinga came and there was such a big earthquake Many people were lost but none of the Sahaja Yogis, and their centre was saved completely. Now we had a big fire also as you know last time and nothing happened to you, you are under protection: You are all the time protected. There was no wrath of Shiva that could work out anything. Fire could not do anything to you because you are under protection. But this protection is your Mother's love. It's not anything else but the love of your Mother, which very powerful, and which is protecting you and helping you. In the same way yOu develop that kind of love for others, for other Sahaja Yogis, for other people, for other things, for this mother earth, for all that. Your love cannot orily protect you but protect others also. Your attention as long as it is on yourself will start becoming smaller and smaller. I should have this, I should have that, I like this, I like that. All these topics will fall. You'll never say. "I like this". No question. What do I like? It is difficult for me to decide if I like anything-this I like, that I like, I like to be this way. Who are you? Ask yourself the question. Who are you? If you are the pure spirit it is nothing but love, and in love you think of others, the problems of others, you try to make others comfortable, you try to look after others and you don't just look after yourself and bother about yourself. This is what you have to reach. Though you may be dharmic, you may be in every way Sahaj, but still, unless and until you reach that state in your Sahasrara, I wouldn't say that you are alright. You have to work it out. For that, of course, meditation is very important. But the thing stops it is your mind. It is your mind that goes on telling you. All the time you watch your nind how it tries to guide you. How it tries to tell you – now what about me, what about my house, what about my children, what about my country. Like that you go on "my, my, my" – ltimately you end up into nothing. But when you say "you, you, you"-Kabira has said a beautiful thing about it. He says that when the goat is living it is saying : "meh, meh, meh" which means I. I, I. But when it dies, then they take out its intestine and put it on a Dhunkih, where they put if for the eleaning of the cotton. And that time what does that Dhunkih say: "Tuhi, tuhi, tuhi"- You are the one, you are, you are he calls all over. In the same way you have to think from other's point of view. Fist of all tuhi (Thou) when you say, you say it to your Guru or to God that you are -I am no more, I am dissolved, I am finished, I have become one with this ocean of love. And then you say to other: "you are, you are" that is Sahaj Culture. and that Sa lots of falsehood will fall off-falsehood that surrounds you and others. Like people try falsehood by saying something "I love you very much" and on the back they plan something very bad. They can do anything. Not Sahaja Yogis, they don't do it. They have reached the stage where they don't do it. But still if they don't do it they are conscious of it. All the time they are conscious, we don't do this, we don't drink-so what? We don't fuss about food. I mean all their things they have achieved they are very proud of it-that we are like this, we are that. You see, because you are the pure spirit, because you are that, so you have become that. How can you take pride in something what you are? Like somebody asked me : don't you feel proud that you are the Adi Shakti? I couldn't understand the question. I said see now, if I am Adi Shakti what is there to be proud, because I am that what is there to be proud. If I was not that then I would be proud of it, butI was, so what is there to be proud of. Like the sun, it shines, it's not proud that. "I am the sun", or if you are born, say, with your eyes and nose, a face like a human being, you are not proud : I am a human being, I am a human being-are you proud? In the same way if you are that what you are, you are not proud, you are not consciouIs of it, not at ail conscious. I mean, I never tell myself I am Adi Shakti there's no need to tell. But it is so, what to do. Now God has chosen me, I should say, to be Adi Shakti, alright, I can have it. But I just don't know what is there -as if like some people think, Sahaja Yoga has been bestowed upon them like some Lordship or something like that. It is what you have become-when you become, you must understand that you have become that. Like Divine Cool Breeze •5• Vol IX Issue 5-6

 supposing a stone becomes gold, then it is gold, it won't be proud that "Tm gold"=gold is gold Why will it be proud of that. In the same way this consciousness of being a Sahaja Yogi drops off. Still it lingers so one has to be careful that once vou are a Sahaja Yogi, vou are a Sahaja Yogi = so what Iam aSahaji, so what, nothing so great. If's like saying that I have a nose, voi see, and be proud of saving 1 have nose. Nose is already there, what is there to be proud of-but this pride has to go. That's very Fmportant to realise that I'm not there, I'm no more - l'm one of the whole- drop of mine-1 don'tkrw if there are any boundaries left in me? This kind of consciouIsness dev elops in you, when your consciousness is filled with joy -just with joy and bubbling with love-bubbling with love. You go on expressing your love, whethervou talkor vou don't talk, whether vou say something about it or not, whether vou are smiling or not, thiss jon is in vouur heart. become the Ocean, this Now the Heart Chakra the peetha (Seat) of the Heart Chakra. gets filled with light of truth, but the truth is not stuch an absurd thing that we know of as truth. Somebody asked me what is the truth. SoI said it was written long time back, that you should speak the truth and speak something that people will like - Satvam Vadeth P'rivam Vadeth. Then people said, hew can we make these two things? Truth may not be palatable and could be something vou say which people like, and may be false. so howw to make these two things meet Shri Krishna gave a very geOod answer, He said Satvam Vadeth Privam Vadeth, I'rivam Vadeth You say the truth, truth you nust sav, but that truth should be good. or should be liked ur should be appreciated or should be nourishing for vour spirit, by which there is benevolence which creates beneolence, and then it has to be priva. In the beginning, pcople may not like and say that "he said horrible things to me" or whatever it is-but at the end of it they ll say that sce, it's so good that it was said to me that I have done somethıng perfect. But in any case there is no need to say something VETY harsh or hard to anyone. That is not your joh to go on correcting all the rest of the people. To begin with, many Sahaja Yogis have been saving : vou've got this chakra caught up, you've got that chakra caught up. AIl this is the play of ego. You have no business to condemn anvone, you have come from such a condemned condition vourself, so wvhy are you condemning others. Only thing is if you are capable, if vou are equipped, if you are matured enough in Sahaja Yoga, then you will just take it up as a great challenge of love and you will do it. But vou won't go on condemning that person, finding faults with that person, it's a very good excuse if you don't want to do it Supposing somebody is sick and the doctor doesn't krow how tocure, so what does he do? He says vou see vou are sick because this happened, because vou went into the cold. But now I am sick so what about curing me? No, because VOu did this. you did that, vou should not have done this. All about the past mistakes, he'll go on In the same way we ARA On : that vou did like this, vou were like this, you went to such and such Guru, vou did this kindof a mistake, that's why you are like this. No, don't tell him anything, just work it out and it works. Of Course, vou can ask if he has been to some Guru, but don't condemn and don't criticise. There is no need to condemn anybody for what mistakes they have committed. This is all coming from the consciousness that you are better equipped, that you have all the knowledge. You have, vuu are very knowledgeable people. I must sav, very knowledgeable. You are the gnostics, all that I accept, but as long as you are aware of it you are not. Once you are not aware of it then you are that what is called Sahaja Yogi. So i would expect all of you to have this new development in our Sahasrara in everybody's Sahasrara. We have to think of the whole world. We cannot just think of Sahaja Yogis and also about the seekers. Seekers are there, alright, but what about the rest? There are so many problems thene and so many things to be done. For example, now we have a problem in India of poverty. I am trying to do something for them. You have problems in your countries. You should find out what problems there are. You can start some sort of a movement for them, try to help them as far as possible. It's not missionary like, that you convert somebody for some sort of a reward or for some name – just do it for your pleasure, because it's your pleasure to do it. That's how you will go to the society and you won't be afraid that you will be caught up. I know of one couple, when I asked them, why don't you start working it out. So Vol IX Issue 5-0 Divne Caol Breeze

 they said "Mother we are afraid our ego will come back". They are afraid of themselves unly- theirego will come back. So all these problems should be dropped out and you should reach that state where you don't have all these fears, all these non-sensical ideas about yourself. You are powerful, vou have powers. Not only that, but you have been specially bestowed with those powers. But if vou don't use it then what are you? It the lamp is not enlightened what is this lamp for-just for decoration? So this has fo bu used. and this has to used without feeling that awareness within you that you are something great, better than others, something selected, or also they say that we are chosen. So, this can spread very tast with such grace and understanding All kinds of stupid people are there, it's alright, vou know they are stupid-just laugh at them, make fun of them and that's how you can solve the problem. But even that, you should do it in stich a way that Vou don't hurt them, that whatever vou do vou should see from the results what works out. Results should be such that vou should see, how it think that's the superior intelligence by which you knowv how to say things, what to say and how to work it out. Love, this Divine Love, gives you a complete control over yourself and you know everything, how to behave, how to talk to people, how to manage them. works out. With some people that's the intelligence, I don't know what is the worst thing among human beings. According to Krishna it was temper temper was the worst thing, but according to me it is jealousv. Jealousy of any kind is absolutely like a Seum. In Sahaja Yoga also people feel jealous and they may not say so because I don't like it, but they may try to create problem among each other. So one thing you should have a watch on vour mind if there is any kind of jealousy. I'm rather worried sometimes-supposing I want to give some present to some people. then I'm worried that I shouldn't do something that will create jealousy. We should not! Mother might have forgotten, or it's all right she's running short of it- it's all right. But people have that kind of a verv sharp sense of jealousy in Sahaja Yoga. Now supposing I meet somebody and I don't meet somebody else-finished. That person develops a jealousy for that person whom I meet. Sometimes people pester me too much-"Mother, I must meet you, I must meet you". I don't know why, why do you want to meet me? I'm all over, everywhere as Vou sav. Then what is the need that vOLu should merit me and talk to me what is the need? It's not for you alone I am, I am tor evervone. But some people think that they have a special right on me and they think that I they feel very bad. All these things have to go away in a bigg way when yoLu become the ocean. Then vou are not bothered what shore you go, where vou travel, vou are not bothered, you are only with the ocean moving up and down, That is how it's a living ocean of love and that's what we have to develop without dominating others, without showing off. It should be, the whole thing, we should be contented within ourself. In Hindi it is said better : Apne Mein Samaye Hue. Should be all within voursclf and that's the most enjovable thing. Because you see what we want, supposing I want something for myself, so lll strive and get it. But this is something if you have within yourself, you are fully filled within yourself. So what is most important, what is so much needed? Nothing! You are completely filled with Vourself, contented with Vourself, and then you want to share. This is the idcal way of dealing with hot must meet them individually otherwise Sahasrara. This whole world's Sahasrara has to be opened up. This is what we have to do and we are not going to disappear into some exclusive places, that is just for meditation -you can go there, but not for escaping the world. That is not the ideas. Idea is meditation, for your growth-it would be a nice place to go to. It is very important to understand how valuable you are, how remarkably important you are- born at this time, got your realisation for what? To emancipate this world, to fransform human beings, to take the whole of this world into the realm of God. That is what you are here for. May God bless you. Divine Caol Breeze

 GURU POOJA '97 Talk By H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Today's Pooja is very important for us. You all have got your self realisation. You have all the knowledge that is necessary to give realisation to others. You have to know what you have already. That is very important. Because if you do not try your hand and if you do not try to give realisation to others, firstly you will have no faith in yourself. You will have no self esteem also. The second part is that you try giving vibrations to other persons, but don't get involved with that person. I have seen some people get too much involved. If they give realisation to one person they think that they have done a great job and they start working on that person, his family, his relations. So far, as you must have learnt that one may be related, one may be closer to one person but not necessarily he will have that much of chance of self realisation. The only way to grow is to be collective. There is no other way out. If people think that by staying away from Ashramas, alone, living somewhere, they will achieve much that is not the way Sahaja Yoga is meant. Formerly people used to go to the Himalayas and most of them were separated. And only one or two persons were chosen for spiritual growth. Here it is not question of spiritual growth, it is a question of your collectivity growing in you. That is how you become a person who is collective, who enjoys collectivity, who works with collective and lives with collective. Such a person develops new kind of powers. And these powers are such that they are very subtle, that they penetrate into any molecule, atom or human beings - anywhere! And this penetration is only possible if you have temperament which is collective. Without being fully collective you cannot achieve that height which is very necessary today for Sahaja Yoga. As you know there are problems and problems all over as if we feel that the world is going to sink. Specially when I went to America I felt that, "My goodness!", this is a hell that they have created here. It is just a hell. Because they have no Dharma, they don't believe in any Dharma. Completely they worship Adharma. And this kind of climate is flowing all over, all over the world you get reaction of American Adhramic life. And people think that there is nothing wrong in it. Whatever you may tell them they will not believe. Now they will think that there is no worth in it. But they don't see the destruction from the very basis of their lives, their families, their societies. Whole country, I feel, is filled with such an ugly type of adharmic nature that one cannot even imagine how such ideas come into their heads! And these ideas I will not tell you, you know them very well. But if you have to save your children you have to be an ideal Guru yourself. If you just talk of Sahaja Yoga and if you try to assume that you are a Sahaja Yogi, also you try to propagate Sahaja Yoga, without all these powers being awakened in you, it would be a failure. So, how to develop these powers within us we should see. It is rather embarrassing for me to tell you how you have to behave towards your Guru. I think people have told you. But naturally, spontaneously as soon as you get your realisation and grow in it, naturally you develop a very humble aftitude. Also an attitude through which you achieve lots of qualities of your Guru. Now, supposing, the Guru is at a particular height and if you try to go on to the same height, so, you must sit at a place which is much lower than the Guru is. Some people take too much advantage of my good nature. And so many people have pointed 'they will out to me that "you must correct these people. They talk to you at equal level". I said Divine Cool Breeze Vol IX Issue 5-6

 learn a lesson, they will learn a lesson". But sometime it does not work out. And they start talking in the same manner as if they are talking to a friend or to their equal. Fist is complete humility. You have to be a humble person, extremely humble. Now you check on that : When you talk to others, are you humble? When you think of others, are you humble? When you look after your wife and children, are you humble? That is a very important thing for every person who thinks he is a Guru. Humility is the first quality or, I should say the ocean, into which you must jump. Some people think that "if you are humble, Mother, people will take advantage of you". Nobody can take advantage of you. Because you have to remember another point that you are protected, all the time looked after by Param Chaitanya. I know, you know that, but how many really believe that there is Param Chaitanya with us. If you really believe that there is Param Chaitanya, then vou don't get frightened, you don't get worried, you are not subjected to all kinds or nonsensical ideas also. But if you think that you are not protected or what will happen, how will things happen, then Param Chaitanya leaves you alone. You have to see the whole drama, how P'aram Chaitarıya works out, how it works out, how you are behaving. Supposing you are not in a proper shape and you try to show off too much, then what happens? Then you get the reward for it; not that I do anything but the Param Chaitanya will teach lesson, that you will remember, that you should have been a little different from what you have been. you a After all we have to know why have we come to Sahaja Yoga. Begin at the root of it. We have come to Sahaja Yoga because we wanted to know the absolute truth. And this absolute truth has been now known to you through your vibrations. You know through your vibrations also what is the absolute truth. And you should work everything on that line. That absolute truth whatever Vou feel on your vibrations you have to follow. Sometime, unfortunately, I have seen many people think that their vibrations are alright. They are alright and whatever they are receiving on their vibrations is first class. Now how to correct that point is very difficult. It comes from ego. When you have ego you can never find anything wrong with you. And even if the vibrations are telling you something it might be somebody else who is telling you. Because you are not there, vour ego is there. And your ego is just spoiling you and teaching you things which normally you would See clearly that "I am doing something wrong. I should not have done it". In this process of correction and improvement, when you indulge, you should see are you getting subtler or rosser That is the best way to judge. Now I have seen people who go on judging on small things like vibrations whether these vibrations are alright or not in this tree or on these flowers or on this lamp or on material things, they want to see the vibrations. But for what are you seeing the vibrations? You are seeing the vibrations because of some sort of material gain. They think that if you check the vibrations and the vibrations are alright then you are quite saved, you will not lose this, you will not lose that. It is not true. Because vibrations are not meant to judge all these worldly things and worldly matters. It is absolutely cheap meaning of the vibrations. We should not cheapen it. Because vibrations can Suggest things which may be detrimental to your growth very much. Once I wanted somebody to go somewhere, so he said I didn't Mother". I said "Why". "Because I saw the vibrations were very bad". I said "that is go, why I asked you to go! If the vibrations were good what was the use of yvour going there The reason I asked vou to go there so that vou could help. But before that vou judged vourself, Divine Caxol Brecze Val IX Issne 5-6

 judged your vibrations and then you did not want to go" So, what happens we want to have.an easy, cosy life. And all our problems must be solved by Sahaja Yoga. Otherwise we feel Sahaj Yoga is of no use. Whatever is our desire must be fulfilled. So now the desires are mostly personal my child is nof well, so the child should get well; my husband is misbehaving, the husband should be alright. Or I have no house, so I must get a house See how we are moving our mind is still on a very consumer society, as they call it. We are all the time thinking : now I should have a son, now instead of a girl. And you do not get a son and blame Sahaja Yoga for that. Anything that according to a desire does not work out then you think it is Sahaja Yoga which has done the harm and you are suffering because of Sahaja Yoga. Or this faith in Sahaja Yoga gets a little-moving or, we can say in a way, it is not that deep But if you are deeply embedded in Sahaja Yoga then what happens : what may come i will be a Sahaja Yogi. Supposing somebody dies. Normally in Sahaja Yoga it is difficult for people to die, also. Even if they want to die they cannot die. It is the Param Chaitanya which decides fOr it; but supposing you take a proposition like that, still you must know that wish may not be fulfilled. And if that is not fulfilled then you feel disturbed and you think "what is wrong?" But your wish is not the wish of God Almighty. And Param Chaitanya is the wish of God Almighty. For example I went to America, take it like this; and America attacked me with negativity, and troubled me. For all these days I have been suffering, so called, and I have had pains, I have had all kinds of things. But that I had to do because, now, the American Sahaja Yogis will realise how much one has to pay to make these dumbs heads of Americans to rise. How stupid they are and how foolish they are who are enamoured by people who are taking money. So many people came to me and told me "Mother, if you start saying that I can give for three hundred dollars, you will get thousands and thousands of disciples of yours". I said "they will not be disciples". If they came for money thinking that I am taking money it is something worthy, that means they are absolutely stupid. You cannot get Sahaja Yoga by money. This is the first principle they don't understand, most of them, most of them don't understand that you can get self realisation without paying any money. There were some Gujaratis rich people, at New Jersey and they asked question to Sahaja Yogis that "how it is possible to get it so easily?" It is not possible because it is a very difficult thing. All the Shastras have said, everybody has said, it is very difficult to get your realisation". Alright,if so, how is it that you are giving it so easily? Why? Nobody knew how to answer these people. You should have said like this: "alright, it is difficult, it is very difficult and you cannot give it amass, true. But if somebody is doing it then you have to think about it. How somebody is doing it?" So this kinds of stupid questions are there and still if they go on you to really tell them in a very humble way "Sir, one has to be worthy also". So they will run after people who are just making money out of them, making fool out of them and they boast at that we have three Gurus, somebody says we have seven Gurus; and I wonder what was their condition. have So, the people who are extremely stupid, in Sanskrit they call 'Moodh', people who are brainless, cannot get realisation. So give them up. If they are arguing with you, you just give them up. It is not their right to argue with you. Their right is to get realisation, but not the right to argue with you, ask vou foolish questions. But you should always remember that with that humility you must have your dignity intact. Because you are à Guru. Once you know you are a Guru, one Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issue 5-6 10

 thing should be there that you will not behave like a joker all the time. Your behaviour must be dignified. At the same time it would be very pleasant personality. It won't be annoying them. Your personality itself will suggest that there is something special about you. Now, how you will develop that kind of personality? The biggest problem in the West is ego. And the biggest problem in East is Super-ego. Now this ego business, I don't know from where it has come. In all work of life they show how egoistical they are. For example I went to America and Iwas surprised that there is a social problem and the blacks are treated in a different manner and the whites in a different manner. I mean colour is given by God and somebody has to be black and white. If everybody looks the same it will look like a regiment. There should be some variety, person carrying better or different expressions. Otherwise you will be with such a world where everybody looks the same, just the same. But so much of socialism there, that I was surprised that how it has worked into human mind. So, at the moment you must develop a complete detest for socialism, complete detest. It is very easy to understand that anybody who has fair complexion could be a cruelest man, cruelest woman and could be a cruelest mother also. And the one who is black could be very kind, generous. It does not go with the colour. Temperament does not go with the coleour. But because the blacks have been hated so much that they react. And they react naturally, sometime, in such a manner that it is very crude and very cruel. But this kind of attention, this kind of wrong type of attitude towards human beings, even animals won't bear it. So towards human beings to have such an attitude itself show that you are not worthy of Sahaja Yoga now. So, anyone of you who has such a figure, that somebody is black or sormebody is white, cannot be a Guru in Sahaja Yoga. there should be some change in the force and also in the expression. One has to be a Then in India we have caste system; equally bad and horrible. It has no sense in it, no basis also. But in India we have people who believe that some castes are higher and some castes are lower. Every caste people can do all the worst possible things, there is no demarcation for them. And every low caste can be very, very good. We have had many great poets and Sufis in the lowest castes in India. These castes are man-made. You know man-made does not suit us. And all these man-made ideas are not going to suit us and it will lead us to complete destruction. Because hatred begets hatred and it goes on increasing and increasing. If you cannot get rid of your hatred then I would say that you are not a Sahaja Yogi. These are all conditionings-you are born in a white family so you are white. You are born in Christian family that is why you are Christian Al this is just because you are born in that. But that does not mean that you are higher or lower. All the problems of the world today, if you see, are because of human attachmnents to nonsensical ideas of superiority. Only through collectivity we well change it. For example, I would say, in an Ashram we should have all coloured people living together, with an equal right, with an equal understanding and love and affection. If that is not there no use calling it an Ashram. Once they asked me "Mother, will you come and give a lecture in Harlem I said "why not?" So, sorme Sahaja Yogi said "Harlem! Mother you don't know what is Harlem?" I said I know. There is no harm". They said "you know the blacks are there and they..." I said "I am also black. You could call me black or you could call me white". But the love is such a thing that cleans all these ridiculous ideas we have about other people. To bound anyone as black and white shows that you have no eyes to see. Any person with that, any person with that loving heart Vol. IX Issuu 5-6 DiVne Cool Breeze I1

 cannot see the superficial things; cannot see. Today is the day when we are celebrating the Guru's greatness. Now look at all the Gurus, how they were, how they behaved. We have many in India and many others, many Sufis in other countries. These Sufis or these Saints that we had never believed in any caste, never believed in black and white. Christ, he never believed in black and white. Buddha never believed in black and white. Nobody believed in any kind of man-made ideas. These are all man-made ideas which we have accepted and even after realisation we try to carry on with that. Now by we do not get rid of it. But acting we can. Just see how we work ouf these stupid ideas within us and how we can get rid of them. Very simple is, in meditation, you should sit down and see how many people you love, and why do you love them. Not out of pity. But just with love, how much you care for others. I have seen some very beautiful examples of that. But still, I must sav. that there are certain fixed ideas which are to be dislodged completely. Very impurtant for a person who is Guru in Sahaja Yoga. You have to be a clean hearted, open hearted, loving hearted fellow. His heart should play the tune of Param Chaitanya. If his heart is full of all these man-made ideas, 1 don't know what will happen. Even when they transplant the heart they cannot do it with a man-made they have to use a real natural one. So you can imagine when you try to take to all these odd ideas are just devices, they will never give you collectivity. saving So introspection has to be made. Are we one or are we judging each other. Now the judgement is quite a lot also. Now all this can be seen only when you live together. Otherwise how will vou know? When you start living together, you start discovering what is missing in you; what is not there; what has to be there. It is so peaceful to have a heart which is full of love! Because every moment of that heart is so much enjoyable, so much enjoyable. There is a steory of Shri Ram,a that he ate the bers', a kind of fruit, which were first tasted by an old lady, with such love. It shows what? Shows that a person like Shri Rama was a king of the highest heritage and this old lady who was just of the lowest caste gives him these fruits with such love. And when he eats that he praising it. So, his wife says "give me some" he says "alright". But the brother is still half way in Sahaja Yoga, so he does not like, he does not like, he gets angry. Then she eats and she says "brother-in-law it is a wonderful fruit, I must say". He says "alright, give me some". She savs "why shouldI eat?" The story shows that the level of your personality as Guru is judged by your clean heart, by your loving heart, by your highest remarkable personality. The personality is not something that is to be built in artificially. It is not artificial. It is natural, absolutely natural. Whatever vou do has to be natural. So this artificiality of certain ways of talking of certain ways of living together creates problems. For exarmple we had an Ashram in America, in New York, and thete was a lady who was very strict. Everything should be tip-top it should be here, the spoons must be there and the forks should be here and all sorts of things. And she hurt many people, it is ncit important. These cultural, tabos are not important in Sahaja Yoga. Becausenow you have became Guru Guru can stay anywhere, live anywhere, eat everything, anytime. That should be the case. But also I have seen in Sahaja Yoga, there are many, they are very axious to eat the food as soon as it is served. Once it happened, I was there, they have served the food and they just started removing the plates. I said "what is the matter? I have to eat food!" "Ch, vou have not eaten Mother?" "No, I have not yet touched it even". So it is a sort of, first is a very lowest type of, we starts give you now? First you were very angry. So, why should I give you this fruit to Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issine 5-6 12

 should say, desire is the hunger. Now a Guru does not bother. Whatever you give alright. Whatever you want not to give: alright. Even if you don't give it is alright. One has to deelop that by treating your ego. People feel very hurt if you serve them little later than another person, These all kinds of funny things I have seen in Sahaja Yoga. On the contrary it is the lowest ty pe of a desire. We should not cater to it at all, if you want to be a real Guru. Cf course many problems are solved. As I have seen, so far, that they do not take to drugs, they do not take todrinking and all such things. It is such a blessing! Because if I had to start from that level I don't know how deep I would have gone, from where I would have pulled vou out. But that is, of course, a verv good thing. That is a nice thing. But still, to make a beautiful life out of you which will attract the attention of everyone: how you talk, how you behave, how you love. So again one has to say that Guru Pad comes only through the love they you have. Love. Like they have, say, ten people for anything, for adhrama suffering, and they have it only from a particular country, from a particular group, the particularone caste could be, or could be one religion, could be, one school or anything So that shows that you are still not there. As a Guru you should like every kind of culture, everv kind of beauty and that has to be brought in our daiiy life. You should not look down upon anvone for their colour, for their status, class consciousness. All this has been shown in the life of all these Gurus, Saints who lived. Tukarama says "Oh God! Thank God! You have made me a scheduled caste". He was not. But he just says so. All of us, all the time, should not be conscious of what has been our birth, what has been our personality or what has been our big name. One should not be able to make out who is the Saint and who is not. Even people are proud that they then there is no fun, there is no fun. For example they will have a music group, su trom are Saints. I was surprised in America also, very much, that the Russians who have gone there are a very different quality of people. They would not raise their eyes to me, they would not raise their eves. And very deep, very very deep. Vibrations were very deep. The reason is. I think, thev have been oppressed during communism, perhaps may be, and now they have come to America. They have seen so called freedom and what nonsense it is doing. So, knowing these two extremes, I think, they have gone very deep into their own being. And they have such strength and such Lunity among themselves. I was surprised that I have never met them before. They did not come from Russia, they come, only they were there. So what is it that has kept them like that is that they had no religion in their heads; they had no religion. To them every religion is the same and they had no religion to follow. So a Guru cannot belong to any religion. Because these religions are also man-made: They have created such a problems all over and they are all fighting among themselves. How can they be Divine? So you should not get involved into some sort of a religious bias. I have seen it that a Sahaja Yogi, say, if he is a Christian then the bias will be shown that he is a Christian. If he is a jew, you cart make it out. So what is the use of coming to Sahaja Yoga? Their attention, if it goes inside they will find out. You have to direct yourself to see what is wrong with you and why is it that you are not very successful as a Guru. The success of the Guru is : he does not bother about time. Everv time is the Holy time. He is not bothered if somebody is late or has come early. He is not a slave of watches and time. This is also man-made. There were no watches about, I think, three hundred years back. And nobody was so particular about the timing. So first thing he is beyond time: Divine Cool Breeze VoL IX IAue 50 13

 Kalatita. Then he is also Gunatita. Gunatita means he does not belong to the left side or the right side or to the center. He is beyond these things, beyond these Gunas. Where he stands he sees everything in the Divine Light. Everything. If something good happens to him he says : the Divine Light has done it. If something bad happened to him he says the Divine Light wanted that way; everything he leaves for the Divine Light. He is beyond the Gunas. Like, supposing, there is a person who is on the right side, egoistical. Then he will start saying "Ah! How is it? I Wanted this, this did not work out". And now he will challenge. Another will start crying, the left side one that "I am very sorry, this has happened to me; it should not have happened" and all. Or in the center also he might think that "how far are my vibrations? How could I not know" and all. The person who is a real Guru : he looks at it as a drama, as a just witness of the drama. It happened, it was to happen so it has happened. So what do we get out of it, you see he gets something; a lesson that this was not right or this was wrong. That is all For that moment not to go on churning in your head. That all what one gets and he is not bothered about anything. So he goes beyond his Gunas. He is beyond Gunas. He eats anywhere, sleeps anywhere. He is not bothered where he lives. He is not bothered where he goes by car or he goes by bullock cart. He does not feel bad he is being not honoured if they give him a garland of a few flowers. He is not bothered. In fact nothing can enhance his personality. Nothing. You will give something simple he is alright or even if you don't give he is alright. It is not that he is judging himself through your eyes. But he judges himself through his own eyes. And he sees for himself, the joy of enjoying himself. What is there to be so particular about thing? What is so great to be hankering after anything? It just works out in his own time and if it does not, it does not. What does it matter? Just think of it. Also in Sahaja Yoga a Guru has to be a bìnding force. There are two types of people I have seen, which go on breaking relations. It is very easy for them. They go on complaining. But there are other who have a power to bring people together in such a manner, in such a sweet manner that the people are brought closer together. Not that they have to forgive, it automatically works out, just works out like that. And people go on joining such a man. I was surprised that in America there were very very few Sahaja Yogis. They spend, they said, fifty thousands dollars and got fifty Sahaja Yogis. The thousand dollars for one Sahaja Yogi in America. So, very bad shape, But still you see they have to go for them because there are a lots of seekers and lost in the wildness of seeking. But I thought, may be, it is a circle. They have to pass through the circle of stupidity and then definitely, they will see the point. And it has happened. We had almost four thousand people for my lecture which never has happened there in that country. Nobody has got such a lot of audience with them. But still not many came, but they got their realisation. So I could gradually see in America it must start going. And the Sahaja Yogis must not worry only about their houses and where they live and all that but go all out to them. I would this outside work. May be, if there are outsiders who come and talk about Sahaja Yoga they might be impressed. There are so many false Guru that you can't count them. And they have accepted them : it is very surprising. Though they have suffered, they have lost their money, everything, still they have accepted: "after all he is our Guru!" So there is basically something wrong with them that they don't understand what is to be expected. say some of the Sahaja Yogis who could afford to go should go to America and work out Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issue 5-6 14.

 I have written one book, perhaps it may reach them. But in any case you all can write your experiences, something and can publish it. May be it might help them to open their eyes. By writing anything you have to remember that it should show your quality of Sahaja Yogi. How you are? In that one should not feel judged, you are putting them down or trying to say something which will hurt them. But say it in such a manner that it corrects them and helps them. For a Guru it is important that you should not have any false ideas about yourself. He might be from a poor family, he might be from a rich family. Whatever it is he should not be conscious of that. Because once you become that, you take Kabira, he was just a weaver, look at Raidas, he was just a shoe maker. In India it is a very low caste. Supposed to be. He has written beautiful poetry. Then Namadeva, he was a tailor. Just think of that. All these people have written the same thing with such great beauty of poetry. How have they achieved? Because now they have entered into that great realm of spirituality. You people also write same very good poetry. I know. But some of the people who have written good poetry can also be very obsinate, very egoistical people. This is somethingI could not understand. You are writing beautiful poetry and here you are full of ego, so from where this poetry is coming out from you? So first of all is yourself, your personality has to be something that the people should say "this is a real Guru we have met. For that, you know very well, you don't have to give up your family, you don't have to give up anything. But ego if it is still there, I don't know what to say, but you must get rid of it. Completely. And collectively also ego should be given up. Collectively. It is a thing that people are egoistical secretly within themselves, for sometime it shows it is a very subtle nonsensical disease that people have and they just indulge into it. On this day of Guru Pooja I have to say, now, that one has to work very hard. Very hard! The most important thing is how much you have dedicated your life, your time to Sahaja Yoga. Then only you will achieve that state of Guru. Look at me I am a house wife and I have my family, resposolities, problems. But inspite that I am all the time thinking about Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoga and all that is the emancipation of human beings in the whole world. Not only here or there, in the whole world. So that should be your widened vision not for only your school, college, university, your this or that. But a very wider vision one should have and that you have to develop through your working into every kind of circumstarices, every type of problems you have. Once you develop that kind of a personality then you will be amazed how you can help so many things. I know there are so many Sahaja Yogis here who are worthy of this and really I love them very much and they also love me very much. But one should always see that, as you are now going to be the Gurus, you have to be careful not to think that you are a Guru. You should never think that you are a Guru. Never. Once you start thinking again Mr. ego of the Guru comes up. So you decide "I am nothing! I am nothing! I am just a little bit in the heart of my mother. If such a humble feeling is there then all your problems can be solved and things will work out because your attention and your behaviour is going to impress others. Nothing else, whatever you may try to work out. It is you who is going to get Sahaja Yoga for them. There is so much to be said about how to become a good Guru and all that. But I think I'll keep it for next Guru Pooja: Thank you very much. 15 - Vol. IX Issue 5-6 Divine Cool Breeze

 OF GOD THE WILL Talk By H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi As it was put forward, it was about to obliterate all the value system, all the proof of God Almighty. If you see, in the history, one after another, when science established itself, the people who are, so called in charge of the helm of affairs in religion, in different religions tried to cope with the findings of the science. They tried to show that, alright, if it is such, this much is in the Bible, and if it is wrong, we should correct it. Specially Augustien did that. And it started looking as if it is all a stupidity. The scriptures were just mythical. At least Koran itself, though had lots of things which were describing the biology of today They could not believe that human beings were specially created by God. They thought it was just a matter of chance that one after another the animals acquired a situation by which they became human beings. Thus all the time Divinity was challenged and there was no way of getting the proof of whatever is said in the Bible or inm the Koran or in the Geeta or in the Upanishadas or in the Torah. Anyone of these things could not be proved. Because it was still just stupid, very very few people got their realisation and when they talked people did not believe them, and thought that they are just trying to say something which they are using to propound their own theories. So the whole thing became a kind of a dead science. There is no science of religion. People started thinking that what is the use of following these 10 commands or these strict rules of life? Because by following that you gain nothing, you lose all the fun of life. Avoid to think of winning some punvas also. And that is how all the time there was a big derailment of human value system. Also these organised religions started taking to course of gaining power or winning money; because they thought that is the only way you can control people and can go on. Thev were least bothered as to deliver the gouuds whatever had been described in the Bible. Bible, of Lourse, was tempered very much and have been lots of changes in that, and a person like Paul and Peter, who joyined together, tried to spoil most of the Truth. Though Koran was not so much touched but still dealt more with the right side, with the reproductive system and all that. And so many things are still ambiguous. Simultaneously two things have happened;I don't know if vou are aware of it or not. First thing that has happened is that now we have a new science of microbiology, in which we havediscovered that every cell has got a DNA tape, as we have in computer every cell has got a programme in it. In a way that it is programmed. And according to that programme a development takes place. Now imagine the intricacy of it. So many computers are already programmed and all these cells have been in them. So a very mysterious sort of thing has come up before the scientists and they cannot explain it. They cannot explain many things. One of them is this. Now what Sahaja Yoga has done is that it has proved that it is the Will of God, it is the Desire of God. The Will of God, which is doing all the work, and it has been proved. All this Chaitanya, Adi Shakti, is nothing but the Will of God. And Will of God is the one that is working out everything very harmoniously I don't know it some of you must have read my book, first book, where I describe how this carth was created. There was a long but it was very harmonious and how it developed is through the Will of God. So everything was done in a way that God's will was working. Now the Will of God you are feeling on your finger tips. After realisation now you have discovered the absolute science which is the Will of God. Which is an absolute science. You people know that we have cured people through Sahaja Yoga. You also know how to give bandhan. Knowing that it will work Divine Cool Breeze Nol. IX Issue 5-6

 out. So many things work out automatically after realisation, that people don't want to believe! In the beginning people would not believe when the scientists told them something. But now it is the science which is always in the flux, it is all the time changing. One theory is again challenged, another theory is again challenged. But Sahaja Yoga has exposed that great truth of science which cannot be challenged. Which is all there, So anybody who comes out with any new proposal about defaming God or saying that there is no God, we can prove, not that there is God but everything, the creation of this earth, the creation of human beings; everything was done harmoniously by the Will of God. If Will of God has done everything, the human beings should not take any credit for discovering something which has been created by God. Supposing, this carpet is made by somebody and we start discovering all the colours, what is so great? It is all there. You cannot create. So it is not the creation part of it which is so much important but the fashioning of this world. All this was done by the Will of God. Now if the Will of God is so important it has to be proved and now through Sahaja Yoga, after the breaking of Sahasrara, you have now, for the first time, felt the Will of God, which is such an important thing But for us it has come to us so Sahaj that we don't understand it, we just give a bandhan and the things work out, and we feel that the things have worked out, so it is bandhan which has worked out and we have managed it! It is not so. It is much more than that. We have now become part and parcel of that big computer, of that Will of God. We have become the medium, or we can say the channels of that Will of God. We are connected with that Will of God which created all this Universe. So everything we can manage because we have göt the absolute science in our hands; the absolute science which will work out the betterment of the whole world. We can prove it to scientists, that there is a Will of God which has done all this creation. Even evolutionary process is the Will of God. Without His will nothing could have happened. So many people used to say that not even a blade of grass moves without the Will of God, which is very true. And you have seen now that the Will of God we have got, as our own power, we can use it. So how important it is to be a Sahaja Yogi. Perhaps we don't realise how important it is to be a Sahaja Yogi. Sahaja Yoga is not only for saying others "I am full of joy, I am enjoying myself, got purified, everything is fine. But for what? Why did you get all these blessings? Why you have been blessed so that this knowledge of Will of God should be apparent in you; not only that it should be a part and parcel of you. So we have to raise our level, we have to come up. For medium and ordinary people it is really useless to give them Sahaja Yoga, because they are good for nothing. They are not going to help us in any way. Because what is needed is now, today, that we should have people who can really manifest and reflect the Will of God. And for that understand we have to have very strong people. Because this will has created this whole Universe, this Cosmos, this Mother Earth, everything is created by this Will of God. you can So now we are exposed to a new dimension, and that dimension is that we are the ones who are channels of that Will of God. So then what is our duty? And what should we do about it? As a result of Sahasrara being opened out, one thing is that illusions have vanished (Bhranti). You should have no illusion as to the existence of God Almighty, the power of His will and the truth about Sahaja Yoga. We should have no doubts at all. Minimum of minimum should be like that. But while using this power you should be aware that this power is given to you because you are capable of handling it. It is the highest power that you can think of. Take any Governor, any Divine Cool Breeze • 17. Vol. IX Issue 5-6

 minister, anyone, they can be removed tomorrow, they can become corrupt, they can become absolutely devoid of any knowledge of their own powers. There are many people who just get elected without knowing what they have to do. So this is not just a conversion of people. It is not only even transformation but it is a new fashioning of a new human being which has come forward and which is capable of carrying the Will of God further. So as a result of your realisation what you have got? The first thing that has happened is your illusions have gone. You should have no illusions about God Almighty. His will and that He is Omnipotent, Omnipresent and Omniscient. All His Omnipotence has done this work and as collective consciousness you should also know that you are also omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient. Omniscient in the sense that voI see everything, know everything. Part of it, that power is also within you. So to prove His Omnipresence vou have to be all the time aware that vou are a Sahaja Yogi. that When I find, even now, Sahaja Yogis are troubled about their wife, their children, their house, their jobs, I start wondering what is their level now? Where are they? Where are they going to take up the role of what they have got? So the Omnipotent God who is everywhere, who has done all this, the Will of God, that has worked it out, has to work through you people.. And you have to be very strong, very sensible, very wise, also very effective people. The more effective you become the more energy you will get. But, still, I feel that most of Sahaja Yogis are not taking the responsibility of understanding that they have to represent this God Almighty who is Omnipresent, Omniscient, who knows Everything, who sees everything, and who is Potent, who is Almighty. If you understand that this is what has happened after opening the Sahasrara, that you have now got the power which has these three qualities in it, say, now this big thing has to be supported by strong pillars, but supposing if they are not strong, it will fall down. In the same way, such a great power which has come to you, for that we don't need very successful people, we don't need people who have a big name or those who have lots of money. What we need is people of character, people of tinderstanding, of wisdom, and of strength, that whatever may comel will stand bv it. I will take to it, I will cope with it, I will change myself and improve myself. TS So now illusions have been dispelled. I hope you all have got rid of you illusions. Also VOI should have no illusions about yourself. If you have an illusion you should leave Sahaja Yoga. But know that vou are chosen for this purpose by God's will. That is why you are here. And have to take up the responsibility of understanding this science which is absolute, and work it out yourself, for yourself as well as for others. You have felt my love, but your love must be felt because God is love. So your love must be felt by others. Others must feel that you are compassionate, loving, understanding. All the time this Will of God is following through you and you you have to work it out in such a manner that people should know that you are a saint. That this power is flowing through you. There is a second thing that has happened to you is that, not the illusion about God ur aboLIt yourself, you have understood the integration, that in the world there is complete integration which is existing. Normally if you see the children they have their own natural, inmate, Divine Cool Breeze • 18 • VoL IN IssTIc 50

 understanding They know. If you see, normally, a good child would always like to share his things; would like to love another child. If another little child is there he would like to protect that child. Naturally! Innately, a child feels that way. Also if you take another child, supposing. who is a little baby, they know that one should be careful about the privacy of the body. Children don't want to be made nude before others. No child likes it. Innately. So all these innate qualities are within yoLt. Children don't like to steal, they don't know what stealing is. They have no ideas of stealing. I have seen also children that if they go to a place which is very beautiful, in somebody's house, they will always try to keep the beauty of that place. But if it is already shabby they don't mind. So innately all these qualities are there. I think the countries which are supposed to be underdeveloped have so many of these qualities within them, which are innately built within us. Innocence is innately built. So the Will of God built up first and foremost thing was innocence, the auspiciousness. The first thing He did was to create Shri Ganesha, or, I will say 'She because the Will of God is Adi Shakti. And all this was created first of all to make the whole world very beautiful. All these innate qualities were also placed within you. All those deities were placed within you, were specially made human beings that they should become saintly people, that they should have the saiintly innate sense. But it happened in the countries which developed that our brain was bombarded by all kinds of television, all kinds of things and we become very, very vulnerable. We started getting into the ideas of others. Anybody who is dominating would dominate us. It is ot only Hitler who dominated people, We also see, today, how much you are dominated, if you really detach vourself from this world. For example fashions. Certain things that come up, people cannot wear at any Cost. They cannot take to something that is sensible, hecause it is a fashiorn. For example nowadays there is the fashion to have such a small skirt, you can't get a long skirt anywhere. Everybody has to wear that kind of skirt. Otherwise you are not 'In, you are not in the mad house. Now this kind of thing is bombarded on us morning till evening. So first of all you become slave of these enterpreneur. Whatever they give us now. I was told, in Belgium that you cannot get anything fresh. You have to take everything from the supermarket, which is all tinned. Gradually what is happening to us; we are getting absolutely artificial. The food is artificial, the dress is artificial, our own attitude becomes artificial. Because we are so much bormbarded by advertisements, by all kinds of outside influences that we just get lost and we forget what is our innate sense, which is being dominated by all these modern things. So adding up to science also there is a big progress in another direction that you can call the money became very important. Once the money becomes important then all your entrepreneurs become important; because they know how to make money and befool you all the time. Today you have this thing, tomorrow you will have that thing, today vou change this and have this. But those people who are innately built they do not change. Thev have their dresses of the same type. They do not change. On the contrary they find it very difficult to get out of their traditional achievements and they don't want to change themselves. So far Sahaja Yogis it is important to see and watch if they are getting this slavery from the entrepreneurs in the modern times? Then the thoughts. So many books we read which give you thoughts which are some mad rambling, I would say, of some mad man like Freud. How could Freud influence the West? Because you have lost the innate sense and you accept it. They accepted that, and that is how Freud became, your sort of a Jesus Christ. He became the most important thing. Became the most Vol IX Issie 5:0 Divine Cool Breeze 19

 important thing. I mean it is so simple. With a little common sense you can understand that at every moment we are put into this kind of a domination by these few dominating people who have certain ideas and they put forward. Anybody puts any idea, for example Sartre or anyone. That idea starts becoming "Oh! He said it!" Who is he? What is his life? Just see for yourself what sort of a man he is. With a little common sense, but with the will that you have now Will of God which has fashioned the whole world, which has fashioned you. Every cell within you has been fashioned by God Almighty, and what are you doing is to play into the hands of these entrepreneurs. They have realised that these vulnerable people are very good for having us as disciples, I should say, to make money? To befool them. Now on this side you have such a great power, you are chosen for such a great thing and on the other side you have this kind of slavery. So try to understand that your innate qualities were lost. But, luckily, by the Kundalini awakening and the breaking of the Sahasrara, all these innate qualities which looked like lost, like your innocence, like your creativity, like your religion within, like your compassion and love for the humanity; like your power of judgement, wisdom, all these great qualities, which we thought were lost, were not lost, they were in a dormant state. They all got awakened one by one, I don't have to tell you don't drink this, don't eat this, don't do that. You yourself realise that this is wrong. You yourself know that is good for you. And still if you want to do wrong you can go ahead. But already there is a light within you to see for yourself what is good and what is bad. It has come because of this Sahasrara being opened out to this new dimension of new knowledge. This is not new. It is innately built within you. Now all those innate qualities are manifesting and you are enjoying them. So now you have to get out of your petty ideas and petty things. Because people are reporting to me something very furıny. I cannot believe Sahaja Yogis can do like that. They run away with the plates that I have got, they run away with the plates. They throw things here and there. All over the places they are throwing things. How can you behave like that? I mean, this is so stupid and so insipid. If you do not have a proper discipline of life for yourself you cannot carry the Will of God. You cannot. But I am not going to tell you do this or do that. I respect your freedom. And I just want that your own Kundalini should awaken that wisdom in you, that greatness, that glory in you and start understanding what are your innate qualities. So it will purify. Once youi are purified completely, like you see, if you have some gold which is not pure, you put it in the fire. The gold is separated. In the same way the fire of Kundalini cleans you completely, makes you absolutely clean, and you start seeing your own glory, your own nature, your own greatness. So the integration part comes to you easily. You start integrating. First of all we used to have Sahaja Yogis say some from England, some from Spain, some from here. They would always have different groups. They would never sit together. You could make out this is English sitting here, they are sitting here, they are sitting there, and they would form But now it is not so. Now I find they all are becoming integrated. The integration of group. human beings is the most important thing for a Sahaja Yogi. That comes by understarding not by your intelligence, but by innate understanding that all human beings are made by God, by His will, and we have no right to desire anything. The second integration that has come within us is that all religions are born on the same tree of spiritual life. That all religions are to be worshipped. All incarnations, all prophets, all scriptures, Vol. IX Issue 5-6 Divine Cool Breeze 20•

 which can be corrected. So, gradually you start entering into the subtler side of divinity to understand that all these people have worked hard to create today's atmosphere for Sahaja Yoga And no religion is to be despised, and no religion is to be attacked which is very, very, absolutely unreal thing and you are working it out, a very unreal theory which does not exist in the Divine Plan. This is how we will finish all fundamentalists. Fundamentalists are the ones who believe that this is written in this book, this is written in this book and because we read this book we are something better. Anybody can read any book. What is so great? Some, I would say, in Sahaja Yoga, people should not become fundamentalists. Be very careful. Because that is what you are born like that. I don't know It is not your innate quality but the way you are made, that way, you are fashioned yourself, that way, that you start also making Sahaja Yoga, sometimes, a fundamentalism. "Mother said so!" Do not use me anywhere. "Mother said so" is the way you want to dominate others. You yourself say because now you have the right, you have an individuality in Sahaja Yoga. You can say what you have to say yourself. But don't say "Mother has said it". Because anybody can start like that "Christ said it ;a clergyman, a pope can stand upon his own platform and say that "Christ has said it". We can just arbitrarily use all these things. So, nobody has business to use me arbitrarily Whatever you have to say yoLI say yourself but don't ever quote me as that "Mother said it", or in this book such and such is written, so this is a lie, or that is like this. You are not bound by any lie, by whatever say. It is you who have to stand up and see for yourself what you have to say. Because you to use, now, your will and for that you have to develop a pure will, the pure desire of God Almighty have The integration, not only outward but inward, like, first of all, whatever we did our mind used to say one thing, our heart used to say another thing. Our brain used to say another thing. Now what has happened is that all these three things have become one. So whatever your brain says is absolutely acceptable to your heart, absolutely acceptable to your attention. So you yourself now have become integrated. Many people write "Mother I want to do it, but I can't do it". "Mother I wish my desire to it but I can't do it". Not now! Now you are completely integrated and you can easily do the whole thing, Very well. If Vou want to examine yourself you should try to find out "Am I integrated or not? Whatever I am doing, am I doing it with full heart or not? With my full attention or not? I feel that you do with full heart and full intelligence but full attention is not there. Still the attention which is first thing that was enlightened is not fully used. So the whole attention should be, absolutely, there that "I have to do this thing with full attention". Otherwise the integration is not complete. Integration is partial. So these three things have to be completely integrated So the integration of all the chakras comes in. Like whatever you do has to be auspicious, whatever vOu do has to be with full attention, whatever you do has to be absolutely religious. So like that all these centres are being absolutely one, integrated power that you have. So the whole life should be integrated. Now, say somebody's husband is not of that level or somebody's wife is not of that level, you should not bother. You should just bother about yourself. Don't expect anything from anybody else. It is your duty which is important. You have to fulfil your duty and you have to work it out yourself. Unless and until you understand that it is your individual being which has achieved it, and it is the individual being which has to realise, is the Divine Cool Breeze MOL IX Iss 56 21

 individual being that has to become one integrated with the rest of them. If you start putting things, many a times I have seen, if I say something then you will start thinking that I have said for somebody else. They never take it for themselves. So now we have to see what are my gains. "I have got financial gains. I have got physical gains, I have got mental gains, I have got joy, happiness". That is not the only things. That should not be the only criteria. But what you should have is the understanding of your own personality which is being specially fashioned, many many lives for you to come in this life to get your realisation; to do the further work of Will of God. Every moment when you see a miracle taking place, you do realise, that is all done by Param Chaitanya. So what is Param Chaitanya? It is the Will of Adi Shakti. And what is Adi Shakti? It is the Will of God. So whatever is done is all fixed entities, we can call them, all these vibrations are like, we can DNA tapes. They all know how they have to fashion. See today it is very sunny. Everybody is Surprised how can that be. So many things happen like this. The other day we had Havaria. It was absolutely sunny. So the whole cosmos is working for you. You are on the stage now and you have to see to it. But if you don't have faith in yourself, if you are not confident as to what you are, how can you help? How can you work out yourself, and work out all the problems of the world, which are created only by human beings? say, So we have to absolutely overthrow all these dominations on us. First from science. We can prove everything, that whatever Sahaja Yoga has said about science has been proved. So we can throw science which is just all the way, all the time in the flux, changing all the time. Then that so called religions that we have, so called religions, because people who have been Catholics, who have been Protestants, who have been Hindus or Muslims and this or that, they all have got that thing on their heads. And this has to be thrown out. We have to become a new personality. After realisation, so as I said, you become like lotuses from the mud. So now you have become lotuses and the lotuses have to throw away all this dead mud. Otherwise fragrance would not be there. That one has to achieve is to throw away all these shackles which are killing you, which are of no use but a burden. And beautiful lotuses, as you are, you have to understand that the whole fashioning has been done so carefully, with such sweetness, such delicacy. So first of all we must have respect for ourself, we must have affection and love for others and we must have respect, means we must have discipline. We have to have the discipline. Because If you respect yourself, you definitely discipline yourself, and you will make it available. Now as we can realise, from my life itself, that I work yerv hard, travel a lot, much more than anyone of you can do. Because I have the will that I have to bring in this world, that state of enjoyment, that state of happiness, that state of Divinity, where they realise what is their glory, what is the glory of their Father. So I work very hard and I never, ever think that something will go wrong with me or this will happen, that will happen. I never bothered you about my family life, about my children. Whatever problems I have, I deal with them myself. But here I got such big, big letters from Sahaja Yogis, writing about their daughter, their son, this thing, that thing. Another thing is attachment to family. It is the biggest burden on your heads. And all the time you are worried about your children, you are worried about this, you are worried about that. That is not your responsibility. Please try to understand that is the responsibility of God Almighty. You can't do better than him. Can you? But when vou try to take the responsibility Divine Cool Breeze IX Isstue 5-6 Vol. 22

 says "alright look after!" and the problems start. Detachment is the word one should understand in a proper sense. When I asked people "why do you throw things here and there" they say "we are detached!" Wonderful way! And what about your children? You cling on to them. What about your own things? You cling on to them, For a small little thing they will bother my head, and when it belongs to me or to Sahaja Yoga then they will have a very nice time with it and throw it away wherever they like. I mean this kind of irresponsibility! How can you call them Divine? How can they be saintly people? Saintly people not only are responsible for themselves but for everyone. Very slowly, smoothly, sweetly, with great affection I have brought you to this level. I did not ask you to go to Himalayas, to stand on you head or to donate all your properties to me. Nothing of this kind. We have managed it in a very, very beautiful manner. Now further, then you have to go. Further. Then you have to understand your duties... you act towards your family, towards your house, towards this, towards that. No duty towards Sahaja Yoga. Before Sahaja Yoga, you were not attached to anyone, in a sense you were only attached to yourself, you were self-centered; now you have widened yourself a little more; now you are attached to your life, to your children. That is just the same. That is alsó selfish. Because they are your children vou think. They are not your children. They are the children of God. I hope all of you are intelligent enough to understand your responsibility and work it out. This is a very important thing that has happened to you that Sahasrara has opened. Now you can prove the Existence of God, His will, everything to do the whole world. Nobody can challenge Sahaja Yoga. Those scientists who will challenge can be told. Anybody. Whether you are a scientist, economist, politician. Anything, everything can be explained in the light of Sahaja Yoga and it can be proved that there is only one politics, that is of God, one economics that is of God and there is only one religion that is of God, is Wishwa Nirmala Dharma. It can be proved. There is nothing to be afraid of or to worry about. This all can be proved to the scientists and to the other intellectuals and to some few people, if they want to listen to us. If they don't want to listen to us forget it. Because we are powerful, why should we worry about them. But if they are willing to listen to us then it is better that we tell them "now we have discovered this great power". And if it works out, if this great power works out then only we can really fashion the whole world in a new way. Ihave great hope from you people. But the seriousness with which you should take Sahaja Yoga, for example even meditation people don't do. Simple thing like meditation you people don't do. can't understand. How will you go without meditation? Unless and until you become thoughtlessly aware you cannot grow. So you have to, at least, meditate morning, evening. There are many people who are not even collective by temperament. If they are staying in an Ashram they just think that Ashram's life is not good. Such people should really get out of Sahaja Yoga. Because they have not yet understood what Sahaja Yoga is. Without collectivity how will you grow? How will you assemble your powers? You see, we know very well that in assembly, in a group, in combining together only you ean be strong. It is a fact that if one stick you can break it, but if you put many sticks together you cannot break it. There are still people, I know, who are still not so much in collectivity, shows how poor they are in their understanding of their ownselves. And they are telling me that "Mother we don't want to stay in you have Divine Cool Breeze 23 - Vol IX Issue 5:6

 the Ashram now any more". So they should get out of Sahaja Yoga. Without the collectivity you cannot grow. Without the discipline of Sahaja Yoga you cannot grow. It is better to have ten people of good quality than to have thousands useless people. That is what is the Will of God. So now, as you are today here, so many people, I am really enamoured to see so many people at a time, and we have done so much of our growth and grown out of all those nonsensical things that you were following. But today we have to take the vow that "I will now fashion my life laccording to the Will of God, absolutely, and dedicate myself to that". No family, no other consideration, just forget it. Nothing so important. Everything can be looked after by Will of God. So if you just try to follow the Will of God your children will be looked after, everything will be looked after. You don't have to worry for anything. And that works. Just try to understand that you have problems because you don t want to give those problems to God. You want to keep it yourself. That is why you have problems. If you decide that No, I just want to give these problems to God's will", finished. Also there are some who want to say that "we are not so capable, Mother we can't do it". Saying that is also stupid. You test yourself, see for yourself. So first of all one has to understand why do we say such thing May be that you are very money oriented, that we want to have money to ourself or something like that. Or some people are there to tälk of business also in Sahaja Yoga. There must be something like money orientation or some sort of a material attachment that they say that we are not capable, we cannot change it. The second could be this mamatva, the attachment. The attachment to your family, children, this, that. Or this is mine, this is mine, this is mine, This could be the second reason that you are not bold enough or you are not strong enough to do Sahaja Yoga. Thirdly could be that you are still playing with your old habits and that you are enjoying your life without virtues. There can be some reason like that. So just try to look into it why I am behaving like this? Why I am not getting into the same beautiful path of my ascent as everybody has got it?" If we introspect we will find out that "There is something wrong with me that I think I am not capable of doing this". You are capable of doing everything. You just try this and enjoy it. So most important thing now remains is that you should become a proper, strong, compassionate vehicle of God's will. Then what is most important, of course, I agree that you can do Because that helps you a lot, no doubt. But other things are not, so many other things, you people tell me, are not important. Main thing is that you should all ascend higher and higher and complete with each other in getting into higher situation. think that you Pooja. my As it is, 1 think, in such a short time we have achieved a lot, no doubt. But still we have to speed and work it out. I am sure that this new science, we can say that which is the absolute science, up will, one day, outshadow the other sciences and tell people that this is what it is. It is in your hands, you work it out. So today is the day we celebrate that by which we have opened absolutely a new dimension, absolutely a venue of a great Divinity of the proofs of Divine. And this is something so great that we can really finish all the illusions they have about themselves. We can manage that. That power you all have. May God bless you! Vol. IN Issue 5-6 Divine Cool Breeze 24



----------------------

1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Volume IX
1997
Issue 5 & 6
"It is very important to understand how valuable you are, how
remarkably important you are
realisation for what? To emancipate this world, to transform
human beings to take the whole of this world into the realm of
God. That is what you are here for"
born at this time, got your
аге
H.H Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
00
Issue 5- 6
1997
Volume IX
Contents
Sahasrara Pooja
Guru Pooja '97
17
The Will of God
Edited by:
Yogi Mahajan
Published by:
Divine Cool Breeze
9 Bhagyachintamani Soc.
Paud Road, Kothrud
Pune 411 029
Printed by:
Printek Phototypesetters
4A/1, Rajinder Nagar
New Delhi 110 060
Phones 5784866, 5710529
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 SAHASRARA POOJA
Talk By H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Cabella - 4th May, 1997
Today we all have assembled here to worship the Sahasrara, as you have realised that Sahasrara is a very
important part of the subtle system. Of course this is a great day. In 1970 this Chakra was opened
by that what you have achieved, we have to see it. First of all when the Kundalini rises she gues to your
Void where is your dharma, and your dharma gets established at the Nabhi Chakra. We can say, around
the Nabhi Chakra your dharma gets established which is the innate Pure Universal Religion, but then
the Kundalini rises higher Despite the establishment of the dharma we start becoming little aloof from
other societies because we find they are amiss, they have no dharma. Also, I think we are afraid that we
might get caught up with their adharmas. At that stage we don't want to cross the limits of Sahaja Yoga.
we want to keep to Sahaja Yogis, to Sahaja Yoga programme, and to our personal Sahaj life. Of course, it
IS important because first this Chakra must be fully nourished, and this Chakra actually moves around
the Nabhi Chakra which we know as Swadhisthana Chakra. This Swadhistana Chakra is in a way very
important because it supplies energy to the brain, so when dharma is established the subtle energy
pushes through the Kundalini more energy for the Sahasrara, and also the energy for dharma which
was in the Swadhistana starts flowing with it. It crosses over and starts rising in the Sahasrara. Till then
we are not yet full Sahaja Yogis because one can become fanatic about Sahaja Yoga. I have seen people
who are so fanatic that they cannot even meet people who are not Sahaja Yogis, they cannot even talk to
people who are not Sahaja Yogis, and all the time they are frightened of meeting people who are not
Sahaja Yogis. Of course you need not meet people who are evil, people who area against Sahaja Yoga,
who talk against it, but those who are seeking the truth, it is our duty that we have to go to them. So
whern it reaches the state where it is established in the brain, that time wwe go beyond dharma.
Dharmateet- we become beyond.
but
up,
Dharma means that dharma becomes part and parcel of our being, we cannot lose it. Sahaja dharma
becomes within us a part and parcel which is a very great achievement because then you don't have to
do any rituals, you don't have to worry about meeting other people, you don't have to worry that your
vibrations will be harmed. Then you don't catch from anyone, you don't catch also other negative forces.
No one can harm you. That I call as the completion of your Shradha. That time Sahasrara is so fully
enlightened that you become dharma. We
stoned, Now Christ had nothing to do with the prostitute, just the opposite of it. When he saw she was
stoned he took a stone in his hand, and he says that those who think who have not sinned at all car
throw a stone to me. And everyone was stunned. Why is he taking the side of a prostitute? He is a
religious marn. He should also put stones on her. But he was standing on truth. That's exactly what
happens to you when it is established in Sahasrara that you stand on truth. There is a little difference in
dharma and in truth. A dharmic person might become too dharmic, illogically dharmic and go to the
right or to the left. A dharmic person might think he is the superior person to others that why should
he try to save anybody else, let them go to hell, who cares. This kind of an attitude can come in a person
who is dharmic. Also I have seen some Sahaja Yogis who start new methods is Sahaja Yoga. You do like
this it will be alright, you do like that it will be alright, because they are not strengthened at the point of
dharma, so they start telling people that you do this way, do that way But when you rise to the point of
uth, then you don't do any rituals, you don't need any rituals, you are not bothered because you are in
dharma and here you are standing on the truth and truth is much greater than dharma. For example, a
person who is standing on truth-he doesn't care for any absurd ideas about religion even about Sahaj
religion. He doesn't care that after all this is Sahaj this is not Sahaj, he goes beyond. In the sense he sees
can give the example of Christ Christ saw a prostitute being
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol IX Issue 5-6.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 a global truth within himself. He sees the truth which is all pervading, not only sees but he know and he
feels that he is in that truth. So when dharma flowers into truth it's a very beautiful happening and that
should happen to all of you. So many things can linger on if you are only on the dharma level. I have
seen people going into ego, making money. Sometimes they don't even ask me and go on doing things
which they should not do. They do wrong things which are not good for Sahaja Yoga. There is no
humility about it and they den't understand that whether this dharma is standing on truth or untruth.
We have to go to the foundation of dharma which is truth. As deseribed before it's a tree of life which has
got its roots in the brain and the branches in the body. So you have to go to the roots ofeverything and
that is the place where you reach when you are absolutely established in Sahasrara. In the Sahasrard are
the roots of all these ideas we have or all these swarupas we have taken. We have now become dharmic.
What is root of dharma? Why should we be dharmic? What is the need to be dharrmie? There are many
people in this world who are extremely adharmic living very well. According to outvard expression we
feel that they are very happy people, they are alright they are enjoying themselves while we are deprived
perhaps of all the so-called enjoyments of this world. So at the state of only dharma things become very
important to us which may not be standing on truth. There are so many things like that I can point out
to you that how Sahaja Yogis falter, even after reaching dharma state they falter. I have seen people
giving up their drugs, alcoholism, giying up other kinds of addictions, ever their language improves,
their behaviour is charged, they become humbler people no doubt, but still they are conscious that they
are standing on dharma. This consciousness has to disappear.
At the state of Sahastara this consciousness disappears becaLIse truth is love and love is truth. That is the
point where the Kundalini meets the Heart Chakra. As you know the Seat (Pitha) of heart is in the
Sahasrara. When the Kundalini pierces through that Heart Chakra, what starts flowing in the brain, in
the Sahasrara is the truth but truth that is love. There's a difference between truth as itself and truth that
is love. It was out of love for that prostitute that Christ stood by her. He stood on the roots of truth no
doubt, but what was flowing through FHis heart was the love, and the pure love. So now when we have
pure love for someone, we see the whole thing in
manner and it becomes very sweet. Otherwise truth can be very bitter, can be very painful, but truth
which is adorned with love is just like a flower without the thorns. It's very interesting how a person
who is pouring with love and is standing on truth-that's the personality you have to become.
Now in the expression of love we can take an example to understand : Supposing I meet somebody and
he is telling all kinds of horrible things about another person. I feel tremendous love for him as well as
for the person about whom he is telling all these things. I take to lie, a complete lie, which is a truth, also
in a way. I tell that person, see what are you talking. The person about whom you are saying all this has
been just praising you all the time and here you are talking like this. Now this is not the truth actually,
but you take the help of the lie, the other side of the truth, to bring out a friendship between the two
persons. This is what is the work of love, that it tries to bring people closer to each other: to say things
by which they become one, united. So all the divisive methods that we have used so far just disappear
and we try to understand what is the method by which we can join people's heart. As it is, you are in
collective consciousness, but this collective consciousness, if it is superficial voI can achieve great results
like as you have done-may be you can build beautiful ashrams, vou can do all this. But when it is filled
with love, then the joy is complete of collective consciousness.
a different manner, we see a person in a different
Now people talk of peace. You cannot have peace without this new awareness, we call collective
consciousness, but in that also there has to be the main tatwa, principal of love. For example now, say
Sahaja Yogis from Germany and Austria are going to Israel - It is very fulfilling. I was happy that they
have chosen for this Puja, people from Israel, and then I found Israelies coming to Egypt, forgetting all
that Moslems had done to them. It's really remarkable how people get attracted towards expression of
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol IX Issuc 5-6
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 their lowe, to their fellow men, to other Sahaja Yogis, and once it starts growing you will be surprisud
huw we can change this world. Most of the problems, human problems, are due to hatred and it is very
commonly used-"I hate, I hate", it's absurdity, it's a sin to hate someone. Why do you hate someone?
You can hate the sin, you can hate the evil, but you should not hate people just for hating sake. This
hatred that we have is responsible for all the problems we have had so far. Because one person becomes
very powerful, by dividing people he becomes very powerful, and these divisive things have really
Crushed so many countries. For example our country was divided by the British, now they are having
the division. This doesn't stop. By dividing us what has happened? All the countries that have gone
away from India are suffering very much. Those people who tried to divide the country thought thhat
they 'd become Prime Ministers, this that. Most of them have been murdered by their own peoaple. Yuu
ean see clearly how hatred manifests itself! It starts from a small point and it manifests all over, very
clearly it can be seen in any country being divided. There's no need to divide any country
more hatred and more trouble.
that creates
In the same way in Sahaja Yoga we should not think of having divisions, Now we have got a beautitul
land near to Ganges. Now people are thinking if they can have separate houses, separate compounds
Why? You kriow how to live collectively, Vou enjoy collective life, So why do you want to haye separate
houses? What sUcrets are we going to have from each other? After all whatever we do is known on the
vibrations
you cannot hide anything, so why have separate houses. Why do you want to have some.
because in Sahaja Yoga there is no privacy. We know about everyone, what they ate put to, what
NoeNLid
are their problems, what chakras they are catching. Isn'tit? So there is no secret about anything in Sahaja
Yoga. Everyone knows abou?everyone, so what's the use of having privacy - alsol can't understand.
It's like this you see - still the mind is working like that.
Then they are thinking of inheritance. I was saying that you can have inheritance, but if vour son is ot
at Sahaja Yogi, what to do. We cannot keep a culprit there to trouble everyone. It is not the rules and
regulations that are going to keep you happy and joined together, but it is the pure collective consciousness
and its love. Because as vou know we have no proper organisations, we havE no clergvship, we hove
nothing like that. Leaders also can shift more times than Ganges River can shift its course. So there is
nothing like that. It's all on a shifty sand we are standing and, all the time, and your Mother is another
one who tries all kinds of tricks. The reason is I want you to stand on rocks and this rock is emitting love
is emitting that Divine Love, and the joy of that love is really so beautiful. For example, people would
like to have their separate bathrooms, specially Indians, suddenly they have become British and British
have become Indians. Indians want to have their separate bathrooms-Ldon't know why, and this is a
Verv.common discase with Indians. And itis also spreading to other people
want to have their separate bathrooms. In a collective life there is no need You don't even know, and it
you ask me won't even know if I lhave been to bathroom or not, just go there and come back. finished.
1 have no time for all that. In the same way you also should have a concept of a societv which is living
like an ocean, it the ocean rises they rise, it falls they fall-just one unison of Love. Iam expecting that
kind of society at the foothills of the Himalayas, and I am sure all of vou realise that Himalaya being the
Sahasrara of the world. Luckily I wanted it to be done before the Sahasrara Puja and it is done, with
blessings of Himalayas.
-I feel sometimes that they
The Himalaya is also like the Sahasrara where the Kundalini has risen, where the vibration have cone
Out, and in the sky you can see the vibrations. But this Himalayas is ruled by a wrathful Gud called Shiva
that's the dangerous part of it. Sowe have to be very, very careful. lf we try to play around, if we try
to take to hatred among ourselves, take to divisive methods, take to something that is not Sahaj, this
wrathful God is sitting on pur head. He's also in Mecca, this is Macceshwar Shiva there. If you try to
misbehave he comes out with his wrathfulness. Anywhere where you are you have to be
that this Shiva is everywhere. Like one of these Lingas of Shiva is in Parli Baijnath in Maharashtra, and
very careful
Divnie Cool Breee
Vol EX Tssne 5.0
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 there people started another kind of Sahaja Yoga, also they were drinking on the day of the Shri Ganesha's
celebrations, so the wrath of Shivalinga came and there was such a big earthquake Many people were
lost but none of the Sahaja Yogis, and their centre was saved completely. Now we had a big fire also as
you know last time and nothing happened to you, you are under protection: You are all the time protected.
There was no wrath of Shiva that could work out anything. Fire could not do anything to you because
you are under protection. But this protection is your Mother's love. It's not anything else but the love of
your Mother, which very powerful, and which is protecting you and helping you. In the same way yOu
develop that kind of love for others, for other Sahaja Yogis, for other people, for other things, for this
mother earth, for all that.
Your love cannot orily protect you but protect others also. Your attention as long as it is on yourself will
start becoming smaller and smaller. I should have this, I should have that, I like this, I like that. All these
topics will fall. You'll never say. "I like this". No question. What do I like? It is difficult for me to decide
if I like anything-this I like, that I like, I like to be this way. Who are you? Ask yourself the question.
Who are you? If you are the pure spirit it is nothing but love, and in love you think of others, the
problems of others, you try to make others comfortable, you try to look after others and you don't just
look after yourself and bother about yourself. This is what you have to reach. Though you may be
dharmic, you may be in every way Sahaj, but still, unless and until you reach that state in your Sahasrara,
I wouldn't say that you are alright. You have to work it out. For that, of course, meditation is very
important.
But the thing stops it is your mind. It is your mind that goes on telling you. All the time you watch your
nind how it tries to guide you. How it tries to tell you – now what about me, what about my house,
what about my children, what about my country. Like that you go on "my, my, my" – ltimately you
end up into nothing. But when you say "you, you, you"-Kabira has said a beautiful thing about it. He
says that when the goat is living it is saying : "meh, meh, meh" which means I. I, I. But when it dies, then
they take out its intestine and put it on a Dhunkih, where they put if for the eleaning of the cotton. And
that time what does that Dhunkih say: "Tuhi, tuhi, tuhi"- You are the one, you are, you are
he calls all over. In the same way you have to think from other's point of view. Fist of all tuhi (Thou)
when you say, you say it to your Guru or to God that you are -I am no more, I am dissolved, I am
finished, I have become one with this ocean of love. And then you say to other: "you are, you are" that
is Sahaj Culture.
and that
Sa lots of falsehood will fall off-falsehood that surrounds you and others. Like people try falsehood by
saying something "I love you very much" and on the back they plan something very bad. They can do
anything. Not Sahaja Yogis, they don't do it. They have reached the stage where they don't do it. But still
if they don't do it they are conscious of it. All the time they are conscious, we don't do this, we don't
drink-so what? We don't fuss about food. I mean all their things they have achieved they are very
proud of it-that we are like this, we are that. You see, because you are the pure spirit, because you are
that, so you have become that. How can you take pride in something what you are? Like somebody
asked me : don't you feel proud that you are the Adi Shakti? I couldn't understand the question. I said
see now, if I am Adi Shakti what is there to be proud, because I am that what is there to be proud. If I was
not that then I would be proud of it, butI was, so what is there to be proud of. Like the sun, it shines, it's
not proud that. "I am the sun", or if you are born, say, with your eyes and nose, a face like a human being,
you are not proud : I am a human being, I am a human being-are you proud? In the same way if you
are that what you are, you are not proud, you are not consciouIs of it, not at ail conscious. I mean, I never
tell myself I am Adi Shakti there's no need to tell. But it is so, what to do. Now God has chosen me, I
should say, to be Adi Shakti, alright, I can have it. But I just don't know what is there -as if like some
people think, Sahaja Yoga has been bestowed upon them like some Lordship or something like that. It is
what you have become-when you become, you must understand that you have become that. Like
Divine Cool Breeze
•5•
Vol IX Issue 5-6
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 supposing a stone becomes gold, then it is gold, it won't be proud that "Tm gold"=gold is gold Why
will it be proud of that. In the same way this consciousness of being a Sahaja Yogi drops off. Still it
lingers
so one has to be careful that once vou are a Sahaja Yogi, vou are a Sahaja Yogi = so what Iam
aSahaji, so what, nothing so great. If's like saying that I have a nose, voi see, and be proud of saving 1
have nose. Nose is already there, what is there to be proud of-but this pride has to go. That's very
Fmportant to realise that I'm not there, I'm no more - l'm one of the whole-
drop of mine-1 don'tkrw if there are any boundaries left in me? This kind of consciouIsness dev elops
in you, when your consciousness is filled with joy -just with joy and bubbling with love-bubbling
with love. You go on expressing your love, whethervou talkor vou don't talk, whether vou say something
about it or not, whether vou are smiling or not, thiss jon is in vouur heart.
become the Ocean, this
Now the Heart Chakra the peetha (Seat) of the Heart Chakra. gets filled with light of truth, but the truth
is not stuch an absurd thing that we know of as truth. Somebody asked me what is the truth. SoI said it
was written long time back, that you should speak the truth and speak something that people will like
- Satvam Vadeth P'rivam Vadeth. Then people said, hew can we make these two things? Truth may not
be palatable and could be something vou say which people like, and may be false. so howw to make these
two things meet Shri Krishna gave a very geOod answer, He said Satvam Vadeth Privam Vadeth, I'rivam
Vadeth You say the truth, truth you nust sav, but that truth should be good. or should be liked ur
should be appreciated or should be nourishing for vour spirit, by which there is benevolence which
creates beneolence, and then it has to be priva. In the beginning, pcople may not like and say that "he
said horrible things to me" or whatever it is-but at the end of it they ll say that sce, it's so good that it
was said to me that I have done somethıng perfect. But in any case there is no need to say something
VETY harsh or hard to anyone. That is not your joh to go on correcting all the rest of the people. To begin
with, many Sahaja Yogis have been saving : vou've got this chakra caught up, you've got that chakra
caught up. AIl this is the play of ego. You have no business to condemn anvone, you have come from
such a condemned condition vourself, so wvhy are you condemning others. Only thing is if you are
capable, if vou are equipped, if you are matured enough in Sahaja Yoga, then you will just take it up as
a great challenge of love and you will do it. But vou won't go on condemning that person, finding faults
with that person, it's a very good excuse if you don't want to do it Supposing somebody is sick and the
doctor doesn't krow how tocure, so what does he do? He says vou see vou are sick because this happened,
because vou went into the cold. But now I am sick so what about curing me? No, because VOu did this.
you did that, vou should not have done this. All about the past mistakes, he'll go on In the same way we
ARA On : that vou did like this, vou were like this, you went to such and such Guru, vou did this kindof
a mistake, that's why you are like this. No, don't tell him anything, just work it out and it works. Of
Course, vou can ask if he has been to some Guru, but don't condemn and don't criticise. There is no need
to condemn anybody for what mistakes they have committed. This is all coming from the consciousness
that you are better equipped, that you have all the knowledge. You have, vuu are very knowledgeable
people. I must sav, very knowledgeable. You are the gnostics, all that I accept, but as long as you are
aware of it you are not. Once you are not aware of it then you are that what is called Sahaja Yogi. So i
would expect all of you to have this new development in our Sahasrara in everybody's Sahasrara. We
have to think of the whole world. We cannot just think of Sahaja Yogis and also about the seekers.
Seekers are there, alright, but what about the rest? There are so many problems thene and so many
things to be done. For example, now we have a problem in India of poverty. I am trying to do something
for them. You have problems in your countries. You should find out what problems there are. You can
start some sort of a movement for them, try to help them as far as possible. It's not missionary like, that
you convert somebody for some sort of a reward or for some name – just do it for your pleasure,
because it's your pleasure to do it. That's how you will go to the society and you won't be afraid that
you will be caught up. I know of one couple, when I asked them, why don't you start working it out. So
Vol IX Issue 5-0
Divne Caol Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 they said "Mother we are afraid our ego will come back". They are afraid of themselves unly- theirego
will come back. So all these problems should be dropped out and you should reach that state where you
don't have all these fears, all these non-sensical ideas about yourself. You are powerful, vou have
powers. Not only that, but you have been specially bestowed with those powers. But if vou don't use it
then what are you? It the lamp is not enlightened what is this lamp for-just for decoration? So this has
fo bu used. and this has to used without feeling that awareness within you that you are something
great, better than others, something selected, or also they say that we are chosen. So, this can spread
very tast with such grace and understanding
All kinds of stupid people are there, it's alright, vou know they are stupid-just laugh at them, make
fun of them and that's how you can solve the problem. But even that, you should do it in stich a way that
Vou don't hurt them, that whatever vou do vou should see from the results what works out. Results
should be such that vou should see, how it
think that's the superior intelligence by which you knowv how to say things, what to say and how to
work it out. Love, this Divine Love, gives you a complete control over yourself and you know
everything, how to behave, how to talk to people, how to manage them.
works out. With some people
that's the intelligence,
I don't know what is the worst thing among human beings. According to Krishna it was temper
temper was the worst thing, but according to me it is jealousv. Jealousy of any kind is absolutely like a
Seum. In Sahaja Yoga also people feel jealous and they may not say so because I don't like it, but they
may try to create problem among each other. So one thing you should have a watch on vour mind if
there is any kind of jealousy. I'm rather worried sometimes-supposing I want to give some present to
some people. then I'm worried that I shouldn't do something that will create jealousy. We should not!
Mother might have forgotten, or it's all right she's running short of it- it's all right. But people have
that kind of a verv sharp sense of jealousy in Sahaja Yoga. Now supposing I meet somebody and I don't
meet somebody else-finished. That person develops a jealousy for that person whom I meet. Sometimes
people pester me too much-"Mother, I must meet you, I must meet you". I don't know why, why do
you want to meet me? I'm all over, everywhere as Vou sav. Then what is the need that vOLu should merit
me and talk to me what is the need? It's not for you alone I am, I am tor evervone. But some people
think that they have a special right on me and they think that I
they feel very bad. All these things have to go away in a bigg way when yoLu become the ocean. Then vou
are not bothered what shore you go, where vou travel, vou are not bothered, you are only with the ocean
moving up and down, That is how it's a living ocean of love and that's what we have to develop
without dominating others, without showing off. It should be, the whole thing, we should be contented
within ourself. In Hindi it is said better : Apne Mein Samaye Hue. Should be all within voursclf and
that's the most enjovable thing. Because you see what we want, supposing I want something for myself,
so lll strive and get it. But this is something if you have within yourself, you are fully filled within
yourself. So what is most important, what is so much needed? Nothing! You are completely filled with
Vourself, contented with Vourself, and then you want to share. This is the idcal way of dealing with
hot
must meet them individually otherwise
Sahasrara.
This whole world's Sahasrara has to be opened up. This is what we have to do and we are not going to
disappear into some exclusive places, that is just for meditation -you can go there, but not for escaping
the world. That is not the ideas. Idea is meditation, for your growth-it would be a nice place to go to.
It is very important to understand how valuable you are, how remarkably important you are- born
at this time, got your realisation for what? To emancipate this world, to fransform human beings, to
take the whole of this world into the realm of God. That is what you are here for.
May God bless you.
Divine Caol Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 GURU POOJA '97
Talk By H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Today's Pooja is very important for us. You all have got your self realisation. You have all the knowledge
that is necessary to give realisation to others. You have to know what you have already. That is very
important. Because if you do not try your hand and if you do not try to give realisation to others, firstly
you will have no faith in yourself. You will have no self esteem also. The second part is that you try
giving vibrations to other persons, but don't get involved with that person. I have seen some people get
too much involved. If they give realisation to one person they think that they have done a great job and
they start working on that person, his family, his relations. So far, as you must have learnt that one may
be related, one may be closer to one person but not necessarily he will have that much of chance of self
realisation.
The only way to grow is to be collective. There is no other way out. If people think that by staying
away from Ashramas, alone, living somewhere, they will achieve much that is not the way Sahaja
Yoga is meant. Formerly people used to go to the Himalayas and most of them were separated. And
only one or two persons were chosen for spiritual growth. Here it is not question of spiritual growth, it
is a question of your collectivity growing in you. That is how you become a person who is collective,
who enjoys collectivity, who works with collective and lives with collective. Such a person develops
new kind of powers. And these powers are such that they are very subtle, that they penetrate into any
molecule, atom or human beings - anywhere! And this penetration is only possible if you have
temperament which is collective. Without being fully collective you cannot achieve that height which is
very necessary today for Sahaja Yoga.
As you know there are problems and problems all over as if we feel that the world is going to
sink. Specially when I went to America I felt that, "My goodness!", this is a hell that they have
created here. It is just a hell. Because they have no Dharma, they don't believe in any Dharma.
Completely they worship Adharma. And this kind of climate is flowing all over, all over the
world you get reaction of American Adhramic life. And people think that there is nothing wrong
in it. Whatever you may tell them they will not believe. Now they will think that there is no
worth in it. But they don't see the destruction from the very basis of their lives, their families,
their societies. Whole country, I feel, is filled with such an ugly type of adharmic nature that one
cannot even imagine how such ideas come into their heads! And these ideas I will not tell you,
you know them very well. But if you have to save your children you have to be an ideal Guru
yourself. If you just talk of Sahaja Yoga and if you try to assume that you are a Sahaja Yogi, also
you try to propagate Sahaja Yoga, without all these powers being awakened in you, it would be
a failure. So, how to develop these powers within us we should see.
It is rather embarrassing for me to tell you how you have to behave towards your Guru. I think
people have told you. But naturally, spontaneously as soon as you get your realisation and
grow
in it, naturally you develop a very humble aftitude. Also an attitude through which you achieve
lots of qualities of your Guru. Now, supposing, the Guru is at a particular height and if you try
to go on to the same height, so, you must sit at a place which is much lower than the Guru is.
Some people take too much advantage of my good nature. And so many people have pointed
'they will
out to me that "you must correct these people. They talk to you at equal level". I said
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol IX Issue 5-6
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 learn a lesson, they will learn a lesson". But sometime it does not work out. And they start
talking in the same manner as if they are talking to a friend or to their equal.
Fist is complete humility. You have to be a humble person, extremely humble. Now you check on
that : When you talk to others, are you humble? When you think of others, are you humble?
When you look after your wife and children, are you humble? That is a very important thing
for
every person who thinks he is a Guru. Humility is the first quality or, I should say the ocean,
into which you must jump. Some people think that "if you are humble, Mother, people will take
advantage of you". Nobody can take advantage of you. Because you have to remember another
point that you are protected, all the time looked after by Param Chaitanya. I know, you know
that, but how many really believe that there is Param Chaitanya with us. If you really believe
that there is Param Chaitanya, then vou don't get frightened, you don't get worried, you are not
subjected to all kinds or nonsensical ideas also. But if you think that you are not protected or
what will happen, how will things happen, then Param Chaitanya leaves you alone. You have to
see the whole drama, how P'aram Chaitarıya works out, how it works out, how you are behaving.
Supposing you are not in a proper shape and you try to show off too much, then what happens?
Then you get the reward for it; not that I do anything but the Param Chaitanya will teach
lesson, that you will remember, that you should have been a little different from what you have
been.
you a
After all we have to know why have we come to Sahaja Yoga. Begin at the root of it. We have
come to Sahaja Yoga because we wanted to know the absolute truth. And this absolute truth has
been now known to you through your vibrations. You know through your vibrations also what
is the absolute truth. And you should work everything on that line. That absolute truth whatever
Vou feel on your vibrations you have to follow. Sometime, unfortunately, I have seen many people
think that their vibrations are alright. They are alright and whatever they are receiving on their
vibrations is first class. Now how to correct that point is very difficult. It comes from ego. When
you have ego you can never find anything wrong with you. And even if the vibrations are telling
you something it might be somebody else who is telling you. Because you are not there, vour ego
is there. And your ego is just spoiling you and teaching you things which normally you would
See clearly that "I am doing something wrong. I should not have done it". In this process of
correction and improvement, when you indulge, you should see are you getting subtler or rosser
That is the best way to judge. Now I have seen people who go on judging on small things
like vibrations whether these vibrations are alright or not in this tree or on these flowers or
on this lamp or on material things, they want to see the vibrations. But for what are you
seeing the vibrations? You are seeing the vibrations because of some sort of material gain.
They think that if you check the vibrations and the vibrations are alright then you are quite
saved, you will not lose this, you will not lose that. It is not true. Because vibrations are not
meant to judge all these worldly things and worldly matters. It is absolutely cheap meaning of
the vibrations. We should not cheapen it. Because vibrations can Suggest things which may be
detrimental to your growth very much. Once I wanted somebody to go somewhere, so he said I
didn't
Mother". I said "Why". "Because I saw the vibrations were very bad". I said "that is
go,
why I asked you to go! If the vibrations were good what was the use of yvour going there The
reason I asked vou to go there so that vou could help. But before that vou judged vourself,
Divine Caxol Brecze
Val IX Issne 5-6
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 judged your vibrations and then you did not want to go"
So, what happens we want to have.an easy, cosy life. And all our problems must be solved by
Sahaja Yoga. Otherwise we feel Sahaj Yoga is of no use. Whatever is our desire must be fulfilled.
So now the desires are mostly personal my child is nof well, so the child should get well; my
husband is misbehaving, the husband should be alright. Or I have no house, so I must get a
house See how we are moving our mind is still on a very consumer society, as they call it. We are
all the time thinking : now I should have a son, now instead of a girl. And you do not get a son
and blame Sahaja Yoga for that. Anything that according to a desire does not work out then you
think it is Sahaja Yoga which has done the harm and you are suffering because of Sahaja Yoga. Or
this faith in Sahaja Yoga gets a little-moving or, we can say in a way, it is not that deep But if you
are deeply embedded in Sahaja Yoga then what happens : what may come i will be a Sahaja
Yogi. Supposing somebody dies. Normally in Sahaja Yoga it is difficult for people to die, also.
Even if they want to die they cannot die. It is the Param Chaitanya which decides fOr it; but
supposing you take a proposition like that, still you must know that wish may not be fulfilled.
And if that is not fulfilled then you feel disturbed and you think "what is wrong?" But your wish
is not the wish of God Almighty. And Param Chaitanya is the wish of God Almighty. For example
I went to America, take it like this; and America attacked me with negativity, and troubled me.
For all these days I have been suffering, so called, and I have had pains, I have had all kinds of
things. But that I had to do because, now, the American Sahaja Yogis will realise how much one
has to pay to make these dumbs heads of Americans to rise. How stupid they are and how
foolish they are who are enamoured by people who are taking money. So many people came to
me and told me "Mother, if you start saying that I can give for three hundred dollars, you will get
thousands and thousands of disciples of yours". I said "they will not be disciples". If they came
for money thinking that I am taking money it is something worthy, that means they are absolutely
stupid. You cannot get Sahaja Yoga by money. This is the first principle they don't understand,
most of them, most of them don't understand that you can get self realisation without paying
any money. There were some Gujaratis rich people, at New Jersey and they asked question to
Sahaja Yogis that "how it is possible to get it so easily?" It is not possible because it is a very
difficult thing. All the Shastras have said, everybody has said, it is very difficult to get your
realisation". Alright,if so, how is it that you are giving it so easily? Why? Nobody knew how to
answer these people. You should have said like this: "alright, it is difficult, it is very difficult and
you cannot give it amass, true. But if somebody is doing it then you have to think about it. How
somebody is doing it?" So this kinds of stupid questions are there and still if they go on you
to really tell them in a very humble way "Sir, one has to be worthy also". So they will run after
people who are just making money out of them, making fool out of them and they boast at that
we have three Gurus, somebody says we have seven Gurus; and I wonder what was their
condition.
have
So, the people who are extremely stupid, in Sanskrit they call 'Moodh', people who are brainless,
cannot get realisation. So give them up. If they are arguing with you, you just give them up. It is
not their right to argue with you. Their right is to get realisation, but not the right to argue with
you, ask vou foolish questions. But you should always remember that with that humility you
must have your dignity intact. Because you are à Guru. Once you know you are a Guru, one
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issue 5-6
10
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 thing should be there that you will not behave like a joker all the time. Your behaviour must be
dignified. At the same time it would be very pleasant personality. It won't be annoying them.
Your personality itself will suggest that there is something special about
you.
Now, how you will develop that kind of personality? The biggest problem in the West is ego.
And the biggest problem in East is Super-ego. Now this ego business, I don't know from where
it has come. In all work of life they show how egoistical they are. For example I went to America
and Iwas surprised that there is a social problem and the blacks are treated in a different manner
and the whites in a different manner. I mean colour is given by God and somebody has to be
black and white. If everybody looks the same it will look like a regiment. There should be some
variety,
person carrying better or different expressions. Otherwise you will be with such a world where
everybody looks the same, just the same. But so much of socialism there, that I was surprised
that how it has worked into human mind. So, at the moment you must develop a complete detest
for socialism, complete detest. It is very easy to understand that anybody who has fair complexion
could be a cruelest man, cruelest woman and could be a cruelest mother also. And the one who
is black could be very kind, generous. It does not go with the colour. Temperament does not go
with the coleour. But because the blacks have been hated so much that they react. And they react
naturally, sometime, in such a manner that it is very crude and very cruel. But this kind of
attention, this kind of wrong type of attitude towards human beings, even animals won't bear it.
So towards human beings to have such an attitude itself show that you are not worthy of Sahaja
Yoga now. So, anyone of you who has such a figure, that somebody is black or sormebody is
white, cannot be a Guru in Sahaja Yoga.
there should be some change in the force and also in the expression. One has to be a
Then in India we have caste system; equally bad and horrible. It has no sense in it, no basis also.
But in India we have people who believe that some castes are higher and some castes are lower.
Every caste people can do all the worst possible things, there is no demarcation for them. And
every low caste can be very, very good. We have had many great poets and Sufis in the lowest
castes in India. These castes are man-made. You know man-made does not suit us. And all these
man-made ideas are not going to suit us and it will lead us to complete destruction. Because
hatred begets hatred and it goes on increasing and increasing. If you cannot get rid of your
hatred then I would say that you are not a Sahaja Yogi. These are all conditionings-you are
born in a white family so you are white. You are born in Christian family that is why you are
Christian Al this is just because you are born in that. But that does not mean that you are higher
or lower. All the problems of the world today, if you see, are because of human attachmnents to
nonsensical ideas of superiority. Only through collectivity we well change it. For example, I
would say, in an Ashram we should have all coloured people living together, with an equal
right, with an equal understanding and love and affection. If that is not there no use calling it an
Ashram. Once they asked me "Mother, will you come and give a lecture in Harlem I said "why
not?" So, sorme Sahaja Yogi said "Harlem! Mother you don't know what is Harlem?" I said I
know. There is no harm". They said "you know the blacks are there and they..." I said "I am also
black. You could call me black or you could call me white". But the love is such a thing that cleans
all these ridiculous ideas we have about other people. To bound anyone as black and white
shows that you have no eyes to see. Any person with that, any person with that loving heart
Vol. IX Issuu 5-6
DiVne Cool Breeze
I1
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 cannot see the superficial things; cannot see.
Today is the day when we are celebrating the Guru's greatness. Now look at all the Gurus, how
they were, how they behaved. We have many in India and many others, many Sufis in other
countries. These Sufis or these Saints that we had never believed in any caste, never believed in
black and white. Christ, he never believed in black and white. Buddha never believed in black
and white. Nobody believed in any kind of man-made ideas. These are all man-made ideas
which we have accepted and even after realisation we try to carry on with that. Now by
we do not get rid of it. But acting we can. Just see how we work ouf these stupid ideas within us
and how we can get rid of them. Very simple is, in meditation, you should sit down and see how
many people you love, and why do you love them. Not out of pity. But just with love, how much
you care for others. I have seen some very beautiful examples of that. But still, I must sav. that
there are certain fixed ideas which are to be dislodged completely. Very impurtant for a person
who is Guru in Sahaja Yoga. You have to be a clean hearted, open hearted, loving hearted fellow.
His heart should play the tune of Param Chaitanya. If his heart is full of all these man-made
ideas, 1 don't know what will happen. Even when they transplant the heart they cannot do it
with a man-made they have to use a real natural one. So you can imagine when you try to take to
all these odd ideas are just devices, they will never give you collectivity.
saving
So introspection has to be made. Are we one or are we judging each other. Now the judgement is
quite a lot also. Now all this can be seen only when you live together. Otherwise how will vou
know? When you start living together, you start discovering what is missing in you; what is not
there; what has to be there. It is so peaceful to have a heart which is full of love! Because every
moment of that heart is so much enjoyable, so much enjoyable. There is a steory of Shri Ram,a that
he ate the bers', a kind of fruit, which were first tasted by an old lady, with such love. It shows
what? Shows that a person like Shri Rama was a king of the highest heritage and this old lady
who was just of the lowest caste gives him these fruits with such love. And when he eats that he
praising it. So, his wife says "give me some" he says "alright". But the brother is still half
way in Sahaja Yoga, so he does not like, he does not like, he gets angry. Then she eats and she
says "brother-in-law it is a wonderful fruit, I must say". He says "alright, give me some". She savs
"why shouldI
eat?" The story shows that the level of your personality as Guru is judged by your clean heart,
by your loving heart, by your highest remarkable personality. The personality is not something
that is to be built in artificially. It is not artificial. It is natural, absolutely natural. Whatever vou
do has to be natural. So this artificiality of certain ways of talking of certain ways of living
together creates problems. For exarmple we had an Ashram in America, in New York, and thete
was a lady who was very strict. Everything should be tip-top it should be here, the spoons must
be there and the forks should be here and all sorts of things. And she hurt many people, it is ncit
important. These cultural, tabos are not important in Sahaja Yoga. Becausenow you have became
Guru Guru can stay anywhere, live anywhere, eat everything, anytime. That should be the case.
But also I have seen in Sahaja Yoga, there are many, they are very axious to eat the food as soon
as it is served. Once it happened, I was there, they have served the food and they just started
removing the plates. I said "what is the matter? I have to eat food!" "Ch, vou have not eaten
Mother?" "No, I have not yet touched it even". So it is a sort of, first is a very lowest type of, we
starts
give you now? First you were very angry. So, why should I give you this fruit to
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issine 5-6
12
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 should say, desire is the hunger. Now a Guru does not bother. Whatever you give alright.
Whatever you want not to give: alright. Even if you don't give it is alright. One has to deelop
that by treating your ego. People feel very hurt if you serve them little later than another person,
These all kinds of funny things I have seen in Sahaja Yoga. On the contrary it is the lowest ty pe of
a desire. We should not cater to it at all, if you want to be a real Guru. Cf course many problems
are solved. As I have seen, so far, that they do not take to drugs, they do not take todrinking and
all such things. It is such a blessing! Because if I had to start from that level I don't know how
deep I would have gone, from where I would have pulled vou out. But that is, of course, a verv
good thing. That is a nice thing. But still, to make a beautiful life out of you which will attract the
attention of everyone: how you talk, how you behave, how you love. So again one has to say that
Guru Pad comes only through the love they you have. Love. Like they have, say, ten people for
anything, for adhrama suffering, and they have it only from a particular country, from a particular
group,
the particularone caste could be, or could be one religion, could be, one school or anything So
that shows that you are still not there. As a Guru you should like every kind of culture, everv
kind of beauty and that has to be brought in our daiiy life. You should not look down upon
anvone for their colour, for their status, class consciousness. All this has been shown in the life of
all these Gurus, Saints who lived. Tukarama says "Oh God! Thank God! You have made me a
scheduled caste". He was not. But he just says so. All of us, all the time, should not be conscious
of what has been our birth, what has been our personality or what has been our big name. One
should not be able to make out who is the Saint and who is not. Even people are proud that they
then there is no fun, there is no fun. For example they will have a music group, su trom
are Saints.
I was surprised in America also, very much, that the Russians who have gone there are a very
different quality of people. They would not raise their eyes to me, they would not raise their
eves. And very deep, very very deep. Vibrations were very deep. The reason is. I think, thev
have been oppressed during communism, perhaps may be, and now they have come to America.
They have seen so called freedom and what nonsense it is doing. So, knowing these two extremes,
I think, they have gone very deep into their own being. And they have such strength and such
Lunity among themselves. I was surprised that I have never met them before. They did not come
from Russia, they come, only they were there. So what is it that has kept them like that is that
they had no religion in their heads; they had no religion. To them every religion is the same and
they had no religion to follow. So a Guru cannot belong to any religion. Because these religions
are also man-made: They have created such a problems all over and they are all fighting among
themselves. How can they be Divine?
So you should not get involved into some sort of a religious bias. I have seen it that a Sahaja Yogi,
say, if he is a Christian then the bias will be shown that he is a Christian. If he is a jew, you cart
make it out. So what is the use of coming to Sahaja Yoga? Their attention, if it goes inside they
will find out. You have to direct yourself to see what is wrong with you and why is it that you are
not very successful as a Guru. The success of the Guru is : he does not bother about time. Everv
time is the Holy time. He is not bothered if somebody is late or has come early. He is not a slave
of watches and time. This is also man-made. There were no watches about, I think, three hundred
years back. And nobody was so particular about the timing. So first thing he is beyond time:
Divine Cool Breeze
VoL IX IAue 50
13
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Kalatita. Then he is also Gunatita. Gunatita means he does not belong to the left side or the right
side or to the center. He is beyond these things, beyond these Gunas. Where he stands he sees
everything in the Divine Light. Everything. If something good happens to him he says : the
Divine Light has done it. If something bad happened to him he says the Divine Light wanted
that way; everything he leaves for the Divine Light. He is beyond the Gunas. Like, supposing,
there is a person who is on the right side, egoistical. Then he will start saying "Ah! How is it? I
Wanted this, this did not work out". And now he will challenge. Another will start crying, the left
side one that "I am very sorry, this has happened to me; it should not have happened" and all. Or
in the center also he might think that "how far are my vibrations? How could I not know" and all.
The person who is a real Guru : he looks at it as a drama, as a just witness of the drama. It
happened, it was to happen so it has happened. So what do we get out of it, you see he gets
something; a lesson that this was not right or this was wrong. That is all For that moment not to
go on churning in your head. That all what one gets and he is not bothered about anything. So he
goes beyond his Gunas. He is beyond Gunas. He eats anywhere, sleeps anywhere. He is not
bothered where he lives. He is not bothered where he goes by car or he goes by bullock cart.
He does not feel bad he is being not honoured if they give him a garland of a few flowers. He
is not bothered. In fact nothing can enhance his personality. Nothing. You will give something
simple he is alright or even if you don't give he is alright. It is not that he is judging himself
through your eyes. But he judges himself through his own eyes. And he sees for himself, the joy
of enjoying himself. What is there to be so particular about thing? What is so great to be hankering
after anything? It just works out in his own time and if it does not, it does not. What does it
matter? Just think of it.
Also in Sahaja Yoga a Guru has to be a bìnding force. There are two types of people I have seen,
which go on breaking relations. It is very easy for them. They go on complaining. But there are
other who have a power to bring people together in such a manner, in such a sweet manner that
the people are brought closer together. Not that they have to forgive, it automatically works out,
just works out like that. And people go on joining such a man.
I was surprised that in America there were very very few Sahaja Yogis. They spend, they said,
fifty thousands dollars and got fifty Sahaja Yogis. The thousand dollars for one Sahaja Yogi in
America. So, very bad shape, But still you see they have to go for them because there are a lots of
seekers and lost in the wildness of seeking. But I thought, may be, it is a circle. They have to pass
through the circle of stupidity and then definitely, they will see the point. And it has happened.
We had almost four thousand people for my lecture which never has happened there in that
country. Nobody has got such a lot of audience with them. But still not many came, but they got
their realisation. So I could gradually see in America it must start going. And the Sahaja Yogis
must not worry only about their houses and where they live and all that but go all out to them.
I would
this outside work. May be, if there are outsiders who come and talk about Sahaja Yoga they
might be impressed. There are so many false Guru that you can't count them. And they have
accepted them : it is very surprising. Though they have suffered, they have lost their money,
everything, still they have accepted: "after all he is our Guru!" So there is basically something
wrong with them that they don't understand what is to be expected.
say some of the Sahaja Yogis who could afford to go should go to America and work out
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issue 5-6
14.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 I have written one book, perhaps it may reach them. But in any case you all can write your
experiences, something and can publish it. May be it might help them to open their eyes. By
writing anything you have to remember that it should show your quality of Sahaja Yogi. How
you are? In that one should not feel judged, you are putting them down or trying to say something
which will hurt them. But say it in such a manner that it corrects them and helps them. For a
Guru it is important that you should not have any false ideas about yourself. He might be from
a poor family, he might be from a rich family. Whatever it is he should not be conscious of that.
Because once you become that, you take Kabira, he was just a weaver, look at Raidas, he was just
a shoe maker. In India it is a very low caste. Supposed to be. He has written beautiful poetry.
Then Namadeva, he was a tailor. Just think of that. All these people have written the same thing
with such great beauty of poetry. How have they achieved? Because now they have entered into
that great realm of spirituality. You people also write same very good poetry. I know. But some of
the people who have written good poetry can also be very obsinate, very egoistical people. This
is somethingI could not understand. You are writing beautiful poetry and here you are full of
ego, so from where this poetry is coming out from you? So first of all is yourself, your personality
has to be something that the people should say "this is a real Guru we have met. For that, you
know very well, you don't have to give up your family, you don't have to give up anything.
But ego if it is still there, I don't know what to say, but you must get rid of it. Completely. And
collectively also ego should be given up. Collectively. It is a thing that people are egoistical
secretly within themselves, for sometime it shows it is a very subtle nonsensical disease that
people have and they just indulge into it.
On this day of Guru Pooja I have to say, now, that one has to work very hard. Very hard! The
most important thing is how much you have dedicated your life, your time to Sahaja Yoga. Then
only you will achieve that state of Guru. Look at me I am a house wife and I have my family,
resposolities, problems. But inspite that I am all the time thinking about Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja
Yoga and all that is the emancipation of human beings in the whole world. Not only here or
there, in the whole world. So that should be your widened vision not for only your school,
college, university, your this or that. But a very wider vision one should have and that you have
to develop through your working into every kind of circumstarices, every type of problems you
have. Once you develop that kind of a personality then you will be amazed how you can help so
many things.
I know there are so many Sahaja Yogis here who are worthy of this and really I love them
very
much and they also love me very much. But one should always see that, as you are now going to
be the Gurus, you have to be careful not to think that you are a Guru. You should never think that
you are a Guru. Never. Once you start thinking again Mr. ego of the Guru comes up. So you
decide "I am nothing! I am nothing! I am just a little bit in the heart of my mother. If such a
humble feeling is there then all your problems can be solved and things will work out because
your attention and your behaviour is going to impress others. Nothing else, whatever you may
try to work out. It is you who is going to get Sahaja Yoga for them. There is so much to be said
about how to become a good Guru and all that. But I think I'll keep it for next Guru Pooja:
Thank you very much.
15 -
Vol. IX Issue 5-6
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 OF GOD
THE WILL
Talk By H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
As it was put forward, it was about to obliterate all the value system, all the proof of God Almighty.
If you see, in the history, one after another, when science established itself, the people who are, so
called in charge of the helm of affairs in religion, in different religions tried to cope with the
findings of the science. They tried to show that, alright, if it is such, this much is in the Bible, and
if it is wrong, we should correct it. Specially Augustien did that. And it started looking as if it is
all a stupidity. The scriptures were just mythical. At least Koran itself, though had lots of things
which were describing the biology of today They could not believe that human beings were
specially created by God. They thought it was just a matter of chance that one after another the
animals acquired a situation by which they became human beings. Thus all the time Divinity
was challenged and there was no way of getting the proof of whatever is said in the Bible or inm
the Koran or in the Geeta or in the Upanishadas or in the Torah. Anyone of these things could not
be
proved. Because it was still just stupid, very very few people got their realisation and when
they talked people did not believe them, and thought that they are just trying to say something
which they are using to propound their own theories. So the whole thing became a kind of a
dead science. There is no science of religion. People started thinking that what is the use of
following these 10 commands or these strict rules of life? Because by following that you gain
nothing, you lose all the fun of life. Avoid to think of winning some punvas also. And that is how
all the time there was a big derailment of human value system. Also these organised religions
started taking to course of gaining power or winning money; because they thought that is the
only way you can control people and can go on. Thev were least bothered as to deliver the gouuds
whatever had been described in the Bible. Bible, of Lourse, was tempered very much and have
been lots of changes in that, and a person like Paul and Peter, who joyined together, tried to spoil
most of the Truth. Though Koran was not so much touched but still dealt more with the right
side, with the reproductive system and all that. And so many things are still ambiguous.
Simultaneously two things have happened;I don't know if vou are aware of it or not. First thing
that has happened is that now we have a new science of microbiology, in which we havediscovered
that every cell has got a DNA tape, as we have in computer every cell has got a programme in it.
In a way that it is programmed. And according to that programme a development takes place.
Now imagine the intricacy of it. So many computers are already programmed and all these cells
have been in them. So a very mysterious sort of thing has come up before the scientists and they
cannot explain it. They cannot explain many things. One of them is this. Now what Sahaja Yoga
has done is that it has proved that it is the Will of God, it is the Desire of God. The Will of God,
which is doing all the work, and it has been proved. All this Chaitanya, Adi Shakti, is nothing
but the Will of God. And Will of God is the one that is working out everything very harmoniously
I don't know it some of you must have read my book, first book, where I describe how this carth
was created. There was a long but it was very harmonious and how it developed is through the
Will of God. So everything was done in a way that God's will was working. Now the Will of God
you are feeling on your finger tips. After realisation now you have discovered the absolute science
which is the Will of God. Which is an absolute science. You people know that we have cured
people through Sahaja Yoga. You also know how to give bandhan. Knowing that it will work
Divine Cool Breeze
Nol. IX Issue 5-6
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 out. So many things work out automatically after realisation, that people don't want to believe!
In the beginning people would not believe when the scientists told them something. But now it
is the science which is always in the flux, it is all the time changing. One theory is again challenged,
another theory is again challenged.
But Sahaja Yoga has exposed that great truth of science which cannot be challenged. Which is all
there, So anybody who comes out with any new proposal about defaming God or saying that
there is no God, we can prove, not that there is God but everything, the creation of this earth, the
creation of human beings; everything was done harmoniously by the Will of God. If Will of God
has done everything, the human beings should not take any credit for discovering something
which has been created by God. Supposing, this carpet is made by somebody and we start
discovering all the colours, what is so great? It is all there. You cannot create. So it is not the
creation part of it which is so much important but the fashioning of this world. All this was done
by the Will of God.
Now if the Will of God is so important it has to be proved and now through Sahaja Yoga, after the
breaking of Sahasrara, you have now, for the first time, felt the Will of God, which is such an
important thing But for us it has come to us so Sahaj that we don't understand it, we just give a
bandhan and the things work out, and we feel that the things have worked out, so it is bandhan
which has worked out and we have managed it! It is not so. It is much more than that. We have
now become part and parcel of that big computer, of that Will of God. We have become the
medium, or we can say the channels of that Will of God. We are connected with that Will of God
which created all this Universe. So everything we can manage because we have göt the absolute
science in our hands; the absolute science which will work out the betterment of the whole
world. We can prove it to scientists, that there is a Will of God which has done all this creation.
Even evolutionary process is the Will of God. Without His will nothing could have happened. So
many people used to say that not even a blade of grass moves without the Will of God, which is
very true. And you have seen now that the Will of God we have got, as our own power, we can
use it. So how important it is to be a Sahaja Yogi. Perhaps we don't realise how important it is to
be a Sahaja Yogi. Sahaja Yoga is not only for saying others "I am full of joy, I am enjoying myself,
got purified, everything is fine. But for what? Why did you get all these blessings? Why you
have been blessed so that this knowledge of Will of God should be apparent in you; not only that
it should be a part and parcel of you. So we have to raise our level, we have to come up. For
medium and ordinary people it is really useless to give them Sahaja Yoga, because they are good
for nothing. They are not going to help us in any way. Because what is needed is now, today, that
we should have people who can really manifest and reflect the Will of God. And for that
understand we have to have very strong people. Because this will has created this whole Universe,
this Cosmos, this Mother Earth, everything is created by this Will of God.
you can
So now we are exposed to a new dimension, and that dimension is that we are the ones who are
channels of that Will of God. So then what is our duty? And what should we do about it? As a
result of Sahasrara being opened out, one thing is that illusions have vanished (Bhranti). You
should have no illusion as to the existence of God Almighty, the power of His will and the truth
about Sahaja Yoga. We should have no doubts at all. Minimum of minimum should be like that.
But while using this power you should be aware that this power is given to you because you are
capable of handling it. It is the highest power that you can think of. Take any Governor, any
Divine Cool Breeze
• 17.
Vol. IX Issue 5-6
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 minister, anyone, they can be removed tomorrow, they can become corrupt, they can become
absolutely devoid of any knowledge of their own powers. There are many people who just get
elected without knowing what they have to do.
So this is not just a conversion of people. It is not only even transformation but it is a new
fashioning of a new human being which has come forward and which is capable of carrying
the Will of God further.
So as a result of your realisation what you have got? The first thing that has happened is
your illusions have gone. You should have no illusions about God Almighty. His will and that
He is Omnipotent, Omnipresent and Omniscient. All His Omnipotence has done this work and
as collective consciousness you should also know that you are also omnipotent, omnipresent
and omniscient. Omniscient in the sense that voI see everything, know everything. Part of it,
that power is also within you. So to prove His Omnipresence vou have to be all the time aware
that vou are a Sahaja Yogi.
that
When I find, even now, Sahaja Yogis are troubled about their wife, their children, their house,
their jobs, I start wondering what is their level now? Where are they? Where are they going to
take up the role of what they have got?
So the Omnipotent God who is everywhere, who has done all this, the Will of God, that has
worked it out, has to work through you people.. And you have to be very strong, very sensible,
very wise, also very effective people. The more effective you become the more energy you will
get. But, still, I feel that most of Sahaja Yogis are not taking the responsibility of understanding
that they have to represent this God Almighty who is Omnipresent, Omniscient, who knows
Everything, who sees everything, and who is Potent, who is Almighty. If you understand that
this is what has happened after opening the Sahasrara, that you have now got the power which
has these three qualities in it, say, now this big thing has to be supported by strong pillars, but
supposing if they are not strong, it will fall down. In the same way, such a great power which has
come to you, for that we don't need very successful people, we don't need people who have a big
name or those who have lots of money. What we need is people of character, people of
tinderstanding, of wisdom, and of strength, that whatever may comel will stand bv it. I will take
to it, I will cope with it, I will change myself and improve myself.
TS
So now illusions have been dispelled. I hope you all have got rid of you illusions. Also VOI
should have no illusions about yourself. If you have an illusion you should leave Sahaja Yoga.
But know that vou are chosen for this purpose by God's will. That is why you are here. And
have to take up the responsibility of understanding this science which is absolute, and work
it out yourself, for yourself as well as for others. You have felt my love, but your love must be
felt because God is love. So your love must be felt by others. Others must feel that you are
compassionate, loving, understanding. All the time this Will of God is following through you
and
you
you have to work it out in such a manner that people should know that you are a saint. That
this power is flowing through you.
There is a second thing that has happened to you is that, not the illusion about God ur aboLIt
yourself, you have understood the integration, that in the world there is complete integration
which is existing. Normally if you see the children they have their own natural, inmate,
Divine Cool Breeze
• 18 •
VoL IN IssTIc 50
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 understanding They know. If you see, normally, a good child would always like to share his
things; would like to love another child. If another little child is there he would like to protect
that child. Naturally! Innately, a child feels that way. Also if you take another child, supposing.
who is a little baby, they know that one should be careful about the privacy of the body. Children
don't want to be made nude before others. No child likes it. Innately. So all these innate qualities
are within yoLt. Children don't like to steal, they don't know what stealing is. They have no ideas
of stealing. I have seen also children that if they go to a place which is very beautiful, in somebody's
house, they will always try to keep the beauty of that place. But if it is already shabby they don't
mind. So innately all these qualities are there.
I think the countries which are supposed to be underdeveloped have so many of these qualities
within them, which are innately built within us. Innocence is innately built. So the Will of God
built up first and foremost thing was innocence, the auspiciousness. The first thing He did was
to create Shri Ganesha, or, I will say 'She because the Will of God is Adi Shakti. And all this was
created first of all to make the whole world very beautiful. All these innate qualities were also
placed within you. All those deities were placed within you, were specially made human beings
that they should become saintly people, that they should have the saiintly innate sense. But it
happened in the countries which developed that our brain was bombarded by all kinds of
television, all kinds of things and we become very, very vulnerable. We started getting into the
ideas of others. Anybody who is dominating would dominate us. It is ot only Hitler who
dominated people, We also see, today, how much you are dominated, if you really detach vourself
from this world. For example fashions. Certain things that come up, people cannot wear at any
Cost. They cannot take to something that is sensible, hecause it is a fashiorn. For example nowadays
there is the fashion to have such a small skirt, you can't get a long skirt anywhere. Everybody has
to wear that kind of skirt. Otherwise you are not 'In, you are not in the mad house. Now this
kind of thing is bombarded on us morning till evening. So first of all you become slave of these
enterpreneur. Whatever they give us now. I was told, in Belgium that you cannot get anything
fresh. You have to take everything from the supermarket, which is all tinned. Gradually what is
happening to us; we are getting absolutely artificial. The food is artificial, the dress is artificial,
our own attitude becomes artificial. Because we are so much bormbarded by advertisements, by
all kinds of outside influences that we just get lost and we forget what is our innate sense, which
is being dominated by all these modern things.
So adding up to science also there is a big progress in another direction that you can call the
money became very important. Once the money becomes important then all your entrepreneurs
become important; because they know how to make money and befool you all the time. Today
you have this thing, tomorrow you will have that thing, today vou change this and have this. But
those people who are innately built they do not change. Thev have their dresses of the same type.
They do not change. On the contrary they find it very difficult to get out of their traditional
achievements and they don't want to change themselves. So far Sahaja Yogis it is important to see
and watch if they are getting this slavery from the entrepreneurs in the modern times?
Then the thoughts. So many books we read which give you thoughts which are some mad
rambling, I would say, of some mad man like Freud. How could Freud influence the West?
Because you have lost the innate sense and you accept it. They accepted that, and that is how
Freud became, your sort of a Jesus Christ. He became the most important thing. Became the most
Vol IX Issie 5:0
Divine Cool Breeze
19
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 important thing. I mean it is so simple. With a little common sense you can understand that at
every moment we are put into this kind of a domination by these few dominating people who
have certain ideas and they put forward. Anybody puts any idea, for example Sartre or anyone.
That idea starts becoming "Oh! He said it!" Who is he? What is his life? Just see for yourself what
sort of a man he is. With a little common sense, but with the will that you have now Will of God
which has fashioned the whole world, which has fashioned you. Every cell within you has been
fashioned by God Almighty, and what are you doing is to play into the hands of these
entrepreneurs. They have realised that these vulnerable people are very good for having us as
disciples, I should say, to make money? To befool them.
Now on this side you have such a great power, you are chosen for such a great thing and on the
other side you have this kind of slavery. So try to understand that your innate qualities were lost.
But, luckily, by the Kundalini awakening and the breaking of the Sahasrara, all these innate
qualities which looked like lost, like your innocence, like your creativity, like your religion within,
like your compassion and love for the humanity; like your power of judgement, wisdom, all
these great qualities, which we thought were lost, were not lost, they were in a dormant state.
They all got awakened one by one, I don't have to tell you don't drink this, don't eat this, don't do
that. You yourself realise that this is wrong. You yourself know that is good for you. And still if
you want to do wrong you can go ahead. But already there is a light within you to see for
yourself what is good and what is bad. It has come because of this Sahasrara being opened out to
this new dimension of new knowledge. This is not new. It is innately built within you. Now all
those innate qualities are manifesting and you are enjoying them. So now you have to get out of
your petty ideas and petty things. Because people are reporting to me something very furıny. I
cannot believe Sahaja Yogis can do like that. They run away with the plates that I have got, they
run away with the plates. They throw things here and there. All over the places they are throwing
things. How can you behave like that? I mean, this is so stupid and so insipid. If you do not have
a proper discipline of life for yourself you cannot carry the Will of God. You cannot. But I am not
going to tell you do this or do that. I respect your freedom. And I just want that your own
Kundalini should awaken that wisdom in you, that greatness, that glory in you and start
understanding what are your innate qualities. So it will purify. Once youi are purified completely,
like you see, if you have some gold which is not pure, you put it in the fire. The gold is
separated. In the same way the fire of Kundalini cleans you completely, makes you absolutely
clean, and you start seeing your own glory, your own nature, your own greatness. So the
integration part comes to you easily. You start integrating.
First of all we used to have Sahaja Yogis say some from England, some from Spain, some from
here. They would always have different groups. They would never sit together. You could make
out this is English sitting here, they are sitting here, they are sitting there, and they would form
But now it is not so. Now I find they all are becoming integrated. The integration of
group.
human beings is the most important thing for a Sahaja Yogi. That comes by understarding not by
your intelligence, but by innate understanding that all human beings are made by God, by His
will, and we have no right to desire anything.
The second integration that has come within us is that all religions are born on the same tree of
spiritual life. That all religions are to be worshipped. All incarnations, all prophets, all scriptures,
Vol. IX Issue 5-6
Divine Cool Breeze
20•
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 which can be corrected. So, gradually you start entering into the subtler side of divinity to
understand that all these people have worked hard to create today's atmosphere for Sahaja Yoga
And no religion is to be despised, and no religion is to be attacked which is very, very, absolutely
unreal thing and you are working it out, a very unreal theory which does not exist in the Divine
Plan. This is how we will finish all fundamentalists.
Fundamentalists are the ones who believe that this is written in this book, this is written in this
book and because we read this book we are something better. Anybody can read any book. What
is so great? Some, I would say, in Sahaja Yoga, people should not become fundamentalists. Be
very careful. Because that is what you are born like that. I don't know It is not your innate
quality but the way you are made, that way, you are fashioned yourself, that way, that you start
also making Sahaja Yoga, sometimes, a fundamentalism. "Mother said so!" Do not use me
anywhere. "Mother said so" is the way you want to dominate others. You yourself say because
now you have the right, you have an individuality in Sahaja Yoga. You can say what you have to
say yourself. But don't say "Mother has said it". Because anybody can start like that "Christ said
it ;a clergyman, a pope can stand upon his own platform and say that "Christ has said it". We can
just arbitrarily use all these things. So, nobody has business to use me arbitrarily Whatever you
have to say yoLI say yourself but don't ever quote me as that "Mother said it", or in this book such
and such is written, so this is a lie, or that is like this. You are not bound by any lie, by whatever
say. It is you who have to stand up and see for yourself what you have to say. Because you
to use, now, your will and for that you have to develop a pure will, the pure desire of God
Almighty
have
The integration, not only outward but inward, like, first of all, whatever we did our mind
used to say one thing, our heart used to say another thing. Our brain used to say another
thing. Now what has happened is that all these three things have become one. So whatever
your brain says is absolutely acceptable to your heart, absolutely acceptable to your attention.
So you yourself now have become integrated.
Many people write "Mother I want to do it, but I can't do it". "Mother I wish my desire to it but I
can't do it". Not now! Now you are completely integrated and you can easily do the whole thing,
Very well. If Vou want to examine yourself you should try to find out "Am I integrated or not?
Whatever I am doing, am I doing it with full heart or not? With my full attention or not? I feel
that you do with full heart and full intelligence but full attention is not there. Still the attention
which is first thing that was enlightened is not fully used. So the whole attention should be,
absolutely, there that "I have to do this thing with full attention". Otherwise the integration is
not complete. Integration is partial. So these three things have to be completely integrated So
the integration of all the chakras comes in. Like whatever you do has to be auspicious, whatever
vOu do has to be with full attention, whatever you do has to be absolutely religious.
So like that all these centres are being absolutely one, integrated power that you have. So the
whole life should be integrated. Now, say somebody's husband is not of that level or somebody's
wife is not of that level, you should not bother. You should just bother about yourself. Don't
expect anything from anybody else. It is your duty which is important. You have to fulfil
your duty and you have to work it out yourself. Unless and until you understand that it is your
individual being which has achieved it, and it is the individual being which has to realise, is the
Divine Cool Breeze
MOL IX Iss 56
21
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 individual being that has to become one integrated with the rest of them. If you start putting
things, many a times I have seen, if I say something then you will start thinking that I have said
for somebody else. They never take it for themselves. So now we have to see what are my gains.
"I have got financial gains. I have got physical gains, I have got mental gains, I have got joy,
happiness". That is not the only things. That should not be the only criteria. But what you should
have is the understanding of your own personality which is being specially fashioned, many
many lives for you to come in this life to get your realisation; to do the further work of Will of
God. Every moment when you see a miracle taking place, you do realise, that is all done by
Param Chaitanya. So what is Param Chaitanya? It is the Will of Adi Shakti. And what is Adi
Shakti? It is the Will of God.
So whatever is done is all fixed entities, we can call them, all these vibrations are like, we can
DNA tapes. They all know how they have to fashion. See today it is very sunny. Everybody is
Surprised how can that be. So many things happen like this. The other day we had Havaria. It
was absolutely sunny. So the whole cosmos is working for you. You are on the stage now and
you have to see to it. But if you don't have faith in yourself, if you are not confident as to what
you are, how can you help? How can you work out yourself, and work out all the problems of
the world, which are created only by human beings?
say,
So we have to absolutely overthrow all these dominations on us. First from science. We can
prove everything, that whatever Sahaja Yoga has said about science has been proved. So we can
throw science which is just all the way, all the time in the flux, changing all the time. Then that so
called religions that we have, so called religions, because people who have been Catholics, who
have been Protestants, who have been Hindus or Muslims and this or that, they all have got that
thing on their heads. And this has to be thrown out. We have to become a new personality. After
realisation, so as I said, you become like lotuses from the mud. So now you have become lotuses
and the lotuses have to throw away all this dead mud. Otherwise fragrance would not be there.
That one has to achieve is to throw away all these shackles which are killing you, which are of no
use but a burden. And beautiful lotuses, as you are, you have to understand that the whole
fashioning has been done so carefully, with such sweetness, such delicacy.
So first of all we must have respect for ourself, we must have affection and love for others and we
must have respect, means we must have discipline. We have to have the discipline. Because If
you respect yourself, you definitely discipline yourself, and you will make it available.
Now as we can realise, from my life itself, that I work yerv hard, travel a lot, much more than
anyone of you can do. Because I have the will that I have to bring in this world, that state of
enjoyment, that state of happiness, that state of Divinity, where they realise what is their glory,
what is the glory of their Father. So I work very hard and I never, ever think that something will
go wrong with me or this will happen, that will happen. I never bothered you about my family
life, about my children. Whatever problems I have, I deal with them myself. But here I got such
big, big letters from Sahaja Yogis, writing about their daughter, their son, this thing, that thing.
Another thing is attachment to family. It is the biggest burden on your heads. And all the
time you are worried about your children, you are worried about this, you are worried about
that. That is not your responsibility. Please try to understand that is the responsibility of God
Almighty. You can't do better than him. Can you? But when vou try to take the responsibility
Divine Cool Breeze
IX Isstue 5-6
Vol.
22
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 says "alright look after!" and the problems start.
Detachment is the word one should understand in a proper sense. When I asked people "why do
you throw things here and there" they say "we are detached!" Wonderful way! And what about
your children? You cling on to them. What about your own things? You cling on to them, For a
small little thing they will bother my head, and when it belongs to me or to Sahaja Yoga then they
will have a very nice time with it and throw it away wherever they like. I mean this kind of
irresponsibility! How can you call them Divine? How can they be saintly people? Saintly people
not only are responsible for themselves but for everyone.
Very slowly, smoothly, sweetly, with great affection I have brought you to this level. I did not ask
you to go to Himalayas, to stand on you head or to donate all your properties to me. Nothing of
this kind. We have managed it in a very, very beautiful manner. Now further, then you have to
go. Further. Then you have to understand your duties... you act towards your family, towards
your house, towards this, towards that. No duty towards Sahaja Yoga. Before Sahaja Yoga, you
were not attached to anyone, in a sense you were only attached to yourself, you were self-centered;
now you have widened yourself a little more; now you are attached to your life, to your children.
That is just the same. That is alsó selfish. Because they are your children vou think. They are not
your children. They are the children of God.
I hope all of you are intelligent enough to understand your responsibility and work it out. This
is a very important thing that has happened to you that Sahasrara has opened. Now you can
prove the Existence of God, His will, everything to do the whole world. Nobody can challenge
Sahaja Yoga. Those scientists who will challenge can be told. Anybody. Whether you are a scientist,
economist, politician. Anything, everything can be explained in the light of Sahaja Yoga and it
can be proved that there is only one politics, that is of God, one economics that is of God and
there is only one religion that is of God, is Wishwa Nirmala Dharma. It can be proved. There is
nothing to be afraid of or to worry about. This all can be proved to the scientists and to the other
intellectuals and to some few people, if they want to listen to us. If they don't want to listen to us
forget it. Because we are powerful, why should we worry about them. But if they are willing to
listen to us then it is better that we tell them "now we have discovered this great power". And if
it works out, if this great power works out then only we can really fashion the whole world in a
new way.
Ihave great hope from you people. But the seriousness with which you should take Sahaja Yoga,
for example even meditation people don't do. Simple thing like meditation you people don't do.
can't understand. How will you go without meditation? Unless and until you become
thoughtlessly aware you cannot grow. So you have to, at least, meditate morning, evening. There
are many people who are not even collective by temperament. If they are staying in an Ashram
they just think that Ashram's life is not good. Such people should really get out of Sahaja
Yoga. Because they have not yet understood what Sahaja Yoga is. Without collectivity how
will you grow? How will you assemble your powers? You see, we know very well that in
assembly, in a group, in combining together only you ean be strong. It is a fact that if
one stick you can break it, but if you put many sticks together you cannot break it. There are still
people, I know, who are still not so much in collectivity, shows how poor they are in their
understanding of their ownselves. And they are telling me that "Mother we don't want to stay in
you have
Divine Cool Breeze
23 -
Vol IX Issue 5:6
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 the Ashram now any more". So they should get out of Sahaja Yoga. Without the collectivity you
cannot grow. Without the discipline of Sahaja Yoga you cannot grow. It is better to have ten
people of good quality than to have thousands useless people. That is what is the Will of
God.
So now, as you are today here, so many people, I am really enamoured to see so many people at
a time, and we have done so much of our growth and grown out of all those nonsensical things
that you were following. But today we have to take the vow that "I will now fashion my life
laccording to the Will of God, absolutely, and dedicate myself to that". No family, no other
consideration, just forget it. Nothing so important. Everything can be looked after by Will of
God. So if you just try to follow the Will of God your children will be looked after, everything
will be looked after. You don't have to worry for anything. And that works. Just try to understand
that you have problems because you don t want to give those problems to God. You want to keep
it yourself. That is why you have problems. If you decide that No, I just want to give these
problems to God's will", finished. Also there are some who want to say that "we are not so
capable, Mother we can't do it". Saying that is also stupid. You test yourself, see for yourself.
So first of all one has to understand why do we say such thing May be that you are very money
oriented, that we want to have money to ourself or something like that. Or some people are there
to tälk of business also in Sahaja Yoga. There must be something like money orientation or some
sort of a material attachment that they say that we are not capable, we cannot change it. The
second could be this mamatva, the attachment. The attachment to your family, children, this,
that. Or this is mine, this is mine, this is mine, This could be the second reason that
you are not bold enough or you are not strong enough to do Sahaja Yoga. Thirdly could be that
you are still playing with your old habits and that you are enjoying your life without virtues.
There can be some reason like that. So just try to look into it why I am behaving like this? Why I
am not getting into the same beautiful path of my ascent as everybody has got it?" If we introspect
we will find out that "There is something wrong with me that I think I am not capable of doing
this". You are capable of doing everything. You just try this and enjoy it.
So most important thing now remains is that you should become a proper, strong, compassionate
vehicle of God's will. Then what is most important, of course, I agree that you can do
Because that helps you a lot, no doubt. But other things are not, so many other things, you
people tell me, are not important. Main thing is that you should all ascend higher and higher
and complete with each other in getting into higher situation.
think that
you
Pooja.
my
As it is, 1 think, in such a short time we have achieved a lot, no doubt. But still we have to speed
and work it out. I am sure that this new science, we can say that which is the absolute science,
up
will, one day, outshadow the other sciences and tell people that this is what it is. It is in your
hands, you work it out.
So today is the day we celebrate that by which we have opened absolutely a new dimension,
absolutely a venue of a great Divinity of the proofs of Divine. And this is something so great that
we can really finish all the illusions they have about themselves. We can manage that. That
power you all have.
May God bless you!
Vol. IN Issue 5-6
Divine Cool Breeze
24
