DIVINE COOL BREEZE 1997 Issue 1 & 2 Volume IX The greatest power that is Shakti is the Power of Love. Love means egoless and without expectations, to spread the Kingdom of Love. H.H Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Delhi '95

 Divine Cool Breeze Дivine C00 1997 Issue 1-2 Volume IX Contents Navratri Puja Diwali Puja Christmas Puja 16 Edited by: Yogi Mahajan Published by: Divine Cool Breeze 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud Pune 411 029 Printed by: Printek Phototypesetters 4A/1, Rajinder Nagar New Delhi 110 060 Phones: 5784866, 5710529

 NAVARATRI PUJA Talk by H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Cabella, Italy- 20-10-96 Today is special day we are worshipping the Goddess who came on this carth nine times before to kill all the demons and all the negativities and relieve all the bhaktas to worship. All Her work has already been described. Despite that all kinds of demons and negative people have now come back. Perhaps, it had to be; after all it is Kali Yuga and the drama of Kali-Yuga would not be performed unless and until they are there to complere the drama. They came but this time it's going to be a very different type of war; it's going to be the war of the peaceful pcople and the peaceful people are the most successful people in every walk of life, even if in the world it did not work out before. They say that when Chenghis Khan came he went to a very big imonastery of Buddhists near Gaya and killed all of them. There were abour 30.000 Buddhists there and they didn't say a word and they were all killed. So, people started disbelieving in Buddhism. They said what kind of a Buddhism we have! Why didn't Buddha save them? That's the human style of thinking but, you will be surprised, in this Kali-yuga, this Chenghis Khan has been praised by many authors and there are books written about him. He was not a muslim, but some sort of a crack-por He finished off many MosquIes, destroyed marny beautiful buildings and also he came to India and ruled there for a short time. All that's a history. In the same way, there have been wars between Christians and non-Christians and berween Muslims and non-Muslims. All kinds of wars, we have heard of, where only the faithful got lost, the real people got lost. The ones who worshipped God with full faith got lost. So, many people became atheists and they said there is nothing like God, nothing like this Divine power, it never existed, you are stupid, you are foolish to follow all this. And, those who were incharge of religion took full advantage of that and said that these people were sinful people. These people were noL Godly people and that is how they were killed by us and we were victorious. In a subtler way, So, we come to Kali-Yuga and in Kali-Yuga same thing has started in a different way it has started that there is a big war going on betwcen the people who are anti-God and who are using god for their own purpose- very dishonest very corrupt and very cruel people and they are that flag of God, that banner which they have no right to use. Then there are Sahaj Yogis who LIsing have got their realisation and they have to fight them. Now the difference in the previous war and this war is very subtle. All those who were successful, started feeling very confident that we have achieved what we wanted, But, in the light of Kali-Yuga all those historical mysteries are regarded as shameful things, as something very aggressive and non-sensical. This is now being described very everywhere like, the white-skinned people went to America, and killed all the rest of them there. Now, that is coming to light, all these people who thought themselves to be victorious, their children, their grandchildren, their progeny are ashamed of them. Until the last wvar, this awareness which has come is the real victory of modern times of Kali-Yuga. That everything that was accepted as a part of the game, as the life-style is now being challenged in modern times everywhere. Whatever is aggression, whatever is oppression, whatever is cruuel is now punished; so many war-criminals might have escaped, but so many went to trial. It has never happened before. Nobody took Chenghis Khan to trial. Now, in a very subtle way, all these aggressive people HOw Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issue1-2

 are getting afraid that they will be questioned and they maybe tortured. In Italy there was a great aggressive man called Mussolini and ultimately he was hanged. In Germany, there was a very powerful man called Hitler, even thc Germans don't want to take his name, they are all ashamed of him. Then, in England, Warren Hastings, who came to India, was put to trail. If Napolcon aggreSsed people, he thought he was very victorious, but he could nor continuc with it. He had to face it. Anybody who) has been aggressive, who has been dominating, who has been very cruel, demoniac, has been taken to task mostly in his lifetime. If not in his lifetime, then afterwards he was maligned. People don't want to erect their statues. The awareness has come in the mind of the people. A person like Stalin, who Iuled Russia once upon a . grcat time, today you can't see cven one statue of Stalin See the power of modern times, and that is frightening to those who think that they can get away with whatever they are doing It is going to be very soon inderstood by them that they have to stop ll this nonsensez otherwisc, they will suffer: It's not those whom they are dominating hur who are dominating, they will suffer physically; mentally emotionally and also their fame will be in tie mud. Today's, victorv of the power of the Divine Mother is doing one very great work and that is to expeOse and this expusure will be, condemning publicly those who are doing that. If you see from that point of view, youA ill LInderstand how we are victorious now. As Sahaj Yogis we have ro know what is the difference between the consciousness of that time and the awarcness at this time. Thhat time, it was necessary to finish those demons, kill them, but they are back again on the stage. Now, at this time when it is Kali-Yuga they are exposed, they are condemned, they are pur in the jail, they are now punished publicly So, the collective awareness has great victory over these people who came, killed and dicd withour getting any punishment out of it, without getting any defamation out of it. such a gor Let us see what is consciouNness and what is awarencss. Consciousness is that when vou are made Conscious, vou became conscious about it. Like, I have my hand, alright, bur normally I am not Konscious abour it that I Iave a hand. If a man is sleeping he is not conscious that he is sleeping. When von tell me that I have a hand, I become conscious or if something pricks me then I become conseious, otherwise I am unconscious about it. I am absolutely unconscious about iy eves. I am seeing everything. But, supposing I become blind I can't see, the I become conscious of my cyes, thar I lave got my eves through which now I cannot sec. So once you say there is this hand; the consciousnes is there. This you can say is the knowledge about the hand that, you get knowledge about the hand. But once, you are not conscious of thc hand, the knowledge disappears, to say there is ignorance, or there is knowledge, both things are just the same. You are nor conscious of VOur hand, so you are quite ignorant about it. Now, suppose somebody says your hands are very beautiful. Somebody remarked like thar then I become conscious of my hand which is beautiful; otherwis I never knew they are beautiful. Normally, all human beings live at that level, where somcbody has to tell you. Now somebody says you are wearing a very nice sarce. Then I will look at it, yes, its very nice; I never knew. So, somcbody has to tell vou, then you become conscious, otherwise you are not. All human beings are at that level. Now what is awareness? Thar's a different thing. That means if I see somebody is attacking me, I put my hand like this. That means I am aware I have hands, I am not conscious, bur Lamawarc, I have a hand and I do this. Like here, in Italy, vOu go on mowing vour hands all the time. That means, vou Divine Cool Breeze 2. Vol. IX Issue 1-2

 know, you are aware that you have got hands that you have to use them for expressing something more, sort of, emphatically. So we are also aware of our body, we are aware of others, we know about others, we know what sort of person another one is, until you are self-realised. After self-realisation what happens is very inreresting. After self-realisation you go beyond both these things consciousness and awareness: Because you go beyond thought. You have gone beyond thought means what? Anger, all kinds of ideas, all kinds of aggression, everything is maneuvered through mind. If your mind is lost what will you do? There is no mind any more, you exist with reality mour So there is no mind to communicate. We call it thoughtlessly aware people. We have conquered all our enemies by giving up one enemy, that is our mind. There's no mind to suggest. There's no mind to tell you. Once there is no mind you are lost. Now, it is being said that you ask a question to yourself-who am I? As soon as you ask this question, you become thoughtless, so you get lost. You cannor answer this question. Otherwise you might say, I am a woman, I am this, I am that I am a Bishop, or I am a Pope. But once you are a realised soul, who will tell you who you are? Because the one who tclls you is the mind which doesn't exist. No thought means you get dissolved into yourself. This is what is reality. But you are aware also. That's another point. It you ask yourself a question, you are nor there but you are aware. If your nabhi is catching, you know immediately, oh, my nabhi is catching, I have got to clear it. Don't have to ask a question. Or, if somebody is standing near you, with left Swadisthana, oh my God this one. If somebody is hot-tempered and very angry, you get such heat from that person, you want to run away from that man. This is a new realm, you have entered into reality which you were never aware of before. Now, supposing there is a very bad man standing ncar you. He might be a thief, a murderer, or anything. You will not be even conscious of it, leave alone aware. But once you are a realised soul, you become aware of the whole. That is reality. What are the problems. In a collective you become aware of the collective, you bccome aware of the problems of the whole world. Now, this awareness is very different. The first awareness, is like this, suppose, somebody tells you are this and this you become aware of it. In this, nobody has to tell you, it's just there. You are there, you know what it is. This is what you have achieved in these modern times which is the blessings of the modern times also that we know now who we are. You always say we are the pure spirit. What makes you believe that you are the pure spirit. You haven't seen your spirit, have you? You haven't seen yourself what you are. Then how do you say you are the pure spirit? You are just saying something because I say so. But you are the pure have experienced whatever description of the pure spirit is given, that it is aware of this Divine Power. That is how you are the pure spirit. Because, only through purc spirit as your personality you can be aware of this all pervading power. This is written in all the shastras, scriptures. everywhere. How do you know about it, that you are the pure spirit because you know about your own chakras. You know about your own nadis. Now, what is happening is that you are separated from yourself and you can see yourself. You sce yourself very clearly and you start seeing yourself as the present, the past and the future. In the past, what I was? You are shocked now, my goodness, I was like it! See it through this present state, in the present state you see. Then you start forgetting it, forget the past. Then, still you have the future. You start thinking about the future. First future, they think abour their own children, their wives, what will happen to my children, what will happen to my spirit because you 3. Divine Cool Breeze Val. IX Issue 1-2

 wife? Then they think what will happen to Sahaj Yoga. Then they feel, what will happen to Mataji? Also they think what will happen to this world, because vour awareness has expanded vou are not in the limited sphere now, anvmore. You can think of yourrchildren, you can think of your wife, also NOU can think of all the problems of the world. So, vou have reached that state. Now wha is the thing that all this? Or, gives you solutions, for your children, family wife, everyone. Your mother COvers believes in giving solutions, not only the problems. To solve present day problems you need no Sword. Since todays's problems, as they are, as we see, are within us. We see the problem, we are aware of it and we want to do something about it. Whether we are in the past, present or future, we sec the problem. So, now what is the solution? We have no weapons, nothing to fight, so manv do not know how to even hold they are so mLich in compassion, in the occan of compassion, enjoying themselves niccly. They are enjoying their own compassion, compassion of others, compassion of their Mother but, then how to solve the problem? The problem can be solved, if you become very powerful yourself within. Where is your attention? You have to move inwards. I have done my job, I have given you realisation, vou have grown sO much, I have explained to you, I have told you everything. This time I have given vou the occan of love. But, now, you have to nourish vourself. You have to become powerful within yourself. So, what is the way you can become powerful? the sword in the hand, and, so many don't even want to hold it because First, vou must believe that you have transcended your human personality and you have become now a super fairh, not blind faith that vou believe in somcthing. Hundred times I have told you that vou must have first faith in vour ascent, in your position as Sahaj Yogi. For this mediration in very importantr,very important. Without meditation you cannot have full faith in yourself, because you can't know yourself by asking "Who am I"? Try now. Ask a question, who am I, you'll be lost! So, what should be the faith then? So vou reach a state where Lhave to tell you that faith is not mental, it is not cmotional, it is not physical but it is a state of your Own Being which we can call as a spiritual state. In a spiritual state, nothing can disturb you. Nothing can overpower you, nothing can dominate you. Because that state if vou have, that means vou are part and parcel of Reality Then vou arc an honoured member of the God's kingdom. Then you are the most revered personality Then you like dicty, a gana. In that state when you arc, its a state, beyond the human state, you are extremely powerful. human being. This must get in vour mind. This is what we call as faith. This faith is not a false There is a story about the sufi saint Nizamuddin. There was a horrible king, and Nizamuddin would and bow to him. He said I can only bow to God and nobody else. The king said if vou don't go come and bow to me tomorrow, I will cut your throar. Thar night, the throat of this king was cut. It was not Nizamuddin Sahib, he would nor do that. Somcone else cut his throat. That state we call as the state of 'Slıraddha' which is enlightencd, enlightened Faith. Its a new Evpe of mechanism that VOu become part and parcel of the whole. I never told the sun to be there for Puja. I never told last timie, this time they were telling, there's no nced to tell, its all done. I don't tell all these vibranions to make a cross, or to show all these miraculous photographs. They just do it by themsclves, 1 am sometimes surprised how ingenious methods they have of their own, how they manage things. It all works automatically. It just works. Only thing, if I have anything it's just complete faith that I am at that state and that's why thcre is completc patience and that is whar we have to learn. It will all happen in any case because we are all of that state. Only meditation is important, very important. For not 1s, Vol. IX Issue 1-2 Divine Cool Breeze

 but for voi all. If vou all can meditate now just ten minutes every day, it will help vou a lot. nor, 1me Now why do we have all these statucs, of the Mother, Hanumana, Ganesha, Christ CIC. beacusu to begin with human beings cannot understand anything which does not have a form, they cannot go deeper unless and until there is a form. Then they went to another limit of using a stone of anvthing as God. But now you have discretion. You know what is to be worshipped, whar is to be treated as a higher personality. But before that, they would worship all kinds of people. Now, pcople worship Pope, they are not only blind, they are not only unaware but they are nor even conscious of it. They are all at such a level that VOu cannot tell them. So, you are a new type of people who have tried to fight it out, to struggle out, to know about the Absolute Truth, Unless and tntil Absolute Truth, vou are nowhere; you have no discretion, no understanding, no wisdom. But, once you know thc Absolute Truth then you should not, by any chance, be half way this and half-way that. That's a very dangerous state of affairs. Say, a seed is sprouted. It is neither a seed, nor a tree. If it does know the you not grow, it IS useless. That happens t) Vour awarcness and then you are neither hare nor there. There are many people who come to Sahaj Yoga to find some pcace but I gect letters that my father is sick, my mother is sick, my brother is sick, my husband is fighting with me, I am sceking a divorce or thirdly, I have lost all my moncy, I must have some moncy; fourthly Iam a great artist bit my art is noE selling. I say what sort of Sahaj Yogis are these? The state of being one with the reality means that the whole of reality is at your fect; whole of it works for you. Once, if you cven get a glimpse of that state, you become so much peaceful within yourself. If you say I am the king, I am the king, if you say I am the beggar, I am the beggar; to that state which is like the purest of pure gold, which cannot be tarnished, such a state of mind we have to develop. It is more of a challenge to us. Wc are Sahaj Yogis, alright we have got realisation alright, we can sing very well, airight, we have got good posirions, alright, we are nicely married, we have got everything, we have got jobs, this, that now Suuddenly, one negative force comes which will trouble vou. So what? Otherwise how will you know what you are? If there is no darkness, who will you know vou are the light? ItIs a challenge to vour own state, at what State vou arc. The word wvord State is not so explanatory, in Sanskrit it is 'Swa-roop-'Swa' is yourself and 'roop' is form or state. That state is possible for all of you by saying not this, not this. Your mind has reachcd that state where there is no mind. You can do it but you have to develop a kind of a personality that realises what no. arc. But in that realisation you are just aware, not conscious of it. As, for example I tell you I am awarc I am Adi Shakti, I am aware, I know it. But when you say Jai Shri Mataji, I also say Jai Shri Mataji, forgetting that I am the one you are talking about. This actually should be the state. Now, you make me sit here like a Queen and give me presents. Alright that's your idea. But I am complete in myself, I have got lost into myself; alright you can do this, alright you can do that, alright if you don't do it, then also it is alright. To me, it makes no difference, it may make a difference to you, like I have been saying don't give many presents; the only arguments is that in the whole year we give you only once, so, why should you, Mother, object, that gives us joy. Alright, if you think it gives you joy, do it. But, to me, it doesn't matter because I don't think I anm there, I am just seemg vou sitting here, alright, there are all realised souls alright, but I am one of you. I don't think I am something very special but if you ask me, then I will say alright, I am Adi Shakti. But I don't think Adi Shakti is very special also. Because I have no mind, otherwise I don't think something special. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Isste 1-2

 Because if somebody is something special so what? Because supposing sun is something special; so what, sun is sun. If somebody is Adi Shakti She is Adi Shakti, so what? But for you, it is creditable because you were not born realised, you have got your realisation so you are spccial, you are great, you have achieved something, I have achieved nothing, I have been like this and I will be like this whether I fight the devil or I sit before you, it makes no difference. But for me, you are great bccause have achieved this. It is great to see, on this Navratri day, so many people sitting to worship. It's you so remarkable. It's not my achievement, it's your sceking. Because I have been on this carth many a times before, but we never had it like this. So many came, got crucified, died, this, that I never had people of this kind. So again we come to the same point that we should be aware of ourselves, complete 'Shraddha' in yourselves. Ifyou have that 'Shraddha' in yourself, then you will have shraddha about me also because we are not different. If you believe that this is water then wherever in the world there is water, you know it is water. If you know this is a Sahaj Yogi. But as far as you are concerned, you forget how grear you are! I am very proud of you are a Sahaj Yogi, then anywhere there is a Sahaj Yogi you will know But because I am a humble person, I do not know how to show-off! To have such nice and you. lovable children! Those Bhaktas, for whom she killed so many devils, were not like you. You are much better, much higher, of a much greater quality. You must know what you are, don't behave like those people who were a very rudimentary nature. You have grown up, you have prospered, now the fruits you can se I don't know whar to do for you really, but, have faith in yourself; you will see how much faith you will have in Reality, that there is Reality within you at every sStep, every moment. No fear, no sense of achievement, done now, finished. When there were five Sahaj Yogis. I was bappy, when there are so many I am happy but when I see so many I feel there are so many powerful personalities who are one with Reality. This collective oneness was never before and so, I say that on this day what have to do is to kill the devils within ourselves, that is all. If you really want to worship me, that's what you have to think, what are the devils within That's all. You don't have to worry about outside devils, they can't to anything to you. you. May God Bless You. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issüe 1-2

 DIWALI PUJA Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Portugal -November 96 Today we are going to worship the Mahalxmi which I think is very much worshipped in this country. apparition of her. First I never believed that it could be but then after feeling the vibration now I know it was in a Here they worship Her as Maria and also there's swaymbhu of Maria and also there was an seen, true as she did appear here in an apparition. She appearcd before me also, you must have photograph. This is the principle by which you have risen to this state. The central path of ascent; is created by Mahalaxmi power for the Kundalini to rise. In the temple of Mahalaxmi in Kolhapur, they always sing the song of "ude, ude Ambe". So Lasked the people there "Why do you sing Ambe song in MahalaXmi temple?" They said, that, "We don't know why we do it but is it wrong?" I said "No, because only in the Mahalaxmi in Kolhapur, they always sing the song of "ude, in Mahalaximi's temple?" They said, that, We don't know why we do it but is it wrong?" I said No because only in the Mahalaxmi Channel, Kundalini can rise and Kundalini is the Amba" That's how they understood and they were really amazed. From ancient times, this song has been sung there and they never knew why this song your ude". So I asked the people there "why do you sing Ambe song is sung. Coming to the have crcated within us a proper balance, a proper route, for Kundalini to rise. Left and right have been balanced and She's the one who makes a wider path, for Kundalini to rise. This is the path of compassion and love. Through that compassion and love, she creates this path because she knows that if the path is not wide enough, the Kundalini cannot rise. Ulrimately one reaches a state where you start seeking and by seeking your Mahalaxmi principle has been awakened. That is awakened and sometimes it is very strong then you start seeking in a mad way. I'm sorry to say that many have already lost in secking, but there are so many people who have come to the right path and to the right point of Mahalaxmi we have to understand, what does it do. The Mahalaxmi power ascent. Another thing this Mahalaxmi principle does is to allow the Kundalini power to go to different chakras. It also makės a way to different chakras and corrects all the chakras. She is a very flexible force, which guides the Kundalini into different chakras and she understands which chakra neceds the help of the Kundalini. So you must have seen that when the Kundalini riscs, how she pulsates, where she where she shows the need of your awakening. All this works out because she is full of gocs, compassion and love that you should get your Absolute Truth. We have many problems, as it is you know, in Sahaj Yoga because when people are ascending they carry on with them some of their stores they cannot climb, they try then they fall, then they go up again, they fall. past Today I'm going to tell you about what is the state one has to achieve. As Shri Krishna has said ir in the Gita, describing 'Sthita Pragya', in the second chapter but it's very difficult to understand. It's nor so clear cut as your mother is. So pcople don't understand what he said and they ask the question, How? How do you reach the state of 'Sthita Pragya'? How do you get to that stage?" But Gyaneshwara, Vol. IX Issue 1-2 Divine Cool Breeze

 when he wrote his Gyaneshwari, he called it as the "Sahaj sthiti", means the state of Sahaj. He didn't call it sthita pragya. He called it as Sahaj sthithi, meaning the state of Sahaj. So he describes the Sahaj in a very beautiful manner, very subtle. Of course, Gyaneshwara also very few people understand. A person who reaches that state is like a mirror and so many faces pass over that mirror. So many look into that mirror. So many decorate in front of the mirror, but mirror is the same as it is. So the who is a sthita pragya, as the person who is Sahaj, is not bothered about what is facing him, who if facing, where he is. He stays within himself. He contains within himself. Like the sun. If the sun plays with his different rays, he's not lost. Afl the rays then return to him. In the same way all the senses that we have, all the senses that are there, do play around but for a person who is in a Sahaj state, it docsn't matter, makes no difference. He's not involved. He just plays around again all of them come back. This is the state you all have to achieve. Then you are really Sahaj Yogis. But I still find people lost, getting money out of Sahaj Yoga. Some people lost getting our of leadership. Some are lost in getting jcalousies, envies and all that. So that means, lot of work has to be done, still, within. There is no need to work, as such, if you leave everything. Thar's why I always say because when you meditate, what happens is that all these things that are pulling you down are finished. Gradually they disappear because you become your self. You get contained by yourself. You are never board, I'm never bored. I don't know what it means. When it is with you or alone, I never get bored. What is there to get bored? It you are not involved into anything, you never person "Meditate", bored. get Another thing is, you rise above all these things, like greed. Now people who are greedy are still involved in making money here, making money there and all that. Those people who are still full of lust are still making, organising some things like that. But in a Sahaj sthiti, you just watch; you are just a witness. You are not lost into anything that is pulling you down. This state is not difficult to achieve for you at all, because you have crossed over your mind. Now all these things come to you through your mind mind. I've already said that mind is a myth which you must accept. Myth is that this gives you ideas. Some people think "Yes Mother, but", this 'but' is coming from your mind. The brain is reality, but not the mind, the mind says 'bur' and then you start feeling very depressed sometimes, unhappy. Because some people feel even bad bccause they're very good people, that there are so few Sahaj Yogis. Doesn't matter. Just watch and this watching state, this witness state, is the Sahaj. In that you become to subtle, you become yourself, meaning so subtle, that nothing can disturb you. Nothing can change you. Now see the nature, as it is, you know there are 92 elements. And 92 elements, none of them can be, say, for example; you cannot make silver into gold or gold into silver. The atoms are so arranged that they have certain valencies and apart from atom, even, molecules are so arranged that they have their own structure, you cannot change. If you try to change then you'll create bombs, atomic bombs. It's absolutely destructive. It's only human beings who can change, who can transform. Now look at the blessings, that you are a human being and you can be transformed, and you can be made into a new element, thar is the self. This is the speciality of human beings. But if somebody has false Guru, who tries to do something with you, you'll explode. I've seen pcople who have been to false gurus. They still faint, they still have problems, they still get trouble more than people who have been withour that. They have also improved. But this is one thing one should understand that in one way when you are analysing and when you are breaking an atom or Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issue 1-2

 you're breaking a molecule and trying to transform, it explodes. It doesn't workout. The other round is that, when you try to synthesize, then you can form anything in the nature. Like this has now been brought out by synthesizing. This plastic is created by synthesizing. Matter can be synthesized and can be brought together and human beings are to get synthesized also. They can be synthesized better than matter, because they change, thcy transform. Now see, for example, there is gold. You make anything out of it. Gold is gold. It is there. It is not that by changing it into ornaments it changes. But for human beings, they get transformed when they are synthesized. way There's a very big difference between the matter and the nature and human becings. Matter, nature are different absolutely, from human beings. Human beings, once they are transformed it's like a living process, they become like flowers. But still it is not what you see in the nature. It's not the same as you see in the nature because nature doesn't have a mind, it is just Lnder the control of the Divine, nature is working out that way. But here you are under your own control. Here you can control yoursclf. In this synthesis which is going on inside, what you find that you are completely in control of yoursclf. You know what is happening to you. Now you start seeing yoursclf separating from all these things. Some people come and tell me "Mother, my ego is very bad. You just take it out". He sees what the problem is. Somebody says, "Mother my nabhi is very bad I'm still busy with the money". He sees it. First starts the knowledge about yourself, we call it self-knowledge. But one has to even go beyond self-knowledge. By that knowledge what do you will do? We have to see. When you have the knowledge, first we say there's no knowledge. There's ignorance, there's darkness. Now the light has come. You can see. You can know what's wrong. Now you start separating yourself from all those things that you see as wrong within you. You see them. So many non sensical things there are, like we have jealousy, envy, greed, lust. It is horrible to say such things on Diwali day. Diwali is, that one by one so many lights are enlightened and you start seeing it first. First you start seeing what is wrong with you. And then as you see you don't want it, then you work out to get rid of it, to become clean. Now this knowledge disappears. You don't have to have any knowledge; you've there, you're there. Thcre is no need to know about your chakras, you're just there. At that nothing matters. You become just like a stone. I can say- stone with a brain intact and a heart intact and a liver intact. You just don't mind anything don't get upset with anything. You just enjoy the love and compassion that's good. And the ripples that come back to you, even that is lost after sometime and you just are nothing but Sahaj. That is the state people achieved. In those days they achieved this state but with that one bad thing happened, they got lost, they all get lost. They couldn't do anything to others. One person getting it, becoming great-finished. Or two persons at the most. So now Sahaj Yoga stands first of all at the knowledge state where you have the knowledge. First of all you should have full knowledge about yourself. The self knowledge should be complete. State, In the third state, when the knowledge is full, you should get rid of all those things that you know about yourself which are useless, which are hampering your progress, which you know is wrong. Like I see some dirt falling on my sari, I just clean it out. Then you start separating yourself into that Sahaj state. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issue 1-2

 Still, in Sahaj Yoga, you devclop another dimension which is collective consciousness. That is the modern Sahaj Yoga. In the olden days, they didn't have this. So they just all got lost. Now you have collective consciousness and in that collective consciousness you start feeling others, fecling for others, compassion for other and, you start working out for others. In that also sometimes, you know, when you are working around and thinking how much money can I make, what I can achieve as a leader, or some sort of thing, you've still there. But this collective consciousness starts growing. When it starts growing, then you become drop in the ocean, means complete occan. So the ocean has its own maryadas, it doesn't bother. It has to live with maryadas, it lives with its marvadas. It doesn't want to cross any boundaries, all right, accepted, it will not cross its boundaries. In the same way it happens, are very self contained. You are not selfish but you become very self-contained. You are that you contained within yourself. I know many Sahaj Yogis are angry that I have not punished many horrible people who have been troubling Sahaj Yoga. I don't have to bother. This Param Chaitanya which is doing lot of work, it will look after it. Why should I bother about anyone. You sce after all, things are working out, so why to interface. My job is just to watch, just to see. That's sufficient. There's no need for me to kill anybody in this life time, or to destroy. They are destroyed by themselves. I've told you that I need not expose people, bur which ever country I go, I find people get exposed. God knows what more is going to comc. Even littlc attention on any country, it just works out; even without my knowledge - oh my God, I said, when did I do that. So one has to become the power of Divi love, left to this Divine Power which is working, which is also separated from me. I'm alone, abolutely alone; even this power is separated from me; but this power knows what is good for human beings, what is good for Sahaj Yoga, it works on its own. I don't interfere. It's a reflex action. May be you might say, Mother you have made it. Oh all right, whatever it is. But I don't interfere with it. I don't have to tell anything to it. It just works and it's working so well. Ill example. Once in England, long time back they said "Mother, we want to have a really long summer", I said why do you want to ask such things? No, No, mother, we must have long summer, 3/4 times they said it and it was a very long horrible summer in London and it's nor like India where we have fans, something, at least hand fans. We had a be little gallery, we used to sleep in that. We went to the shop in London city and we asked for a fan they said, after 3 months after your order, after 3 month when it will be very cold, then they'll give us the fan, we don't want any fans. My daughter sent two fans by plane and that's how we managed. This summer heat was so tremendous, that after that one thing good happened, that ochre color appeared on the leaves and then gradually the red and all that. The autumn season was best at that time and than one Sahaj Yogi dreamt that Mother asked mnc to drive in her backyard. I telephoned to him; I didn't know what he had dreamt like can you come along far a while, I want to go see this autumn all over England. Can you imagine? The whole England was filled with the bcauty of autumn. So even if something like that happens it is compensated and so beautiful it was, all the people were out in the autumn to see the beautiful colours of the narure, of different greenery, yellow, ochre all kinds of colors were there. Surprisingly in that you'd never see all that, but because of the sun shining so bright, it was compensated by this give an country, Param Chaitanya. The Param Chaitanya is looking after this, all these things are managed by Param Chaitanya. I am Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issue1-2 • 10 -

 doing nothing. I am 'Nishkriya. I'm just sitting down and watching. To me nothing matters. You see it's working out slowly and steadily If you tell me something, supposing they said, "Mother we prayed to you and it happened", all right may be. These people must have heard around me, not me you see and they must have done the job and for that, I'm not responsible. Everything, you think I do, is not done by me, it is done by this Param Chaitanya because I'm also separated from you, completely, absolutcly separated. So they say you pray now, you can pray pray, you pray to these deities that are around, you pray to all these ganas and all that, not to mc, because I have nothing to do with it. They don't tell me that I have to do this or I have to do that So why should I tell them do this or do thar? It is like thar and in that state if you can stay you are in Sahaj state, when you don't desire anything, you don't want anything. I do everything, all kinds of things I'm doing. Like the sun, if he's doing, I'm doing in the sense that I'm looking after the things flowers, this that and also rcceiving preseES from you and receiving this from you and then I don't receive anything. I don't have anything. I've no interest in it. You want to pur flowers, all right, you can have flowwers even if there are flowers or not, makes no difference to me as a person, I am saying, But as your mother I love you, all of you I lovc, but I don't do anything as such to love everybody says, "Mother you love us sa much". When did I love you? But you always say, very much. Who is working it our is something which is not me, it's beyond me. This is the state in which, once we rise, we'll call as Sahaj sthiti. If you and you I love you In the Sahaj Stithi, you think, you are doing nothing; everything is working out, but at this state if I tell you oh, we are not doing anything. Why should we spread Sahaj Yoga? It's not our job, now, it's not your sthiti, that's why. So you have to rise up to that state. Thar's only possible when vou are in the knowledge state, where you have self knowledge. The knowledge of the whole world. But you have to go beyond that. Then you must have seen many a times, I just say something and it is there, I never feel vibrations of anyone or anything. I don't feel my Kundalini either, nor any chakras nothing. But I know, automatically like a computer but that computer also I am not. That's the trouble. It's difficult to explain to you what this sthiti is, because you have to achieve it. Once vou achieve it, also you cannot enjoy then you are in a very subtle state and that subtle stare is nothing but bliss but that bliss I don't know how to enjoy everything. Supposing now you say, "Jai Shri Mataji", I forger even you are calling me. I also say, "Jai Mataji". Finished. See it is such a simple thing. One has to understand that a state in which one has to rise, is state where, without doing anything, cverything works out. If that is your state, all right, it's not so. You have to rise up to that state by doing, first you have to do it. First you have to know. Then knowledge has no need. Don't have to know, but first that has to be worked our and brought to that level. Now Diwali has the significance that on Diwali Day, what we do, we put lights all over, so that we put Sahaj Yoga everywhere. But does the light know about itsclf? Does the candle know about itself? She enlightens everything but she docsn't know. Like the moon, giving moonlight, does it know itself? Does it enjoy? In the same way it happens that on the Diwali Day what you are doing is enlightening people, you are doing all this for them. It's a good idea. You must do it. But also know Vol IX Issue 1-2 11· Divine Cool Breeze

 that you have to become the lamp yourself which doesn't know yourself. So there are two messages. The first one is thar we have to enlighten the world. We have no enlighten others. That's the first one. Then we have to become that, which is the light itself and light doesn't know itself that it's the light. I am the light, I don't know myself. That's the state that you don't know you are the light. This doesn't come into your head; even so many times you have sung. You have said, 1000 names there are, everything, but doesn't come into my head that this is me you're talking about. Now when I say this, I do not know how you will react? May be that your ego might come up and you'll say, yes, yes, I am also just the same. There are many who come like that, that I am higher than Mataji, there who said that I am Kalki. Now-a-days there's one fellow going around saying I'm Kalki, many I'm this, that all right, docsn't matter. You be that; very good idea. But if I say I'm Adi Shakti, that means I don't know what I am; really, I had to say because people said, "Mother you have to declarc". Declare what? What I am, that I am. Now I find that by declaration, you people started growing more, all right, have it then. But there is no need for anyone to declare anything or to say anything. That is the state one has to achieve. But to get to that state, you have to work and the work is to spread Sahaj Yoga. You have to enlighten many lights. That means you will realise that you are the light which is enlightening other and then, in a sublte way you'll realise, "That I am the lighr". Many Sahaj Yogis are doing a lot of work and working it out spreading Sahaj Yoga. It's a very great thing that has happened. In so many countries the way it has spread, it has removed the darkness of religion which was outside. There's darkness of racialism, this "that", that "ism". So this has worked out the cleansing for you to have the clean water to swim. Once you start doing that then you realise gradually that, now the sea is clean, we just watch, we just see how it is working. I hope in your life time only you achieve this state, where you achieve your complete work of Self- Realisation to others. Those who do not give self-realisation of others, who just come for the Pujas, are mediocres. They cannot rise very high. Coming to Puja what? You just rise higher with the puja, again you go down, but those who steadily grow will grow into this state, I'm sure. In my lifetime I should be able to sce some people who are such that if they stand here, they emit peace, they emit light. They emit every thing, because they are the light. They don't have to enlighten but they are the light. Such a state has to be developed and worked out within yourself and this state has been described by so many poets, so many saints but they were not at that stage and people thought what is this they are talking. They thought they were mad. Even for Christ they thought he needs to be So then SO crucified because they couldn't understand. Now you are gradually growing, one by one, step. now you understand. You understand Christ. You understand all these people and at this state you have still to work. Those who do not wörk for Sahaj Yoga cannor rise higher, you have to work for Sahaj Yoga. You have to spread it more, you have to work it out, enjoying cach other, Unless and achieve that state you cannot really rise higher to that state which I described, as the Sahaj until you sthiti. Today is the day Mahalaxmi. The first thing. I think, is this madness about money. It should be Lnderstood that it's really madness. You ask a rich man, he says, "Oh I have no moncy". Right? What is this. You ask the poor man, he has no money. Rich man has no money. So it's a kind of a greed which is never satisfied. All these little things have to first drop out. Then your work should cleanse Vol. IX Issue 1-2 • 12 - Divine Cool Breeze

 you. In your work you'll know, whether you are cleansing are not. In the work you will know how you arc doing everything. Cnce that is done, then some of you will achieve that state in my lifetime. Today, on the Diwali Day, I want to tell you that we have to become subrler and subtler. We should not be influenced by outside. Like the outside thing is that some sort of a fashion starts. People who follow fashions, are stupid. They are like blind mices. Anybody can lead them into anything. Now do this, they do that. So if you try to follow any kind of a thought which is given to us by somebody else, in that thought, you'll completely lose yourself and you become, "I am Hindu. I am Christian, I am Muslim", stupidity. You are your self. You are the spirit and when you become the spirit, then you start knowing so and that knowledge is very important. This is the gap between a Saint and a normal human being, which you have crossed gradually. So you know what the problems of the human beings are and dealing with human beings and you know how to deal with them. In Sahaj Yoga only the collective consciousness in modern times has come. This collective consciousness also the saints had, but they would not say anything. They would not bother, all right this fellow has this chakras, let him go to hell, docsn't care. It's not a question of not caring bur not bothered. They were sitting in a state that was just recording, all right. An ugly man goes before the mirror, all right, if a beautiful person goes before the mirror, is all right. In the same way, these people sat. But we have to understand that still we have to grow. We have to still grow by working it out. Those people who are working it out and spreading it all over are the ones which all really, very much there and to them, the Param Chaitanya is just thcir servant. I have seen people who desire something. It works out. They ask for somcthing, it works out. For that now, what should we have is the point? After getting realisation, after getting everything what should we have that we develop is the faith. Faith in yourself. Faith in that you are the spirit, that you have the light and you have to enlighten others. This faith, when it grows deeper and deeper, then you think, oh what I'm, I am the spirit. If you are the spirit, then this whole nature is with you. I know of some Sahaj Yogis. One of them was a fisherman, who has tremendous faith in me and somehow he was going to another village to do Sahaj Yoga work. When he came out of his little hut, he found it's all full of black clouds. He raised his hand and said, "Sce now, I'm going for Mother's work and you dare not start raining. You keep as you are hanging there till I finish my work. Because he was going by boat, and other Sahaj Yogis thought what is he talking about? Got in to the boat. They reached the other village. They gave realisation to others. He finished his lecturing, everything. He came back on the shore and he entered complete Whatever you say will happen, but first you must have complete faith in yourself, that you are a Sahaj Yogi. Even now I find, you see, people have some lust, some sort of horrible things in them. So first his house; when he was closing the door, all right now go ahead and he managed. So the faith that this Param Chaitanya is like your servant is all the time waiting there to serve you. you must be established in Dharma. Dharma is, as you know is righteousness. If you are in the righteousness, there's no question. There's no question that this Param Chaitanya won't obey you, but supposing you want today, something and it does't work out, then even to get disappointed, itself, is not a very good thing. Disappointment also is a sign of your immaturity. What is there to be disappointed? May be that was good for you. Supposing I lose my way. I'm going this way. I lose m way, I don't know where to go, so I gct lost, it's all right what is there? Wherever I am,I am there. Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Isstie 1-2 13

 How can I be lost to myself And then what I find? That I had to go that way, because I was to mect somebody. I'd been wanting to meer somebody and I meet that person there. Can you imagine? Such things happen with me and even if I don't meet, so what? I was to go that side. I have to give some vibrations perhaps. It's like that. So once you know thar whatever you are doing, you're in command- full command, full faith, actually the whole authority comes to you through your faith. The words is as you know the Truth. The truth give you the authority. If you have the truth with you, the absolute Truth with you, then you have the authority, And aurhority is such, that authorises you, not others, but to you. This authority that you have, works and works. I've seen simple Sahaj Yogis, very simple, uneducated also, are very powerful Sahaj Yogis, but they have one thing, faith, complete faith. Then another word in Sanskrit in Titiksha – means, patience (saboori), you must have patience. If you don't have patience you want immediately something to be done. How will you see the whole thing working out? Many people are extremely jittery and very fast running. This world is running so fast and you are the ones who have stood out and watching this rat racc. You are not one of them. So you must have patience. So you must have faith in yourself, fully, and patience to see how Sahaj Yoga is working out or how this Param Chaitanya is working out. If it works this way, all right. There's some meaning, if it is that way, it has some meaning. Now another thing that is important is, the faith in your Guru. If you have faith in your Guru; Param Chaitanya is kind. But if vou doubt then Param Chaitanya also doubts because Param Chaitanva knows you through your Guru, whether it is me or any other real Guru, it's the same. But with me, of course, because you know I'm very forgiving so people start taking liberties. With another guru, you see he will beat them. He'll do all sorts of horrible things ro you if you are not there. I've told you many stories àabout the Guru, how they treat their disciples. But I'm forgiving, I say nothing. I think that by leaving them alone, they'll risc & they will come up to this stage. But it happens somerimes that it works the other way round. Forgiven, then they take it for granted. So the faith in yourself is, with patience you watch and do nor get disappointed with anything, whatsoever. Now just imagine so many people have got Realisation. So many Saints in this world. Have you seen yesterday I was Surprised the way the French were singing so well! For style I had to take the harmonium to teach them how to sing one line. Half an hour I tried. I couldn't do it. The same French have reached that state of creativity. You see all your potential will rise. It will express itself. But be careful not to ger into ego about it. Gradually it will flower and others who are surrounding you will get the fragrance of it and they'll come to Sahaj Yoga. That is thc blessings; at that time, the blessings of the real Divine will be, that you'll be raised to the state which we call as perfect, complete. That completeness mISt come. But you judge yourself. Are you absolutely one with Sahaj? Are you absolutcly dedicated to Sahaj? Or other things are more important to you than Sahaj Yoga? Go ahead. There is one thing to be understood very clearly that there is no completion in Sahaj Yoga. There is no envy, no back biting. You are all saints, above all these things. You are no dishonest, you cannot cheat people. And if you are still doing that, then you have still to grow in it. Some people think that they are very high up in Sahaj Yoga. But it is not so. If you think so, then you are lost. What you have to do is to think, what have I done? How many people I have given realisation to? How many people I have talked abour Sahaj Yoa? People are shy of talking about Sahaj Yoga. In parties they cannot say that I am a Divine Cool Breeze • 14 Vol. IX 1ssue 1-2

 Sahaj Yogi, I cannor drink. By nature I cannot. So announcement is the third part - faith in yourself and you must announce. All the saints announced. They were killed for that, but no one can harm you. Full faith and understanding of Sahaj Yoga, announce. The purpose is to transform the whole world. With your transformation the whole world will get transformed. Then all this knowledge, this bliss becomes one. You are in such a bliss without knowing of it. I hope all of you achieve that state. With the Diwali being done in Portugal, it is a special place, I think, of Mahalxmi because she appeared here as they say and also the swyambhu that we have also is that of Mahalaxmi face. So I'm sure it will work out for all of you. Ir's a little subtle state I'm talking about but it is, I had to tell you that one has to rise up to that stäte and for you that state is very casy to achieve. Then you don't have to do anything. You go Cairo. Everybody was saluting me. I was wondering, what has happened? I went to their village. Thousands came to my programme: I asked them how did you come to my program? It's obvious from your face. They just saw a small little advertisement in the newspaper. It is obvious that you are Divine. And then you can announce that Sahaj Yoga is the only way. They may not be seekers. Does not matter. I think we're finished with the seekers now. Must be. Must have people who are not so seeking. into a village and everything works out. Sce now what happens. I went to May God Bless You. Divine Cool Breeze 15 Vol IX Issue 1-2

 CHRISTMAS PUJA Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Ganpatipule-25 December 1996 Today we are cclebrating the birth of Jesus Christ. The birth of Jesus Christ is very symbolic because he was born in such a manner that even the poorest of poor won't be born in the stable. He was pur in the bed which was made of dried grass. He came on this carth to show people that a person who Is an ncarnation or who is a highly evolved soul is not bothered about the comfort of the body. His message was so great and deep but he had disciples who were not prepared for the battle they had to fight. It is the same thing that sometimes happens with Sahaj Yoga. He had only twelve disciples, we too have twelve type of Sahaj Yogis. And all of them though tried to dedicate themselves to Christ fell a trap, some of them, to the worldly aspirations or to their own worldly hankerings. His message of love and forgiveness is the same even today, preached by all the saints, all the incarnations, all the prophets. They all have said about love and forgiveness. If it was challenged or people felt that this won't work out they were asked to have faith. But, they were simple people in those days, so they obeyed him. Some of them definitcly were very good, some were half baked and few of them were pcople who were doubting. He came on this carth to prepare for us our Agnya Chakra and despite all his cfforts one finds it very difficult that such people who follow Christianity have the worst rype of Agyas, extremely aggressive, extremely planning type, futuristic. All the troubles of the right side are found in those countries who Telaim to be Christians. Even the early Christians who were gnostics, "gn" in Sanskrit mean know, they had the knowledge they were also tortured and suppressed by the Christians who were supposed to be the in-charge of Christianity. And so many people were massacared by the so called Christians priests and Christian churches. And still is going on. What we find in the wvest is a great influence of these churches on the minds of the pcople. Otherwise they are supposed to be intellectual, analytical, something very brave, but when it comes to temples and churches, religion of Christianity, their brains are completely blocked by some sort of mesmerism. They just can't think that there could be something very wrong with these people. When living in Italy I was shocked, how this catholic church has bcen doing all kinds of scandals much more than what we have in our country Money bungling, molesting women and children and every sort of dirty habit! They are supposed to be priests, they are called Fathers, Mothers, Sisters, Brothers. It was a shock to me, I did not know as how such things are happenings in the name of Christ? What Christ tried to show through his birth, there's nO need to have very Comfortable, great birth in a big hospital in London. The simplicity of his birth should have made all the Christians extremely simple and not at all moncy-oriented. For moncy they went all round, destroved so many people. When you go to Brazil, Chile or Argentina you do not find a single man belonging to the Aboriginal people and they are so unkind to them, unbelievable, how aggressive these people are! Even in England wherc there are Protestants, I find the same thing even among them, you must go on saying thank vou, thank you morning till evening otherwise you are finished. Racialism! What was the race of Christ? Was he a fair man? No, was he a white person? Not at all. He Divine Cool Breeze 16: Vot. IX Issuc1-2 16•

 was brown, just like the Indians. From where does this racialism come to these. Wesrerners? It has nothing to do with Christ or if it is real Christianity. You go anywhere, you will be surprised how so faithful, simple-hearted people are misused by these Churches. They are used for Voting, they are used for money for everything; to such an extent, that money was nmade artificially, counterfeited in billions by the Church itself. Such autocracy, such Control, such authority they had that whatever they did, the Pope is infallible, whatever he does is alright. No idea of sinning, no idea of hell, no idea of Christ, which was nothing but purity innocence. Christ had taken a hunter in this hand and hit all the people who were sellirng in front of the temple because he said God cannot be sold, they were nor selling God, they were selling only goods, but he talked about the respect of the temple. and for killing Christ. They put all the blame Another great thing Christians have done is to blame Jews on others. This is the speciality of Christians even today, to put the blame of what wrong they are doing on orhers; this is what you sce very clearly in those cOuntries who call themseclves Christians. First of all, those who were Jews that time might have been Indian later on. Alright, they don't believe in reincarnation. Secondly you mean to say the same Jews who were there are born again? Thirdly the Jews never killed Christ, because in a multitude how can you decide? It was the judge who decided and ordered. He was a Roman. The Roman empire didn't want to take the responsibility of his death, so they said Jews have killed. So, Mr. Hitler gor out and he rcally tortured them. It was too much, can't even understand how he believed in catholic religion, and how could he kill small little children in the gas chamber? But now the same people who were tortured are also becoming very aggressive and they are against the Palestinians and the Palestinians on their own are Muslims and the Muslim are playing a havoc all over. When you go through the historv and scc the life of Christ what you find is aggression from one to another If somebody slaps somebody then thar person will try to kill that person. This religion has created this divisiveness., People are just killing cach other in the name of God and religion. Even in Sahaj Yoga people are taking advantage of my name or trying to get into some mesmeric groups. So beware, this should not happen to you. Using the name of Christ, the incarnation of Divine love, they are doing all works of violence, hatred, cheating, From one to another it passes, same thing happens in Sahaj Yoga. If I told somebody that Vou are no more a leader, somebody elsc is a leader, immediately that person gets angry, he forgets what good Sahaj Yoga has done to him. If I tell him the leadership powers should pass to somebody else, finished. He forgets what Sahaj Yoga has done for him and that he is living only because Sahaj Yoga has helped him. So, this leadership goes into the heads of people. Sahaj Yoga is nor here to make Icaders out of inconvenient, we have to change them, thats all. As simple as that. But still I find this idea of authority something very great and they start using it left and right. It is happening practically in every country, has happened and is still happening, which is a very sad thing. This will never bring forth my efforts. My effort is to synthesize the whole not to divide. Whatever is wrong, whatever is unholv, has to be brought to your notice. You see, when a housewife cleans the rice there are some white stones in it, she just takes them out: WWe don't cook rice with theose stones. Such stones have to go out. Some of them are just like stones. You cannot change them. Namadeva has said they are like a fly, who when lives gives us trouble by coming on our food and if by mistake we take it inside our stomach it is you; no, never. It is just for convenience that we have leaders and if they become Divne Cool Brecze Vol. IX Isstie 1-2 •17•

 dead, but still it troubles us. These are all Rakshsas. They can never understand Sahaj Yoga and they will always try to trouble us. But what the people, who have achieved Sahaj Yoga, should do. Should they also take to such methods? I have never blamed anyone for anything, like people say, didn't give any money to Sahaj Yoga, so he has lost all his wealth. I never said like that. He should have donated some money. I never asked for donations, I never asked for money. Every time I don't give, its sufficient. I have never asked for a single pie, from anyone to be given to me even when I nceded because I know I don't have that problem. Mother, he say, From the life of Christ one has to understand, he had no problems. He was fearless. He knew he was the son of God, he faced everything, even his crucifixion. People liked his crucifixion or not, they carried the cross. Of course, it is the transformed symbol of Swastika, no doubt, but still he had to sacrifice his life! He sacrificed his life for all of us so that we could cross over our Agnya. The condemnation if you do is not of others but of yourself. We can call that as a crucifixion of ours by which we see, as Sahaj Yogis, where are we. I am told there are some 80-90 Sahaj Yogis who have come, who are mesmerised by some people. How could Sahaj Yogis may mesmerised? Is it possible? They may not be doing meditation. How can they get into it? Now they are asking for forgiveness. I forgive, but that docsn't mean they will be alright. We cannot mix them anymore. We do not put spoilt apples with the good ones, do we? There is no wisdom. They are sploit and should keep out till I say. They should not attend any collectivity, any Puja. They should let them cleanse themselves. Though a rotten apple cannor get well, they can. They should try to understand that thcy were not Sahaj Yogis. If a Sahaj Yogi can get mesmerised, then what's the use of doing Sahaj Yoga? What is the use of getting your Kundalini raised? In this respect western Sahaj Yogis are much better. It is a thing of jubilation because Christ came as a saviour, he did everything that's possible under the sun. For us, Yogis go on demanding, Mother we can't even meet you, we can't even shake hands with you, we can't even fall at your feet, we can't do this, we can't do that. It surprises me. You must do this, you must do that, all the time lecturing to me. What you must do is meditate and to believe that this Param Chaitanya is my power, that you have felt My power within you. The more you are away from me, the better you will be. Absolutely I can't understand the demanding nature of some Sahaj Yogis. They have got their Jagruti, which would never have happened. its alright but whar about Him? What did we give Him? In the same way, Many Sahaj At this time we have to understand that such a great incarnation came on this earth. Of course, he couldn't give realisation. Imagine the people who were abour to crucify him. How could he give realisation? Supposing somebody comes with a dagger at me, can I give him realisation? Nobody listened to them, nobody thought anything of them. But not you, you people have got your realisation, you are born-again people, you are great people, your potential is there. Instead of utilising that now what are you doing? How many people are really involved in Sahaj Yoga? Introspect. They have their business, they have their own this thing, that thing, how many are really involved in Sahaj Yoga? He had only 12 disciples except for 1 to 2 all of them dedicated. Without realisation dedicated themselves fully to the work of Christianity and it spread out. Because they had not much idea about the whole thing. The Christians that they had were just converts. If they did not do any justice to the birth of Christ, one can understand. But what about you people who are born twice, who have got self- knowledge, who are so equipped with all the powers, who are connected with this all pervading Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issue 1-2 18 ·

 power of Divine Love. All your powcrs can be utilised, can be known. Its like sonme dynamic machine which has started. Few wheels are moving but there are so many wheels after wheels and so much vou can do, I can't blame the Christians. After all they never got their awakening, only some priest would get some water, put it on their head and baptise them. But what about vou people: I have lived because of you because I wanted to see that you people mature. That's the idea of the Mother There are many who have matured but still manV have to be matured. Docsn't mean that vou should be alble to give big lecrures or write big books but within vourself you should mature. Your own personality should flower into the fragrance of love and divinity. This is the difference between me and Christ. He said, "I have had enough, no more of the stupid people". Not me, I knew, what was tlhe world like. I knew what had happened to this world. Today the world is much worse because all the leaders are fighting amongst themselves. Firstly all the politicians are badly corrupt, competing in that corruption, nobody has sense of truth and honesry, everybody is involved in the advertisement, media, newspaper, which is the nmost corrupting influence today With all this backgroundI know by the vear 2000 Sahaj Yoga will come out in the world as somcthing very great. (Clappings). You did not allow me to complete the sentence. If you pcoplc become real Sahaj Yogis; all of you. All of vou who are attending me, here. It doesn't matter if I cannor go to your places and meet vou personally, it docsn't matrer nothing matters. Christ's disciples worked as if he never existed. It is not important. What is important Is that you are people who are responsible for the emancipation of this world, for the svnthesis of this world, to bring pcace, joy and happiness. Just now when I was coming, people spread the shawls. It reminded me of when Christ came they brought palm leaves to wish him and spread their shawls on the ground for him and where does he o? To the gallows, to the cross, to his dearh. When you show your love for me, vou have to know that you have to love the whole work of Sahaj Yoga It's not some personal relationship with me that is going to work out. All these Western countries which are under the influence of Christianity will go down, are going down already because there is no morality. There's recession, all kinds of problems, their ehildren are wayward, they are drinking, smoking, even their influence on us is corrupting. It is nothing but anti-Christ activity. Who is the anti-Christ? There is an anti-Christ within us who accepts all these things which arc against the purity and love of Christ. Christ said love thy neighbour, as vou love yourself. In the West, if vou have a neighbour vou had it. He will try to find out where you go, what you do, he will have a binocular to sce. If you make any noisc, vou are finished. But, cven if you sing, you are finished. In that way Indians are better. We don't have that noise difficult, they don't mind. I have found out the reason and it is that in the west people are under stress and strain and that's why they can't bear. But in India people don't know what this stress and strain is, still that has not developed, I don't know how, to that extent. That discase has Not come. That might be the reason why they are so much frightened of noises, People will come from villages here they will sleep on the station, nothing happens, the trains are coming We had a neighbour his name was Mr. Peace; I don't know who gave him that name. Such contradictions in life, I don't know, how will they learn how to love their neighbours. Indians do, somchow they don't have this problem, not much. But if there is music supposing, all thc neighbours will join, bring tea, bring this, they will enjoy the music. But there the collectivity is so little I think, I can't Lunderstand how can they call themselves Christians. Only they go to Church, well dressed. And our and 19 - Vol. IX Issuer1-2 Divine Cool Brecze

 Mayor told me that for 15 min. hardly we can sit, start looking at their watches, 15 min. and after one hour we run out of the jail. And how these people are sitting with you for hours together. I mean they are not so collective. Unless and until they get intoxicated, they cannor talk to each other. They all the time tired. They get so tired you sce them in the films or anywhere, they come, sit and yawn; young pcople all the time thinking, thinking, which comes from Agnya which comes from anti Christ activity, anti Christ. Thinking, thinking, thinking, what should we do tomorrow, what is to be done and all that. Still, we have to hope that this kind of religion will finish. All such religions must finish. They have to go now. They are so full of anti-religious temperament that you just cannot bear them. It is better to finish all religions, all isms, one after another. are To what religion did Christ belong? You belong to one religion which is Sahaj Which is the universal religion, which is pure religion, which is born within you. You don't belong to any other religion because there is no religion in that. So, by the time 2000 years I hope all these religions will run away from this earth. All of them fighting for nothing, killing each other for nothing. They want to fight, they like to fight. Why blame Quran, why blame Bible, why blame anyonc they want to fight. They want to have separate nations, separate communitics separate this. Once you start of separating you are anti-Christ absolutely. In Sahaj Yoga you are one identity, you are to separate country separate organisation, separate this. It doesn't exist in my own idea, I never thought of it. We are all children of one Father-and of one Morher. Wc have no business to think we are separate. Even now I sce groups are made very easily, how? The groups are made like Maharashtrians sitting together. Indians are quite separatists, by temperament North Indians also have separate ideas. You must come to Indore, why? Is it not a part of India? They can't come to Delhi? You must go to every village, every place. Why? You are born todđay in Delhi, tomorrow you will be born in some horrid place. Then this place is my house that's another headache. You must come to me, önce you start that you are finished. This is a very common programme even today, that if you see around yourself, must see people from your own country. In Sahaj Yoga who is the other? We are all one, and this unity you have to learn if you really love me, and Christ. All the groupism and all-that has to end now amongst Sahaj Yogis. We are all one identiry, we are all one living body, we are all one organism. We cannot say we are separate. Can this hand separate from the body? Can it exist? Once you start giving it up, you will be surprised, you will have real enjoymnent. But once vou have all these ideas about my, mine you cannot even enjoy Sahaj Yoga, cannot enjoy anybody else. My wife, my children, my house, this that. That awakening has to come within you. I don't belong to this country. Many girls and boys have written Indian marriage only, the age of the woman is 35 years, now where will I find a husband for her in India? I give you choice, alright, have a choice. I also have a choice. I can't marry you. That is my choice. You have the freedom to say where you want to marry, alright, marry. But as far as I am concerned, I can't marry you like that. You have to marry wherever there is a good match for you. Many Indian girls have married Indian boys and suffered a lot. We have not even been able to organise one marriage of a Hindustani with Hindustani. Not possible. Why don't you find in your own community somewhere, same thing? As in India very particular. Like when my daughter was to bç married they said no, he is not Srivastava as you. Even if he is the same Srivastava, now this thing is different I mean, I said this thing is going too far. Because I had all my clders living with me and they were after me. I said whether Srivastava or not Srivastava, I am going to marry them, finished. My husband agreed. Same we wish a Srivastava. Even if he is a Srivastava also, he is not the same Divine Cool Breeze Vol IX Issue1-2 20-

 my grand children. If you get Srivastava, very good, otherwise forget it. Maharashtrians also, same thing, Maharashtrians who have become Christian, also the same. Now they are saying we are 'dalit Chrisrians. Means who were converted from the lower castes into Christianity. Now a new caste has come. Once you have become Christians what is your cast? You are Christians, not that, there are dalits and there are higher Christians. They will not marry in the dalit and dalit won't marry in the higher. Supposed to bc Christians following Christ, going to church regularly, well dressed. Even if they do not have a proper suit, they must wear like the English some suit, to church. Because according to Indian Christians, Christ was born in England. Really you won't believe. Unless and until you wear a suit and a tie, you can't go to church. Can you imagine anybody with a dhoti to church? Impossible. India women cannot do without the sarces, but they were with borrow it and go going forced, so many were married the way the English marry. Now I was amazed, even the Japanese who come to Australia dress up the way the English brides do and get married because they are Christians. That shows they believe that Christ was born in England or what? Actually for Christians its not necessary to worry about any dress. All this nonsense comes from the west that you must dress up like this, you must have you spoon here, fork there. Did Christ eat with fork and spoon? He was born in the manger. Its not even possible to understand these people are Christians so much worried about the spoons and forks and they come to your house for dinner, they lift the plate to see from what company you have bought it. Very important. Such silly people, they call themselves Christians. Christ was born in the manger. One must understand the greatness of his birth in which he has shown that he was born with the cows tied thcre and the calves were there. You can make out a Christian in no time, see them on Sunday morning. The way my father opposed it, he used to wear a kurta. Because Christ wore kurta, he didn't wear a suit. Indians have at least certain sense of dignity. If you have any, why should wear a suit on a May day in this heat. We are Sahaj Yogis we have to wear a common dress of a common man. Whom are we going to impress except this Param Chaitanya? They are extremely superficial, extremely, meticulously particular about their dress, how they live, is really horrible. I have seen this and that is the reason I think I should warn you. Don't take to the culture, that is anti Christ culture. In every way they have insulted Christ. You people should not in any way insult Christ in any way you live. What is the message of Christ, that you develop your spirituality, your divinity by which you know what is the dignity of Sahaj Yogi. He was your eldest brother. His life-style you should follow. Absolutely not afraid of anything, not worried about any job, not worried about any business, nothing, absolutely free from all this. There are so many beautiful examples of his life. But when we see Christians and try to reflect it as an expression of the life of the Christ that is where we make mistake. They are by no means following Christ. As Sahaj Yogis we have a different culture. We have a culture where we respect morality, we have dignity, we have our own personality, we are fearless, we don't tell lies, we don't cheat and we can never get mesmerised. We can call it the Mother's culture, which is not in any way showing off, in any way taking to artificial things. The whole thing will change, the whole concept will change, the whole idea will change, once you understand that have the Mother's culture.. c you you I never asked you for presents, nothing. Forcing the presents on my head, alright, for you joy sake, Vol. IX Issue 1-2 21 Divine Cool Breeze

 Vou have it. But one thing I must request these Maharashtrians they are not to give me any more, again, any more what they call Oty. My Oty is overfull. Absolutely, nobody has to give me Orv: If somebody gets married, somebody has a child they will give the Oty. There is no need to give any Ory to me, you can go to the temple, give youur Oty there and its is resold and resold. In between, sellers and Brahmins who are the pujaris, make money. the On a Christmas Day I have to say one thing, what did we give to Christ, and the second question what are we going to give tO Mother? This is very important. I don't want anything from vou, nothing. I am fully content with mysclf. Whhat I want is Vou must dedicate vourself to Sahaj Yoga, to Truth and to Love, also not to talk like what Christ has called murmuring souls. Talking herc, there, all this I don't like, it should not be done and if vou do like this, vou will fall. Fall very badly, this is the last judgement, cither you go to heaven or you will go to hell. Its already working out like that, now ler us see, where are you. I have to again and again tell you as your Mother, correct you thar remeniber, this is the last judgement and please do not take anymore to the activities which are anti Christ. You can judge within yoursclf whatever you are doing is not good and for that best thing is to dedicate yourself to Sahaj Yoga but not to make money out of Sahaj Yoga, not to make politics out of Sahaj Yoga but make Sahaj Yoga like a huge big tree and it will work out, it has to work out, vou have the potential, that's why you are here. May God Bless You. Vol IX Issue 1-2 Divine Cool Breeze 22



----------------------

1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
1997
Issue 1 & 2
Volume IX
The greatest power that is Shakti is the Power of Love. Love
means egoless and without expectations, to spread the Kingdom
of Love.
H.H Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Delhi '95
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Дivine C00
1997
Issue 1-2
Volume IX
Contents
Navratri Puja
Diwali Puja
Christmas Puja
16
Edited by:
Yogi Mahajan
Published by:
Divine Cool Breeze
9 Bhagyachintamani Soc.
Paud Road, Kothrud
Pune 411 029
Printed by:
Printek Phototypesetters
4A/1, Rajinder Nagar
New Delhi 110 060
Phones: 5784866, 5710529
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 NAVARATRI PUJA
Talk by H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Cabella, Italy- 20-10-96
Today is special day we are worshipping the Goddess who came on this carth nine times before to
kill all the demons and all the negativities and relieve all the bhaktas to worship. All Her work has
already been described. Despite that all kinds of demons and negative people have now come back.
Perhaps, it had to be; after all it is Kali Yuga and the drama of Kali-Yuga would not be performed
unless and until they are there to complere the drama. They came but this time it's going to be a very
different type of war; it's going to be the war of the peaceful pcople and the peaceful people are the
most successful people in every walk of life, even if in the world it did not work out before.
They say that when Chenghis Khan came he went to a very big imonastery of Buddhists near Gaya
and killed all of them. There were abour 30.000 Buddhists there and they didn't say a word and they
were all killed. So, people started disbelieving in Buddhism. They said what kind of a Buddhism we
have! Why didn't Buddha save them? That's the human style of thinking but, you will be surprised,
in this Kali-yuga, this Chenghis Khan has been praised by many authors and there are books written
about him. He was not a muslim, but some sort of a crack-por He finished off many MosquIes,
destroyed marny beautiful buildings and also he came to India and ruled there for a short time. All
that's a history. In the same way, there have been wars between Christians and non-Christians and
berween Muslims and non-Muslims. All kinds of wars, we have heard of, where only the faithful got
lost, the real people got lost. The ones who worshipped God with full faith got lost. So, many people
became atheists and they said there is nothing like God, nothing like this Divine power, it never
existed, you are stupid, you are foolish to follow all this. And, those who were incharge of religion
took full advantage of that and said that these people were sinful people. These people were noL
Godly people and that is how they were killed by us and we were victorious.
In a subtler way,
So, we come to Kali-Yuga and in Kali-Yuga same thing has started in a different way
it has started that there is a big war going on betwcen the people who are anti-God and who are
using god for their own purpose- very dishonest very corrupt and very cruel people and they are
that flag of God, that banner which they have no right to use. Then there are Sahaj Yogis who
LIsing
have got their realisation and they have to fight them. Now the difference in the previous war and
this war is very subtle. All those who were successful, started feeling very confident that we have
achieved what we wanted, But, in the light of Kali-Yuga all those historical mysteries are regarded as
shameful things, as something very aggressive and non-sensical. This is now being described
very
everywhere like, the white-skinned people went to America, and killed all the rest of them there.
Now, that is coming to light, all these people who thought themselves to be victorious, their children,
their grandchildren, their progeny are ashamed of them.
Until the last wvar, this awareness which has come is the real victory of modern times of Kali-Yuga.
That everything that was accepted as a part of the game, as the life-style is now being challenged in
modern times everywhere. Whatever is aggression, whatever is oppression, whatever is cruuel is now
punished; so many war-criminals might have escaped, but so many went to trial. It has never happened
before. Nobody took Chenghis Khan to trial. Now, in a very subtle way, all these aggressive people
HOw
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issue1-2
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 are getting afraid that they will be questioned and they maybe tortured. In Italy there was a great
aggressive man called Mussolini and ultimately he was hanged. In Germany, there was a very powerful
man called Hitler, even thc Germans don't want to take his name, they are all ashamed of him. Then,
in England, Warren Hastings, who came to India, was put to trail. If Napolcon aggreSsed people, he
thought he was very victorious, but he could nor continuc with it. He had to face it. Anybody who)
has been aggressive, who has been dominating, who has been very cruel, demoniac, has been taken to
task mostly in his lifetime. If not in his lifetime, then afterwards he was maligned. People don't want
to erect their statues. The awareness has come in the mind of the people. A person like Stalin, who
Iuled Russia once upon a .
grcat
time, today you can't see cven one statue of Stalin
See the power of modern times, and that is frightening to those who think that they can get away
with whatever they are doing It is going to be very soon inderstood by them that they have to stop
ll this nonsensez otherwisc, they will suffer: It's not those whom they are dominating hur who are
dominating, they will suffer physically; mentally emotionally and also their fame will be in tie mud.
Today's, victorv of the power of the Divine Mother is doing one very great work and that is to expeOse
and this expusure will be, condemning publicly those who are doing that. If you see from that point
of view, youA
ill LInderstand how we are victorious now.
As Sahaj Yogis we have ro know what is the difference between the consciousness of that time and the
awarcness at this time. Thhat time, it was necessary to finish those demons, kill them, but they are
back
again on the stage. Now, at this time when it is Kali-Yuga they are exposed, they are condemned,
they are pur in the jail, they are now punished publicly So, the collective awareness has
great victory over these people who came, killed and dicd withour getting any punishment out of it,
without getting any defamation out of it.
such a
gor
Let us see what is consciouNness and what is awarencss. Consciousness is that when vou are made
Conscious, vou became conscious about it. Like, I have my hand, alright, bur normally I am not
Konscious abour it that I Iave a hand. If a man is sleeping he is not conscious that he is sleeping.
When von tell me that I have a hand, I become conscious or if something pricks me then I become
conseious, otherwise I am unconscious about it. I am absolutely unconscious about iy eves. I am
seeing everything. But, supposing I become blind I can't see, the I become conscious of my cyes, thar
I lave got my eves through which now I cannot sec. So once you say there is this hand; the
consciousnes is there. This you can say is the knowledge about the hand that, you get knowledge
about the hand. But once, you are not conscious of thc hand, the knowledge disappears, to say there
is ignorance, or there is knowledge, both things are just the same. You are nor conscious of VOur
hand, so you are quite ignorant about it. Now, suppose somebody says your hands are very beautiful.
Somebody remarked like thar then I become conscious of my hand which is beautiful; otherwis I
never knew they are beautiful. Normally, all human beings live at that level, where somcbody has to
tell you. Now somebody says you are wearing a very nice sarce. Then I will look at it, yes, its very
nice; I never knew. So, somcbody has to tell vou, then you become conscious, otherwise you are not.
All human beings are at that level.
Now what is awareness? Thar's a different thing. That means if I see somebody is attacking me, I put
my hand like this. That means I am aware I have hands, I am not conscious, bur Lamawarc, I have a
hand and I do this. Like here, in Italy, vOu go on mowing vour hands all the time. That means, vou
Divine Cool Breeze
2.
Vol. IX Issue 1-2
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 know, you are aware that you have got hands that you have to use them for expressing something
more, sort of, emphatically. So we are also aware of our body, we are aware of others, we know about
others, we know what sort of person another one is, until you are self-realised. After self-realisation
what happens is very inreresting. After self-realisation you go beyond both these things
consciousness and awareness: Because you go beyond thought. You have gone beyond thought
means what? Anger, all kinds of ideas, all kinds of aggression, everything is maneuvered through
mind. If your mind is lost what will you do? There is no mind any more, you exist with reality
mour
So there is no mind to communicate. We call it thoughtlessly aware people. We have conquered all
our enemies by giving up one enemy, that is our mind. There's no mind to suggest. There's no mind
to tell you. Once there is no mind you are lost.
Now, it is being said that you ask a question to yourself-who am I? As soon as you ask this question,
you become thoughtless, so you get lost. You cannor answer this question. Otherwise you might say,
I am a woman, I am this, I am that I am a Bishop, or I am a Pope. But once you are a realised soul,
who will tell you who you are? Because the one who tclls you is the mind which doesn't exist. No
thought means you get dissolved into yourself. This is what is reality. But you are aware also. That's
another point. It you ask yourself a question, you are nor there but you are aware. If your nabhi is
catching, you know immediately, oh, my nabhi is catching, I have got to clear it. Don't have to ask a
question. Or, if somebody is standing near you, with left Swadisthana, oh my God this one. If
somebody is hot-tempered and very angry, you get such heat from that person, you want to run away
from that man.
This is a new realm, you have entered into reality which you were never aware of before. Now,
supposing there is a very bad man standing ncar you. He might be a thief, a murderer, or anything.
You will not be even conscious of it, leave alone aware. But once you are a realised soul, you become
aware of the whole. That is reality. What are the problems. In a collective you become aware of the
collective, you bccome aware of the problems of the whole world. Now, this awareness is very different.
The first awareness, is like this, suppose, somebody tells you are this and this you become aware of it.
In this, nobody has to tell you, it's just there. You are there, you know what it is. This is what you
have achieved in these modern times which is the blessings of the modern times also that we know
now who we are. You always say we are the pure spirit. What makes you believe that you are the
pure
spirit. You haven't seen your spirit, have you? You haven't seen yourself what you are. Then how do
you say you are the pure spirit? You are just saying something because I say so. But you are the pure
have experienced whatever description of the pure spirit is given, that it is aware of
this Divine Power. That is how you are the pure spirit. Because, only through purc spirit as your
personality you can be aware of this all pervading power. This is written in all the shastras, scriptures.
everywhere. How do you know about it, that you are the pure spirit because you know about your
own chakras. You know about your own nadis. Now, what is happening is that you are separated
from yourself and you can see yourself. You sce yourself very clearly and you start seeing yourself as
the present, the past and the future. In the past, what I was? You are shocked now, my goodness, I
was like it! See it through this present state, in the present state you see. Then you start forgetting it,
forget the past. Then, still you have the future. You start thinking about the future. First future, they
think abour their own children, their wives, what will happen to my children, what will happen to my
spirit because
you
3.
Divine Cool Breeze
Val. IX Issue 1-2
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 wife? Then they think what will happen to Sahaj Yoga. Then they feel, what will happen to Mataji?
Also they think what will happen to this world, because vour awareness has expanded vou are not in
the limited sphere now, anvmore. You can think of yourrchildren, you can think of your wife, also NOU
can think of all the problems of the world. So, vou have reached that state. Now wha is the thing that
all this? Or, gives you solutions, for your children, family wife, everyone. Your mother
COvers
believes in giving solutions, not only the problems. To solve present day problems you need no
Sword. Since todays's problems, as they are, as we see, are within us. We see the problem, we are
aware of it and we want to do something about it. Whether we are in the past, present or future, we
sec the problem. So, now what is the solution? We have no weapons, nothing to fight, so manv do
not know how to even hold
they are so mLich in compassion, in the occan of compassion, enjoying themselves niccly. They are
enjoying their own compassion, compassion of others, compassion of their Mother but, then how to
solve the problem? The problem can be solved, if you become very powerful yourself within.
Where is your attention? You have to move inwards. I have done my job, I have given you
realisation, vou have grown sO much, I have explained to you, I have told you everything. This time
I have given vou the occan of love. But, now, you have to nourish vourself. You have to become
powerful within yourself. So, what is the way you can become powerful?
the sword in the hand, and, so many don't even want to hold it because
First, vou must believe that you have transcended your human personality and you have become now
a super
fairh, not blind faith that vou believe in somcthing. Hundred times I have told you that vou must
have first faith in vour ascent, in your position as Sahaj Yogi. For this mediration in very importantr,very
important. Without meditation you cannot have full faith in yourself, because you can't know yourself
by asking "Who am I"? Try now. Ask a question, who am I, you'll be lost! So, what should be the faith
then? So vou reach a state where Lhave to tell you that faith is not mental, it is not cmotional, it is not
physical but it is a state of your Own Being which we can call as a spiritual state. In a spiritual state,
nothing can disturb you. Nothing can overpower you, nothing can dominate you. Because that state
if vou have, that means vou are part and parcel of Reality Then vou arc an honoured member of the
God's kingdom. Then you are the most revered personality Then you like dicty, a gana. In that state
when you arc, its a state, beyond the human state, you are extremely powerful.
human being. This must get in vour mind. This is what we call as faith. This faith is not a false
There is a story about the sufi saint Nizamuddin. There was a horrible king, and Nizamuddin would
and bow to him. He said I can only bow to God and nobody else. The king said if vou don't
go
come and bow to me tomorrow, I will cut your throar. Thar night, the throat of this king was cut. It
was not Nizamuddin Sahib, he would nor do that. Somcone else cut his throat. That state we call as
the state of 'Slıraddha' which is enlightencd, enlightened Faith. Its a new Evpe of mechanism that
VOu become part and parcel of the whole. I never told the sun to be there for Puja. I never told last
timie, this time they were telling, there's no nced to tell, its all done. I don't tell all these vibranions to
make a cross, or to show all these miraculous photographs. They just do it by themsclves, 1 am
sometimes surprised how ingenious methods they have of their own, how they manage things. It all
works automatically. It just works. Only thing, if I have anything it's just complete faith that I am at
that state and that's why thcre is completc patience and that is whar we have to learn. It will all
happen in any case because we are all of that state. Only meditation is important, very important. For
not
1s,
Vol. IX Issue 1-2
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 but for voi all. If vou all can meditate now just ten minutes every day, it will help vou a lot.
nor,
1me
Now why do we have all these statucs, of the Mother, Hanumana, Ganesha, Christ CIC. beacusu to
begin with human beings cannot understand anything which does not have a form, they cannot go
deeper unless and until there is a form. Then they went to another limit of using a stone of anvthing
as God. But now you have discretion. You know what is to be worshipped, whar is to be treated as a
higher personality. But before that, they would worship all kinds of people. Now, pcople worship
Pope, they are not only blind, they are not only unaware but they are nor even conscious of it. They
are all at such a level that VOu cannot tell them. So, you are a new type of people who have tried to
fight it out, to struggle out, to know about the Absolute Truth, Unless and tntil
Absolute Truth, vou are nowhere; you have no discretion, no understanding, no wisdom. But, once
you know thc Absolute Truth then you should not, by any chance, be half way this and half-way that.
That's a very dangerous state of affairs. Say, a seed is sprouted. It is neither a seed, nor a tree. If it does
know the
you
not grow, it IS useless. That happens t) Vour awarcness and then you are neither hare nor there. There
are many people who come to Sahaj Yoga to find some pcace but I gect letters that my father is sick,
my mother is sick, my brother is sick, my husband is fighting with me, I am sceking a divorce or
thirdly, I have lost all my moncy, I must have some moncy; fourthly Iam a great artist bit my art is
noE selling. I say what sort of Sahaj Yogis are these?
The state of being one with the reality means that the whole of reality is at your fect; whole of it
works for you. Once, if you cven get a glimpse of that state, you become so much peaceful within
yourself. If you say I am the king, I am the king, if you say I am the beggar, I am the beggar; to that
state which is like the purest of pure gold, which cannot be tarnished, such a state of mind we have to
develop. It is more of a challenge to us. Wc are Sahaj Yogis, alright we have got realisation alright, we
can sing very well, airight, we have got good posirions, alright, we are nicely married, we have got
everything, we have got jobs, this, that now Suuddenly, one negative force comes which will trouble
vou. So what? Otherwise how will you know what you are? If there is no darkness, who will
you
know vou are the light? ItIs a challenge to vour own state, at what State vou arc. The word wvord State
is not so explanatory, in Sanskrit it is 'Swa-roop-'Swa' is yourself and 'roop' is form or state. That
state is possible for all of you by saying not this, not this. Your mind has reachcd that state where
there is no mind. You can do it but you have to develop a kind of a personality that realises what
no.
arc. But in that realisation you are just aware, not conscious of it. As, for example I tell you I am
awarc I am Adi Shakti, I am aware, I know it. But when you say Jai Shri Mataji, I also say Jai Shri
Mataji, forgetting that I am the one you are talking about. This actually should be the state.
Now, you make me sit here like a Queen and give me presents. Alright that's your idea. But I am
complete in myself, I have got lost into myself; alright you can do this, alright you can do that,
alright if you don't do it, then also it is alright. To me, it makes no difference, it may make a difference
to you, like I have been saying don't give many presents; the only arguments is that in the whole year
we give you only once, so, why should you, Mother, object, that gives us joy. Alright, if you think it
gives you joy, do it. But, to me, it doesn't matter because I don't think I anm there, I am just seemg vou
sitting here, alright, there are all realised souls alright, but I am one of you. I don't think I am
something very special but if you ask me, then I will say alright, I am Adi Shakti. But I don't think
Adi Shakti is very special also. Because I have no mind, otherwise I don't think something special.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Isste 1-2
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Because if somebody is something special so what? Because supposing sun is something special; so
what, sun is sun. If somebody is Adi Shakti She is Adi Shakti, so what? But for you, it is creditable
because you were not born realised, you have got your realisation so you are spccial, you are great,
you have achieved something, I have achieved nothing, I have been like this and I will be like this
whether I fight the devil or I sit before you, it makes no difference. But for me, you are great bccause
have achieved this. It is great to see, on this Navratri day, so many people sitting to worship. It's
you
so remarkable. It's not my achievement, it's your sceking. Because I have been on this carth many a
times before, but we never had it like this. So many came, got crucified, died, this, that I never had
people of this kind.
So again we come to the same point that we should be aware of ourselves, complete 'Shraddha' in
yourselves. Ifyou have that 'Shraddha' in yourself, then you will have shraddha about me also because
we are not different. If you believe that this is water then wherever in the world there is water, you
know it is water. If you know
this is a Sahaj Yogi. But as far as you are concerned, you forget how grear you are! I am very proud
of
you are a Sahaj Yogi, then anywhere there is a Sahaj Yogi you will know
But because I am a humble person, I do not know how to show-off! To have such nice and
you.
lovable children! Those Bhaktas, for whom she killed so many devils, were not like you. You are much
better, much higher, of a much greater quality.
You must know what you are, don't behave like those people who were a very rudimentary nature.
You have grown up, you have prospered, now the fruits you can se I don't know whar to do for you
really, but, have faith in yourself; you will see how much faith you will have in Reality, that there is
Reality within you at every sStep, every moment. No fear, no sense of achievement, done now, finished.
When there were five Sahaj Yogis. I was bappy, when there are so many I am happy but when I see so
many I feel there are so many powerful personalities who are one with Reality. This collective oneness
was never before and so, I say that on this day what have to do is to kill the devils within ourselves,
that is all. If you really want to worship me, that's what you have to think, what are the devils within
That's all. You don't have to worry about outside devils, they can't to anything to you.
you.
May God Bless You.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issüe 1-2
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 DIWALI PUJA
Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Portugal -November 96
Today we are going to worship the Mahalxmi which I think is very much worshipped in this country.
apparition
of her. First I never believed that it could be but then after feeling the vibration now I know it was
in a
Here they worship Her as Maria and also there's swaymbhu of Maria and also there was an
seen,
true as she did appear here in an apparition. She appearcd before me also, you must have
photograph. This is the principle by which you have risen to this state. The central path of
ascent; is created by Mahalaxmi power for the Kundalini to rise. In the temple of Mahalaxmi in
Kolhapur, they always sing the song of "ude, ude Ambe". So Lasked the people there "Why do you
sing Ambe song in MahalaXmi temple?" They said, that, "We don't know why we do it but is it
wrong?" I said "No, because only in the Mahalaxmi in Kolhapur, they always sing the song of "ude,
in Mahalaximi's temple?" They said,
that, We don't know why we do it but is it wrong?" I said No because only in the Mahalaxmi
Channel, Kundalini can rise and Kundalini is the Amba" That's how they understood and they were
really amazed. From ancient times, this song has been sung there and they never knew why this song
your
ude". So I asked the people there "why do you sing Ambe song
is sung.
Coming to the
have crcated within us a proper balance, a proper route, for Kundalini to rise. Left and right have
been balanced and She's the one who makes a wider path, for Kundalini to rise. This is the path of
compassion and love. Through that compassion and love, she creates this path because she knows
that if the path is not wide enough, the Kundalini cannot rise. Ulrimately one reaches a state where
you start seeking and by seeking your Mahalaxmi principle has been awakened. That is awakened and
sometimes it is very strong then you start seeking in a mad way. I'm sorry to say that many have
already lost in secking, but there are so many people who have come to the right path and to the right
point of Mahalaxmi we have to understand, what does it do. The Mahalaxmi power
ascent.
Another thing this Mahalaxmi principle does is to allow the Kundalini power to go to different
chakras. It also makės a way to different chakras and corrects all the chakras. She is a very flexible
force, which guides the Kundalini into different chakras and she understands which chakra neceds the
help of the Kundalini. So you must have seen that when the Kundalini riscs, how she pulsates, where
she
where she shows the need of your awakening. All this works out because she is full of
gocs,
compassion and love that you should get your Absolute Truth. We have many problems, as it is you
know, in Sahaj Yoga because when people are ascending they carry on with them some of their
stores they cannot climb, they try then they fall, then they go up again, they fall.
past
Today I'm going to tell you about what is the state one has to achieve. As Shri Krishna has said ir in
the Gita, describing 'Sthita Pragya', in the second chapter but it's very difficult to understand. It's nor
so clear cut as your mother is. So pcople don't understand what he said and they ask the question,
How? How do you reach the state of 'Sthita Pragya'? How do you get to that stage?" But Gyaneshwara,
Vol. IX Issue 1-2
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 when he wrote his Gyaneshwari, he called it as the "Sahaj sthiti", means the state of Sahaj. He didn't
call it sthita pragya. He called it as Sahaj sthithi, meaning the state of Sahaj. So he describes the Sahaj
in a very beautiful manner, very subtle. Of course, Gyaneshwara also very few people understand. A
person who reaches that state is like a mirror and so many faces pass over that mirror. So many look
into that mirror. So many decorate in front of the mirror, but mirror is the same as it is. So the
who is a sthita pragya, as the person who is Sahaj, is not bothered about what is facing him, who if
facing, where he is. He stays within himself. He contains within himself. Like the sun. If the sun
plays with his different rays, he's not lost. Afl the rays then return to him. In the same way all the
senses that we have, all the senses that are there, do play around but for a person who is in a Sahaj
state, it docsn't matter, makes no difference. He's not involved. He just plays around again all of them
come back. This is the state you all have to achieve. Then you are really Sahaj Yogis. But I still find
people lost, getting money out of Sahaj Yoga. Some people lost getting our of leadership. Some are
lost in getting jcalousies, envies and all that. So that means, lot of work has to be done, still, within.
There is no need to work, as such, if you leave everything. Thar's why I always say
because when you meditate, what happens is that all these things that are pulling you down are
finished. Gradually they disappear because you become your self. You get contained by yourself. You
are never board, I'm never bored. I don't know what it means. When it is with you or alone, I never
get bored. What is there to get bored? It you are not involved into anything, you never
person
"Meditate",
bored.
get
Another thing is, you rise above all these things, like greed. Now people who are greedy are still
involved in making money here, making money there and all that. Those people who are still full of
lust are still making, organising some things like that. But in a Sahaj sthiti, you just watch; you are
just a witness. You are not lost into anything that is pulling you down. This state is not difficult to
achieve for you at all, because you have crossed over your mind. Now all these things come to you
through your
mind
mind. I've already said that mind is a myth which you must accept. Myth is that this
gives you ideas. Some people think "Yes Mother, but", this 'but' is coming from your mind.
The brain is reality, but not the mind, the mind says 'bur' and then you start feeling very depressed
sometimes, unhappy. Because some people feel even bad bccause they're very good people, that there
are so few Sahaj Yogis. Doesn't matter. Just watch and this watching state, this witness state, is the
Sahaj. In that you become to subtle, you become yourself, meaning so subtle, that nothing can
disturb you. Nothing can change you. Now see the nature, as it is, you know there are 92 elements.
And 92 elements, none of them can be, say, for example; you cannot make silver into gold or gold
into silver. The atoms are so arranged that they have certain valencies and apart from atom, even,
molecules are so arranged that they have their own structure, you cannot change. If you try to change
then you'll create bombs, atomic bombs. It's absolutely destructive. It's only human beings who can
change, who can transform. Now look at the blessings, that you are a human being and you can be
transformed, and you can be made into a new element, thar is the self. This is the speciality of human
beings. But if somebody has false Guru, who tries to do something with you, you'll explode. I've seen
pcople who have been to false gurus. They still faint, they still have problems, they still get trouble
more than people who have been withour that. They have also improved. But this is one thing one
should understand that in one way when you are analysing and when you are breaking an atom or
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issue 1-2
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 you're breaking a molecule and trying to transform, it explodes. It doesn't workout. The other
round is that, when you try to synthesize, then you can form anything in the nature. Like this has
now been brought out by synthesizing. This plastic is created by synthesizing. Matter can be synthesized
and can be brought together and human beings are to get synthesized also. They can be synthesized
better than matter, because they change, thcy transform. Now see, for example, there is gold. You
make anything out of it. Gold is gold. It is there. It is not that by changing it into ornaments it
changes. But for human beings, they get transformed when they are synthesized.
way
There's a very big difference between the matter and the nature and human becings. Matter, nature are
different absolutely, from human beings. Human beings, once they are transformed it's like a living
process, they become like flowers. But still it is not what you see in the nature. It's not the same as
you see in the nature because nature doesn't have a mind, it is just Lnder the control of the Divine,
nature is working out that way. But here you are under your own control. Here you can control
yoursclf. In this synthesis which is going on inside, what you find that you are completely in control
of yoursclf. You know what is happening to you. Now you start seeing yoursclf separating from all
these things. Some people come and tell me "Mother, my ego is very bad. You just take it out". He
sees what the problem is. Somebody says, "Mother my nabhi is very bad I'm still busy with the
money". He sees it.
First starts the knowledge about yourself, we call it self-knowledge. But one has to even go beyond
self-knowledge. By that knowledge what do you will do? We have to see. When you have the knowledge,
first we say there's no knowledge. There's ignorance, there's darkness. Now the light has come. You
can see. You can know what's wrong. Now you start separating yourself from all those things that
you see as wrong within you. You see them. So many non sensical things there are, like we have
jealousy, envy, greed, lust. It is horrible to say such things on Diwali day.
Diwali is, that one by one so many lights are enlightened and you start seeing it first. First you start
seeing what is wrong with you. And then as you see you don't want it, then you work out to get rid
of it, to become clean. Now this knowledge disappears. You don't have to have any knowledge;
you've there, you're there. Thcre is no need to know about your chakras, you're just there. At that
nothing matters. You become just like a stone. I can say- stone with a brain intact and a heart
intact and a liver intact. You just don't mind anything don't get upset with anything. You just enjoy
the love and compassion that's good. And the ripples that come back to you, even that is lost after
sometime and you just are nothing but Sahaj. That is the state people achieved. In those days they
achieved this state but with that one bad thing happened, they got lost, they all get lost. They
couldn't do anything to others. One person getting it, becoming great-finished. Or two persons at
the most. So now Sahaj Yoga stands first of all at the knowledge state where you have the knowledge.
First of all you should have full knowledge about yourself. The self knowledge should be complete.
State,
In the third state, when the knowledge is full, you should get rid of all those things that you know
about yourself which are useless, which are hampering your progress, which you know is wrong.
Like I see some dirt falling on my sari, I just clean it out. Then you start separating yourself into that
Sahaj state.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issue 1-2
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Still, in Sahaj Yoga, you devclop another dimension which is collective consciousness. That is the
modern Sahaj Yoga. In the olden days, they didn't have this. So they just all got lost. Now you have
collective consciousness and in that collective consciousness you start feeling others, fecling for others,
compassion for other and, you start working out for others. In that also sometimes, you know, when
you are working around and thinking how much money can I make, what I can achieve as a leader, or
some sort of thing, you've still there. But this collective consciousness starts growing. When it starts
growing, then you become drop in the ocean, means complete occan. So the ocean has its own
maryadas, it doesn't bother. It has to live with maryadas, it lives with its marvadas. It doesn't want to
cross any boundaries, all right, accepted, it will not cross its boundaries. In the same way it happens,
are very self contained. You are not selfish but you become very self-contained. You are
that
you
contained within yourself. I know many Sahaj Yogis are angry that I have not punished many horrible
people who have been troubling Sahaj Yoga. I don't have to bother. This Param Chaitanya which is
doing lot of work, it will look after it. Why should I bother about anyone. You sce after all, things are
working out, so why to interface. My job is just to watch, just to see. That's sufficient. There's no
need for me to kill anybody in this life time, or to destroy. They are destroyed by themselves. I've told
you that I need not expose people, bur which ever country I go, I find people get exposed.
God knows what more is going to comc. Even littlc attention on any country, it just works out; even
without my knowledge - oh my God, I said, when did I do that. So one has to become the power
of Divi love, left to this Divine Power which is working, which is also separated from me. I'm
alone, abolutely alone; even this power is separated from me; but this power knows what is good
for human beings, what is good for Sahaj Yoga, it works on its own. I don't interfere. It's a reflex
action. May be you might say, Mother you have made it. Oh all right, whatever it is. But I don't
interfere with it. I don't have to tell anything to it. It just works and it's working so well. Ill
example. Once in England, long time back they said "Mother, we want to have a really long summer",
I said why do you want to ask such things? No, No, mother, we must have long summer, 3/4 times
they said it and it was a very long horrible summer in London and it's nor like India where we have
fans, something, at least hand fans. We had a be little gallery, we used to sleep in that. We went to the
shop in London city and we asked for a fan they said, after 3 months after your order, after 3 month
when it will be very cold, then they'll give us the fan, we don't want any fans. My daughter sent two
fans by plane and that's how we managed. This summer heat was so tremendous, that after that one
thing good happened, that ochre color appeared on the leaves and then gradually the red and all that.
The autumn season was best at that time and than one Sahaj Yogi dreamt that Mother asked mnc to
drive in her backyard. I telephoned to him; I didn't know what he had dreamt like can you come
along far a while, I want to go see this autumn all over England. Can you imagine? The whole
England was filled with the bcauty of autumn. So even if something like that happens it is compensated
and so beautiful it was, all the people were out in the autumn to see the beautiful colours of the
narure, of different greenery, yellow, ochre all kinds of colors were there. Surprisingly in that
you'd never see all that, but because of the sun shining so bright, it was compensated by this
give an
country,
Param Chaitanya.
The Param Chaitanya is looking after this, all these things are managed by Param Chaitanya. I am
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issue1-2
• 10 -
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 doing nothing. I am 'Nishkriya. I'm just sitting down and watching. To me nothing matters. You see
it's working out slowly and steadily If you tell me something, supposing they said, "Mother we
prayed to you and it happened", all right may be. These people must have heard around me, not me
you see and they must have done the job and for that, I'm not responsible.
Everything, you think I do, is not done by me, it is done by this Param Chaitanya because I'm also
separated from you, completely, absolutcly separated. So they say you pray now, you can pray
pray, you pray to these deities that are around, you pray to all these ganas and all that, not to mc,
because I have nothing to do with it. They don't tell me that I have to do this or I have to do that So
why should I tell them do this or do thar? It is like thar and in that state if you can stay you are in
Sahaj state, when you don't desire anything, you don't want anything. I do everything, all kinds of
things I'm doing. Like the sun, if he's doing, I'm doing in the sense that I'm looking after the things
flowers, this that and also rcceiving preseES from you and receiving this from you and then I don't
receive anything. I don't have anything. I've no interest in it. You want to pur flowers, all right, you
can have flowwers even if there are flowers or not, makes no difference to me as a person, I am saying,
But as your mother I love you, all of you I lovc, but I don't do anything as such to love
everybody says, "Mother you love us sa much". When did I love you? But you always say,
very much. Who is working it our is something which is not me, it's beyond me. This is the state in
which, once we rise, we'll call as Sahaj sthiti.
If you
and
you
I love you
In the Sahaj Stithi, you think, you are doing nothing; everything is working out, but at this state if
I tell
you oh, we are not doing anything. Why should we spread Sahaj Yoga? It's not our job, now, it's
not your sthiti, that's why. So you have to rise up to that state. Thar's only possible when vou are in
the knowledge state, where you have self knowledge. The knowledge of the whole world. But you
have to go beyond that. Then you must have seen many a times, I just say something and it is there,
I never feel vibrations of anyone or anything. I don't feel my Kundalini either, nor any chakras
nothing. But I know, automatically like a computer but that computer also I am not. That's the
trouble. It's difficult to explain to you what this sthiti is, because you have to achieve it. Once vou
achieve it,
also you cannot enjoy
then
you are in a very subtle state and that subtle stare is nothing but bliss but that bliss
I don't know how to enjoy everything. Supposing now you say, "Jai Shri Mataji", I forger even you
are calling me. I also say, "Jai Mataji". Finished. See it is such a simple thing. One has to understand
that a state in which one has to rise, is state where, without doing anything, cverything works out. If
that is your state, all right, it's not so. You have to rise up to that state by doing, first you have to do
it. First you have to know. Then knowledge has no need. Don't have to know, but first that has to be
worked our and brought to that level.
Now Diwali has the significance that on Diwali Day, what we do, we put lights all over, so that we
put Sahaj Yoga everywhere. But does the light know about itsclf? Does the candle know about itself?
She enlightens everything but she docsn't know. Like the moon, giving moonlight, does it know
itself? Does it enjoy? In the same way it happens that on the Diwali Day what you are doing is
enlightening people, you are doing all this for them. It's a good idea. You must do it. But also know
Vol IX Issue 1-2
11·
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 that you have to become the lamp yourself which doesn't know yourself. So there are two
messages. The first one is thar we have to enlighten the world. We have no enlighten others. That's
the first one. Then we have to become that, which is the light itself and light doesn't know itself that
it's the light. I am the light, I don't know myself. That's the state that you don't know you are the
light. This doesn't come into your head; even so many times you have sung. You have said, 1000
names there are, everything, but doesn't come into my head that this is me you're talking about. Now
when I say this, I do not know how you will react? May be that your ego might come up and you'll
say, yes, yes, I am also just the same. There are many who come like that, that I am higher than Mataji,
there
who said that I am Kalki. Now-a-days there's one fellow going around saying I'm Kalki,
many
I'm this, that all right, docsn't matter. You be that; very good idea. But if I say I'm Adi Shakti, that
means I don't know what I am; really, I had to say because people said, "Mother you have to declarc".
Declare what? What I am, that I am. Now I find that by declaration, you people started growing
more, all right, have it then. But there is no need for anyone to declare anything or to say anything.
That is the state one has to achieve. But to get to that state, you have to work and the work is to
spread Sahaj Yoga. You have to enlighten many lights. That means you will realise that you are the
light which is enlightening other and then, in a sublte way you'll realise, "That I am the lighr". Many
Sahaj Yogis are doing a lot of work and working it out spreading Sahaj Yoga. It's a very great thing
that has happened. In so many countries the way it has spread, it has removed the darkness of religion
which was outside. There's darkness of racialism, this "that", that "ism". So this has worked out the
cleansing for you to have the clean water to swim. Once you start doing that then you realise gradually
that, now the sea is clean, we just watch, we just see how it is working.
I hope in your life time only you achieve this state, where you achieve your complete work of Self-
Realisation to others. Those who do not give self-realisation of others, who just come for the Pujas,
are mediocres. They cannot rise very high. Coming to Puja what? You just rise higher with the
puja,
again you go down, but those who steadily grow will grow into this state, I'm sure. In my
lifetime I should be able to sce some people who are such that if they stand here, they emit peace, they
emit light. They emit every thing, because they are the light. They don't have to enlighten but they
are the light. Such a state has to be developed and worked out within yourself and this state has been
described by so many poets, so many saints but they were not at that stage and people thought what
is this they are talking. They thought they were mad. Even for Christ they thought he needs to be
So
then
SO
crucified because they couldn't understand. Now you are gradually growing, one by one,
step.
now you understand. You understand Christ. You understand all these people and at this state you
have still to work. Those who do not wörk for Sahaj Yoga cannor rise higher, you have to work for
Sahaj Yoga. You have to spread it more, you have to work it out, enjoying cach other, Unless and
achieve that state you cannot really rise higher to that state which I described, as the Sahaj
until
you
sthiti.
Today is the day Mahalaxmi. The first thing. I think, is this madness about money. It should be
Lnderstood that it's really madness. You ask a rich man, he says, "Oh I have no moncy". Right? What
is this. You ask the poor man, he has no money. Rich man has no money. So it's a kind of a greed
which is never satisfied. All these little things have to first drop out. Then your work should cleanse
Vol. IX Issue 1-2
• 12 -
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 you. In your work you'll know, whether you are cleansing are not. In the work you will know how
you arc doing everything. Cnce that is done, then some of you will achieve that state in my lifetime.
Today, on the Diwali Day, I want to tell you that we have to become subrler and subtler. We should
not be influenced by outside. Like the outside thing is that some sort of a fashion starts. People who
follow fashions, are stupid. They are like blind mices. Anybody can lead them into anything. Now do
this, they do that. So if you try to follow any kind of a thought which is given to us by somebody
else, in that thought, you'll completely lose yourself and you become, "I am Hindu. I am Christian, I
am Muslim", stupidity. You are your self. You are the spirit and when you become the spirit, then you
start knowing so and that knowledge is very important. This is the gap between a Saint and a normal
human being, which you have crossed gradually. So you know what the problems of the human
beings are and dealing with human beings and you know how to deal with them.
In Sahaj Yoga only the collective consciousness in modern times has come. This collective consciousness
also the saints had, but they would not say anything. They would not bother, all right this fellow has
this chakras, let him go to hell, docsn't care. It's not a question of not caring bur not bothered. They
were sitting in a state that was just recording, all right. An ugly man goes before the mirror, all right,
if a beautiful person goes before the mirror, is all right. In the same way, these people sat.
But we have to understand that still we have to grow. We have to still grow by working it out. Those
people who are working it out and spreading it all over are the ones which all really, very much there
and to them, the Param Chaitanya is just thcir servant. I have seen people who desire something. It
works out. They ask for somcthing, it works out. For that now, what should we have is the point?
After getting realisation, after getting everything what should we have that we develop is the faith.
Faith in yourself. Faith in that you are the spirit, that you have the light and you have to enlighten
others. This faith, when it grows deeper and deeper, then you think, oh what I'm, I am the spirit. If
you are the spirit, then this whole nature is with you. I know of some Sahaj Yogis. One of them was
a fisherman, who has tremendous faith in me and somehow he was going to another village to do
Sahaj Yoga work. When he came out of his little hut, he found it's all full of black clouds. He raised
his hand and said, "Sce now, I'm going for Mother's work and you dare not start raining. You keep as
you are hanging there till I finish my work. Because he was going by boat, and other Sahaj Yogis
thought what is he talking about? Got in to the boat. They reached the other village. They gave
realisation to others. He finished his lecturing, everything. He came back on the shore and he entered
complete
Whatever
you say will happen, but first you must have complete faith in yourself, that you are a Sahaj Yogi.
Even now I find, you see, people have some lust, some sort of horrible things in them. So first
his house; when he was closing the door, all right now go ahead and he managed. So the
faith that this Param Chaitanya is like your servant is all the time waiting there to serve you.
you
must be established in Dharma. Dharma is, as you know is righteousness. If you are in the
righteousness, there's no question. There's no question that this Param Chaitanya won't obey you,
but supposing you want today, something and it does't work out, then even to get disappointed,
itself, is not a very good thing. Disappointment also is a sign of your immaturity. What is there to be
disappointed? May be that was good for you. Supposing I lose my way. I'm going this way. I lose m
way, I don't know where to go, so I gct lost, it's all right what is there? Wherever I am,I am there.
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Isstie 1-2
13
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 How can I be lost to myself And then what I find? That I had to go that way, because I was to mect
somebody. I'd been wanting to meer somebody and I meet that person there. Can you imagine? Such
things happen with me and even if I don't meet, so what? I was to go that side. I have to give some
vibrations perhaps. It's like that. So once you know thar whatever you are doing, you're in command-
full command, full faith, actually the whole authority comes to you through your faith. The words is
as you know the Truth. The truth give you the authority. If you have the truth with you, the absolute
Truth with you, then you have the authority, And aurhority is such, that authorises you, not others,
but to you. This authority that you have, works and works. I've seen simple Sahaj Yogis, very simple,
uneducated also, are very powerful Sahaj Yogis, but they have one thing, faith, complete faith.
Then another word in Sanskrit in Titiksha – means, patience (saboori), you must have patience. If
you don't have patience you want immediately something to be done. How will you see the whole
thing working out? Many people are extremely jittery and very fast running. This world is running so
fast and you are the ones who have stood out and watching this rat racc. You are not one of them. So
you must have patience. So you must have faith in yourself, fully, and patience to see how Sahaj Yoga
is working out or how this Param Chaitanya is working out. If it works this way, all right. There's
some meaning, if it is that way, it has some meaning.
Now another thing that is important is, the faith in your Guru. If you have faith in your Guru; Param
Chaitanya is kind. But if vou doubt then Param Chaitanya also doubts because Param Chaitanva
knows you through your Guru, whether it is me or any other real Guru, it's the same. But with me,
of course, because you know I'm very forgiving so people start taking liberties. With another
guru,
you see he will beat them. He'll do all sorts of horrible things ro you if you are not there. I've told you
many stories àabout the Guru, how they treat their disciples. But I'm forgiving, I say nothing. I think
that by leaving them alone, they'll risc & they will come up to this stage. But it happens somerimes
that it works the other way round. Forgiven, then they take it for granted. So the faith in yourself is,
with patience you watch and do nor get disappointed with anything, whatsoever. Now just imagine
so many people have got Realisation. So many Saints in this world. Have you seen yesterday I was
Surprised the way the French were singing so well! For style I had to take the harmonium to teach
them how to sing one line. Half an hour I tried. I couldn't do it. The same French have reached that
state of creativity. You see all your potential will rise. It will express itself. But be careful not to ger
into ego about it. Gradually it will flower and others who are surrounding you will get the fragrance
of it and they'll come to Sahaj Yoga. That is thc blessings; at that time, the blessings of the real Divine
will be, that you'll be raised to the state which we call as perfect, complete. That completeness mISt
come. But you judge yourself. Are you absolutely one with Sahaj? Are you absolutcly dedicated to
Sahaj? Or other things are more important to you than Sahaj Yoga? Go ahead. There is one thing to
be understood very clearly that there is no completion in Sahaj Yoga. There is no envy, no back
biting. You are all saints, above all these things. You are no dishonest, you cannot cheat people. And
if you are still doing that, then you have still to grow in it. Some people think that they are very high
up in Sahaj Yoga. But it is not so. If you think so, then you are lost. What you have to do is to think,
what have I done? How many people I have given realisation to? How many people I have talked
abour Sahaj Yoa? People are shy of talking about Sahaj Yoga. In parties they cannot say that I am a
Divine Cool Breeze
• 14
Vol. IX 1ssue 1-2
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Sahaj Yogi, I cannor drink. By nature I cannot. So announcement is the third part - faith in yourself
and you must announce. All the saints announced. They were killed for that, but no one can harm
you. Full faith and understanding of Sahaj Yoga, announce. The purpose is to transform the whole
world. With your transformation the whole world will get transformed. Then all this knowledge,
this bliss becomes one. You are in such a bliss without knowing of it. I hope all of you achieve that
state.
With the Diwali being done in Portugal, it is a special place, I think, of Mahalxmi because she
appeared here as they say and also the swyambhu that we have also is that of Mahalaxmi face. So I'm
sure it will work out for all of you. Ir's a little subtle state I'm talking about but it is, I had to tell you
that one has to rise up to that stäte and for you that state is very casy to achieve. Then you don't have
to do anything. You go
Cairo. Everybody was saluting me. I was wondering, what has happened? I went to their village.
Thousands came to my programme: I asked them how did you come to my program? It's obvious
from your face. They just saw a small little advertisement in the newspaper. It is obvious that you are
Divine. And then you can announce that Sahaj Yoga is the only way. They may not be seekers. Does
not matter. I think we're finished with the seekers now. Must be. Must have people who are not so
seeking.
into a village and everything works out. Sce now what happens. I went to
May God Bless You.
Divine Cool Breeze
15
Vol IX Issue 1-2
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 CHRISTMAS PUJA
Talk by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Ganpatipule-25 December 1996
Today we are cclebrating the birth of Jesus Christ. The birth of Jesus Christ is very symbolic because
he was born in such a manner that even the poorest of poor won't be born in the stable. He was pur
in the bed which was made of dried grass. He came on this carth to show people that a person who
Is an ncarnation or who is a highly evolved soul is not bothered about the comfort of the body. His
message was so great and deep but he had disciples who were not prepared for the battle they had to
fight. It is the same thing that sometimes happens with Sahaj Yoga. He had only twelve disciples, we
too have twelve type of Sahaj Yogis. And all of them though tried to dedicate themselves to Christ fell
a trap, some of them, to the worldly aspirations or to their own worldly hankerings.
His message of love and forgiveness is the same even today, preached by all the saints, all the
incarnations, all the prophets. They all have said about love and forgiveness. If it was challenged or
people felt that this won't work out they were asked to have faith. But, they were simple people in
those days, so they obeyed him. Some of them definitcly were very good, some were half baked and
few of them were pcople who were doubting.
He came on this carth to prepare for us our Agnya Chakra and despite all his cfforts one finds it very
difficult that such people who follow Christianity have the worst rype of Agyas, extremely aggressive,
extremely planning type, futuristic. All the troubles of the right side are found in those countries who
Telaim to be Christians.
Even the early Christians who were gnostics, "gn" in Sanskrit mean know, they had the knowledge
they were also tortured and suppressed by the Christians who were supposed to be the in-charge of
Christianity. And so many people were massacared by the so called Christians priests and Christian
churches. And still is going on. What we find in the wvest is a great influence of these churches on the
minds of the pcople. Otherwise they are supposed to be intellectual, analytical, something very
brave, but when it comes to temples and churches, religion of Christianity, their brains are completely
blocked by some sort of mesmerism. They just can't think that there could be something very wrong
with these people. When living in Italy I was shocked, how this catholic church has bcen doing all
kinds of scandals much more than what we have in our country Money bungling, molesting women
and children and every sort of dirty habit! They are supposed to be priests, they are called Fathers,
Mothers, Sisters, Brothers. It was a shock to me, I did not know as how such things are happenings
in the name of Christ? What Christ tried to show through his birth, there's nO need to have very
Comfortable, great birth in a big hospital in London. The simplicity of his birth should have made all
the Christians extremely simple and not at all moncy-oriented. For moncy they went all round,
destroved so many people. When you go to Brazil, Chile or Argentina you do not find a single man
belonging to the Aboriginal people and they are so unkind to them, unbelievable, how aggressive
these people are! Even in England wherc there are Protestants, I find the same thing even among
them, you must go on saying thank vou, thank you morning till evening otherwise you are finished.
Racialism! What was the race of Christ? Was he a fair man? No, was he a white person? Not at all. He
Divine Cool Breeze
16:
Vot. IX Issuc1-2
16•
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 was brown, just like the Indians. From where does this racialism come to these. Wesrerners? It has
nothing to do with Christ or if it is real Christianity.
You go anywhere, you will be surprised how so faithful, simple-hearted people are misused by these
Churches. They are used for Voting, they are used for money for everything; to such an extent, that
money was nmade artificially, counterfeited in billions by the Church itself. Such autocracy, such
Control, such authority they had that whatever they did, the Pope is infallible, whatever he does is
alright. No idea of sinning, no idea of hell, no idea of Christ, which was nothing but purity
innocence. Christ had taken a hunter in this hand and hit all the people who were sellirng in front of
the temple because he said God cannot be sold, they were nor selling God, they were selling only
goods, but he talked about the respect of the temple.
and
for killing Christ. They put all the blame
Another great thing Christians have done is to blame Jews
on others. This is the speciality of Christians even today, to put the blame of what wrong they are
doing on orhers; this is what you sce very clearly in those cOuntries who call themseclves Christians.
First of all, those who were Jews that time might have been Indian later on. Alright, they don't
believe in reincarnation. Secondly you mean to say the same Jews who were there are born again?
Thirdly the Jews never killed Christ, because in a multitude how can you decide? It was the judge
who decided and ordered. He was a Roman. The Roman empire didn't want to take the responsibility
of his death, so they said Jews have killed. So, Mr. Hitler gor out and he rcally tortured them. It was
too much, can't even understand how he believed in catholic religion, and how could he kill small
little children in the gas chamber? But now the same people who were tortured are also becoming
very aggressive and they are against the Palestinians and the Palestinians on their own are Muslims
and the Muslim are playing a havoc all over. When you go through the historv and scc the life of
Christ what you find is aggression from one to another If somebody slaps somebody then thar
person will try to kill that person. This religion has created this divisiveness., People are just killing
cach other in the name of God and religion. Even in Sahaj Yoga people are taking advantage of my
name or trying to get into some mesmeric groups. So beware, this should not happen to you. Using
the name of Christ, the incarnation of Divine love, they are doing all works of violence, hatred,
cheating, From one to another it passes, same thing happens in Sahaj Yoga. If I told somebody that
Vou are no more a leader, somebody elsc is a leader, immediately that person gets angry, he forgets
what good Sahaj Yoga has done to him. If I tell him the leadership powers should pass to somebody
else, finished. He forgets what Sahaj Yoga has done for him and that he is living only because Sahaj
Yoga has helped him. So, this leadership goes into the heads of people. Sahaj Yoga is nor here to make
Icaders out of
inconvenient, we have to change them, thats all. As simple as that. But still I find this idea of authority
something very great and they start using it left and right. It is happening practically in every country,
has happened and is still happening, which is a very sad thing. This will never bring forth my efforts.
My effort is to synthesize the whole not to divide. Whatever is wrong, whatever is unholv, has to be
brought to your notice. You see, when a housewife cleans the rice there are some white stones in it,
she just takes them out: WWe don't cook rice with theose stones. Such stones have to go out. Some of
them are just like stones. You cannot change them. Namadeva has said they are like a fly, who when
lives gives us trouble by coming on our food and if by mistake we take it inside our stomach it is
you; no, never. It is just for convenience that we have leaders and if they become
Divne Cool Brecze
Vol. IX Isstie 1-2
•17•
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 dead, but still it troubles us. These are all Rakshsas. They can never understand Sahaj Yoga and they
will always try to trouble us. But what the people, who have achieved Sahaj Yoga, should do. Should
they also take to such methods? I have never blamed anyone for anything, like people say,
didn't give any money to Sahaj Yoga, so he has lost all his wealth. I never said like that. He should
have donated some money. I never asked for donations, I never asked for money. Every time I
don't give, its sufficient. I have never asked for a single pie, from anyone to be given to me even when
I nceded because I know I don't have that problem.
Mother, he
say,
From the life of Christ one has to understand, he had no problems. He was fearless. He knew he was
the son of God, he faced everything, even his crucifixion. People liked his crucifixion or not, they
carried the cross. Of course, it is the transformed symbol of Swastika, no doubt, but still he had to
sacrifice his life! He sacrificed his life for all of us so that we could cross over our Agnya. The
condemnation if you do is not of others but of yourself. We can call that as a crucifixion of ours by
which we see, as Sahaj Yogis, where are we. I am told there are some 80-90 Sahaj Yogis who have
come, who are mesmerised by some people. How could Sahaj Yogis may mesmerised? Is it possible?
They may not be doing meditation. How can they get into it? Now they are asking for forgiveness.
I forgive, but that docsn't mean they will be alright. We cannot mix them anymore. We do not put
spoilt apples with the good ones, do we? There is no wisdom. They are sploit and should keep out till
I say. They should not attend any collectivity, any Puja. They should let them cleanse themselves.
Though a rotten apple cannor get well, they can. They should try to understand that thcy were not
Sahaj Yogis. If a Sahaj Yogi can get mesmerised, then what's the use of doing Sahaj Yoga? What is the
use of getting your Kundalini raised? In this respect western Sahaj Yogis are much better.
It is a thing of jubilation because Christ came as a saviour, he did everything that's possible under the
sun. For us,
Yogis go on demanding, Mother we can't even meet you, we can't even shake hands with you, we
can't even fall at your feet, we can't do this, we can't do that. It surprises me. You must do this, you
must do that, all the time lecturing to me. What you must do is meditate and to believe that this
Param Chaitanya is my power, that you have felt My power within you. The more you are away
from me, the better you will be. Absolutely I can't understand the demanding nature of some Sahaj
Yogis. They have got their Jagruti, which would never have happened.
its alright but whar about Him? What did we give Him? In the same way, Many Sahaj
At this time we have to understand that such a great incarnation came on this earth. Of course, he
couldn't give realisation. Imagine the people who were abour to crucify him. How could he
give
realisation? Supposing somebody comes with a dagger at me, can I give him realisation? Nobody
listened to them, nobody thought anything of them. But not you, you people have got your realisation,
you are born-again people, you are great people, your potential is there. Instead of utilising that now
what are you doing? How many people are really involved in Sahaj Yoga? Introspect. They have their
business, they have their own this thing, that thing, how many are really involved in Sahaj Yoga? He
had only 12 disciples except for 1 to 2 all of them dedicated. Without realisation dedicated themselves
fully to the work of Christianity and it spread out. Because they had not much idea about the whole
thing. The Christians that they had were just converts. If they did not do any justice to the birth of
Christ, one can understand. But what about you people who are born twice, who have got self-
knowledge, who are so equipped with all the powers, who are connected with this all pervading
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issue 1-2
18 ·
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 power of Divine Love. All your powcrs can be utilised, can be known. Its like sonme dynamic machine
which has started. Few wheels are moving but there are so many wheels after wheels and so much vou
can do, I can't blame the Christians. After all they never got their awakening, only some priest would
get some water, put it on their head and baptise them. But what about vou people: I have lived
because of you because I wanted to see that you people mature. That's the idea of the Mother There
are many who have matured but still manV have to be matured. Docsn't mean that vou should be alble
to give big lecrures or write big books but within vourself you should mature. Your own personality
should flower into the fragrance of love and divinity. This is the difference between me and Christ.
He said, "I have had enough, no more of the stupid people". Not me, I knew, what was tlhe world like.
I knew what had happened to this world. Today the world is much worse because all the leaders are
fighting amongst themselves. Firstly all the politicians are badly corrupt, competing in that corruption,
nobody has sense of truth and honesry, everybody is involved in the advertisement, media, newspaper,
which is the nmost corrupting influence today With all this backgroundI know by the vear 2000
Sahaj Yoga will come out in the world as somcthing very great. (Clappings). You did not allow me to
complete the sentence. If you pcoplc become real Sahaj Yogis; all of you. All of vou who are attending
me, here. It doesn't matter if I cannor go to your places and meet vou personally, it docsn't matrer
nothing matters. Christ's disciples worked as if he never existed. It is not important. What is important
Is that you are people who are responsible for the emancipation of this world, for the svnthesis of this
world, to bring pcace, joy and happiness.
Just now when I was coming, people spread the shawls. It reminded me of when Christ came they
brought palm leaves to wish him and spread their shawls on the ground for him and where does he
o? To the gallows, to the cross, to his dearh. When you show your love for me, vou have to know
that you have to love the whole work of Sahaj Yoga It's not some personal relationship with me that
is going to work out. All these Western countries which are under the influence of Christianity will
go down, are going down already because there is no morality. There's recession, all kinds of problems,
their ehildren are wayward, they are drinking, smoking, even their influence on us is corrupting. It is
nothing but anti-Christ activity. Who is the anti-Christ? There is an anti-Christ within us who accepts
all these things which arc against the purity and love of Christ.
Christ said love thy neighbour, as vou love yourself. In the West, if vou have a neighbour vou had it.
He will try to find out where you go, what you do, he will have a binocular to sce. If you make any
noisc, vou are finished. But, cven if you sing, you are finished. In that way Indians are better. We
don't have that noise difficult, they don't mind. I have found out the reason and it is that in the west
people are under stress and strain and that's why they can't bear. But in India people don't know what
this stress and strain is, still that has not developed, I don't know how, to that extent. That discase has
Not come. That might be the reason why they are so much frightened of noises, People will come
from villages here they will sleep on the station, nothing happens, the trains are coming
We had a neighbour his name was Mr. Peace; I don't know who gave him that name. Such contradictions
in life, I don't know, how will they learn how to love their neighbours. Indians do, somchow they
don't have this problem, not much. But if there is music supposing, all thc neighbours will join,
bring tea, bring this, they will enjoy the music. But there the collectivity is so little I think, I can't
Lunderstand how can they call themselves Christians. Only they go to Church, well dressed. And our
and
19 -
Vol. IX Issuer1-2
Divine Cool Brecze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Mayor told me that for 15 min. hardly we can sit, start looking at their watches, 15 min. and after
one hour we run out of the jail. And how these people are sitting with you for hours together. I mean
they are not so collective. Unless and until they get intoxicated, they cannor talk to each other. They
all the time tired. They get so tired you sce them in the films or anywhere, they come, sit and
yawn; young pcople all the time thinking, thinking, which comes from Agnya which comes from
anti Christ activity, anti Christ. Thinking, thinking, thinking, what should we do tomorrow, what is
to be done and all that. Still, we have to hope that this kind of religion will finish. All such religions
must finish. They have to go now. They are so full of anti-religious temperament that you just cannot
bear them. It is better to finish all religions, all isms, one after another.
are
To what religion did Christ belong? You belong to one religion which is Sahaj Which is the universal
religion, which is pure religion, which is born within you. You don't belong to any other religion
because there is no religion in that. So, by the time 2000 years I hope all these religions will run away
from this earth. All of them fighting for nothing, killing each other for nothing. They want to fight,
they like to fight. Why blame Quran, why blame Bible, why blame anyonc they want to fight. They
want to have separate nations, separate communitics separate this. Once you start of separating you
are anti-Christ absolutely. In Sahaj Yoga you are one identity, you are to separate country separate
organisation, separate this. It doesn't exist in my own idea, I never thought of it. We are all children
of one Father-and of one Morher. Wc have no business to think we are separate. Even now I sce
groups are made very easily, how? The groups are made like Maharashtrians sitting together. Indians
are quite separatists, by temperament North Indians also have separate ideas. You must come to
Indore, why? Is it not a part of India? They can't come to Delhi? You must go to every village, every
place. Why? You are born todđay in Delhi, tomorrow you will be born in some horrid place. Then this
place is my house that's another headache. You must come to me, önce you start that you are finished.
This is a very common programme even today, that if you see around yourself, must see people from
your own country. In Sahaj Yoga who is the other? We are all one, and this unity you have to learn if
you really love me, and Christ. All the groupism and all-that has to end now amongst Sahaj Yogis. We
are all one identiry, we are all one living body, we are all one organism. We cannot say we are separate.
Can this hand separate from the body? Can it exist? Once you start giving it up, you will be surprised,
you will have real enjoymnent. But once vou have all these ideas about my, mine you cannot even
enjoy Sahaj Yoga, cannot enjoy anybody else. My wife, my children, my house, this that. That awakening
has to come within you. I don't belong to this country. Many girls and boys have written
Indian marriage only, the age of the woman is 35 years, now where will I find a husband for her in
India? I give you choice, alright, have a choice. I also have a choice. I can't marry you. That is my
choice. You have the freedom to say where you want to marry, alright, marry. But as far as I am
concerned, I can't marry you like that. You have to marry wherever there is a good match for you.
Many Indian girls have married Indian boys and suffered a lot. We have not even been able to
organise one marriage of a Hindustani with Hindustani. Not possible. Why don't you find in your
own community somewhere, same thing? As in India very particular. Like when my daughter was to
bç married they said no, he is not
Srivastava as you. Even if he is the same Srivastava, now this thing is different I mean, I said this
thing is going too far. Because I had all my clders living with me and they were after me. I said
whether Srivastava or not Srivastava, I am going to marry them, finished. My husband agreed. Same
we wish
a Srivastava. Even if he is a Srivastava also, he is not the same
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol IX Issue1-2
20-
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 my grand children. If you get Srivastava, very good, otherwise forget it. Maharashtrians also,
same thing, Maharashtrians who have become Christian, also the same. Now they are saying we are
'dalit Chrisrians. Means who were converted from the lower castes into Christianity. Now a new
caste has come. Once you have become Christians what is your cast? You are Christians, not that,
there are dalits and there are higher Christians. They will not marry in the dalit and dalit won't marry
in the higher. Supposed to bc Christians following Christ, going to church regularly, well dressed.
Even if they do not have a proper suit, they must wear like the English some suit,
to church. Because according to Indian Christians, Christ was born in England. Really you won't
believe. Unless and until you wear a suit and a tie, you can't go to church. Can you imagine anybody
with a dhoti to church? Impossible. India women cannot do without the sarces, but they were
with
borrow it and
go
going
forced, so many were married the way the English marry. Now I was amazed, even the Japanese who
come to Australia dress up the way the English brides do and get married because they are Christians.
That shows they believe that Christ was born in England or what? Actually for Christians its not
necessary to worry about any dress. All this nonsense comes from the west that you must dress up
like this, you must have you spoon here, fork there. Did Christ eat with fork and spoon? He was born
in the manger. Its not even possible to understand these people are Christians so much worried
about the spoons and forks and they come to your house for dinner, they lift the plate to see from
what company you have bought it. Very important. Such silly people, they call themselves Christians.
Christ was born in the manger.
One must understand the greatness of his birth in which he has shown that he was born with the
cows tied thcre and the calves were there. You can make out a Christian in no time, see them on
Sunday morning. The way my father opposed it, he used to wear a kurta. Because Christ wore kurta,
he didn't wear a suit. Indians have at least certain sense of dignity. If you have any, why should
wear a suit on a May day in this heat. We are Sahaj Yogis we have to wear a common dress of a
common man. Whom are we going to impress except this Param Chaitanya? They are extremely
superficial, extremely, meticulously particular about their dress, how they live, is really horrible. I
have seen this and that is the reason I think I should warn you. Don't take to the culture, that is anti
Christ culture. In every way they have insulted Christ. You people should not in any way insult Christ
in any way you live.
What is the message of Christ, that you develop your spirituality, your divinity by which you know
what is the dignity of Sahaj Yogi. He was your eldest brother. His life-style you should follow.
Absolutely not afraid of anything, not worried about any job, not worried about any business,
nothing, absolutely free from all this. There are so many beautiful examples of his life. But when we
see Christians and try to reflect it as an expression of the life of the Christ that is where we make
mistake. They are by no means following Christ. As Sahaj Yogis we have a different culture. We have
a culture where we respect morality, we have dignity, we have our own personality, we are fearless, we
don't tell lies, we don't cheat and we can never get mesmerised. We can call it the Mother's culture,
which is not in any way showing off, in any way taking to artificial things. The whole thing will
change, the whole concept will change, the whole idea will change, once you understand that
have the Mother's culture..
c
you
you
I never asked you for presents, nothing. Forcing the presents on my head, alright, for you joy sake,
Vol. IX Issue 1-2
21
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Vou have it. But one thing I must request these Maharashtrians they are not to give me any more,
again, any more what they call Oty. My Oty is overfull. Absolutely, nobody has to give me Orv: If
somebody gets married, somebody has a child they will give the Oty. There is no need to give any
Ory to me, you can go to the temple, give youur Oty there and its is resold and resold. In between,
sellers and Brahmins who are the pujaris, make money.
the
On a Christmas Day I have to say one thing, what did we give to Christ, and the second question
what are we going to give tO Mother? This is very important. I don't want anything from vou,
nothing. I am fully content with mysclf. Whhat I want is Vou must dedicate vourself to Sahaj Yoga, to
Truth and to Love, also not to talk like what Christ has called murmuring souls. Talking herc, there,
all this I don't like, it should not be done and if vou do like this, vou will fall. Fall very badly, this is the
last judgement, cither you go to heaven or you will go to hell. Its already working out like that, now
ler us see, where are you. I have to again and again tell you as your Mother, correct you thar remeniber,
this is the last judgement and please do not take anymore to the activities which are anti Christ. You
can judge within yoursclf whatever you are doing is not good and for that best thing is to dedicate
yourself to Sahaj Yoga but not to make money out of Sahaj Yoga, not to make politics out of Sahaj
Yoga but make Sahaj Yoga like a huge big tree and it will work out, it has to work out, vou have the
potential, that's why you are here.
May God Bless You.
Vol IX Issue 1-2
Divine Cool Breeze
22
