DIVINE COOL BREEZE Volume IX 1997 issue 3 & 4 ya Saiij Vogi i Meson, just befare a prrja, skwzes the Kiundalini ppeuring in the sky This plotograpi, ctitkef hy "What you must do is to meditate and to believe that this Param Chaitanya is my Power, that you have felt my power within you". H.H Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Christ Puja – 1996

 Divine Cool Breeze Issue 3-4 1997 Volume IX Contents Birthday Puja 1 10 Shivratri Puja Medical Conference 16 St. Petersberg, Russia 21 108 Names of Shri Krishna Edited by Yogi Mahajan Published by: Divine Cool Breeze 9 Bhagyachintamani Soc. Paud Road, Kothrud Pune 411 029 Printed by: Printek Phototypesetters 4A/1, Rajinder Nagar New Delhi 110 060 Phones : 5784866, 5710529

 BIRTHDAY PUJA Talk By H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Delhi 21-3-1997 (Synopsis, translated from Hindi) When the whole world sleeps a Sahaj Yogi is awake and when the world is awake a Sahaj Yogi sleeps. This mcans that those things towards which a Sahaj Yogi is inclined, other people are not inclined. They are inclined towards other things. In some way or the other they are disinclined (vimukh) from the truth. Someone is caught up with money, someone with power, they are caught up with one thing or another and are completely lost; away from the truth. They cannot see the truth. Someone will say this is the reason, someone will say that is the reason, some explanation or the other. However I think, God knows what all a man does in his ignorance. A sort of darkness envelops. Like for example, if this place is plunged into darkness, God knows there might be a stampede, people may fall, get trampled over, anything can happen. When we are in this darkness we are asleep. But when we are awake, when our Kundalini is awakened and when we are confronted with the truth , nobody can explain the beauty of truth. Lasked somebody what did you get out of Sahaj Yoga? He said, "I can't tell youu what Igot but I have got everything." What does everything mean? I will also say that today, in Sahaj I have got everything.When I was small, I used to tell My father that it is My desire that like the stars in the sky, many people on earth should also shine and spread the light of God. He said, it is possible, you find a method for en-masse awakering; don't give lectures, don't write anything or else you Vou will have a second Bible, a second Qoran and there will be a thing to fight about. So, before this there should be en masse awakening and the task of en masse awakening has started in Sahaj. But, the problems of this, I have to discuss with you to day. It is a thing of great pleasure that there has been en masse awakening and everywhere people, in great numbers, have found out the truth and in that bliss, we have not been selective. We opened the door and all sorts of people entered and brought their dirt with them. When even a few people like this come they cause a lot of damage. Saints like Namadeva had said that those who are bad can never become good. Their habits can never become good. He said, for example, if a fly sits on your food, it will make you sick and if it dies and you eat it, you will die too. This fly cannot become alright and like this fly a lot of people are very fond of jaggery and they keep running towards it. In Sahaj all these things should drop off. Until they drop off we cannot ascend. If something gets stuck to the wings of the bird, it cannot fly. This is why this sky of bliss which he has called "Raganchal"-the Mother's love, in this you cannot fly like a bird such very elearly Vol. IX Isstte 34 Divine Cool Brecze

 should leave things to Me. Let Me decide if a leader is good or not. But to say why has this leader done this, why is he like that, you do not have the authority to say that. Now someone will say why are there leaders in Sahaj Yoga? They are there because it is not possible for me to associate with evervone, so if there is a person in between, through him I can associate with everyone. So, they got angry with the leaders. If there is something wrong with the leaders, I should correct it, not you. What you should do is to write to Me, But if you do not like your leaders leave Sahaj Yoga. With them 10 more half baked Sahaj Yogis will latch on and then trouble the leader. you should In the same marner, a group was formed and about 70-80 Sahaj Yogis whom I had never seen or heard of before, joined them. Then that person said, I am an incarnation of Kalki. Alight, if you are, so be it, I have nothing to say. But keep away from Sahaj Yoga. There is no place for Sahaj Yoga. These people believed that he was an incarnation of Kalki and started touching his feet änd all that-these are "charanchhoo maharaj", "Paisa Le Maharaj", that is why they become you in so. When they took money, all the faults they were pointing out in the leaders, the same faults were apparent in them and everybody started wondering what was going on? So this sort of jealousy and ambition takes place. But all the foolish Sahaj Yogis got strained into that-since it is the last judgement. About the leaders, that his character is not right, that he misappropriates money, he is like this, like that, more than the CBI. I was surprised. Atleast consult Me. They say well Mother we believe in you, but what I say atleast believe in that. Then these peuple reached Ganapatipule and threw stones at me because when one loses one's mind, one is not aware of what one is doing or saying, like a drunkard. And there they created a scene, came into nmy programme. I felt such bad vibrations. I said are these people in Sahaj Yoga? Instead of improving their own vibrations they were checking other people's vibrations. So such people should leave Sahaj Yoga. Now if such a person stands up, many people follow him, thinking he will lead them to heaven. This is not so. Sahaj is a collective movement. Here if somebody's ear is here, nose is here, hand is here-it's just not going to work out because the Chaitanya does not like this. Then I said "you are rebelling", they said, "you are abusing us?" I said, "I am just describirng you that don't rebel against the Chaitanya." This is why there was an earthquake there. As a Mother I told them that the truth and God will not spare you, I am after all a Mother, you please leave all this. But they are still caught up. In Sahaj Yoga there is no compulsion. I have never even forced the people of my family to take to Sahaj Yoga, although I know that there is nothing greater than this. If you want to take to this, do don't want to, then it is your wish, but don't do these kind of things. This means you SO, if you can never be a Sahaj Yogi. In a way, from a Sahaj point of view, to behave like this towards your leaders is a sin and to formn groups on this basis is a greater sin. If you want, you can write to me, Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issug 34

 I will find out. In fact I know immediately through vibrations, whether you are right or they. They write all kinds of things in their letters. When they write it's so nonsensical, I don't bother. That leader is like that, that one is like that. Are you yourselves a very great soul? Look at yourself, if you are not alright, then what will happen in future? You have children and besides the people around you, what will they think? These kinds of things start and Sahaj Yoga finishes. Till now it has not finished anywhere. We have always tried to save all those who are drowning, the more Sahaj Yogis we have the better. But I also feel that this is a heaven based on truth and to go to this heaven also some preparations are necessary. And if not then there must be shortage of space, so destiny must be doing this job of pushing out the useless people. But you should not get into all you are aware, be aware of yourself, not of others and find out what is wrong Somebody is caught up this if with you. with something like money, people come to Sahaj to earn money. If you tell them that you are not here to earn money, it cannot enter their brains. I will also have to tell you today.that in the money game, people have very little brain. Christ had said that first will be the last and the last will be first. But I don't see any such thing. In the beginning the Sahaj Yogis who came to Bombay, they said Mother atleast take a thousand from each one of us. I said children, I neither know how to count money or how to keep it nor do rupees I know any banking. But if you form a trust, then I will put your money in that. Not that I want to be very honest, but bécause I have no brains to be dishonest. If I don't know how to count money, what should I do? I don't even know how to write a cheque. But you people know that if anyone takes money in the name of religion he can not escape punishment. This money game is very dangerous. So, this time I thought that lots of women who beg on the roads, a lot of Muslim women too, who have been abandoned by their husbands, who take their children with them and beg on the roads and a lot of women who come from Bihar and Rajasthan, we should do some good to them, so we formed an organisation. For this we don't need any money from you people. We have never asked you for any money, it all gets arranged but I thought that you should also receive some blessings, so I said OK, donate Rs. 500 for the cause. But so much fuss was made on it. Mother, who suggested you to decide like that? I received so many letters and phone calls complaining about it. There is nobody who can suggest anything to me. I go according to my will. This you should understand. I look very simple but actually I am very clever! So you should not try to befool me, you people cannot even do this much for Sahaj Yoga? For so many years I cured so many, and gave away so much money, did what all you know, but for such a small thing so many people complained! I felt very sad. Earlier also such a thing has happened, such a lowly behaviour. First Indians especially should take their attention off money to grow in Sahaj Yoga, otherwise there is Divine Cool Brecze Vol. IX Issue 3-4

 a jail bharo andolan' going on. Why is your attention so much on money when I have awakened your Lakshmiji. How much you give that much you shall receive. To give is so joyful 1 cannot tell you. When you give Me something I only take it to make you feel happy. I don't need anything. There is no place in My house to keep anything. You give it out of so much love, I am tired of fighting with you people, of saying don't give me sarees, I don't need anything, I don't need jewellery. I even said I am going to sell all the jewellery, all the jobs will be done by that. They said do whatever You want but we will give You anyway, I am doing it for your joy. I don't want any give and take. When I have not taken I needn't give. But this is something we Indians must learn, T have met such people, you will be surprised, to gain independence, my father sold all the land my mother sold all her jewellery and went to jail. They gave Me electric shocks and made Me lie on ice. Nothing happened to Me, it was a joke but still all kinds of things people tolerated and went to jail for 2-3 years. They are still going to jail, there is no doubt, but that's because they have eaten money. They claim we also went to jail! Those people who have misbehaved in Sahaj Yoga are going to be turned out for sure and if anyone dares to voice against any leader in Sahaj Yoga, we will turn him out. Know that fully, because we do not want to divide. If you are selfish you don't have any job, join the police or CID. Do anything, why have you come to Sahaj, when you are not worth it. I know it was not fair on my part to talk of all this tocday. When I went to sleep I thought, what should I say today? I am 74 years old, what should I say now? So old people also have only one job, to guide their children, to tell them what life is all about and why they have come to Sahaj. In Sahaj you have not come to destroy yourself because Sahaj is an extremely narrow patb. If you have to come to Sahaj you should know that you have to tread on this narrow path, on one side of which is a mountain and on the other a ditch. So to ascend this, if you do not have that determination, that wisdom and that pure desire, it will not work out, you will be stuck somewhere in between. On the mountains you have seen people sit on donkeys and go up. Somebody asked them how did you become donkeys? So they said, we were also like you but since we were hälf baked that God made us donkeys, so that in this form we will make it to the top. These stories you have heard, read, our country abounds in them, mostly they were written to teach us and those stories which have a moral, those are the ones which are real. The knowledge of Sahaj Yoga for you is in a way free. You have received it because of the punyas of your previous lives. However, after coming into Sahaj and gaining all this if you are going to be of no use, it is better you leave it and relieve me. Also, I have been thinking a lot about this, although I do not think much, I am generally in Nirvichara, I am worried because I consider you Vol. IX Issic 34 Divine Cool Breeze

 as my children and so if due to your faults you are falling, I cannot bear it. It pains me. In Sahaj Yoga there is every thing; bliss, peace, all your questions disappear in à snap of the fingers. You know it, you have experienced it, I don't have to explain it to you especially. Addressing foreign Sahaj Yogis in English Shri Mataji said "That was for Indians, not for you people". Thank you very muIch for the celebration, for all these beautiful balloons. But looking at these balloons we have to also see some of them who have lost their air completely. This is another problem we face in the West. Because to have ego itself, according to western culture, is a very great achievement and when we start living with our ego, I know how one looks like.He really looks like a stupid fellow, when he talks, when he describes himself, you don't know where to look because you just feel like laughing at his stupidity. Ego is the outcome of stupidity. I don't know what to say, how to give a similie to ego, because it's just bloated and makes you float in the air and when it bursts, you are down on the earth. But not the way a Sahaj Yogi should be down to earth but you are completely finished. All your arrogance goes to waste. You can never understand Sahaj Yoga if you have this ego in your head. I have known people who have this ego, they have come to Sahaj Yoga and still they want to think that they know more than anybody else. To know about yourself you have to go deep down and to go deep down you have to give all this idea which makes you float in the air. Imagine if you have a big balloon attached to up you, how can you go deep down into the sea, you cannot. That kind of an air which makes you float in the air, absolutely in an area of stupidity, I mean what else, English will think there are no words, stupidity means everything .Then you may think no end of yourself, you may behave the way you like and all that but what do you achieve? You achieve nothing out of it. Whatever you achieve people are jealous of you ,they want to harm you, you have no friends, nobody cares for you and in Sahaj Yoga people know who has got this problem. So I have seen people when they start talking they say ah! We know him, we know him very well. Once I had an experience a long time back in Pune, where the people who were owning that hall (Vada) said that we cannot have Shri Mataji's programme because she is not a brahmin. So the Sahaj Yogis said alright, we will give it in the newspaper that because She is not a brahmin, we cannot have her programme. So these people came to my programme and the owner of it was sitting on the gallery on top. He couldn't even walk, he was suffering from some sort of a funny disease. So these people suddenly started shaking. I didn't know, they didn't tell m . eanything They didn't tell me that these people had protested or whatever it is, so these people started shaking like this. Oh ma! I said, what is this? They said Mother stop this, we know You are shakti but stop it, stop it, its too much. But what did you do? They said we didn't do anything, we Divine Cool Breeze Vol. LX Issuc 3-4

 said this is a brahmin's hall (Vada) and this area is mostly resided by brahmins so we thought that you cannot have your programme here. I said really, that's all? Yes, that's all. They said see on the other side, see those people, they are also shaking with your power, so I asked them, I said who are you? Are you also brahmins? They said no, we are certified mad people from Thane. I said how are you here? They said there was one fellow who was mad, was cured by YOLI. So our suprintendent has brought us here, we are certified mad. These people looked at me, you tally, you are shaking and they are shaking, now you tally, where are you? And they all become Sahaj Yogis and not only that, the gentleman sitting upstairs, I told him, get up and come down. He came and since that day he surrendered his life and did alot of work in Pune. So what I said now I am saying is that, anybody who talks like that, that this is wrong in Sahaj Yoga, this should not happen, we should not have paid so much, this leader is not good, should take a paper, a on his left hand and put it before the photograph,if you can stop the shaking, then thin paper you are alright. All of you can try this, then try on the right hand, very practical. If the paper is shaking that means Mr. ego is shaking and you know how to treat your ego in Sahaj Yoga, thanks to Mohamed Sahib he has told us how to treat it. Now these two problems are within us, one of them is our conditioning and the another is our ego and we make our mind out of that and we are playing under the governance of these two things which we have used to make this mind. Now you have to be careful. You find out with left hand, now let's see, if the left hand is shaking then you are conditioned, if right hand is shaking, then you are egoistical, so now treat it. You treat these two things. Before me you will get vibrations alright because you see I am your Mother. But that does not mean you are alright. You try on my photograph, that's much more sharp. Being a Mother I play around, I don't know what I should say. Maybe you may not feel that way. But before the photo, you put on the left hand side, a newspaper or a little paper or a thin paper, on the right hand side another paper. One by one you try and judge yourself, what are you. After all you have not come here in Sahaj Yoga to emancipate Me. You have come here to evolve yourself and because of that you have to face yourself and see for yourself as to what is within you, which is very strong, which is troublesome, which is dragging you down, which is killing. Sahaj Yoga is nothing but ocean of joy. I thought that in my absence, you will be all enjoying it alright.You do. Airport, I have seen, sometimes Iam late because of the plane for 5 hours, 4 hours and everybody is so fresh in the morning, I said what happened? Whole night we have been enjoying, Mother. So what you enjoy in that is collectivity- Samuhikta .That collectivity you should enjoy only by getting rid of your nonsesical boundaries that you have built. And then you see the joy. All the time you will be floating in joy. There is a sense which people have, which you may not have before realisation. Some of the people, I am amazed, how deep they are, how Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issue 3-4

 they took to Sahaj Yoga! Supposed to be very great men, supposed to be men of very great principles but very hot tempered, very intolerant about people and they take to Sahaj Yoga just like this because inside there is a big depth, so everything is absorbed without any problem. Everybody can achieve, but one has to be careful as to the two wheels of our mind, one is the ego and the other is the conditioning. All kind of conditionings are there especially in India. In the west it is all kinds of egos, you see different, different types. I was surprised. To face that I did not know what to say! It's a very subtle thing that the people have carved out of their minds. So, for you today, it is to be decided that you are still only small children and like small children you must have a very clean heart to accept, to absorb the beauty of peace that is within you and also the beauty of purity. Without purity you cannot enjoy. So in Sahaj Yoga though we have so many people, the purity of these few saints, who lived earlier, we have yet to achieve. We have so many people in our country itself. For example, yesterday they were singing about Ali. I was very happy, because he was an incarnation. His purity people are singing now, and not that the time he was tortured and killed. We have many others. We have Dum-Dum Sahib, Nizamuddin Aulia. We have so many people in our country itself that no other country can clain. We had so many people, Why? Not because we were very good people but because we were to be improved. Things had to be done so they were born. This is Yoga-Bhumi, anywhere you go in India, I was surprised, in Haryana, so many great saints lived there. But they were a all tortured, troubled, never understood. It is so painful and hurts you that how these stupid, ignorant and blind people tortured them! So now, it is our duty, of Sahaj Yogis to find out who is the saint? Even in Sahaj Yogis, I have seen people who try to trouble others. If you have no recognition and understanding of what is the truth, what is love, what is pure compassion then you are not a הה. Sahaj Yogi. You look at a person with an obtuse angle, you don't see anything. One sided. Now at this juncture, when I am so old now, I have to request that you turn your eyes to yourself, Introspect, because among you there are some people who will try to divert your attention; try to say things. Very easy to say, he is dishonest, he is immoral, very easy to say. What are you? We have to now understand that Sahaj Yoga has to be consolidated through synthesis. We are believers of synthesis. Any divisive thing that comes into your mind you should just throw it away. This is a request that I make to you on this day that please introspect, unless and until you introspect you cannot even respect yourself, love yourself. If you love yourself you will introspect and find out what's wrong. Supposing I love this saree, then if I find any doubt about it or if I see some dots or something I will get it cleaned. I will not be proud of it, go around, ah, see, I've got so many spots. In the same way you should not be proud of whatsoever asahaj temprament you have 8. Vol. IX Issue 3-4 Divine Cool Breeze

 within yourself. And don't talk like that. Christ has called them murmuring souls. He said beware of the murmuring souls. I would say-throw away all the murmuring souls. That's the only way. In Hindi as they say 'bakwasi' they are really 'bakwasi', means the ones who just chatter, chatter, chatter, talk all nonsense about others. Doesn't know what he is. It is much more in India I must confess, I am sorry though I am an Indian. It is a habit of talking ill of others, just sitting and chit-chatting. They will not talk of Sahaj Yoga. How. many people know of Sahaj Yoga proper way? I mean if I have to give degrees, what degree should I give you? Tell me.You don't even know about your vibrations. Ofcourse you are Sahaj Yogis because you have fallen into the trap of achieving evolution. But how many are really grown up into it? You can. in So I have to again and again tell you to make Me happy you have to give up all these nonsensical, cheapish talks but try to understand from each other what we know of Sahaj Yoga. Discuss it and contribute to this knowledge by describing your experiences of Sahaj Yoga. There are many who do it, I am not saying that they don't do but even if there is one bad fellow he can spoil all of them like one bad apple can spoil all apples. So what do we do-throw away the apple out of the basket. It is important to see, even I feel all this, standing like a witness to you, silent witness. When I see big big mountains and I think they are like great saints who are watching and they are trying to record what is happening in this world because they also understand. They also know. I have to again and again tell you that today is the day to see your own self, to see your own chakras, your own-I should say defects. That will give you permanentl joy, you have been promised. You will get thoughtless awareness, also you will get doubtless awareness. But never get into the trap of your ego and of your conditionings. This is what I have to tell you today, on this day, when you are celebrating, that you celebrate your own birthday. Celebrate it, see for yourself what have achieved and what you are going to achieve. It is time for you to celebrate, than you to celebrate My birthday. I will be very happy to celebrate your birthday than to celebrate Mine. May God Bless You. Vol IX Issue 3-4 Divine Cool Breeze

 SHIVARATRI PUJA Talk by H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Delhi 16-3-1997(Synopsis, translated from Hindi) Shiva is the reflection of Sadashiva. Shiva's form is in our heart all the time in the formof our spirit. It resides there. I would not say it is enlightened. When the Kundalini is awakened, then: this Shiva gets awakened and this gets awakened in our nerves. Chaitanya is said to be 'Medha Sthiti'. First our heart and our brain get connected. Otherwise, ordinarily a person's brain goes one and the mind runs the other way. When this union takes place, the light that is there within us, which comes from our spirit, flows in the form of Chaitanya from our heads and our fontanel bone area What we have to understand further is that when this light comes within us, then gradually we see that our life changes. Our anger and other vices, start vanishing. Gradually all these things drop off and devotion is established within us. In devotion, a sense of detachment awakens, Nothing is important any more. way The form of Shiva is highly evolved. He is not bothered about anything. His hair is dishevelled, he is not bothered about the type of clothes he is wearing, what he should do. All this work he has given to Vishnu. He is himself detached from all this. His vehicle is Nandi who cannot in any way be tamed. Wherever it takes, Shiva goes there. Shiva is never bothered about what people might say, because he is contained within Himself. When he came for his wedding Shri Vishnu saw him and thought, "How could he be bridegroom for my sister?" But Parvati knew that it was only he who was worthy of her. He was a happy-go-lucky type of person. He was not bothered about anything. When one rises above everything, then for Him everything is alike. His attention never goes there. This form of Shiva that we see, we find very endearing. When the Shiva tattwa gets awakened in Sahaja Yogis, their life also starts changing. When people come to Sahaja Yoga, both men and women, are very fond of dressing up. All the attention is on what they should wear. There are many beauty clinics and things and women are very caught up in all this. But when, by getting enlightened, you become beautiful from within, then all these things cease to be important and one looks only for the comfort of the spirit. One stays away from bodily comforts: See these foreign Sahaja Yogis, they live in big houses, they have everything, but when they come here, they are contented within themselves. It's not so with Indians. Indians now also, wherever they travel, they need attached bathrooms and all cars and sorts of things. Still, they are not able to rise above all this. I am surprised to find that in a poor country like India people still have so many desires left. These people said, "Mother, take a big • 10• Vol. IX Issue 3-4 Divine Cool Brecze

 place for an ashram.' Our Indians never live in an ashram. When we made this ashram, with such hard work and a lot of expenditure, nobody was prepared to live in it. We said we will pay you a salary to live in it, still they were not prepared. For My birthplace, Chhindwara, we spent So much money and I said that retired Sahaja Yogis should stay there, the climate is very nice, it's a hill station. But nobody is prepared to go. Everybody is bothered about their comfort. My house, my place, my wife, my food should be cooked in this manner. They will eat only special kind of food. We Indians are so conditioned up by our tastes; with the foreigners it is not so. By meditation until we overcome all this, we cannot ascend. In the matters of sacrifice, we lag behind. For the purchase of land, for NGO project, Sahaja Yogis were asked to pay a little more puja money. But there was a lot of hue and cry, complaints and all that. I have been doing everything without taking any money from you. How does it matter if you give a little more money for a noble cause? I have seen many sacrificing people in My lifetime, but, nowadays, this spirit couldn't be seen. I don't see it nowadays. I know about My mother, if she had even one saree more than six, she would give it away. When, people come to Cabella, I am surprised, they want separate rooms, they do not want to stay with everyone. One who cannot be collective, cannot be a Sahaja Yogi. He still thinks, 'I am special, I must have some special arrangements'. He is a Sahaja Yogi in name only. One who worships Shiva, he should be like Shiva. You make him sleep anywhere, give him anything to eat, one who is not bound by time, is not bound by anything, only such a person is Sahaja Yogi. And you have Shivji's Pradurbhava' (manifestation) in you. But to attain this, God knows, what Tapasya people undergo, and anywhere you go they will snatch all your money and what not. It is not so in Sahaja Yoga. But this Vriti' (tendency) that we have in ourselves, we should give up. We should try and see what all we can give up. Until you do not get this 'masti' (ecstacy) within you, you cannot be called a worshipper of Shiva. Mataji has all types of worshippers, there is nothing special about that. Whatever they do, a Mother is a Mother, Mother will forgive them. But by being forgiven, you cannot reach that state. In forgiveness the most important thing is that one should always ask for Shiva's forgiveness because we are at each step doing things we should not be doing. So we should ask for forgiveness from Shiva Shambhu. We make this mistake and that mistake, we have this need and that need- till we have these needs within us, we should keep asking forgiveness from God. This feeling of possessiveness-my house, my wife-until we can overcome this, we cannot be Shiva Bhaktas. In this regard, it is very surprising that while foreigners who have never heard of Shiva's name have benefitted so much, we are still caught in small things and consider that so important. To be Shiva means that the hatred and negativities that are there within us, we should give them up. But even after coming to Sahaja Yoga, people are unable to see themselves. I have heard there is Divine Coul Breeze Vol IX Issue 3 4

 a mother-in-law who is ill-treating her daughter-in-law. When I asked her why she is doing so, she said, I have never ill-treated anyone.' Really? They will go to the cinema and see a mother- in-law ill-treating her daughter-in-law arnd start crying, but they will come home and do the same thing. Or, the daughter-in-law will ill-treat the mother-in-law and will say that I have never ill-treated anyone'. Without being truthful within, you cannot ascend in Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga changes your life, you have become pure like gold, and gold cannot be tarnished. have become that, reached that state. Why is it that you are still slaves of these Now you innumerable things in this world? This is the speciality of Kundalini, that it cleanses you completely. Now, service. Yes, you should do service too, but I really do not require any service from you. I am self contained. What are you going to do for Me? The only thing is that you should also be self contained and enjoy yourself. In that state of joy, you should think that all these things are meant for enjoyment and that by doing Sahaja Yoga when you are already in that state of joy, then why do you need to do all this? After much brooding, I have come to the conclusion that Sahaja is very simple and that's why it is very difficult. If somebody is there standing with a stick and saying, 'alright now shave off your heads, wear saffron clothes', hunger strike for 14 days, then it will be alright. But accepting Sahaja with heart, mind and brain, one should condemn one's misdeeds and improve oneself; why do I do like that? Should have I done that? By doing this, you will be able to give up many HWEL bad things and find that you are 'Samartha' (Capable). You have no needs, no desires, you are sitting comfortably. And it is surprising that when the Chaitanya knows that you require nothing, then it will serve you a platter full of everything. May be that it is to tempt you. There is no need of yours that it cannot fulfil. Today we did so much 'Avahan' (invocation) of Shivji and he actually likes this sort of people. The difference between Him and Me is that I like all sort of people. He only likes those kind of people who have given up all this. We have these conditionings for everything-we should wear this type of clothes. If we don't; so what? But in Sahaja, Sanyas is not from the outside, but from within. From within, you become a Sanyasi and then no desire remains. Wherever you are, you are joyful. First there were 'Nath Panthis', they used to wander all over and they taught people a lot of things. I am surprised, how much these people travelled! When I went to Colombia I found out that these people had even reached Bolivia. When you go to Colombia in an aeroplane, feel giddy, it is at such a height, and at that time people used to go on foot. So I don't you understand how these people might have reached there. In Russia also and other countries they travelled. How they lived, how they travelled all over, what they wore, no-one knows! Because you reach that state where you become a miraculous person, like 'Shirdi Sainath'. He appears anywhere, helps anyone. People say, 'Mother, we saw him'. I say, "Yes, it is possible'. Such people Vol. IX Issue 3-4 •12• Divine Cool Breeze

 become immortal because the killing tendecies in them get finished and that make them mortal. They become immortal. And to achieve this immortality is the real puja of Shivji. SHIVARATRI PUJA Talk in English-Delhi 16-3-1997 Today I'm going to tell you about the internal happening within us. When you get your there are eleven rudras. They are particles or 'anshas' of Shiva's powenrs and all of them try to realisation, take out or to remove all the false ideas we have about life. When the Kundalini rises they all get enlightened. For example, Buddha had a part of that, Mahavira had a part of that. Now all of them, control us from falling into the brain of various things. Like, we have an ego, so will look after the ego part. He will see that you get shocked by your ego. You will be quite amazed how you could be so egoistical, so insulting and so humiliating. But when this rudra is not awakened, when there is no light in this rudra, then what happens? You start justifying yourself. You think whatever you do is correct, whatever you have done, whatever you have said, whatever you have achieved, you think, is your right. You have done nothing wrong. For that, this Buddha's rudra has to be a awakened. Buddha become On the contrary, if you go on pampering your ego, if you go on becoming egoistical, you absolutely a right-sided personality. Once you are a right-sided personality you know what all the symptoms there are of such a person. Now for that if you just watch and introspect and see for yourself what Mohammed Saheb had said beat yourself with shoes. He did not know what else to tell. Because ego has done to you, what wrong ideas you had about yourself, that's why this ego business can really burst your head completely and you may land up into so many difficulties. Ultimately people develop this Yuppies disease where the conscious mind becomes absolutely useless, cannot move. Consciously people cannot move, unconsciously, they will, but not consciously. And this disease is so horrible that a person becomes like a reptile. You have to carry them on your body they can't walk on their own, they can't sit on their own. At a very young age this can happen. So try to see your ego and control it and feel repentant about it. In Sahaja Yoga there is nothing like repentance because we believe that you all have got your realisation, you are beyond any mistakes. It is not true. We have to repent. In English there is a word, 'sorry'. For everything they say, 'sorry.' Even telephone, when they pick up, they say, 'sorry.' I said, 'sorry for what? This sorry' itself is very empty, it has no meaning, it has no depth. When you say, 'sorry,' you have to see why you are saying, 'sorry,' and what is to be corrected. It's a very big problem with today's generation, where people have developed such tremendous ego because all our economic growth, all our industrial developments, all our big big organisations, all of them have given us a say that we should all develop our ego. If we don't develop our ego we will be lost, we will be nowhere. • 13 . Vol. IX Issuc 3-4 Divine Cool Breeze

 That's how we start pampering it and then this right-sided problem starts. Then as a reaction, it goes to the left side and actually, in the head, it is on the right side. The right side ego comes up. The left Rudra is that of Mahavira. So people do things which are sinful, which are wrong, which are against Shri Ganesha. Then also there are controlling powers of Mahavira who controls. He says you will go to hell, this will happen; he describes all the hells, that you will go to hell and will be buried alive-1 don't know-all kinds of things described to frighten you. But that doesn't help. So people start getting more onto the left side and to this Rudra. When this Rudra gets helpless then a tremendous depression comes. One feels very depressed-'Oh God, what a depression I have, I'm so sick! Then you try to frighten others with your depressions. You show, what we call, an emotional blackmail. All kinds of things you will do and beat your head. Could be through ego, could be through this left side problem. These two Rudras are very important because they are directly connected with our left and right sympathetic nervous system. So it is very important to see that you do not fall a prey Rudras. These Rudras are to be satisfied. So to be normal, at least, look after these two rudras to these which are: one that controls the ego, and another who controls self-pity. 'I just can't do it, this, that', and all kinds of depression. All this works out into very serious physical problems like cancer. If the Rudras are caught up, you develop cancer. But all this portion gets swollen up. It is called as the 'medha'. You can see a cancer patient having a swelling all over. At least would be here or may be there (on the left or right forehead). There is such a swing in the nature of a person that you can't say from which Rudra they have developed these psychosomatic troubles. Psychosomatic troubles, all of them, come because the Rudras have become ineffective. It can be due to the depressive nature or oppressive nature. It could be due to many other factors also, but all these factors are nothing but part and parcel of Shri Shiva's or Sada Shiva's powers. He is the one who is full of 'Karuna', full of compassion. He is the ocean of compassion. If you ask him for forgiveness, he will forgive. But if you think everything you have done is good, you never tortured anybody, you have never made anybody suffer, then it krnows, Shiva knows everything. And because he knows he starts giving up. There is a big combination of your will power to he there and the combination of the blessings of Shiva. When the Shiva blesses you your will power also heightens. But you must have full will power to know that you have to be of a higher level of personality. He was not at all a mundane type. Supposing, ask Shiva to go tó some party, how will He look like! There, people will laught at Him. When I met some hippies and asked them, "Why are you having this kind of hair"? They said, Divine Cool Breeze Vol. IX Issue 3-4 14•

 "We want to be primitive." I said, "But the brain is modern, what's the use of having primitive hair." So, deception, deceiving yourself is not going to help. Best thing is to face yourself and understand what wrong you have been doing. If it works out, I tell you, so many Sahaja Yogis you are sitting here, if you correct yourselves and become that, I am sure that all the problems, political and economic problems will be finished. But today it's such a mixture, due to Kali Yuga, that even the worst people are carrying on. Now we have a responsibility to save this world. We have a responsibility to create a great, honourable life which is not superficial, which is not jLust to show off, but inside it should develop so that this light of your spirit spreads and enlightens this world. It's very important to understand. All these troubles and psychosomatic diseases and all other problems which are in a collective way, we can call, of the Kali Yuga, like political, economic, all these problems only are created by human beings. They are not created by the Divine Force. Divine Force tries to neutralise them. If there are many Sahaja Yogis who are practising Sahaja Yoga, in the real sense of the word, if that could be done, if that could be achieved, then I think we can do a lot. A lot for the betterment of humanity and that's why we have got realisation. It's not only for yourself, it's not only for your family, it's not only for your city or country but for the whole world Sahaja Yoga is going to work out. Now if you have to do competition, you must do competition only in your ascent and in nothing else. But people are so superficial that they think by showing off or by becoming something, a big Johnny, they will achieve something of a very great level. It is not so. It has to be a very humble attitude towards yourself, also, so that you understand that whatever you are doing is for the betterment of global problems. Absolutely we can solve, because you are the channels of the Divine. If I could do it alone I would have done it, but I can't. So that's why Ihad to gather you all and to tell you that you have to become the channels. But in the meanwhile, you are enjoying, you are enjoying life, every second becomes a joy, which is also the gift of Shiva. Shiva is the one who creates this great admiration and this great appreciation of every moment, everything that is done, And that is the state you have to achieve, by not condemning yourself or not by pampering your ego, but by seeing what you are. That's the main thing one has to see that, what problems you have? What is troubling you is yourself only. If you could just come to that point of understanding, I'm very very sure that you will be such an asset to help and make this world look at itself and change, because superficially you cannot change such deep-rooted problems. You are being so blessed by Kundalini that you can really become a great torch, Torch on the path of truth, love and joy. May God bless you, Vol. IN Issue 34 15 • Divine Cool Brecze

 MEDICAL CONFERENCE Talk by H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi St. Petersburg, Russia – 14.4.94 I am so much surprised that scientists are talking of morality, is something unusual. It's only in Russia people can do that. Because science is Amoral and it has nothing to do with spirituality. Find that your people are so advanced that you want to know about spirituality. Spirituality is meta-science. The morality sense has come now to science and scientific research that they are realising that there are genes in the Human beings which get you to mutation. There are two genes specifically, which look after our morality. With one gene mutation we do sin against the Mother. Sin against the mother is that you indulge into things which are immoral. Everything that is self destructive. This self destruction is what we call immorality. The second gene in Human beings goes into mutation when you do the sin against the Father. Against the father the mutation takes place when we are aggressive, violent, we are thieves or do things which are improper in the legal way. These genes get into mutation and then person starts doing all kinds of things. Either he starts destroying himself or he starts destroying others. Thank God they have now reached the state of genes in medical science. l am sure they will find out these two mutation bound genes in Human beings. Only through traditions of moral life can these be preserved. In the democratic countries, freedom was given, so they went absolutely haywire. These two genes have gone into such mutation, that people do not even know that they are doing something wrong. In a way science has shown that going beyond limits of science one can get reactions. When there is no limit of production of anything which is scientifically found out, people go on producing things like atom bomb, hydrogen bomb, all kinds of things. Now there is a big movement to stop the production of these bombs. This aggressiveness which started in scientific advancement went too far. They dominated so many countries and destroyed so many people. The second part which is the sin against the Mother where people have taken to drugs, alcohol, womanising, all kinds of wrong things, In America you cannot talk against homosexuality, because homosexuals gave votes for Clinton to be elected. Now with this Aids reaction what is happening is that they have now become like martyrs, they think it is a very big thing they have done because their ego now is hurt, they do not want to admit that they have done mistake, that they have got this Aids, this horrible disease But who creates the genes and who puts them into mutation? In science there is no answer yet. Here you see within yourself - this is the mechanism. This is a very subtle built in system within us. You are all scientists here, so you should have an open mind. Whatever I am telling you today is before you some sort of hypothesis. If it is true then you have to accept it as honest people, because it is for the benevolence of you as individuals, for the benevolence of your country and benevolence of the whole world. Here you see a triangular bone which is called as Divine Cool Breeze 16. Vol IX Issue 3-4

 sacrum" which Greeks knew- as a sacred bone. In this bone lies a power of pure desire, all other desires are not pure. Today you want to buy a house, then a car, then a helicopter, you go on buying, you are never satisfied. According to economics, wants are not satisfied in general. This is the pure desire within us. You may be aware of it or may not. Now what is the pure desire? The pure desire is to be the spirit. You are not this body, you are riot this mind, you are not this intellect, you are not these emotions, your ego, but you are pure spirit. In the evolutionary state you have reached a state which we calla human beings. But it's not the end of the journey. Even in science you find out something, then somebody else comes and says, no that's not so. We do not know the absolute truth. If we had known the absolute truth there would have been no quarrels, no fights, no wars. This is meta science, but it was known in My country thousands of years back. If I have done anything, is this that I have brought this knowledge to the masses. It's nothing great, all human problems create world problems, and all fugal problems come from these centres, which are our foundations. These centres act on the left and on the right. The left side sympathetic and the right side sympathetic are not doing the same work. They do two absolutely different. In the centre is the parasympathetic nervous system. It is meta-science. types, I need not tell doctors, they know that when you want to run you can increase the beat of the heart. In emergency sympathetic acts. But the heart is brought to normal by parasympathetic. Now on top of the brain these channels go and create from the left side, they cross over in the optic chiasma, And they created a balloon like thing. From left side activity you get your conditionings. This can be called as psyche but psyche is ugly word. Say a mother is nursing the child and the child is very happy, but she turns him round so he doesn't like it. So the like of ego starts, then she scolds him, "don't do like this". Then the first line of conditioning starts. Thus we live either on ego or on conditioning. We see these beautiful flowers, but they are miracles, aren't they. Who creates these flowers? If you ask a doctor, who runs your heart he'll say it is the autonomous nervous system, But who is this auto? This thev cannot answer. Now this Kundalini which is in the triangular bone is your mother, is your individual mother. She knows everything about you, she's a doctor, and also a psychologist, and a scientist. She thinks, she understands, above all she loves. Everyone of you have this power; this power when awakened passes through six centres above. These six centres are responsible for you physical, emotional, mental and spiritual being. The second centre is called swadisthana which is on the physical side manifest as aortic plexus. Only we'll deal with one today and you'll be amazed how many diseases can be cured if this one centre can be enlightened. The function of this centre because it moves and can also contract, is like a lotus. The function is to look after liver, pancreas, spleen, kidneys and intestine. It has another very important work, is to convert the fat for the use of the grey cells. Now, the scientists have not reached that point. A person who thinks too much, is futuristic, he plans. Such a person uses the energy of his grey cells, isn't it? This centre becomes • 17• Divine Cool Breeze Vol IX Issue 34

 concerned about the supply of the energy, So all these organs start suffering from starvation. First attack is on liver. The function of liver is to deliver the poison form the body into the blood. I'm talking in general. Now what happens that the heat aceumulates in the liver. Such a person, starts becoming thin because there is poison in the liver. He becomes hot tempered. He develops skin troubles. Then this heat can start moving to other organs because other organs are also suffering. When it goes to the pancreas people start suffering from a disease called Diabetes. Diabetes can only happen to people who are futuristic, who sit on the seat, plan things. In My country the farmers take at least six spoons of sugar in one cup of tea, they don't get Diabetes because whatever they earn they spend and sleep off. This disease is more in the west. TME In the west people have insurances, all kinds of problems if they even have a small little thing. It's a mad race of insurance. Now the other, spleen is the most important. I don't know about Russia but in the other western countries people sleep very late. They have to attend drinking parties, dancing parties, maddening parties. Then they get up very early, somehow or other they dress up hectically and start reading newspaper. Now our spleen is a speedo-meter. It creates red blood cells as you krnow very well when there is an emergency. But the life is so hectic and then to read newspaper in the morning, you get such a shock that this poor spleen starts wobbling. Then they get into the car and there is a traffic. They get upset and go to the office and the boss starts shouting at them. They are just slaves of the time. Even if somebody is one minute late they will shout for fifteen minutes. This poor spleen doesn't know how to cope with this hectic personality. That also become hectic and vulnerable to blood cancer. I must tell you that, truthfully, that blood cancer has been cured by Sahaja Yoga, without changing blood, without doing anything. Third thing is the kidney. With this heat the kidney also coagulates, so you cannot pass your urine. Then you go for dialysis and die bankrupt. Now this can also be cured by this Kundalini awakening. There is no need at all to go in for dialysis. People get constipated, some develop terrible constipation at the end of the large intestine. Apart from that, when this heat rises above, it reaches the heart. If there is a young boy who is drinking too much, who is maybe playing tennis or something very hard game, and who thinks too much, such a young boy can get a heart attack which is always Fatal. Also people get it in old age as this heat rises and contracts the heart. Then this heat rises even above and goes to the brain and constricts your arteries and you get concussion of the brain on the left hand side. Left hand, because it crosses over and one gets paralysis on the right hand side, there is a reaction. There are diseases on the left hand side also. Now when it is on the left hand side your diseases are of a more serious nature. Left side gives you psychosomatic diseases, all incurable diseases, right from muscular diseases, cancers, heart angina, madness, lunacy, out of which lunacy is just somatic. All other are psychosomatic, they come from viruses. Now on the left side is all our past since our creation, so there are many dead vegetables which have gone out of the circulation of evolution. Dead animals, dead human beings. • 18 • Divine Cool Brecze Vol. IX Isstie 3-4

 When the attention starts moving towards the left, towards the past or you get a shock or you start feeling sorry for something then it goes to the left. Russia has more left side I feel because of whatever was the political situation before. One has to be in the centre because if you go to the left there these viruses catch you or some dead animals will catch you, some micro animals might catch you or some Hluman beings who are dead. So the possessions take place. With the awakening of the Kundalini your attention is drawn in the centre. All the religions were created to create a balance, not to go to extremes. But why the balance? Because with the balance only you can ascend. All living work is done by all pervading Divine power. In the Bible it is described as the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost. In the Koran as Ruh. And in Indian philosophy it is described as Param Chaitanya, Adi Shankaracharya said, "Salilam, Salilam" means cool, cool. You have to become one with that. That is the Yog. Once you are united with that all pervading power then you become empowered, Our thoughts rise and fall, again rise and fall, and we are jumping on the cusp of the thoughts. We cannot be in the present, and the reality in the present, when this Kundalini rises over this centre on the optic chiasma, she creates present in you, become silent, thoughtlessly aware. You are aware but thoughtless. You jump out of your problems also. If you are standing in the water you are afraid of the high waves, but if you jump out of it into a boat you can see that, you can enjoy them, but if you learn how to swim, you can jump in and save many. So you come into next state that is doubtlessly aware. You have so many powers, potential in you, they are awakened. In India many artists have become world famous, many painters have become world famous. It is a bliss, actually you enter into the kingdom of God and all the time you feel you are being looked after, guided, protected, that is your right, we call it Sahaja Yoga. "Saha" means with, "ja" is born, means it is born with you, this right to be in this Yoga, this union, with the Divine, you become divine automatically, you become absolutely moral, you become righteous, you enjoy all your virtues, you become you own guide in the light of the spirit. Overnight people have given up their drugs. This is the last breakthrough of our evolution. Can you imagine Christ addressing you people like this? They crucified Him. Christ was a great Divine personality, very great. He didn't understand human beings I think, because He was so What He has said that if your eye commits a sin, take it out. If your right hand commits a pure. sin, cut it. In the West everybody would have been without hands and eyes if they had followed Him. Then Mohammad Sahib thought that Christ has said about the men to be that strict, but for women he didn't say anything. So He said about women. I just thought that first let them have little light. Now supposing I am obstinate, I have a snake in My hand, and I'm standing in the darkness. I don't want to listen to you. You go on telling Me there is a snake. I will not leave it till it bites Me. But if there is a little light, immediately I'll leave it Myself. That is what I thought that Human beings, if they get little light they will immediately change, and it has worked. I never dreamt that Ill be able to address such people in Russia. Divine Cool Brecze • 19• Vol IX Issue 3-4

 If's really destined I think that such Divine people should be sitting before Me. In this short lecture I'm sorry I can't tell you everything about Sahaja Yoga. In English language only I must have given 5000 lectures, but lecture is just a mental acrobat, you have to go beyond it, and achieve a stage of enlightenment. Enlightenment doesn't mean any brand, like born-again or anything, it is actualisation and a becoming. It's not just talk, it is also not blind faith, this is an actual happening. This happening has to take place, for which you don't have to pay. It is living process when you put a seed in the Mother earth, it sprouts. How much does the Mother earth take from us in money? Because it is built in the Mother earth to sprout and built in the seed to be sprouted. It's a living process of spontaneity. Nobody can explain why are we on this earth, nobody can say why when the foetus starts growing why don't we throw it away, as all foreign things have to be thrown away out of the body? It is preserved, looked after, till it has to be thrown, it is kept in the womb. Who does that? The other day somebody asked Me "why am Ion this earth?" I said, "to become Divine and to enter into the Kingdom of God". So he said, "How will that help me? I told him, first you enter, it will riot only help you physically, mentally, emotionally, spiritually but it will help others". On your finger tips you can feel your centres. On your finger tips you can feel the centres of others. Otherwise half of the people die only during diagnosis. On your finger tips you can find out the trouble. They talk the language of centres. You cann feel the vibrations of anyone whether dead, alive or far away. Now if you know how to VOLur correct, you can correct your centres and correct the centres of others, because who is the other, you have become collective now, that means the microcosm has become a macrocosm, or a drop has become the sea. This is your capacity, this is your glory, this is what you have to have as your own. No obligation, it's all love and compassion. The power is of love, of Divine love, of pure love without any lust or greed. We have never used the power of love. Now the time has come and one day I am sure this Russia will be the leader of the whole world. This knowledge is coming, say from an Indian person or India, but science has come from the West, so it doesn't matter, if it is coming from the East why should people think it something low. All the wise people will realise that they are the one. May God Bless You All! Vol IX Issue 3-4 20• Divine Cool Brecze

 108Names of Shri Krishna He is the Lord of America. Amerikeshwar He is Shri Krishna. He sows and cultivates the field of sprituality. Shri Krishna He is blue. Maha Neela He has Shree Shakti. Shreedhar He wears a pectambar (yellow dhoti). Peetambar Dhari He plays the divine flute. Venudhar He has a beautiful face. Sumukha He holds all wealth. Shreeman His laughter is beautiful. He is accessible only through Shri Mataji Suhasya Nirmalagamya He has perfect speech. Subhash Nirmala Pujak He worships Shri Mataji. He has perfect eyes. Sulochan He loves the devotees of Shri Nirmal Bhakta He has a perfect nose. Sunasik Mataji. Priya He has perfect teeth. Sudant Nirmal Hriday He has the Lotus Feet of ShrI Mataji in His heart. He has perfect hair. Sukesh He needs no support Niradhar He has a peacock feather: adorning His head. Sikhandi He is the Father of Christ. Vishwadhar He listens to all that is auspicious Janak Sushrut He is Shri Vishnu. Shri Vishnu Sudarshan Dhari He uses the Sudarshan to protect the seekers. He is worshipped by Christ. Maha Vishnu Pujita Maha Vira He is a great warrior. He is announced by Shri Vishnumaya. Vishnumaya Sughoshita He gives valour. Shaurya Dayak He is the master of the art oi Rana Pandit 15 He is the Master of language. Vageshwar warfare. Vageshwari Bhrata He is the Brother of Maha Saraswati. He runs away from the battlefield to win the war. Rana Chod Vishnumayanuja He is the Brother of Shri Vishnumaya. He is the master of ParaI Shrinath 15 Chaitanya. He is the Brother of Draupadi. Draupadi Bandhu He knows all the tricks. Yuktivan He is the greatest person Akbar He is the Friend of Arjuna. Partha Sakha He is the God of the whole Akhileshwar He is a true Friend. Sanmitra IFLue LITIverse. Vishwa Vyapi He permeates the Universe. He is the great being of which everything else is part and parcel. Maha Virata He guards the Universe. Vishwa Rakshi He is the God of the Yogis. Yogeshwar He witnesses the cosmic play. Vishwa Sakshi He has Fatherly love for the Yogis. Yogi Vatsala Dwarakadheesha He rules over Dwaraka. He describes Yoga as the destination. Yogavarnitha He rules over the area of Vishuddhi Prantadheesha the Vishuddhi. Sahaja Sandesh Vahak Through Him we.can communicate the message of Sahaja Yoga. He leads the people. Jana Nayak He protects the people of the land of the Vishuddhi. Vishuddhi Jana Palak Vol. IX Isstie 3-4 Divine Cool Breeze 21

 He upholds Dharma. He is the giver of joy. Vishwa Dharma flag of Vishwa Ananda Dhwaja Dharak Pradayaka Garudarudha He rides on the Garuda. He is beyond form. He is formless. Nirakar He holds the mace. Gadadhar Anand Akbar He is joy personified. Shankhadhar He is the joy of purity He holds the conch. Pavitranand He holds the lotus. Padmadhar Pavitra Rakshak He protects chastity He holds the key to the cosmic play. Leeladhar He enjoys the pure knowledge of joy. Gyananand Damadar He is very generous Kalanand He gives joy from the arts. Govardhan Dhari He lifted Govardhan mountain to Gruhananda He gives the joy of the household. protect the Gopas. Dhanand He gives joy from prosperity. He looks after the benevolence of the Yogis. Yogakshema Vahaka He is the God of wealth and properity. Kubera He always speaks the truth. Satya Bhashi He is the joy of the spirit. Atmanand Hita Pradayaka He bestows benevolence. He gives joy from Sahaj collectivity. Samuhanand His speech is pleasing to the Spirit. Priya Bhashi He creates fearlessness. Abhaya Pradayaka He gives joy of the Sahaj collectivity. Sarvanand He destroys all fears. Vishuddhanad Bhay Nashaka He gives pure joy. Sadhak Rakshaka He protects the seekers of Truth. Sangeetanand He gives joy of music. He gives joy of collective dancing. Nrutyanand Bhakta Vatsala He loves devotees. Shabdanand He gives joy through words. He destroys grief. Shoka Hari Maunand He gives joy from silence. He destroys sorrow. Dukha Nashak Sahajanand He gives joy through Sahaj culture. Rakshasa Hantri He is the Killer of rakshasas. He opposed the Kuru family which upheld adharma. Kurukula Virodhak He gives absolute joy. Paramanand He is the source of absolutely pure joy. Niranand Gokul Vasi He resides in Gokul He looks after cows Gopal He enjoys drama, the play. Natya Priya He enjoys cows. Sangeet Priya Govind He enjoys music Ksheer Priya He is the highest of the Yadavas. Yadu Kul Shreshta He enjoys milk. Dadhi Priya He enjoys curd. Akul He is beyond family attachments. Madhu Priya He enjoys honey. He is the destroyer of disparities accordance to caste, creed and Vansh Dwesha Ghrut Priya He enjoys ghee. Nashak race. He adores the amrut from the Matru Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji. Charanamrut Atma Gyan Varnita He describu the knowledge of the Spirit. Priya Vol. IX Issue 3-4 Divine Cool Breeze 22

 देवि प्रसीद परिपालय नोऽरि भीतेर्नित्यं यथासुरवधादधुनैव सद्यः। पापानि सर्वजगतां प्रशमं नयाशु उत्पातपाकजनितांश्च महोपस्गान।। देवीमहात्म्यम् ( एकादशोऽध्याय-३४) "O Devi, be pleased and protect us always from fear of foes, as you have done just now by the killing of asuras. And destroy quickly the sins of all worlds and the horrible calamities which have sprung from the maturing of evil portents".



----------------------

1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Volume IX
1997
issue 3 & 4
ya Saiij Vogi i Meson, just befare a prrja, skwzes the Kiundalini ppeuring in the sky
This plotograpi, ctitkef hy
"What you must do is to meditate and to believe that this Param
Chaitanya is my Power, that you have felt my power within you".
H.H Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Christ Puja – 1996
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Issue 3-4
1997
Volume IX
Contents
Birthday Puja
1
10
Shivratri Puja
Medical Conference
16
St. Petersberg, Russia
21
108 Names of Shri Krishna
Edited by
Yogi Mahajan
Published by:
Divine Cool Breeze
9 Bhagyachintamani Soc.
Paud Road, Kothrud
Pune 411 029
Printed by:
Printek Phototypesetters
4A/1, Rajinder Nagar
New Delhi 110 060
Phones : 5784866, 5710529
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 BIRTHDAY PUJA
Talk By H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Delhi 21-3-1997 (Synopsis, translated from Hindi)
When the whole world sleeps a Sahaj Yogi is awake and when the world is awake a Sahaj Yogi
sleeps. This mcans that those things towards which a Sahaj Yogi is inclined, other people are not
inclined. They are inclined towards other things. In some way or the other they are disinclined
(vimukh) from the truth. Someone is caught up with money, someone with power, they are
caught up with one thing or another and are completely lost; away from the truth. They cannot
see the truth. Someone will say this is the reason, someone will say that is the reason, some
explanation or the other.
However I think, God knows what all a man does in his ignorance. A sort of darkness envelops.
Like for example, if this place is plunged into darkness, God knows there might be a stampede,
people may fall, get trampled over, anything can happen. When we are in this darkness we are
asleep. But when we are awake, when our Kundalini is awakened and when we are confronted
with the truth , nobody can explain the beauty of truth.
Lasked somebody what did you get out of Sahaj Yoga? He said, "I can't tell youu what Igot but
I have got everything." What does everything mean? I will also say that today, in Sahaj I have got
everything.When I was small, I used to tell My father that it is My desire that like the stars in the
sky, many people on earth should also shine and spread the light of God. He said, it is possible,
you find a method for en-masse awakering; don't give lectures, don't write anything or else you
Vou
will have a second Bible, a second Qoran and there will be a thing to fight about. So, before this
there should be en masse awakening and the task of en masse awakening has started in Sahaj.
But, the problems of this, I have to discuss with you to day.
It is a thing of great pleasure that there has been en masse awakening and everywhere people, in
great numbers, have found out the truth and in that bliss, we have not been selective. We
opened the door and all sorts of people entered and brought their dirt with them. When even a
few people like this come they cause a lot of damage. Saints like Namadeva had said
that those who are bad can never become good. Their habits can never become good. He said, for
example, if a fly sits on your food, it will make you sick and if it dies and you eat it, you will die
too. This fly cannot become alright and like this fly a lot of people are very fond of jaggery and
they keep running towards it. In Sahaj all these things should drop off. Until they drop off we
cannot ascend. If something gets stuck to the wings of the bird, it cannot fly. This is why this sky
of bliss which he has called "Raganchal"-the Mother's love, in this you cannot fly like a bird
such
very elearly
Vol. IX Isstte 34
Divine Cool Brecze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 should leave things to Me. Let Me decide if a leader is good or not. But to say why has this leader
done this, why is he like that, you do not have the authority to say that. Now someone will say
why are there leaders in Sahaj Yoga? They are there because it is not possible for me to associate
with evervone, so if there is a person in between, through him I can associate with everyone. So,
they got angry with the leaders. If there is something wrong with the leaders, I should correct it,
not you. What you should do is to write to Me, But if you do not like your leaders
leave Sahaj Yoga. With them 10 more half baked Sahaj Yogis will latch on and then trouble the leader.
you should
In the same marner, a group was formed and about 70-80 Sahaj Yogis whom I had never seen or
heard of before, joined them. Then that person said, I am an incarnation of Kalki. Alight, if you
are, so be it, I have nothing to say. But keep away from Sahaj Yoga. There is no place for
Sahaj Yoga. These people believed that he was an incarnation of Kalki and started touching his
feet änd all that-these are "charanchhoo maharaj", "Paisa Le Maharaj", that is why they become
you in
so. When they took money, all the faults they were pointing out in the leaders, the same faults
were apparent in them and everybody started wondering what was going on? So this sort of
jealousy and ambition takes place. But all the foolish Sahaj Yogis got strained into that-since it
is the last judgement. About the leaders, that his character is not right, that he misappropriates
money, he is like this, like that, more than the CBI. I was surprised. Atleast consult Me. They say
well Mother we believe in you, but what I say atleast believe in that. Then these peuple reached
Ganapatipule and threw stones at me because when one loses one's mind, one is not aware of
what one is doing or saying, like a drunkard. And there they created a scene, came into nmy
programme. I felt such bad vibrations. I said are these people in Sahaj Yoga? Instead of improving
their own vibrations they were checking other people's vibrations. So such people should leave
Sahaj Yoga. Now if such a person stands up, many people follow him, thinking he will lead them
to heaven. This is not so. Sahaj is a collective movement. Here if somebody's ear is here, nose is
here, hand is here-it's just not going to work out because the Chaitanya does not like this. Then
I said "you are rebelling", they said, "you are abusing us?" I said, "I am just describirng you that
don't rebel against the Chaitanya." This is why there was an earthquake there. As a Mother I told
them that the truth and God will not spare you, I am after all a Mother, you please leave all this.
But they are still caught up.
In Sahaj Yoga there is no compulsion. I have never even forced the people of my family to take to
Sahaj Yoga, although I know that there is nothing greater than this. If you want to take to this, do
don't want to, then it is your wish, but don't do these kind of things. This means you
SO, if
you
can never be a Sahaj Yogi. In a way, from a Sahaj point of view, to behave like this towards your
leaders is a sin and to formn groups on this basis is a greater sin. If you want, you can write to me,
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issug 34
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 I will find out. In fact I know immediately through vibrations, whether you are right or they.
They write all kinds of things in their letters. When they write it's so nonsensical, I don't bother.
That leader is like that, that one is like that. Are you yourselves a very great soul? Look at yourself,
if you are not alright, then what will happen in future? You have children and besides the people
around you, what will they think? These kinds of things start and Sahaj Yoga finishes. Till now it
has not finished anywhere. We have always tried to save all those who are drowning, the more
Sahaj Yogis we have the better. But I also feel that this is a heaven based on truth and to go to this
heaven also some preparations are necessary. And if not then there must be shortage of space, so
destiny must be doing this job of pushing out the useless people. But you should not get into all
you are aware, be aware of yourself, not of others and find out what is wrong
Somebody is caught up
this if
with
you.
with something like money, people come to Sahaj to earn money. If you
tell them that you are not here to earn money, it cannot enter their brains.
I will also have to tell you today.that in the money game, people have very little brain. Christ had
said that first will be the last and the last will be first. But I don't see any such thing. In the
beginning the Sahaj Yogis who came to Bombay, they said Mother atleast take a thousand
from each one of us. I said children, I neither know how to count money or how to keep it nor do
rupees
I know any banking. But if you form a trust, then I will put your money in that. Not that I want
to be very honest, but bécause I have no brains to be dishonest. If I don't know how to count
money, what should I do? I don't even know how to write a cheque. But you people know that if
anyone takes money in the name of religion he can not escape punishment. This money game is
very dangerous. So, this time I thought that lots of women who beg on the roads, a lot of Muslim
women too, who have been abandoned by their husbands, who take their children with them
and beg on the roads and a lot of women who come from Bihar and Rajasthan, we should do
some good to them, so we formed an organisation. For this we don't need any money from you
people. We have never asked you for any money, it all gets arranged but I thought that you
should also receive some blessings, so
I said OK, donate Rs. 500 for the cause. But so much fuss
was made on it. Mother, who suggested you to decide like that? I received so many letters and
phone calls complaining about it.
There is nobody who can suggest anything to me. I go according to my will. This you should
understand. I look very simple but actually I am very clever! So you should not try to befool me,
you people cannot even do this much for Sahaj Yoga? For so many years I cured so many,
and
gave away so much money, did what all you know, but for such a small thing so many people
complained! I felt very sad. Earlier also such a thing has happened, such a lowly behaviour. First
Indians especially should take their attention off money to grow in Sahaj Yoga, otherwise there is
Divine Cool Brecze
Vol. IX Issue 3-4
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 a jail bharo andolan' going on. Why is your attention so much on money when I have awakened
your Lakshmiji. How much you give that much you shall receive. To give is so joyful 1 cannot tell
you. When you give Me something I only take it to make you feel happy. I don't need anything.
There is no place in My house to keep anything. You give it out of so much love, I am tired of
fighting with you people, of saying don't give me sarees, I don't need anything, I don't need
jewellery. I even said I am going to sell all the jewellery, all the jobs will be done by that. They
said do whatever You want but we will give You anyway, I am doing it for your joy. I don't want
any give and take. When I have not taken I needn't give. But this is something we Indians must
learn,
T have met such people, you will be surprised, to gain independence, my father sold all the land
my mother sold all her jewellery and went to jail. They gave Me electric shocks and made Me lie
on ice. Nothing happened to Me, it was a joke but still all kinds of things people tolerated and
went to jail for 2-3 years. They are still going to jail, there is no doubt, but that's because they
have eaten money. They claim we also went to jail! Those people who have misbehaved in Sahaj
Yoga are going to be turned out for sure and if anyone dares to voice against any leader in Sahaj
Yoga, we will turn him out. Know that fully, because we do not want to divide. If you are selfish
you don't have any job, join the police or CID. Do anything, why have you come to Sahaj, when
you are not worth it.
I know it was not fair on my part to talk of all this tocday. When I went to sleep I thought, what
should I say today? I am 74 years old, what should I say now? So old people also have only one
job, to guide their children, to tell them what life is all about and why they have come to Sahaj.
In Sahaj you have not come to destroy yourself because Sahaj is an extremely narrow patb. If you
have to come to Sahaj you should know that you have to tread on this narrow path, on one side
of which is a mountain and on the other a ditch. So to ascend this, if you do not have that
determination, that wisdom and that pure desire, it will not work out, you will be stuck somewhere
in between. On the mountains you have seen people sit on donkeys and go up. Somebody asked
them how did you become donkeys? So they said, we were also like you but since we were hälf
baked that God made us donkeys, so that in this form we will make it to the top. These stories
you have heard, read, our country abounds in them, mostly they were written to teach us and
those stories which have a moral, those are the ones which are real.
The knowledge of Sahaj Yoga for you is in a way free. You have received it because of the punyas
of your previous lives. However, after coming into Sahaj and gaining all this if you are going to
be of no use, it is better you leave it and relieve me. Also, I have been thinking a lot about this,
although I do not think much, I am generally in Nirvichara, I am worried because I consider you
Vol. IX Issic 34
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 as my children and so if due to your faults you are falling, I cannot bear it. It pains me. In Sahaj
Yoga there is every thing; bliss, peace, all your questions disappear in à snap of the fingers. You
know it, you have experienced it, I don't have to explain it to you especially.
Addressing foreign Sahaj Yogis in English Shri Mataji said "That was for Indians, not for you
people".
Thank
you very muIch for the celebration, for all these beautiful balloons. But looking at these
balloons we have to also see some of them who have lost their air completely. This is another
problem we face in the West. Because to have ego itself, according to western culture, is a very
great achievement and when we start living with our ego, I know how one looks like.He really
looks like a stupid fellow, when he talks, when he describes himself, you don't know where to
look because you just feel like laughing at his stupidity. Ego is the outcome of stupidity. I don't
know what to say, how to give a similie to ego, because it's just bloated and makes you float in
the air and when it bursts, you are down on the earth. But not the way a Sahaj Yogi should be
down to earth but you are completely finished. All your arrogance goes to waste. You can never
understand Sahaj Yoga if you have this ego in your head. I have known people who have this
ego, they have come to Sahaj Yoga and still they want to think that they know more than anybody
else. To know about yourself you have to go deep down and to go deep down you have to give
all this idea which makes you float in the air. Imagine if you have a big balloon attached to
up
you, how can you go deep down into the sea, you cannot. That kind of an air which makes you
float in the air, absolutely in an area of stupidity, I mean what else, English will think there are no
words, stupidity means everything .Then you may think no end of yourself, you may behave the
way you like and all that but what do you achieve? You achieve nothing out of it. Whatever you
achieve people are jealous of you ,they want to harm you, you have no friends, nobody cares for
you and in Sahaj Yoga people know who has got this problem. So I have seen people when they
start talking they say ah! We know him, we know him very well.
Once I had an experience a long time back in Pune, where the people who were owning that hall
(Vada) said that we cannot have Shri Mataji's programme because she is not a brahmin. So the
Sahaj Yogis said alright, we will give it in the newspaper that because She is not a brahmin, we
cannot have her programme. So these people came to my programme and the owner of it was
sitting on the gallery on top. He couldn't even walk, he was suffering from some sort of a funny
disease. So these people suddenly started shaking. I didn't know, they didn't tell m .
eanything
They didn't tell me that these people had protested or whatever it is, so these people started
shaking like this. Oh ma! I said, what is this? They said Mother stop this, we know You are shakti
but stop it, stop it, its too much. But what did you do? They said we didn't do anything, we
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. LX Issuc 3-4
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 said this is a brahmin's hall (Vada) and this area is mostly resided by brahmins so we thought
that you cannot have your programme here. I said really, that's all? Yes, that's all. They said see
on the other side, see those people, they are also shaking with your power, so I asked them, I said
who are you? Are you also brahmins? They said no, we are certified mad people from Thane. I
said how are you here? They said there was one fellow who was mad, was cured by YOLI. So our
suprintendent has brought us here, we are certified mad. These people looked at me,
you tally, you are shaking and they are shaking, now you tally, where are you? And they all
become Sahaj Yogis and not only that, the gentleman sitting upstairs, I told him, get up and come
down. He came and since that day he surrendered his life and did alot of work in Pune. So what
I said now
I am saying is that, anybody who talks like that, that this is wrong in Sahaj Yoga, this should
not happen, we should not have paid so much, this leader is not good, should take a paper, a
on his left hand and put it before the photograph,if you can stop the shaking, then
thin
paper
you are alright. All of you can try this, then try on the right hand, very practical. If the paper
is shaking that means Mr. ego is shaking and you know how to treat your ego in Sahaj Yoga,
thanks to Mohamed Sahib he has told us how to treat it. Now these two problems are within
us, one of them is our conditioning and the another is our ego and we make our mind out of that
and we are playing under the governance of these two things which we have used to make this
mind. Now you have to be careful. You find out with left hand, now let's see, if the left hand is
shaking then you are conditioned, if right hand is shaking, then you are egoistical, so now treat
it. You treat these two things. Before me you will get vibrations alright because you see I am your
Mother. But that does not mean you are alright. You try on my photograph, that's much more
sharp. Being a Mother I play around, I
don't know what I should say. Maybe you may not feel
that way. But before the photo, you put on the left hand side, a newspaper or a little paper or a
thin paper, on the right hand side another paper. One by one you try and judge yourself, what
are you. After all you have not come here in Sahaj Yoga to emancipate Me. You have come here to
evolve yourself and because of that you have to face yourself and see for yourself as to what is
within you, which is very strong, which is troublesome, which is dragging you down, which is
killing.
Sahaj Yoga is nothing but ocean of joy. I thought that in my absence, you will be all enjoying it
alright.You do. Airport, I have seen, sometimes Iam late because of the plane for 5 hours, 4 hours
and everybody is so fresh in the morning, I said what happened? Whole night we have been
enjoying, Mother. So what you enjoy in that is collectivity- Samuhikta .That collectivity you
should enjoy only by getting rid of your nonsesical boundaries that you have built. And then
you see the joy. All the time you will be floating in joy. There is a sense which people have, which
you may not have before realisation. Some of the people, I am amazed, how deep they are, how
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issue 3-4
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 they took to Sahaj Yoga! Supposed to be very great men, supposed to be men of very great
principles but very hot tempered, very intolerant about people and they take to Sahaj Yoga just
like this because inside there is a big depth, so everything is absorbed without any problem.
Everybody can achieve, but one has to be careful as to the two wheels of our mind, one is the ego
and the other is the conditioning. All kind of conditionings are there especially in India. In the
west it is all kinds of egos, you see different, different types. I was surprised. To face that I did
not know what to say! It's a very subtle thing that the people have carved out of their minds. So,
for you today, it is to be decided that you are still only small children and like small children
you must have a very clean heart to accept, to absorb the beauty of peace that is within you
and also the beauty of purity. Without purity you cannot enjoy. So in Sahaj Yoga though we
have so many people, the purity of these few saints, who lived earlier, we have yet to achieve. We
have so many people in our country itself. For example, yesterday they were singing about Ali.
I was very happy, because he was an incarnation. His purity people are singing now, and not
that the time he was tortured and killed. We have many others. We have Dum-Dum Sahib,
Nizamuddin Aulia. We have so many people in our country itself that no other country can
clain. We had so many people, Why? Not because we were very good people but because we
were to be improved. Things had to be done so they were born. This is Yoga-Bhumi, anywhere
you go in India, I was surprised, in Haryana, so many great saints lived there. But they were a
all
tortured, troubled, never understood. It is so painful and hurts you that how these stupid, ignorant
and blind people tortured them! So now, it is our duty, of Sahaj Yogis to find out who is the saint?
Even in Sahaj Yogis, I have seen people who try to trouble others. If you have no recognition and
understanding of what is the truth, what is love, what is pure compassion then you are not a
הה.
Sahaj Yogi.
You look at a person with an obtuse angle, you don't see anything. One sided. Now at this
juncture, when I am so old now, I have to request that you turn your eyes to yourself, Introspect,
because among you there are some people who will try to divert your attention; try to say things.
Very easy to say, he is dishonest, he is immoral, very easy to say. What are you? We have to now
understand that Sahaj Yoga has to be consolidated through synthesis. We are believers of synthesis.
Any divisive thing that comes into your mind you should just throw it away. This is a request
that I make to you on this day that please introspect, unless and until you introspect you cannot
even respect yourself, love yourself. If you love yourself you will introspect and find out what's
wrong. Supposing I love this saree, then if I find any doubt about it or if I see some dots or
something I will get it cleaned. I will not be proud of it, go around, ah, see, I've got so many
spots. In the same way you should not be proud of whatsoever asahaj temprament you have
8.
Vol. IX Issue 3-4
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 within yourself. And don't talk like that. Christ has called them murmuring souls. He said
beware of the murmuring souls. I would say-throw away all the murmuring souls. That's the
only way. In Hindi as they say 'bakwasi' they are really 'bakwasi', means the ones who just
chatter, chatter, chatter, talk all nonsense about others. Doesn't know what he is. It is much more
in India I must confess, I am sorry though I am an Indian. It is a habit of talking ill of others, just
sitting and chit-chatting. They will not talk of Sahaj Yoga. How. many people know of Sahaj Yoga
proper way? I mean if I have to give degrees, what degree should I give you? Tell me.You
don't even know about your vibrations. Ofcourse you are Sahaj Yogis because you have fallen
into the trap of achieving evolution. But how many are really grown up into it? You can.
in
So I have to again and again tell you to make Me happy you have to give up all these nonsensical,
cheapish talks but try to understand from each other what we know of Sahaj Yoga. Discuss it and
contribute to this knowledge by describing your experiences of Sahaj Yoga. There are many who
do it, I am not saying that they don't do but even if there is one bad fellow he can spoil all of them
like one bad apple can spoil all apples. So what do we do-throw away the apple out of the
basket.
It is important to see, even I feel all this, standing like a witness to you, silent witness. When I see
big big mountains and I think they are like great saints who are watching and they are trying to
record what is happening in this world because they also understand. They also know. I have to
again and again tell you that today is the day to see your own self, to see your own chakras,
your own-I should say defects. That will give you permanentl joy, you have been promised.
You will get thoughtless awareness, also you will get doubtless awareness. But never get into the
trap of your ego and of your conditionings. This is what I have to tell you today, on this day,
when you are celebrating, that you celebrate your own birthday. Celebrate it, see for yourself
what have achieved and what you are going to achieve. It is time for you to celebrate, than
you
to celebrate My birthday. I will be very happy to celebrate your birthday than to celebrate Mine.
May God Bless You.
Vol IX Issue 3-4
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 SHIVARATRI PUJA
Talk by H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Delhi 16-3-1997(Synopsis, translated from Hindi)
Shiva is the reflection of Sadashiva. Shiva's form is in our heart all the time in the formof our
spirit. It resides there. I would not say it is enlightened. When the Kundalini is awakened, then:
this Shiva gets awakened and this gets awakened in our nerves. Chaitanya is said to be 'Medha
Sthiti'.
First our heart and our brain get connected. Otherwise, ordinarily a person's brain goes one
and the mind runs the other way. When this union takes place, the light that is there within us,
which comes from our spirit, flows in the form of Chaitanya from our heads and our fontanel
bone area What we have to understand further is that when this light comes within us, then
gradually we see that our life changes. Our anger and other vices, start vanishing. Gradually all
these things drop off and devotion is established within us. In devotion, a sense of detachment
awakens, Nothing is important any more.
way
The form of Shiva is highly evolved. He is not bothered about anything. His hair is dishevelled,
he is not bothered about the type of clothes he is wearing, what he should do. All this work he
has given to Vishnu. He is himself detached from all this. His vehicle is Nandi who cannot in any
way be tamed. Wherever it takes, Shiva goes there. Shiva is never bothered about what people
might say, because he is contained within Himself. When he came for his wedding Shri Vishnu
saw him and thought, "How could he be bridegroom for my sister?" But Parvati knew that it
was only he who was worthy of her.
He was a happy-go-lucky type of person. He was not bothered about anything. When one rises
above everything, then for Him everything is alike. His attention never goes there. This form of
Shiva that we see, we find very endearing.
When the Shiva tattwa gets awakened in Sahaja Yogis, their life also starts changing. When
people come to Sahaja Yoga, both men and women, are very fond of dressing up. All the attention
is on what they should wear. There are many beauty clinics and things and women are very
caught up in all this. But when, by getting enlightened, you become beautiful from within, then
all these things cease to be important and one looks only for the comfort of the spirit. One stays
away from bodily comforts: See these foreign Sahaja Yogis, they live in big houses, they have
everything, but when they come here, they are contented within themselves. It's not so
with Indians. Indians now also, wherever they travel, they need attached bathrooms and all
cars and
sorts of things. Still, they are not able to rise above all this. I am surprised to find that in a poor
country like India people still have so many desires left. These people said, "Mother, take a big
• 10•
Vol. IX Issue 3-4
Divine Cool Brecze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 place for an ashram.' Our Indians never live in an ashram. When we made this ashram, with
such hard work and a lot of expenditure, nobody was prepared to live in it. We said we will pay
you a salary to live in it, still they were not prepared. For My birthplace, Chhindwara, we spent
So much money and I said that retired Sahaja Yogis should stay there, the climate is very nice, it's
a hill station. But nobody is prepared to go. Everybody is bothered about their comfort. My
house, my place, my wife, my food should be cooked in this manner. They will eat only special
kind of food. We Indians are so conditioned up by our tastes; with the foreigners it is not so. By
meditation until we overcome all this, we cannot ascend.
In the matters of sacrifice, we lag behind. For the purchase of land, for NGO project, Sahaja Yogis
were asked to pay a little more puja money. But there was a lot of hue and cry, complaints and all
that. I have been doing everything without taking any money from you. How does it matter if
you give a little more money for a noble cause? I have seen many sacrificing people in My
lifetime, but, nowadays, this spirit couldn't be seen. I don't see it nowadays. I know about My
mother, if she had even one saree more than six, she would give it away. When, people come to
Cabella, I am surprised, they want separate rooms, they do not want to stay with everyone. One
who cannot be collective, cannot be a Sahaja Yogi. He still thinks, 'I am special, I must have some
special arrangements'. He is a Sahaja Yogi in name only. One who worships Shiva, he should be
like Shiva. You make him sleep anywhere, give him anything to eat, one who is not bound by
time, is not bound by anything, only such a person is Sahaja Yogi. And you have Shivji's
Pradurbhava' (manifestation) in you. But to attain this, God knows, what Tapasya people undergo,
and anywhere you go they will snatch all your money and what not. It is not so in Sahaja Yoga.
But this Vriti' (tendency) that we have in ourselves, we should give up. We should try and see
what all we can give up. Until you do not get this 'masti' (ecstacy) within you, you cannot be
called a worshipper of Shiva.
Mataji has all types of worshippers, there is nothing special about that. Whatever they do, a
Mother is a Mother, Mother will forgive them. But by being forgiven, you cannot reach that state.
In forgiveness the most important thing is that one should always ask for Shiva's forgiveness
because we are at each step doing things we should not be doing. So we should ask for forgiveness
from Shiva Shambhu. We make this mistake and that mistake, we have this need and that need-
till we have these needs within us, we should keep asking forgiveness from God. This feeling of
possessiveness-my house, my wife-until we can overcome this, we cannot be Shiva Bhaktas.
In this regard, it is very surprising that while foreigners who have never heard of Shiva's name
have benefitted so much, we are still caught in small things and consider that so important. To be
Shiva means that the hatred and negativities that are there within us, we should give them up.
But even after coming to Sahaja Yoga, people are unable to see themselves. I have heard there is
Divine Coul Breeze
Vol IX Issue 3 4
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 a mother-in-law who is ill-treating her daughter-in-law. When I asked her why she is doing so,
she said, I have never ill-treated anyone.' Really? They will go to the cinema and see a mother-
in-law ill-treating her daughter-in-law arnd start crying, but they will come home and do the
same thing. Or, the daughter-in-law will ill-treat the mother-in-law and will say that I have
never ill-treated anyone'. Without being truthful within, you cannot ascend in Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja Yoga changes your life, you have become pure like gold, and gold cannot be tarnished.
have become that, reached that state. Why is it that you are still slaves of these
Now
you
innumerable things in this world? This is the speciality of Kundalini, that it cleanses you
completely. Now, service. Yes, you should do service too, but I really do not require any service
from you. I am self contained. What are you going to do for Me? The only thing is that you
should also be self contained and enjoy yourself. In that state of joy, you should think that all
these things are meant for enjoyment and that by doing Sahaja Yoga when you are already in that
state of joy, then why do you need to do all this?
After much brooding, I have come to the conclusion that Sahaja is very simple and that's why it
is very difficult. If somebody is there standing with a stick and saying, 'alright now shave off
your heads, wear saffron clothes', hunger strike for 14 days, then it will be alright. But accepting
Sahaja with heart, mind and brain, one should condemn one's misdeeds and improve oneself;
why do I do like that? Should have I done that? By doing this, you will be able to give up many
HWEL
bad things and find that you are 'Samartha' (Capable). You have no needs, no desires, you are
sitting comfortably. And it is surprising that when the Chaitanya knows that you require nothing,
then it will serve you a platter full of everything. May be that it is to tempt you. There is no need
of yours that it cannot fulfil.
Today we did so much 'Avahan' (invocation) of Shivji and he actually likes this sort of people.
The difference between Him and Me is that I like all sort of people. He only likes those kind of
people who have given up all this. We have these conditionings for everything-we should wear
this type of clothes. If we don't; so what? But in Sahaja, Sanyas is not from the outside, but from
within. From within, you become a Sanyasi and then no desire remains. Wherever you are, you
are joyful. First there were 'Nath Panthis', they used to wander all over and they taught people
a lot of things. I am surprised, how much these people travelled! When I went to Colombia I
found out that these people had even reached Bolivia. When you go to Colombia in an aeroplane,
feel giddy, it is at such a height, and at that time people used to go on foot. So I don't
you
understand how these people might have reached there. In Russia also and other countries they
travelled. How they lived, how they travelled all over, what they wore, no-one knows! Because
you reach that state where you become a miraculous person, like 'Shirdi Sainath'. He
appears
anywhere, helps anyone. People say, 'Mother, we saw him'. I say, "Yes, it is possible'. Such people
Vol. IX Issue 3-4
•12•
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 become immortal because the killing tendecies in them get finished and that make them mortal.
They become immortal. And to achieve this immortality is the real puja of Shivji.
SHIVARATRI PUJA
Talk in English-Delhi 16-3-1997
Today I'm going to tell you about the internal happening within us. When you get your
there are eleven rudras. They are particles or 'anshas' of Shiva's powenrs and all of them try to
realisation,
take out or to remove all the false ideas we have about life. When the Kundalini rises they all
get
enlightened. For example, Buddha had a part of that, Mahavira had a part of that. Now all of
them, control us from falling into the brain of various things. Like, we have an ego, so
will look after the ego part. He will see that you get shocked by your ego. You will be quite
amazed how you could be so egoistical, so insulting and so humiliating. But when this rudra is
not awakened, when there is no light in this rudra, then what happens? You start justifying
yourself. You think whatever you do is correct, whatever you have done, whatever you have
said, whatever you have achieved, you think, is your right. You have done nothing wrong. For
that, this Buddha's rudra has to be a awakened.
Buddha
become
On the contrary, if you go on pampering your ego, if you go on becoming egoistical, you
absolutely a right-sided personality. Once you are a right-sided personality you know what all
the symptoms there are of such a person. Now for that if you just watch and introspect and see
for yourself what
Mohammed Saheb had said beat yourself with shoes. He did not know what else to tell. Because
ego has done to you, what wrong ideas you had about yourself, that's why
this ego business can really burst your head completely and you may land up into so many
difficulties. Ultimately people develop this Yuppies disease where the conscious mind becomes
absolutely useless, cannot move. Consciously people cannot move, unconsciously, they will, but
not consciously. And this disease is so horrible that a person becomes like a reptile. You have to
carry them on your body they can't walk on their own, they can't sit on their own. At a very
young age this can happen.
So try to see your ego and control it and feel repentant about it. In Sahaja Yoga there is nothing
like
repentance because we believe that you all have got your realisation, you are beyond any
mistakes. It is not true. We have to repent. In English there is a word, 'sorry'. For everything they
say, 'sorry.' Even telephone, when they pick up, they say, 'sorry.' I said, 'sorry for what? This
sorry' itself is very empty, it has no meaning, it has no depth. When you say, 'sorry,' you have to
see why you are saying, 'sorry,' and what is to be corrected. It's a very big problem with today's
generation, where people have developed such tremendous ego because all our economic growth,
all our industrial developments, all our big big organisations, all of them have given us a say that
we should all develop our ego. If we don't develop our ego we will be lost, we will be nowhere.
• 13 .
Vol. IX Issuc 3-4
Divine Cool Breeze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 That's how we start pampering it and then this right-sided problem starts. Then as a reaction, it
goes to the left side and actually, in the head, it is on the right side. The right side ego comes up.
The left Rudra is that of Mahavira. So people do things which are sinful, which are wrong, which
are against Shri Ganesha.
Then also there are controlling powers of Mahavira who controls. He says you will go to hell,
this will happen; he describes all the hells, that you will go to hell and will be buried alive-1
don't know-all kinds of things described to frighten you. But that doesn't help. So people start
getting more onto the left side and to this Rudra. When this Rudra gets helpless then a tremendous
depression comes. One feels very depressed-'Oh God, what a depression I have, I'm so sick!
Then you try to frighten others with your depressions. You show, what we call, an emotional
blackmail. All kinds of things you will do and beat your head. Could be through ego, could be
through this left side problem.
These two Rudras are very important because they are directly connected with our left and right
sympathetic nervous system. So it is very important to see that you do not fall a prey
Rudras. These Rudras are to be satisfied. So to be normal, at least, look after these two rudras
to these
which are: one that controls the ego, and another who controls self-pity. 'I just can't do it, this,
that', and all kinds of depression. All this works out into very serious physical problems like
cancer. If the Rudras are caught up, you develop cancer. But all this portion gets swollen up. It is
called as the 'medha'. You can see a cancer patient having a swelling all over. At least would be
here or may be there (on the left or right forehead). There is such a swing in the nature of a
person that you can't say from which Rudra they have developed these psychosomatic troubles.
Psychosomatic troubles, all of them, come because the Rudras have become ineffective. It can be
due to the depressive nature or oppressive nature. It could be due to many other factors also, but
all these factors are nothing but part and parcel of Shri Shiva's or Sada Shiva's powers. He is the
one who is full of 'Karuna', full of compassion. He is the ocean of compassion. If you ask him for
forgiveness, he will forgive. But if you think everything you have done is good, you never tortured
anybody, you have never made anybody suffer, then it krnows, Shiva knows everything. And
because he knows he starts giving up.
There is a big combination of your will power to he there and the combination of the blessings of
Shiva. When the Shiva blesses you your will power also heightens. But you must have full will
power to know that you have to be of a higher level of personality. He was not at all a mundane
type. Supposing, ask Shiva to go tó some party, how will He look like! There, people will laught
at Him.
When I met some hippies and asked them, "Why are you having this kind of hair"? They said,
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol. IX Issue 3-4
14•
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 "We want to be primitive." I said, "But the brain is modern, what's the use of having primitive
hair." So, deception, deceiving yourself is not going to help. Best thing is to face yourself and
understand what wrong you have been doing. If it works out, I tell you, so many Sahaja Yogis
you are sitting here, if you correct yourselves and become that, I am sure that all the problems,
political and economic problems will be finished. But today it's such a mixture, due to Kali Yuga,
that even the worst people are carrying on.
Now we have a responsibility to save this world. We have a responsibility to create a great,
honourable life which is not superficial, which is not jLust to show off, but inside it should develop
so that this light of your spirit spreads and enlightens this world. It's very important to understand.
All these troubles and psychosomatic diseases and all other problems which are in a collective
way, we can call, of the Kali Yuga, like political, economic, all these problems only are created by
human beings. They are not created by the Divine Force. Divine Force tries to neutralise them. If
there are many Sahaja Yogis who are practising Sahaja Yoga, in the real sense of the word, if that
could be done, if that could be achieved, then I think we can do a lot. A lot for the betterment of
humanity and that's why we have got realisation. It's not only for yourself, it's not only for your
family, it's not only for your city or country but for the whole world Sahaja Yoga is going to work
out.
Now if you
have to do competition, you must do competition only in your ascent and in nothing
else. But people are so superficial that they think by showing off or by becoming something, a
big Johnny, they will achieve something of a very great level. It is not so. It has to be a very
humble attitude towards yourself, also, so that you understand that whatever you are doing is
for the betterment of global problems. Absolutely we can solve, because you are the channels of
the Divine. If I could do it alone I would have done it, but I can't. So that's why Ihad to gather
you all and to tell you that you have to become the channels. But in the meanwhile, you are
enjoying, you are enjoying life, every second becomes a joy, which is also the gift of Shiva. Shiva
is the one who creates this great admiration and this great appreciation of every moment,
everything that is done, And that is the state you have to achieve, by not condemning yourself or
not by pampering your ego, but by seeing what you are. That's the main thing one has to see
that, what problems you have? What is troubling you is yourself only. If you could just come to
that point of understanding, I'm very very sure that you will be such an asset to help and make
this world look at itself and change, because superficially you cannot change such deep-rooted
problems. You are being so blessed by Kundalini that you can really become a great torch, Torch
on the path of truth, love and joy.
May God bless you,
Vol. IN Issue 34
15 •
Divine Cool Brecze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 MEDICAL CONFERENCE
Talk by H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
St. Petersburg, Russia – 14.4.94
I am so much surprised that scientists are talking of morality, is something unusual. It's only in
Russia people can do that. Because science is Amoral and it has nothing to do with spirituality.
Find that your people are so advanced that you want to know about spirituality. Spirituality is
meta-science. The morality sense has come now to science and scientific research that they are
realising that there are genes in the Human beings which get you to mutation.
There are two genes specifically, which look after our morality. With one gene mutation we do
sin against the Mother. Sin against the mother is that you indulge into things which are immoral.
Everything that is self destructive. This self destruction is what we call immorality. The second
gene in Human beings goes into mutation when you do the sin against the Father. Against the
father the mutation takes place when we are aggressive, violent, we are thieves or do things
which are improper in the legal way. These genes get into mutation and then person starts doing
all kinds of things. Either he starts destroying himself or he starts destroying others. Thank God
they have now reached the state of genes in medical science. l am sure they will find out these
two mutation bound genes in Human beings. Only through traditions of moral life can these be
preserved. In the democratic countries, freedom was given, so they went absolutely haywire.
These two genes have gone into such mutation, that people do not even know that they are doing
something wrong. In a way science has shown that going beyond limits of science one can get
reactions. When there is no limit of production of anything which is scientifically found out,
people go on producing things like atom bomb, hydrogen bomb, all kinds of things. Now there
is a big movement to stop the production of these bombs. This aggressiveness which started in
scientific advancement went too far. They dominated so many countries and destroyed so many
people. The second part which is the sin against the Mother where people have taken to drugs,
alcohol, womanising, all kinds of wrong things, In America you cannot talk against homosexuality,
because homosexuals gave votes for Clinton to be elected. Now with this Aids reaction what is
happening is that they have now become like martyrs, they think it is a very big thing they have
done because their ego now is hurt, they do not want to admit that they have done mistake, that
they have got this Aids, this horrible disease
But who creates the genes and who puts them into mutation? In science there is no answer yet.
Here you see within yourself - this is the mechanism. This is a very subtle built in system
within us. You are all scientists here, so you should have an open mind. Whatever I am telling
you today is before you some sort of hypothesis. If it is true then you have to accept it as honest
people, because it is for the benevolence of you as individuals, for the benevolence of your
country and benevolence of the whole world. Here you see a triangular bone which is called as
Divine Cool Breeze
16.
Vol IX Issue 3-4
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 sacrum" which Greeks knew- as a sacred bone. In this bone lies a power of pure desire, all
other desires are not pure. Today you want to buy a house, then a car, then a helicopter, you go
on buying, you are never satisfied. According to economics, wants are not satisfied in general.
This is the pure desire within us. You may be aware of it or may not. Now what is the pure
desire? The pure desire is to be the spirit. You are not this body, you are riot this mind, you are not
this intellect, you are not these emotions, your ego, but you are pure spirit. In the evolutionary
state you have reached a state which we calla human beings. But it's not the end of the journey.
Even in science you find out something, then somebody else comes and says, no that's not so.
We do not know the absolute truth. If we had known the absolute truth there would have been
no quarrels, no fights, no wars. This is meta science, but it was known in My country thousands
of years back. If I have done anything, is this that I have brought this knowledge to the masses.
It's nothing great, all human problems create world problems, and all fugal problems come from
these centres, which are our foundations. These centres act on the left and on the right. The left
side sympathetic and the right side sympathetic are not doing the same work. They do two
absolutely different. In the centre is the parasympathetic nervous system. It is meta-science.
types,
I need not tell doctors, they know that when you want to run you can increase the beat of the
heart. In emergency sympathetic acts. But the heart is brought to normal by parasympathetic.
Now on top of the brain these channels go and create from the left side, they cross over in the
optic chiasma, And they created a balloon like thing. From left side activity you get your
conditionings. This can be called as psyche but psyche is ugly word.
Say a mother is nursing the child and the child is very happy, but she turns him round so he
doesn't like it. So the like of ego starts, then she scolds him, "don't do like this". Then the first line
of conditioning starts. Thus we live either on ego or on conditioning. We see these beautiful
flowers, but they are miracles, aren't they. Who creates these flowers? If you ask a doctor, who
runs your heart he'll say it is the autonomous nervous system, But who is this auto? This thev
cannot answer. Now this Kundalini which is in the triangular bone is your mother, is your
individual mother.
She knows everything about you, she's a doctor, and also a psychologist, and a scientist. She
thinks, she understands, above all she loves. Everyone of you have this power; this power when
awakened passes through six centres above. These six centres are responsible for you physical,
emotional, mental and spiritual being. The second centre is called swadisthana which is on the
physical side manifest as aortic plexus. Only we'll deal with one today and you'll be amazed
how many diseases can be cured if this one centre can be enlightened. The function of this centre
because it moves and can also contract, is like a lotus. The function is to look after liver, pancreas,
spleen, kidneys and intestine. It has another very important work, is to convert the fat for the use
of the grey cells. Now, the scientists have not reached that point. A person who thinks too much,
is futuristic, he plans. Such a person uses the energy of his grey cells, isn't it? This centre becomes
• 17•
Divine Cool Breeze
Vol IX Issue 34
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 concerned about the supply of the energy, So all these organs start suffering from starvation.
First attack is on liver. The function of liver is to deliver the poison form the body into the blood.
I'm talking in general. Now what happens that the heat aceumulates in the liver. Such a person,
starts becoming thin because there is poison in the liver. He becomes hot tempered. He develops
skin troubles. Then this heat can start moving to other organs because other organs are also
suffering. When it goes to the pancreas people start suffering from a disease called Diabetes.
Diabetes can only happen to people who are futuristic, who sit on the seat, plan things. In My
country the farmers take at least six spoons of sugar in one cup of tea, they don't get Diabetes
because whatever they earn they spend and sleep off. This disease is more in the west.
TME
In the west people have insurances, all kinds of problems if they even have a small little thing.
It's a mad race of insurance. Now the other, spleen is the most important. I don't know about
Russia but in the other western countries people sleep very late. They have to attend drinking
parties, dancing parties, maddening parties. Then they get up very early, somehow or other they
dress up hectically and start reading newspaper. Now our spleen is a speedo-meter. It creates
red blood cells as you krnow very well when there is an emergency. But the life is so hectic and
then to read newspaper in the morning, you get such a shock that this poor spleen starts wobbling.
Then they get into the car and there is a traffic. They get upset and go to the office and the boss
starts shouting at them. They are just slaves of the time. Even if somebody is one minute late they
will shout for fifteen minutes. This poor spleen doesn't know how to cope with this hectic
personality. That also become hectic and vulnerable to blood cancer. I must tell you that, truthfully,
that blood cancer has been cured by Sahaja Yoga, without changing blood, without doing anything.
Third thing is the kidney. With this heat the kidney also coagulates, so you cannot pass your
urine. Then you go for dialysis and die bankrupt. Now this can also be cured by this Kundalini
awakening. There is no need at all to go in for dialysis. People get constipated, some develop
terrible constipation at the end of the large intestine. Apart from that, when this heat rises above,
it reaches the heart. If there is a young boy who is drinking too much, who is maybe playing
tennis or something very hard game, and who thinks too much, such a young boy can get a heart
attack which is always Fatal. Also people get it in old age as this heat rises and contracts the
heart.
Then this heat rises even above and goes to the brain and constricts your arteries and you get
concussion of the brain on the left hand side. Left hand, because it crosses over and one gets
paralysis on the right hand side, there is a reaction. There are diseases on the left hand side also.
Now when it is on the left hand side your diseases are of a more serious nature. Left side gives
you psychosomatic diseases, all incurable diseases, right from muscular diseases, cancers, heart
angina, madness, lunacy, out of which lunacy is just somatic. All other are psychosomatic, they
come from viruses. Now on the left side is all our past since our creation, so there are many dead
vegetables which have gone out of the circulation of evolution. Dead animals, dead human beings.
• 18 •
Divine Cool Brecze
Vol. IX Isstie 3-4
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 When the attention starts moving towards the left, towards the past or you get a shock or you
start feeling sorry for something then it goes to the left. Russia has more left side I feel because of
whatever was the political situation before. One has to be in the centre because if you go to the
left there these viruses catch you or some dead animals will catch you, some micro animals
might catch you or some Hluman beings who are dead. So the possessions take place.
With the awakening of the Kundalini your attention is drawn in the centre. All the religions were
created to create a balance, not to go to extremes. But why the balance? Because with the balance
only you can ascend. All living work is done by all pervading Divine power. In the Bible it is
described as the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost. In the Koran as Ruh. And in Indian philosophy it
is described as Param Chaitanya, Adi Shankaracharya said, "Salilam, Salilam" means cool, cool.
You have to become one with that. That is the Yog. Once you are united with that all
pervading
power then you become empowered,
Our thoughts rise and fall, again rise and fall, and we are jumping on the cusp of the thoughts.
We cannot be in the present, and the reality in the present, when this Kundalini rises over this
centre on the optic chiasma, she creates present in you, become silent, thoughtlessly aware. You
are aware but thoughtless. You jump out of your problems also. If you are standing in the water
you are afraid of the high waves, but if you jump out of it into a boat you can see that, you can
enjoy them, but if you learn how to swim, you can jump in and save many. So you come into next
state that is doubtlessly aware. You have so many powers, potential in you, they are awakened.
In India many artists have become world famous, many painters have become world famous. It
is a bliss, actually you enter into the kingdom of God and all the time you feel you are being
looked after, guided, protected, that is your right, we call it Sahaja Yoga. "Saha" means with, "ja"
is born, means it is born with you, this right to be in this Yoga, this union, with the Divine, you
become divine automatically, you become absolutely moral, you become righteous, you enjoy all
your virtues, you become you own guide in the light of the spirit. Overnight people have given
up their drugs. This is the last breakthrough of our evolution.
Can you imagine Christ addressing you people like this? They crucified Him. Christ was a great
Divine personality, very great. He didn't understand human beings I think, because He was so
What He has said that if your eye commits a sin, take it out. If your right hand commits a
pure.
sin, cut it. In the West everybody would have been without hands and eyes if they had followed
Him. Then Mohammad Sahib thought that Christ has said about the men to be that strict, but for
women he didn't say anything. So He said about women. I just thought that first let them have
little light. Now supposing I am obstinate, I have a snake in My hand, and I'm standing in the
darkness. I don't want to listen to you. You go on telling Me there is a snake. I will not leave it till
it bites Me. But if there is a little light, immediately I'll leave it Myself. That is what I thought that
Human beings, if they get little light they will immediately change, and it has worked. I never
dreamt that Ill be able to address such people in Russia.
Divine Cool Brecze
• 19•
Vol IX Issue 3-4
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 If's really destined I think that such Divine people should be sitting before Me. In this short
lecture I'm sorry I can't tell you everything about Sahaja Yoga. In English language only I must
have given 5000 lectures, but lecture is just a mental acrobat, you have to go beyond it, and
achieve a stage of enlightenment. Enlightenment doesn't mean any brand, like born-again or
anything, it is actualisation and a becoming. It's not just talk, it is also not blind faith, this is an
actual happening. This happening has to take place, for which you don't have to pay. It is living
process when you put a seed in the Mother earth, it sprouts. How much does the Mother earth
take from us in money? Because it is built in the Mother earth to sprout and built in the seed to be
sprouted. It's a living process of spontaneity. Nobody can explain why are we on this earth,
nobody can say why when the foetus starts growing why don't we throw it away, as all foreign
things have to be thrown away out of the body? It is preserved, looked after, till it has to be
thrown, it is kept in the womb. Who does that? The other day somebody asked Me "why am Ion
this earth?" I said, "to become Divine and to enter into the Kingdom of God". So he said, "How
will that help me? I told him, first you enter, it will riot only help you physically, mentally,
emotionally, spiritually but it will help others". On your finger tips you can feel your centres. On
your finger tips you can feel the centres of others. Otherwise half of the people die only during
diagnosis. On your finger tips you can find out the trouble. They talk the language of centres.
You cann feel the vibrations of anyone whether dead, alive or far away. Now if you know how to
VOLur
correct, you can correct your centres and correct the centres of others, because who is the other,
you have become collective now, that means the microcosm has become a macrocosm, or a drop
has become the sea. This is your capacity, this is your glory, this is what you have to have as your
own. No obligation, it's all love and compassion. The power is of love, of Divine love, of pure
love without any lust or greed. We have never used the power of love. Now the time has come
and one day I am sure this Russia will be the leader of the whole world. This knowledge is
coming, say from an Indian person or India, but science has come from the West, so it doesn't
matter, if it is coming from the East why should people think it something low. All the wise
people will realise that they are the one.
May God Bless You All!
Vol IX Issue 3-4
20•
Divine Cool Brecze
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 108Names of Shri Krishna
He is the Lord of America.
Amerikeshwar
He is Shri Krishna. He sows and
cultivates the field of sprituality.
Shri Krishna
He is blue.
Maha Neela
He has Shree Shakti.
Shreedhar
He wears a pectambar (yellow
dhoti).
Peetambar Dhari
He plays the divine flute.
Venudhar
He has a beautiful face.
Sumukha
He holds all wealth.
Shreeman
His laughter is beautiful.
He is accessible only through Shri
Mataji
Suhasya
Nirmalagamya
He has perfect speech.
Subhash
Nirmala Pujak
He worships Shri Mataji.
He has perfect eyes.
Sulochan
He loves the devotees of Shri
Nirmal Bhakta
He has a perfect nose.
Sunasik
Mataji.
Priya
He has perfect teeth.
Sudant
Nirmal Hriday
He has the Lotus Feet of ShrI
Mataji in His heart.
He has perfect hair.
Sukesh
He needs no support
Niradhar
He has a peacock feather:
adorning His head.
Sikhandi
He is the Father of Christ.
Vishwadhar
He listens to all that is auspicious
Janak
Sushrut
He is Shri Vishnu.
Shri Vishnu
Sudarshan Dhari He uses the Sudarshan to protect
the seekers.
He is worshipped by Christ.
Maha Vishnu
Pujita
Maha Vira
He is a great warrior.
He is announced by Shri
Vishnumaya.
Vishnumaya
Sughoshita
He gives valour.
Shaurya Dayak
He is the master of the art oi
Rana Pandit
15
He is the Master of language.
Vageshwar
warfare.
Vageshwari
Bhrata
He is the Brother of Maha
Saraswati.
He runs away from the battlefield
to win the war.
Rana Chod
Vishnumayanuja He is the Brother of Shri
Vishnumaya.
He is the master of ParaI
Shrinath
15
Chaitanya.
He is the Brother of Draupadi.
Draupadi
Bandhu
He knows all the tricks.
Yuktivan
He is the greatest person
Akbar
He is the Friend of Arjuna.
Partha Sakha
He is the God of the whole
Akhileshwar
He is a true Friend.
Sanmitra
IFLue
LITIverse.
Vishwa Vyapi
He permeates the Universe.
He is the great being of which
everything else is part and parcel.
Maha Virata
He guards the Universe.
Vishwa Rakshi
He is the God of the Yogis.
Yogeshwar
He witnesses the cosmic play.
Vishwa Sakshi
He has Fatherly love for the Yogis.
Yogi Vatsala
Dwarakadheesha He rules over Dwaraka.
He describes Yoga as the
destination.
Yogavarnitha
He rules over the area of
Vishuddhi
Prantadheesha
the Vishuddhi.
Sahaja Sandesh
Vahak
Through Him we.can
communicate the message of
Sahaja Yoga.
He leads the people.
Jana Nayak
He protects the people of the land
of the Vishuddhi.
Vishuddhi Jana
Palak
Vol. IX Isstie 3-4
Divine Cool Breeze
21
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 He upholds
Dharma.
He is the giver of joy.
Vishwa Dharma
flag of Vishwa
Ananda
Dhwaja Dharak
Pradayaka
Garudarudha
He rides on the Garuda.
He is beyond form. He is formless.
Nirakar
He holds the mace.
Gadadhar
Anand Akbar
He is joy personified.
Shankhadhar
He is the joy of purity
He holds the conch.
Pavitranand
He holds the lotus.
Padmadhar
Pavitra Rakshak
He protects chastity
He holds the key to the cosmic
play.
Leeladhar
He enjoys the pure knowledge of
joy.
Gyananand
Damadar
He is very generous
Kalanand
He gives joy from the arts.
Govardhan Dhari He lifted Govardhan mountain to
Gruhananda
He gives the joy of the household.
protect the Gopas.
Dhanand
He gives joy from prosperity.
He looks after the benevolence of
the Yogis.
Yogakshema
Vahaka
He is the God of wealth and
properity.
Kubera
He always speaks the truth.
Satya Bhashi
He is the joy of the spirit.
Atmanand
Hita Pradayaka
He bestows benevolence.
He gives joy from Sahaj
collectivity.
Samuhanand
His speech is pleasing to the Spirit.
Priya Bhashi
He creates fearlessness.
Abhaya
Pradayaka
He gives joy of the Sahaj
collectivity.
Sarvanand
He destroys all fears.
Vishuddhanad
Bhay Nashaka
He gives pure joy.
Sadhak
Rakshaka
He protects the seekers of Truth.
Sangeetanand
He gives joy of music.
He gives joy of collective dancing.
Nrutyanand
Bhakta Vatsala
He loves devotees.
Shabdanand
He gives joy through words.
He destroys grief.
Shoka Hari
Maunand
He gives joy from silence.
He destroys sorrow.
Dukha Nashak
Sahajanand
He gives joy through Sahaj
culture.
Rakshasa Hantri
He is the Killer of rakshasas.
He opposed the Kuru family
which upheld adharma.
Kurukula
Virodhak
He gives absolute joy.
Paramanand
He is the source of absolutely
pure joy.
Niranand
Gokul Vasi
He resides in Gokul
He looks after cows
Gopal
He enjoys drama, the play.
Natya Priya
He enjoys cows.
Sangeet Priya
Govind
He enjoys music
Ksheer Priya
He is the highest of the Yadavas.
Yadu Kul
Shreshta
He enjoys milk.
Dadhi Priya
He enjoys curd.
Akul
He is beyond family attachments.
Madhu Priya
He enjoys honey.
He is the destroyer of disparities
accordance to caste, creed and
Vansh Dwesha
Ghrut Priya
He enjoys ghee.
Nashak
race.
He adores the amrut from the
Matru
Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji.
Charanamrut
Atma Gyan
Varnita
He describu the knowledge of the
Spirit.
Priya
Vol. IX Issue 3-4
Divine Cool Breeze
22
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 देवि प्रसीद परिपालय नोऽरि
भीतेर्नित्यं यथासुरवधादधुनैव सद्यः।
पापानि सर्वजगतां प्रशमं नयाशु
उत्पातपाकजनितांश्च महोपस्गान।।
देवीमहात्म्यम्
( एकादशोऽध्याय-३४)
"O Devi, be pleased and protect us always from fear of foes,
as you have done just now by the killing of asuras.
And destroy quickly the sins of all worlds and the
horrible calamities which have sprung
from the maturing of evil portents".
