Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue : 7& B 1997 "Like amall children you must have a very clean heart to accept, to nbsorb the benuty of peace that anything Her Holiness Mataji Shree NiTTAla Devi Birthday Puja, Delhi (21.3 1007)

 In this Issue: Sahaja Yoga World Centres 1 Shree Adi Shakii Puja - 1997 Shree Adi Shakti Puja Talk -25 May, 1997 Talk by H.H. Mataji Shree Nirmata Devi - 18.1.1983 11 Ayurvedie Medicine - History, Application and 16 Connection with Yoga News from Around the Wortd: March 1997 Auslralian National Puja and Public Programs 21 News trom Thailand 22 First Sahaja Yoga Pragrams in Croatia and Bosnia 23 Experiences in Norway Part Two 23 Back Cover illustration by Sharat Sameer Yogi Mahajan Edited by Published by: V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Münirka VIhar New Delhi-110 067

 Volume : IX Issue : 7& 8 1997 Divine Cool Breeze Sahaja Yoga World Centres Mr. Phillip Zeiss Kastanienstrasse 19 D 14624 Dallgow Germany Phone: Mr. Daniel Oyono B.P. 11771 Yaounde, Cameron Phone: Mr. Mohammed Said Ait-Chaalal 27 Avenue Pasteur Alger, Algeria Phone: Works: (237) 22 73 97 (Joseph Tsala) (213) 64 81 22 (213) 64 95 23 home: (49 3322) 20 88 70 (49 30) 315 25 66 (493322)20 24 73 ganeshiat @cs.tu-berin.de (karsten Radatz) Jay Chudasama 390 Dixon Road #612 Etobicoke OT Canada M9R 1TR Phone: Fax: work: Fax: Mr. Mariano Martinez Cuyo 937, Martinez 1640 Buenos Aires, Argentina Phone/Fax: (54 1) 798-9378 E-Mail: (1-1416) 614-7338 (1-416) 614-9521 (ashram) Vaibhav Khopade & Thodoris Xouleis Alkamenous 66-68 104-40 Athens Greece Phone/Fax: (30-1) 822 9262 Nadjilem Tolasde Moudjingar c/o Ndoubalengar Mdgaou S.A.C. N.P. 185 Ndjamena, Chad Nikkhil & Raani Varde Palm Apts 11B, Palm Beach 6D (Dutch Caribbean), Aruba Phone: Fax: E-Mail: (297) 839 662 (297) 839 253 nash@setarmet.aw Mr. Henno de Graaf Мг. Неппо Varikstraat 1 1106 CT Amsterdam Z.0., Holland Phone: Fax: E-Mail: Lyndan de Valle Room 304, Foreign Students Building Capital University of Economics & Business Hongmiao, Chaowai Beijing, China Phone: Mr. Michael Fogarty 20 Holly Street Castle Cove NSW 2069, Australia Phone/Fax: (61 2) 9417 5572 E-Mall: (3120)697-2038 (3120) 697-5131 degraaf@euronet.nl (86 10) 65 06 11 88 (86 10) 65 00 60 91 esis etpgi.com.au (John Dobbie) Mr. Alex Henshaw Flat D, 6/F, Lei Shun Court 116 Leighton Rd. Causeway Bay, Hong Kong Phone: Fax: Mrs. Marie-Laure Cernay Diag 110-Nr 19-15 Bogota, Colombia Phone/Fax: (571) 214-3971 E-Mail: Dr. Engelbert Oman AuhofstraBe 231/3/1 1130 Vienna, Austria Phone: home: (852 2) 573-8201 (8522)504-4779 (852 2) 504-4965 work: (43-1)877 7411 Fax: E-Mail: norbert klimt@south- smtech@hkstar.com Dr. Wollgang Hack Schonbrunner Alle 2331 Vosendorf, Austria Phone/Fax: (43-1) 609 1131 Cell Phone: (66-4) 422 5686 america.notes.pw.com Mr. Gyorgy Pohi Avar Ut. 17b H-1183 Budapest Hungary Phone/Fax: (36 1) 218 04 93 Work: E-Mail: Michel Bikindou 33 rue Owando-Ouenze Brazzaville, Congo Mr. Radim Ryska Koziskova 511 250 82 Uvaly, Czech Republic Phone/Fax: (42 2) 997 23 10 Work: E-Mail: Shri K. Madhusudan Pillai C.C. 85, ALBA Post Box 570 Bahrain Phone: (36 1) 169 53 41 lovasa ludens.elte.hu (Agnes Lovas) Mr. Yogi Mahajan 9, Bhagya Chintamani Society Paud Road, Opp. Octrol Post Kothrud, Pune 411 029, India Phone: (42 2) 519 33 94 ryska @s3.msmt.cz (973) 702 148 Belarus Minsk, UI. Ilimskaya Domi kv 56 Korotky Oleg Phone: Work: Mr. Rasmus Heltberg Hammelstrupvej 40, 2. tv 2450 Copenhagen SV, Denmark Phone: Work: E-Mail: (91 212) 33 58 85 Prof. Dr. U.C. Ral International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Centre Plot 1, Sector 8, CBD Navi Mumbai, India Phone: Fax: (45)3545 60 15 (45) 35 32 44 00 rasmus.heltberg@econ.ku.dk (7 0172) 62 68 27 (7 0172) 66 02 13 Bernard Cuveller Rue Piervenne 58 B 5590 Ciney, Belgium Phone/Fax: (32 55) 428 265 E-Mail: Alexel & Galina Kotlov Rohu 109-14 EE-3600 Pdrnu, Estonia Phone: (91 22) 757 6922 (9122) 757 6795 cuve skynet.be (372 44) 36 043 Mr. Paresh Duncan 11 Raglan Road Dublin 4, Ireland Phone: Mr. Raine Salo Javier Valderrama Los Pinos, Bloque 7, Apartamento 102 San Miguel, LaPaz, Bolivia Phone: Fax: Kuusikallionkuja 3 B 27 02210 Espoo, Finland Phone: (353 1) 660 7723 (3589)855 0934 (358 9) 621 4262 tuomas@cute,fi (Tuomas Kantelinen) (591 2) 790 870 (5912)391 782 Oleg Kotilarsky c/o Philippe Scheimann 30 A #3 Avoda St. 63821 Tel Aviv, Israel Phone: Fax: E-Mail: Mr. Edson Almeida Cond. Rural Vivendas da Serra Modulo C. Casa 4 Rod. DF-150, km 2,5 (Sobradinho) Brasilia DF 73070-014 Brazil Phone: Cell Phone: (55 61)983-9821 E-Mail: Mr. Antonio Mendes Nazare 47 Avenue du Muguet 93370 Montfermeil, France Phone: Fax: E-Mail: (972-3) 507 3911 philips @well.com (Philippe Scheimann) E-Mail: (33-1) 43 30 57 25 (33-1) 43 30 73 18 asy@world-net.sct.fr Mr. Guido Lanza Vocabolo Albereto 10 (5561)501-0834 02046 Magliano Sabina, Italy (39-744) 919-815 (39-744) 919-122 (39-744) 919-904 nirmala @etr.it Phone: Patrick Desire Akouma Nze B.P. 146 Libreville, Gabon marino @if.utrj.br Fax: E-Mail: Mrs. Rosa Alexieva clo Bulgaria Sofia - 1126 Galitchiza St. 25 Mr. M. Konstantinov Phone/Fax: (35 92) 628 024 E-Mail: Georgia 380094 Tbilisi UI. Sabutalo-Kutuzova kor 2, kv 13 Sandro Chubinidze Jean-Claude Laine 01 BP 2887 Bouake 01, Ivory Coast Phone: E-Mail: work: (225) 63 25 14 Amon AlricaOnline.co.ci Ivdei @ vmei.acad.bg (78832)38 95 24 Phone: (Amon Ettien)

 Divine Cool Breeze a Volume: IX issue 788 1997 Sahaja Yoga World Centres (contd.) Dr. Rajiv Kuma 20, V Madrigai Street, Corinthian Gardens Duezon City 1100, Metro Manilla, Philippines Phone Mr. Philippe Carton Himonya 6 chome 7-a Meguro-ku Tokya 152. Japan Phone/Fax E-Mail Roll Carisson Valhallanvagen TH 5-11422 Stockholn Sweden Phane: E-Mal (46-0) (6T-3) 3760 4434 pcartonsottiab.co.jp 16 77 17 (632 633 5633 (632) 632 2381 (632) 632 5709 ikumar mait asiatitavbank org toit.cartssonstocktatm mailiteta.com la.com. Fax. Work E-Mal. Mr. Armeau de 2 bia, Chemin Sous-Vole 1295 Mies, Switzerland Phone/Fax Kaibermaten 486 008 chimkent Mp. Tomanz Komack UL Baczynskiego 20 m 17 05-092 Lomiariki inr. Warnew Poiand Phora/Fax (41 22) 779 20.37 Bondareriko Dima Phane 17 3252) 12 13 B8 ME Wen-Cheng Lu 2F. No. 13, Alley 3, Lane 106 Sec 3, Ming Chuan East Rd sung Shan Distrct Taiphi City. Taiwan (R.O.C.) Phone: (48 22) 7513520 Didier Gauvin French School of Narobi (Callege Diderut) P.O, Box 47525 Nairobi, Kenya Phone Calarina de Castro Freire R. Garcia de Crta, 70-1C Lisboa-1200, Portugal Phone Eome (8BE 2) 715 5208 351-1) 396-314g (254 2) 56 62 59 Prakash Sreshthaputra Apt 38, 19 Sol Samanchan Sukumvit 42 10110 Bangkok, Thailand Phone/Fax Mr. Dan Costian Sir. Constantin Nacu No.8 70219 Bucharest. Romania Phone Fax EMll Ms Iriria Solomenikova Riga, Latvia Phone (0132) 25 93 42 (66-2) 391 44 75 (40-1) B13-58-82 (40-1)912-69-94 dcostian syrom.sfos.ra Gertruda Sargaunane Staneviciaus 66-64 Vilnius 2029 Lithuania Phone: E-Mall Claire Cupari 13 Starboard Drive, Schooner Coun Westmoonings, Trinidad Aussin Tertaetmt.wow.nut (Tettance Aleong) 142700 Mascoskaya Oblast (37 02) 47 81 43 vkaEpubost. (suby lo Gartruda") Vidnoe-2, UL Vokzalriaya 19 E-Mail Dr. Bohdan Shnhovych Phone Fax: E-Mail Tunisia do Mr. Yaucel Brahimi Roggegasse 40 1210 Wien, Austria Phone: (7 095) 5413745 bogdan@sahaja msk su Goitchoo Stevkovski Partenie Zogralski 77A 01000 skopje, Macedonia Phone (389 home (43 1) 2929 956 Aziz Gueye s/o de Serigue MBeye Gueye Direction CFAO-BP 2631 Dakar, Senegal 91) 22 62 75 Hilat Koray Cayirbasi cad 8-4 Buyukdere B0B90 Istanbul, Turkey Phone Fax, E-Mail: Mr. Ivan Tan 17, Jalan 14/52 46100 petaling Java Selangor, Maiaysia Phone Fax E-Mal Mr Erie Sopholas Belönle Mahe Seychelles Phone (00) 212 218 1232 的2125159670 Cicaksa donuk tomtr (Satfet Cicekdag) (60 3) 774 4750 (60 3) 718 7128 rhertanjanng my (248) 24 400 ext 545 ME Patrick B. Shorif po Siera Rutile Limited PO. Box 59 Freetown, Sierra Leone Phone Talex: Ukraine Kiev-252-190, Estonskaj 5/80 Galina Sabirova Phone: Graciela Vazquez-Diaz Tejocotes 56-201 Col del Valle Mexico D,F 03100 Mexico Phone/Fax E-Mail: (7 044) 442-68-71 (232) 25316 3259 Frank Glannasi Al Faheemi Building, Cathay Lid PO Box 25421 Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates Phone (52 5) 575 1949 indoamci@tn.netmx Siivestor irs clo Etika Hutacova Polnohospodarska 32 Vrakuna Bratislava 62107, Slovakia Phone E-Mail Semmerova) Mr. Herbert Wiehart Gourmet Vinna Chha 1-705 Thamel, Kathmandhu, Nepal Phone/Fax (971 2) 31 29 95 ME Derek Lee Shudy Camps Park House Shudy Carmps Cambridgeshire CB1 6AD United Kingdom Phorie Work Fax (42.7)24 95 16 GeImimerov@cvtstuba.sk (suska (977 1) 41548E Mr. Geotf Platord Francis Curtis Ave, Biockhouse Bay Auckland New Zediand Phone Fax E-Mail Mr. Dusan Hados Valjceva 6 1360 Vihnlia. Slovenia Phone EMail (44 179) 958 A68E (44 122) 363 271 (44179) 958 019 (64-9) 627 922594 Twba uctrogen.ne (Detashin Bhatacharjen) (386) 61 755369 troha @Int.uni-lj s (Bostjan Troha) Mr. Manoj Kurmar 75 South Franklin Avenue Bergentield NJ 07621, USA Phone Fax: E-Mail: Dr. Siva Govendel PO Box 729 Laxmi 3207 Natal, South Africa Phone Fax: E-Mail. Sidsel Mugtord Myrlia 31 1453 Bjornemyr Norway Phone Fax E-Mall: (1-201) 384-5034 (1-2011 384-0820 manoj_kumar@merck.com (27-331) 424484 (27-331) 425685 G=Deena S-GovenderOU-1751PMFS TMZA LINIOLANGATE (47 56) 915608: mugford@online no E sprit.com Virpinia Cury Cale Leyenda Patria, 2990/201 Villa Biaritz Montvideo Uruguay Phone: Melise Rodriguez Calle Louis Pasteur 1271 San Isidro, Limi Peru Phone: Mr. Jose-Antonia Salgado Santa Virgilia 16 28033 Madrid, Spain. Phone Fax: (34-1) 764 3767 (54-1) 564 1457 (59 82) 717 899 7315 ( 51-74) 227

 Volume IX I sue: 7& 8 1997 DIvine Cool Breeze ESUA Shree Adi Shakti Puja 1997 Cabella, 23-25 May HE Adi Shakti Puja was performed in Not pasta again !' came from the man just home, Cabella with the hosting countries being and people were tired of waiting for everyone to come to eat, so they started the mantra quickly so people would hurry up. Of course the phone Belgium, Holland, Spain, Finland, Sweden, Denmark and Norway. We enjoved sunshine, cool nights, and warm days, along with the pleasure rang and disturbed everyone while eating, and of again being welcomed to these Divine grounds. when about 40 people wanted to attend the The flower room was once more filled with the evening's Sahaja Yoga program, it was Too much most beautiful scents from all the flowers. The !Not possible. roses were tremendous with big thick stems and they were just beautiful. (I have never seen such roses.) The second act was an improvement on the first act. The manners improved slightly but still vou could feel the tension and it took a third act to get the act together.' The audience was thrilled, but Shri Mataji commented afterwards Entertainment Evening We are all anxiously awaiting Shri Mataji's arrival that, It is just like that some places,' so many at the entertainment evening, and the very special yogis and yoginis had to introspect as well as experience of this moment. All our little hearts are laugh at our own silly behaviour. so excited and the sight of our Mother fulfils all the little hearts so much that the little hearts performed an Indian candle dance. The Belgians become bigger to fit it all in. And sometimes the love is so tremnendous that the hearts get so full Song, Mama. They also performed a play in which of love and it overflows and manifests in tears, It must be the lovetears that come because it feels like we have been a little lost again and the performances with humour, dance slides, videos, sight of our Mother reassures us that She is quotes of Shri Mataji and singing, to demonstrate always with us. Later four Belgian girls came up and sang a beautiful sorg devoted to Shri Mataji, Your the central focus is a lady who wants to go into meditation. Meanwhile there are many different the problems, peace, joy, surrender, and The entertainment evening started beautifully collectivity in her meditation. In the end she joins with the children from Holland singing The Mouse of Shri Ganesha so sweetly, and they all had big English about the visions for the coming world. mouse ears on their heads. Again the joy tears Next, an Indian dance was performed showing entered our eyes. The beauty of innocence seems also to have this effect of overflowing the heart. also a video made by the Antwerp Yuva Shakti At the end of the song, the big screen focused on the little boy who did not sing at all, just sitting Wake Lip World was sung later in the evening. down looking at everyone a little seriously with his little mouse ears on his head. A moment of they have a wonderful feeling of rhythm which quietness occured and then he spontaneously did really awakens the heart (anyone being on the left namaskar. The timing was perfect, and this got would wake up for sure!). This rhythm gives the the evening started with lots of laughter. The theatre act from Holland simulated more limits. The spanish sing beautifully and it 'ashram life.' It was in three acts, the first one is always a pleasure to listen to them. They showing the not-so-ideal way of living. The story represent the atma, the spirit, on the world chart, was set around dinner-time when peaple came back from work, others were cooking, and some. were still playing on the computer. The comment, the collective when they sing a qawwali in the ten incarnations of shri Vishnu. There was about surrender with the song, Our Holy Mother. The Spanish delivered a heavenly drum solo. feeling of really being alive, and that there are no and it can be felt through their performances very much. The Finnish performed traditional

 Divine Cool Breeze Volune : IX Issue:788 1997 Scandinavian-Finnish dance which expressed the in the background!) The evening was as brother-sister relationship. It was a very collective wonderful as the previous year and we all dance performed by eight yogis, and at the end enjoyed, laughed, and introspected through the the audience was invited to join in a ring dance. evening. It was not too difficult and great fun. They wore beautiful traditional costumes which represent The Puja different parts of the country. They also showed us a video from the collectives in Finland. Sakshi from Holland also very bravely before the puja to cool us down and get us ready. performed a raga, and when her partner could not make it she had a stand-in to accompany her, but the second microphone did not work so we could only hear Sakshi. Incredible! Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. were impressed and there was big applause and admiration from all of us. Beautiful violin music was also played and we all entered Nirvichara imnmediately. One of them was from Jules Massenet's Meditation. (It is funny countries. Thank you again, Mother, for making because as I am sitting here trying to remember the details of every performance so I don't miss anything, this piece of music came on my radio We were nicely sprinkled with some drops of rain The puja was tremendous, and the main message was that we really have to introspect and face ourselves to go deeper. Do the simplest things like footsoak and clear ourselves regularly. Manifest our desire in our daily lives, and give realization. On the Monday it was packing up again to go back home, and we were full of vibrations. We left the Holy grounds to spread the love to our it all possible. - Sidsel Mugford, Norway

 Divine Cool Breeze Valume IX lssus: 7&8 1997 Shree Adi Shakti Puja Cabella Ligure, 25th May, 1997 Talk by H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi WODAY we are going to do the puja of Adi as it could, and then it manifested on the surface Shakti. It is a difficult subject, to talk about of the earth as different chakras. So it's Adi Shakti, because it is not easy to tremendous similarity that we have with Virata, understand that Adi Shakti is the power of the Mother Earth and the human beings. If all of Sadashiva. Sadashiva is the God Almighty- She them are being reflected by the Adi Kundalini, so, is his breath, as some people call it, some say she is the desire and some say that she is the entire If is not understood by human beings how they power of Sadashiva and Sadashiva cannot do are connected to this Mother Earth. This anything without her powers. This subject has been described by many creating different centres in the Mother Earth and people in various books in different ways. But ultimately broke through Kailasha. And, I don't actually we need not go to the background of the know how many of you have been to Kailasha? creation of Adi Shakti - for that at least you need at least seven lectures. But we'll come to the Kailasha. point where Adi Shakti started working on this Mother-Earth. there has to be a great cornection between them. Kundalini passed through different centres, You will see tremendous vibrations flowing out of Now the way we insult our Mother Earth, what we are doing is we are insulting the Adi The first thing is, we must know, that she Shakti. So many ways there are, we should created Kundalini in the Mother Earth itself and respect the Mother Earth. I mean it was an Indian custom to begin with, when you got up from It is very interesting. So the Mother Earth your bed and you touched the Mother Earth with becomes a very important thing for us. If you do your feet you have to say, "Oh! Mother Earth I am touching you do not know how to respect ourselves. The with my feet." All the movements of Mother Earth are controlled by this inner Kundalini which is the reflection of Adi Shakti. The gravity that it she created Shri Ganesha out of the Mother Earth. not know how to respect the Mother Earth, we please forgive me because expression of Adi Shakti within you is the Kundalini, no doubt. That is the reflection of Adi Shakti in you. But the reflection in the Mother has also is the manifestation of the Kundalini of the Mother Earth. Earth is also expressed, as you all know, in different places, different countries, different cities Now, why we are suffering in this beautiful as the manifestation of chakras and Adi Shakti's planet because we do not respect what we have creations. It was very important first to create a to respect the most. Mother Earth is to be very Holy Mother Earth for human beings to be respected. Meaning what? Meaning that whatever is created on this earth, by the movement of the earth, by the sea, by all the elements, has to be born on them. So the reflection of the Adi Shakti, as Kundalini first, was on the Mother Earth. respected. Today's problem is pollution, all kinds Kundalini is a, we should say is a wee part of the Adi Shakti or we can say that she is the desire people never understood the importance of all - pure desire- of the Adi Shakti. So Adi Shakti these five elements which are supportive of our is the desire - complete desire of Sadashiva, and Kundalini, Adi Kundalini – is the desire complete desire – of Adi Shakti. Now this one as first expressed in the Mother Earth, inside the building the house, they will do the Bhoomi Mother Earth. Inside the Mother Earth the Pujan, means they will respect the Mother Earth. Kundalini came up in such a way that it cooled down the inner part of the Mother Earth as much could be an earthquake- which means that this of things people talk of, the reason behind it, life. So to respect the Mother Earth people do Bhoomi Puja. Many people when they are Because if she is not being respected may be there

 Volume: IX Issue: 7& 8 1997 Divine Cool Breeze Mother Earth understands, knows and acts. It acts in such a manner that human beings don't where we lived, they were crossing since long understand why such things happen. crossing each other at a place called Oxtead, but we lived there later on. So Mother Earth also Now we can say that in a place called Latur, organizes and arranges things for saintly people. it was Shri Ganesha's 14th day and they had to It is very interesting to see how the Mother Earth submerge the statues into the sea or into the river, guides you in a proper way. I mean, I don't know so they went all out singing, dancing. After how many instances I can give you but we don't coming from there, they all started drinking and understand the value of the understanding of this drinking is not liked by Mother Earth at all. If Mother Earth and her loving protection for all the you are drunk and you are walking on the road saints. In the same way we have to understand you fall down. It so happened with their drinking how the whole atmosphere, the rain, comes in at that a big earthquake broke in and all those who the right time, the moon, the sun, everything were dancing, drinking all of them were engulfed works out in such a beautiful manner because into that earthquake by Mother Earth. Only our they know it's a saint. They know these are "centre, which is there, was surrounded by a big Saintly people sitting here. They know that they gap but nothing happened to our centre, and not are pure, that they are the essence of life and they one single Sahaja Yogi was ruined by that. We can should be looked after, they should be cared for, understand because we are Sahaja Yogis, how the they should be bothered for. It is not bothered Mother Earth has acted to save those people who about people who are of no use. For example were Sahaja Yogis. So the understanding of Mother Earth about saints is very great. She knows who is a saint, she knows the feet of a saint and that's why you know, so marıy things ritualistic people, going for a ritual which, in the were created like Moses. He went to the sea and discretion of the Mother Earth was of no avail the Mother Earth came up for them to walk and of no advantage to them. But nobody learns through. If all the jews had walked it would not have worked, but it was Moses and his saintliness that the Mother Earth herself came up and helped. In the same way when Rama was building a big bridge between Lanka and India, there? By going there what is proved that it is not the Mother Earth came up as a bridge. now for Haj, 50 many people went and so many were killed. Some went to Amarnath and they were killed because they were not saints, just from this, nobody learns. When so many people were going to Amarnath were killed, Pakistan said "See they should not have gone to this Amarnath, it is a false place, why did they go a holy place." But when the Haj thing took place So we should not try to cuurse the Mother Earth to explain this Haj business and the dying of so for any mishaps on this Earth. If people are many people. The reason is this, that these people saintly they will be always protected by Mother have been going to Haj all the time. Once there Earth. She will always try to give themn whatever they want. You can see in a minute way, that troubled and killed. Now this is it. Now what is supposing now, in our Cabella here, the roses are Mother Earth suggesting is that going to these of such a big size, such a big size of roses you places, Holy places they are really holy, no won't find such big size in the whole world, but doubt –, vou are not doing any spiritual ascent. was a stampede with 32,000 people injured, we have here such big ones. In Pratishthan we had flowers Sunflowers- so big as that, one places which are really holy, that cannot be man could not lift it. Now how is it all this is challenged, they are Holy places. You must be happening in particular places? It is the Mother knowing that I was born in Chhindwara, and Earth who knows, who is living here, who is Mecca and Chhindwara are on the same cancer walking here on her back we should say, on her line. How is it? What is about Mecca? Mecca is Soil, because Mother Earth understands Makeshwara Shiva, it is a Shiva. Why did You are not achieving anything by going to these vibrations. Mohammed Sabib ask people to worship a stone? Now certain places we say that are very Holy. He didn't believe in stones, he was against all How have they discovered that these places are kinds of idol worship, then why did he say this Because of magnetic forces. The black stone, which is there, has to be magnetic forces in England, I was surprised, were worshipped- for that people have to go there. Holy?

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX Issue: 7 & 8 1997 of Adi Shakti, then we should be pure, absolutely What was the reason? Because he could feel the vibrations, he could feel that it's a Swayambhu- pure, like the white stone. Even one black drop so he said it. So all the muslims are going there like mads. By going there nobody has improved. the white, it shows. You should be so white, that I have not seen anybody improve by going to anything, any minute black spot also should be Mecca. It's just a kind of a ritual. They think if they go there when they will die tomorrow they If that height is achieved by pure life, by pure will tell God - see now we have a certificate, we thinking, by pure heart! It is not necessary to have been to Mecca. (that's why I worn today the white sari) falls on seen by you and in others also to be felt by you. manipulate anything. No, no need at all. It's all Like our Pope once upon a time used to give natural, like the Mother Earth. Does she certificate that when you go to heaven you can manipulate anything? Nothing, just see how show the certificate that now you are a real Christian. In this way, all these artificial things came up, but there is reality within. The spontaneous, her activity is so spontaneous we difference is that reality is for the real people and not for false people. But this ritualism has grown too much. Like in India we have many heights of shrubs and trees! How she grows with Swayambhus created by the Kundalini again I would say, and which are really worshipped. I have been to most of them and I was surprised that most of the pujaris were suffering from some sort of a serious disease. Like one was a Shakti and that is this Mother Earth. So first we paralyzed fellow. He said, "We are serving this God here, and this is Swayambhu, then Mother how is it that we are suffering from these good. For meditation if you can sit on the Mother diseases?" I said, "Because you are just making Earth it will be extremely good because the money. You cannot make money out of God. If special quality of the Mother Earth which also I you don't want to serve God, don't stay here. But if you want to serve God then you can stay here, but don't make money out of this." It is very common. I have seen, that those people that make spontaneous she is! You put a seed in the Mother Earth and see how it sprouts! She is so never wonder about it. See different types of flowers, different types of fragrances, different such balance in every place! In every minute atom and molecule of that Mother Earth there is sense. So before us is the best reflection of the Adi must respect the Mother Earth. I like you people because you are sitting on the ground. It is very have, unfortunately, that I suck your problems. She too sucks your problems and when she sucks your problemns, you get rid of them without any difficulties. So if you cannot say, sit on the ground money get paralysis. I have seen it. It is a very deep understanding. All these marble, or something which is natural on which elements, Mother Earth, everybody has about you should try to sit. But if you sit on the plastic everything. Because their Kundalini is not like your Kundalini, which is though in itself is pure, going to help you? The plastic? That's why I but because of your human endeavours, human request you always that use natural things, mistakes, ego, super ego –all sorts of because natural things can absorb your problems nonsense - the Kundalini is not so sensitive, nor does it tell you what is happening. It has to be very alert, sensitive, spirituality within you, by mental line, what do we do? We go on arguing, which you can say immediately what you think, explaining, going on and on and on. There's no what you know, what you understand about anything. But the problem is that this doesn't exist. Why is it that you should not be so spontaneous – immediately you will know, what sensitive? On the contrary, I have seen, if their mind works against somebody, then they start communicate. You don't need much thinking saying, "You are catching on this, you are about it because you can absorb even the thought catching on that." Actually the person who is saying that is catching. So with this thing one has to understand that, if we are the true reflection then take a stone to sit on or you can have you and do your meditation I don't know what is very well. Unnaturally also we live, otherwise, it is on the physical line, also on mental line. On end to it. One should get headache with all that. But if you are spontaneous, if you are very the other fellow is trying to do, or to say or to of another person. Absorb doesn't mean that you take the bad thing of that person but it is like sieving out. You absorb what the other perosn is

 Volume : IX Issue: 7& 8 1997 Divine Cool Breeze saying and sieve it out. Now the problem of this Adi Shakti is this, she comes very much closer to my attention, then that I decided, that I will have all of you enter I into my body, absorb all of you. It is a very dangerous game, I know, but I did play because why are we in Sahaja Yoga? We are in Sahaja I am supposed to do it, at this stage of time that Yoga to ascend, to go higher and higher, as you I should absorb you, all in my body. So with you, sang yesterday. It was very entertaining yesterday all your problems have also gone into me, all your troubles have also gone into me. But by higher and higher. Really it was very joy giving, absorbing it, see, it's like the ocean to which you have put and you are cleansed, but what about the ocean? Ocean has still got your problems and things lingering and they are very troublesome. So the best thing would be for you to cleanse yourself. Cleansing is very important through much of this, which is very bad because you are introspection. But it doesn't mean thinking, it never means thinking. But introspection means meditation and that you all should meditate. that, or a lady like that, is full of problems and I have to take up the cross it's like this. A very simple understanding should be, that the way you talked about your ambition to be no doubt. But what are we doing about it? What are we trying about it? Seriously we must think, are we meditating? Are we all doing something to elevate others also, to give realization to others? Especially women, I have seen don't do the mothers. You have to go all out to give realization to others. But men are more active that and women are not. So it works the other way I must tell you we had a meeting of the way round. Now on one side the men are, I leaders and they came out and sat in the drawing meditate and men do the outside work. It's sort room. As soon as they had assembled, I had such a severe pain in the stomach and I had such a bad diarrhoea that you cann't believe. Now who division, that you meditate at home and we will had got those problems, I don't know. But as a mother I don't mind anything, as long as you get well and purified. Just like as the Mother Earth cares for you, I also care for you. And just done. Supposing now you meditate and you don't like as the Mother Earth loves you, I also love spread Sahaja Yoga. You will never ascend. you, whether you are bad or good, it is not the point. But to be kind to me, if you could try to be really good Sahaja Yogis, not the show-offs, thinks, why should I make her a saint? What is not business like, not only thinking type, not argumentative, not criticizing others, if you just for one person to become a saint and sit try to meditate everyday 10 to 15 minutes, I tell you, my health will be first class. Because I have taken your injections inside and they start a collective happening. So if you are not helping torturing my life for nothing at all. You see so now it is a risk I have run and I am sure you are all very sensible people and you will body if one organ says, alright now I am alright, understand that your mother shouldn't suffer. I am not going to work out or one cell says that This is everyday crucifixion for me sometimes you know and I don't know what to say, for example, the other day in Delhi, one gentleman, not work. It's a living organism. I have told you who is a leader, came to me, to see me and my hundred times, when it is a living organism it has one foot started going like that, and paining so much. I mean, I didn't know what to tell him that you get out now? Because I just cann't hurt him but I said, "What's the matter, where have are no more a Sahaja Yogi. I wouldn't call a you been, what did you do?" So he realized and he went out and really it improved. Nearness realization to one person. He cannot be a Sahaja also, I think, has an effect, because if a man like Yogi. Sahaja Yogi has to give realization to others. think, are active but don't meditate. Women of a part time, or you can call it a good labour all go out. It's not going to work out. So one has to meditate and one has to also go out to spread Sahaja Yoga. Both things have to be all Because after all this Kundalini, you see, she is a sensible woman - she is very sensible. She the use? Sahaja Yoga is not individualistic, it's not somewhere. It's not like that. It is not meant for one person, for oneself. It's not individualistic, it's to the collective, Kundalini says alright, you are alright as it is just like our body. You see in our I am not going to grow now. It is alright. Why should I worry about the whole body? It would to grow. It has to grow and also to absorb. To have energy you have to meditate and you have to grow. If you don't grow, you are finished. You person a Sahaja Yogi who has not even given

 Volume : IX Issue : 7 & 8 1997 Divine Cool Breeze Apart from other activities, the main activity happen. What happens is, once they are married, should be how we give realization to others. Unless and until we really look after that side of life we can never never grow in Sahaja Yoga. then either they will quarrel, they will ask for divorce. If that doesn't happen, luckily, because in Sahaja Yoga it is so easy to get married. If that doesn't happen, then they start having their own For example now, take my position. I am alright, I am complete. I have no problem. But family, their own homes, they are again becoming why did I work so hard and wanted so many Sahaja Yogis? Why? What was it? I don't have to grow either. I am overgrown already. I don't have your responsibility. See this Mother Earth, how to do it, but why? What is the need? The need is like this. The need is of love. I have so much of nothing but soil, some mud – but look at her. love that I have to channelize it. If I don't I will suffocate. I cann't love myself. So, this love has to spread. For that, I have to have you people is careful! While you, though you have been who can take this love to others and make them blessed so much, by everything, are you thinking happy. This is a kind of a vision I have. And in of giving it to others? this special time, it was promised by many people, by many saints and it is so obvious that you are all specially chosen for this kind of thing. must say, but still, Christianity spread out. Islam Now how far you understand your importance was not a very good job either, it spread out. All is a different point. You do for your emancipation, those bad jobs have spread so much. So why not alright, you meditate. But if you are not channelizing the love, the divine love, what is the has to go to various places. Try and find out use? Now supposing I repair something very where you can go and talk about it and do nicely. I repaired this machine nicely something good to others and help them, (microphone), put it right, everything, and I don't somehow, to rise above these common existence speak what is the use of having this? In the of misery, unhappiness and destruction. The time same way, if you work very hard- I know people who get up at 4 o'clock, have their baths, do meditation, sit down, in the night again they have to be much faster, we have to go much sit down for meditation. But they never go out, ahead and we have to create much more Sahaja they never talk to others, they never spread Yogis through our, consistent very intensive effort. Sahaja yoga. They do not give divine love to others. So how can this great problem of this by the way - and this is where we are failing world be solved, that it has no love. It has never known divine love, it has to be given to them. They have to feel this divine love, this power of we be like you? After all, you are Adi Shakti. Adi Shakti. They have to know it, otherwise you Many people say that you are Adi Shakti, so are being selfish, I would say. That you had a nice time having all of this and you are not things like that. But why should I ? Why should giving it to others. This is the reason why Sahaja I? What is the need? So in that reflection that you Yoga sometimes fails to create a proper balanced personality in a human being. very small, very very small, very limited. Did you come to Sahaja Yoga for that? You have to realize she knows her responsibility. She is just made out How she is conscious, how she is particular, how she works it out, how she is attentive, how she With 12 disciples, whatever was the problem of Christianity, I mean it was not a good job, the good job of Sahaja Yoga? It has to spread, it is very short and I think if you see the time, the rate at which we are moving is not proper. We But it is a side issue, by the way, Sahaja Yoga is in our responsibility. We have to learn from the Mother Earth. You might say that Mataji, how can what? You see, with one finger you can move are me, in that reflection that the Mother Earth is me, in that beautiful creation within you, you people are like this, that now supposing have to become very sensitive to the need of the a Sahaja Yogi has married another Sahaja Yogini, world. What is the need of the world? Today if take a position like that. Now my desire is that you fail the whole thing will fail forever. Only they should develop a complete understanding of very few will be there. So the need for you is to each other, have love for each other but have love spread Sahaja Yoga because this love is not only for Sahaja Yoga and for others. This is the only for you. It is not only to be enjoyed by you, it is way we can justify marriage in Sahaja Yoga. to be enjoyed by as many possible in the whole world. Some Otherwise why should they marry? But it doesn't

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Isue: 7 & 8 1997 10 So today we have to decide that as the children of Adi Shakti, we have to go all out, you will talk about Sahaja Yoga, know about every where, every corner, we have to shout and Sahaja Yoga. There are many who don't know we have to tell loudly what is the time in which anything. Also it is very surprising there are you are living and what is the responsibility that Sahaja Yogis who don't know anything and you have to fulfill as Sahaja Yogis. There must be create problems for me. Like marriage you cann't some reason why you are here. Like in the beginning Sahaja Yogis used to ask me "Mother, husband. All sorts of non-sensical problems was I this last life, was I Shivaji last life" I said, people create for me in Sahaja Yoga. Are you here "What is the use?" You might have been anything. But what you are today, is much higher. Try to understand. You might be, say Nepoleon. You might be say one of the kings or may be one of the queens somewhere, so what! What did they with more enthusiasm and joyfully. You don't do? Did they raise anybody's Kundalini? Did they know what joy you get when you give realization have any power? Even the disciples of Christ or even Mohammed Sahib's disciples, could anyone do it? Did they have any understanding of Kundalini? Did they have any love for others that they should give them realization? There were Yoga the want disappears into this desire that some sufis, they never gave realization to anyone. "my God this man is going There were so many saints who never gave and give him realization?" On the street you will realization to anybody. Mohammed Sahib never gave realization to anybody. Gautama Buddha you something" and you will make him sit down never gave realization to anybody. Think of it, Christ never gave realization to anybody. like mad. You will say, "Oh no, no, look at this, Anybody!! Krishna did not do it, Rama did not do it. Nobody but you can do it ! You can do it give him." You will have to go to churches, you and you know everything about Kundalini. It's a very big thing because you are children of the Adi-Shakti. You are here and your Mother is here. It's a very very fortunate thing for me that you without any fear, without any malice. You can are here. I am very proud of you, but again and talk to them and you should tell them, now we again I have to tell you that the work has to be are here to help you for your good. We have not done with a faster speed. We have to move with come here for our good, but for your good, now a faster speed and get more people to Sahaja listen to us and I am sure, very sure that the Yoga. It's rather, rather difficult for me to say Kundalini within you will be very happy. She is something forcefully, that is not my nature you not happy, you see, she is not happy with people know. I can't get into tempers and cannot get who are not using her fully. So she will be very angry and I can not forcefully say something to happy to help you and to do the needful for the you. But if you fail then the only thing will be emancipation of the whole world. that, you have failed me completely. It means that, nothing less than that and if you don't want to do it then I would request all of you to take a vow today that you will spread Sahaja Yoga and now live with the wife, you cann't live with the to create problems or to remove problems of people? So, on the whole, we have done well, I must say, but it's not the final, we have to work faster, to somebody. The most joyful moment is when you give realization to others. Now you just try once and you enjoy it and then you want to do it more and more and more. Now after Sahaja should I call him see some one and say, "Come here, I want to give and give him realization. This will be your style, let us this gentleman is without realization will have to go to universities. You have to go to all such congregations where they have no idea about what they can achieve, and then tell them May God bless you.

 Volume : IX Issue: 7.&8 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 11 Talk by H.H. Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi 18th January, 1983 O now we are coming to the end of our first it will work out. Let us face the things as they half tour. Now we have to look back upon are and not to be conditioned by anything else. ourselves and try to find out what have we achieved out of this. You have to achieve a certain depth within yourself to even enlighten the mantra. First of all you should have clear-cut vibrations, minimum of minimum. If you have certain chakras, with the photograph, pay due We must understand that, Sahaja Yoga is not done through brain activities. Like many people think, that if you just tell yourself: "You have to be like this", it will work out. If you have to, all respect to the photograph, it's only the the time, inform yourself that "Oh, you must get photograph which is going to work it out, rid of a particular problem", it will be alright. Or nothing else - or if I am there. But once if you some people think that if they tell somebody that: have achieved a certain state of enlightenment, This is wrong with you and you should get then you can use mantras otherwise also, it will well", it will be alright. It is not so, because help you. Sahaja Yoga does not work on mental level. It works on spiritual level, which is a much higher level, than the mental level. But first of all your heart must be clear. I have found out in general, there are two chakras, overwhelmingly, not working alright in most of the western people. First is the heart. That means; heart is not clear, that heart is not how to work out your machines. Perhaps people clean, that in the heart you still are a small still live on mental level and try to solve person; in the heart you have not placed your problems on mental level. And that's why all the Mother. You have to purify your heart, by looking at the photograph and putting all loving feelings problem with any chakra or there is anything about your Mother, understanding Her work and catching, or you find that there is something putting Her into your heart. If the heart is not wrong, no use working it on any other level, but clear, then everything has no meaning, because it spiritual level. Some people believe that if they is a dark heart which is doing all these things. have dressed up like something, or if they The heart has to be clean, absolutely surrendered outwardly behave like something, they become and must try to put Me before everything else. I that. That is not true. Like we have hippies in the can tell you because we are all Sahaja Yogis. I cannot say this to people who are not Sahaja So what you have to do, is to understand, how to correct your chakras, and you must understand problems start coming up. Now if you have a west and they think that they have become primitive. You do not become primitive by any Yogis. means, because you are so overdeveloped that you can not become primitive. So by just doing something mentally, we do not become that. Now we always try to relate Sahaja Yoga from our own terms, not from the terms that belong to God. God is what He is. He cannot change Now this mental level can go even further in Himself; you have to change. So whatever we a subtler way, into people, some of you might feel think about God, we want to put on that. For that by knowing some of the Aaratis and things example if someone thinks that he tries to be nice by heart, you will achieve weight, is not true also, or good to me, or if he is close to me, so called' because that is also just words. But if that is an and if he thinks that he is organizing better or he awakened thing within you, then they become a is doing this work or that work or anything else "Mantra' and then you can work it out. But first like that, where he feels that he is important of all you must achieve a certain standard to have because he is doing this job or that job, then one that power to create the Mantras. Also when you must know that all this is mental. Actually you are doing nothing. Whenever you try to do say some 'aarati', it is not necessarily possible that

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX Issue 7&8 1997 12 something, you really confuse yourself and out. You just cannot think about it. Whatever you confuse Me also. We have seen yesterday's may try to do through your thought, you cannot example. I was sure that they had to go next day, achieve any results in Sahaja Yoga. You have to use your hands, you have to use you feet, you away and they found that the tickets were have to soak your feet in the water, because water brought for the next day. This knowledge comes is the ocean. All these five chakras or say six chakras which are, I say five because the one is said, you better not come. I did not know what the mooladhara chakra, which is the first, and the seventh and the topmost is the brain. So in- between five chakras, which are there, are to be happen. So this clear-cut idea comes to you handled fully, with the idea that they are basically when your heart is clear. But first of all people made of matter, and the five elements constitute do not understand that you have to work it the body of these chakras. Now these chakras, if through your heart and not through your brain. they are to be corrected, we have to correct them When we have to work out things through our by taking out all the problems of these chakras brain, we try to develop our brain, isn't it, by into the elements from which they have come. For memorising, by practising something, teaching example a person, who is very right sided has to our brain how to think, how to go this way, that give a balance by the left side. Of course raising way. We try to train our brain. Now we have to with a hand is alright, but what about the train our heart in Sahaja Yoga, and to train our element? Right sided person has all the elments heart in Sahaja Yoga one has to know first of all which give heat, we can say the light, we carn say the fire. So, for people who are right sided the The limbic area actually represents the heart. And light is not going to help much. Like if you put the light before the photograph and those who are ego oriented people, if you just use the light, working but it is only mental projection, and you it is not going to work out. So what is going to will feel that I am doing it from heart. That's work out is Mother-Earth and the water element which is cooling. Even ice is very helpful to Now then supposing what should we do, if we people who are right sided. So all cooling effects have weak heart. You might say, you should try should be used for correcting your right to sort of tell yourself that, that's not good and sidedness. So that you cool it down. Same about this is not good, this and that and all kinds of food. In food, those who are right sided people, mental suggestions or auto suggestions or this is should take to foods which are left sided, that is the way psychiatrists and all that give you carbohydrates, it means they should become suggestions. That's again mental. So that's not the partly vegetarian or quite a lot of vegetarian, and way it is going to work out. We must understand should eat things at the most like chickens but that what we have to do is to raise the left side not fishes, not sea food because they are all hot. and put it to the right side. There is no other way. That's how you treat material side of your You have to just work it out with your hands. chakras. Now the left sided people should use Your hands are working it out and not your again the 'deepa' - the light, or the fire to correct their left side. Also in food, such people should take more to nitrogenous, means, proteins and foods like that. They should take more proteins. but nobody would listen to me and they rushed to you, if you are clear hearted. As yesterday, I was the situation there. 1 just said, "don't come. Finished, because I krew that it was going to that it is enveloped either by ege or by super-ego. if there is ego, heart will always be so called' heart. It will not be the real heart that will be my not so. brain. So use your hands, and the methods of Sahaja Yoga. Now every one must have a regular sitting in the water everyday. That's important 'Every' morning you 'must' do you meditation, because basic thing is Kundalini, and the Kundalini as I on mental level, we tell, we have been with told you is pure desire. Again listen to it Mother, alright. This exposure is alright. You carefully- "Pure desire'. That means all other came, you saw how Indians are and how they desires are impure. There is only one pure desire are, and how they are good for Sahaja Yoga. But and that is to be one with the divine, one with after seeing all that, you have to know that Sahaja the Brahma, one with God. That's the 'only' pure Yoga is to be worked out and not to be thought desire. All other desires are impure. So train your Now as far as Sahaja Yoga is concerned, the

 Volume: 1X issue: 7& 8 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 13 mind gradually to achieve that desire main thing. don't feel bad about it. That's one of the signs that If you train your mind in that fashion then you Sahaja Yoga has not yet developed. If I scold you, can develop pure desire, se all other desires will negate gradually. Alright. Now this desire, to be one with the divine, is the purest and the highest. away. So accept it just as a correcting point that And to achieve that, what have we to do? To is good for you. Some sort of a thorn is within achieve that you have to keep your mother you, which has to be takeri out by another thorn pleased, very simple. Adishankaracharya has said that you don't bother about anything, just keep understanding the compassion of your Mother your Mother pleased. You have to be simple you will not mind my saying anything to you, person; do not try to be cunning with Me or ny correcting you or my telling you that this is clever with Me. I know everyone well. So try to tell yourself that "I should say things, I should who do not have a good heart, clean heart cannot behave in a manner that will please my Mother". understand this. They cannot understand this, Supposing you are in Sahaja Yoga, and you are very difficult. So you keep your heart clean doing wrong things, it is not going to please Me towards your Mother. Whatever, I do for you, is at all. " So how to please Mother?" – That, you just a blessing, always a blessing for you. should try to see for yourself. What kind of a thing pleases me the best. I am also a very simple that. person, so I want a simple hearted person is simple hearted. For example, a person who tries to show off too much, tries to be always the suggesting that you are still very very first, or tries to be always the sort of a cinema star, I don't like such person. You have to be very materialistic. It becomes subtler and subtler and quiet and extremely shy about showing off subtler. So try to understand that matter is not so yourself. Do I show off that I am Adishakti? I do important. Matter is just there to please each not. I live like you, absolutely like you. Do I try other, specially to please your Mother. It has no to show off? Then why should you try to show off to me? So that kind of a person is no good. it is because there is something in you which has to go away and which I must scold, so it will go and Mother has taken it out. Once you start wrong, becauIse I have to do that. Those people Whatever I do for you is a blessing, remember who Now another chakra, which is horribly caught with most of you is your Nabhi chakra, up materialistic. In small small things also we are other value whatsoever. So you should not try to be materialistic in the sense that, you see, for a little thing, you have to do this, for a little you There is no need to be tense. If I find something have to do that. Nothing is important, if it works wrong with you, if I scold you also, it is for your out well and good. So you see Nabhi Chakra is good. If I say a good word it is for your good. very individualistic, very individualistic. It is My Sahaja Yoga works this way. I have no malice everybody's personal thing. If your desire is only against anyone in the whole world, no malice at upto Lakshmi point, that you want to have more money, or you care for little things, here and nothing but compassion. But in compassion there, without any spiritual value to it, then your sometimes I have to scold and in the same Lakshmi tattva, at the most might be awakened. But this Lakshmi tattva has to become compassionate manner. So both ways it helps you. Mahalakshmi tattva. That is for our ascent and It helps you both ways. So thank God that you just to get into that Mahalakshmi tattva, what you have somebody, who will correct you at the right have to do is to use all your material things and time, for your good, because you are saints, and your material being in such a way that you please you have come on this earth to establish God's me. That is 'very important'. Everybody must Secondly, you should not be tense with me. all, and no anger for anyone in the world. I have compassion I have to speak in a very kingdom. That's what you have to do. And if you are the people who are not respected, who are not understand. I want you to understand that when you dress sensible, who haven't got the dignity, who behave up also, certain things I don't like at all - like dishevelled hair - at all. That might be a fashion, So this Heart Chakra is to be looked after, that or whatever but I don't like it. Always must be with your heart, desire you will keep your properly combed, properly done hair. These Mother pleased. Even if I am angry with you, modern things you should give up, of dishevelled in a cheapish way, how can people accept you?

 Divine Cool Breeze a Volume: IX Issue 78 8 1997 hair, because this is a sign of pucca (real) Bhoot Bombay to buy this", that's a wrong idea. coming in. If you have dishevelled hair, the Bhoots, recognize the person and they get into such a person, who has dishevelled hair. So try of that, what we see outside is not good for to make your hair in a proper way. See now vibrations. But if your attention is inside you Indians, how they make their hair. Look at them. "will not' buy anything that is not good for They all make their hair properly, because I have vibrations or you will not own something, you nothing to do with your hair. I am not a hair will just throw it away. But the attention is stylist person or anything, but if you do not outside and because of that you just don't know your hair properly combed and done then how to judge a thing. Nabhi Chakra has to be definitely you are in for trouble. So take heed to these things. Now attention has to be inward, all the time. I have seen that our attention is outward. Because have attended to. For that you do not have to think, you have to work it out. See which side of Nabhi Then some people have a habit of being is catching. If the right side is catching, for you the sugar is the best. Sugar represents many things. Sugar also means your tongue should be not because it is material, but it is very important sweet. You should talk sweetly. People think if that if it is not so, that kind of material will you talk sweetly to someone than people will start thinking that you are good for nothing or you are absolutely a meek person. You have to be meek. We have to be meek arid humble. We must learn how to talk sweetly to each other, and if untidily dressed. That's also not a good thing. You have to be tidily dressed; clean and tidily dressed, attract all the bādhās into it. You must keep yourself clean and neat because these badhas should not enter. All these ideas that have come to the west have come from some satanic force. It does not look beautiful. In any way it does not you don't understand how to speak, then take look good for any spiritual person. We have to change our styles that will be appealing to the tongue sweeter and sweeter and your ideas will divine and not to the bhoots. We do not want any bhoot to come on to us. If understand this Criticising. simple fact, then you may start dressing up in a way, that may not be modern, may not be suggested. For the left sided people ancient, whatever it is, is neat and clean, spick sided people should take salt more, and with salt and span. Otherwise also if you see to the matter they can solve many problems, because salt gives point more and more, no use accumulating them a personality, a composure by which they thousand and one things, which are plastic in temperament and nature. You should have few dignified and also not very lethargic. So the speed things which have spiritual value, not all extraordinary things that we try to have, because be in the centre. It should not be lethargic, nor they have no spiritual value. So try not to should be too quick and fast and hectic. accumulate all these nonsensical things to you. Gradually you will find, you will reduce. You go point of everything. Everything in the centre, one on reducing, You will have simpler lives, better things and spiritual things. W.hatever you buy, see the vibrations and then buy, otherwise you don't much and if you are fast, try to reduce your buy, because all kinds of nonsensical bhoots will speed by 'alertly' looking at it. You have to be be in your house and you will be troubled. So alert: see - "my speed is going up. There is no whatever you want to buy you must see on vibratory awareness. If you cannot understand, do not talk at all, are also not good. So those who ask somebody else, a Sahaja Yogi, to help you, talk or those who do not talk have to understand But don't go on buying things just because you only one thing, whatever we talk, we talk in the think, they are cheap, or they are nice or good. centre. Once you understand that, your responses So try to buy things which are vibrationwise alright and if it is not so, finish it. It's nothing beautiful. Now this is all I can say at this time important, I must buy this, I have to go to because the time is short also for us. more sugar, vibrated sugar. That will make your be sweeter about other person than harsh or you So, for the right sided people sugar is salt. Left can express themselves in a way, which is of your talks or behaviour or everything should So you will understand, Sahaja Yoga is central should try to do, not one extreme or another extreme. If you talk too much and jabber too need for me to talk. Let me stop." But those who to things will be absolutely central, balanced and

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue: 7& 8 1997 15 We have all enjoyed our stay all over, I think so. You all have been happy all over and we have through your super-ego. I am not very happy, 1 worked it out very well, and it has been quite a lesson to all of us and also a very great have to be in joy. And these things can work out. experience of enjoyment. So not to feel guilty You should have patience with yourself, love for about anything, because by feeling guilty you do yourself and dignity that you are Sahaja yogis. not get over it. Feeling guilty is an escape. you must face it. You must face it and see, correct yourself and be one with it. That is a much better people who are only worried about others. Worry way, than to just to go on feeling guilty or about yourself and see only the good points of aggressive. That's not the way, because as I said others. Not the bad points, but good point of it's all mental. LIE ego or "very unhappy" because it is troubling am not very unhappy, that's not the way. You Every individual has to work it out for himself so the whole can be alright. There could be some others, and also if somebody has to tell you that So you understand these few points on these you must organise, go fast and all that, do not two chakras, Nabhi and your Heart. If you understand these two points clearly, that you Very quick. We have to do so much work in this must keep it clear, and the expression of that will show in your behaviour, in your dress, in your very quick and we have to be very prompt and walk, gait, talking and everything outside. But you cannot go from outside. Supposing somebody says that, "Mother, I have combed my hair very well so I am alright". It's not so. Not compared to you, and I am so much older necessarily. Even if you have combed your hair, Compared to you people. Alright, you can say that you might be possessed by a bhoot. But at least Mother you are Adishkati. It's alright. But I am there is less chances. So one has to understand your ideal. In any case if somebody is your that it has to be worked out. I think this must be ideal, try to become like that person, try to imbibe really screwed into your head that Sahaja Yoga is those qualities in you. to be worked out. You cannot just tell yourself, "Oh I am very happy" because it pampers your feel bad. We have to be like that, we have to be world we have no time to waste. One has to be healthy about it. As you know that in this trip you have seen that how much workI have been doing May God Bless You. in

 Divine Coal Breeze a Volume: IX Issue 7&8 1997 Ayurvedic Medicine Its History, Application, and Connection with Yoga The following is extracted from a talk given by Dr. is not considered only as a physical body, but the Syjata Kenjale in Verona, Italy. She is a Sahaja Yogini sense organs, the mind, and the soul are also who graduated in Ayurvedic Medicine with the included. So, according to Ayurveda, health is not encouragement of Shri Mataji. At the end of the talk, only a state of freedom from disease, but also a the audience was offered the experience of self- state in which uninterrupted physical, mental, and realization. spiritual happiness are enjoyed. The main aim of Ayurveda is to help those who are ill to cure their diseases or unbalanced state. It helps normal, healthy people to restore principles, methods of diagnosis and positive health arnd prevent exposure to diseases. treatment, and, last but not the least, its relation When a person is examined, the person is with yoga and ultimately, Sahaja Yoga. It is a very considered as a whole; we cannot divide him or interesting subject and I hope you will all enjoy her into parts. If something falls on our leg, tears come into our eyes, net from our feet. This shows that all organs are connected to each other. So Ayurveda does not allow symptomatic treatment, but mind, soul, and body are treated together. oday we have all gathered together to know about ayurveda: its history, basic it. What is Ayurveda? Ayurveda is Nature's gift to us. It is a very ancient science, born in India and practised before The Human Constitution 4,000 B.C. According to Indian mythology, Ayurveda was originally propounded by God. Ayurveda focuses on every aspect of life: day-to- Brahma is the primordial factor who created this day life, diet, physical exercise, psychology, and universe, and the original propounder of spirituality. According to Acharya Atreya (a Ayurveda. This knowledge was transmitted by famous teacher), Nature is called Prakriti, and the Brahma to other gods like Adaksha Prajapati and Ashwini Kumar. Then Indra, leader of the gods, part of Prakriti. So the human body is a small received this knowledge and transmitted it to part of Nature. Nature is composed of five basic disciples like Atreya, Bharadvaja, Kashyapa, and Dhanvantari. The disciples transmitted this knowledge to their disciples and thus this divine human body this Panchamahabhuta is represented knowledge came on Earth to serve all mankind. human body is called a Purush. Purush is a small elements: earth, water, air, fire and ether. These five together are called Panchamahabhuta. In the in the form of Doshas; Dhatus, and Malas. The three basic elements in the body are called Then, to study it better, it was divided into eight specialized branches, like Kaya Chikitsa, Doshas. These are active and are responsible for which means internal medicine, and Shalya all bodily functions, growth, and decay. The first Chikitsa, which is general surgery. Many books Dosha is Vata or air element. Second is Pitta or have been written on this subject. Famous ones are: Charak Samhita and Susruf Samhita. Ayurveda is also a part of Vedic science. Veda is an integral spiritual science in the form of sacred body. books, which gives knowledge about life. Ayurveda is a part of it which deals with Doshas, or elements, is responsible for good physical, mental and spiritual life.. Ayurveda is a Sanskrit word composed of two day, month and season. For example in childhood, words: Ayus and Veda. Ayus means life and veda Kapha, the water element, is greater. In middle means knowledge. Thus Ayurveda is a science, or knowledge, of life. In Avurveda the human body fire element. The third one is Kapha made up of water and earth. They are found in different quantities in the The correct balance between these three health. They increase or decrease according to age, age, Pitta, the fire element, is more, and in old age, Vata, the air element, is prevalent.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX. Issue: 788 1997 17 In Ayurveda there are six tastes of food: swveet, Kapha: The Water Element salty, sour, pungent, bitter, and astringent. These The third Dosha is Kapha, or water element. It is tastes also increase these Doshas, or elements. For mainly situated in the stomach, heart, and tongue example, Pitta, the fire element, is increased by a and is responsible for the connection in joints and pungent taste and is reduced by a bitter taste. bones, the solid nature of the body, and its strength. There are 20 types of diseases caused by Vata: The Air Element The first element, Vata is mainly situated in the disturbed Kapha, such as anorexia, laziness, intestine, pelvic region, and bones. It governs all diabetes, mucus expectoration, obesity, hardening nervous functions and is the originator of all of the blood vessels. movements in the body. There are 80 kinds of possible diseases due to disturbed Vata, such as arthritis, stiffness, paralysis, heart disease, and to position and function hypertension. Vata is divided into five types according to position and function: - Prana and Udana are in the head and upper part of the thorax and they are responsible for the voice and breathing. Kapha is also divided into five types according - Tarpaka is mainly in the brain and spinal cord, protecting them from the bories. Bodhaka Kapha gives us taste. . Avarambaka Kapha is in the chest and gives support to the lungs and heart. Kledaka Kapha is situated in the stomach and helps the digestion of food. - Slesaka is in the bone joints and acts as a Samana is in the intestines and helps in digestion. Apana is situated in the pelvic region and is responsible for all excretory functions. Vyana is situated in the heart and helps the Diagnosis heart to pump blood all over the body. lubricant. Like the body, the mind also has three qualities, Sattwa, Raja and Tama, called as Triguna. In Pitta: The Fire Element The second element is Pitta, or the fire eleemuent yurveda diagnosis of diseases depends on the which is mainly situated in the stomach, intestines, and liver. It governs enzymes, secretions, and hormones. It is responsible for digestion, body temperature, and pigmentation. The diagnosis of a disease is through a brief examination of the patient in three steps: 1) Darshana, meaning visual observation. 2) Sparshana, meaning touching the patient or There are 40 types of diseases caused by disturbed Pitta, including jaundice, acidity, percussion. burning sensation, pharyngitis. Pitta is also divided into five types according discussion. to position and functions : I Alochaka Pitta is in the eyes and is responsible examination in Ayurveda. Prakriti is the physical for vision. 3) Prashna, meaning an oral examination or Prakriti Nidan is another important and psychological constitution of the body, which is different in every person. It depends on the Doshas. 1 Sadhaka Pitta is in the brain and heart and is responsible for intelligence and memory, - Ranjaka Pitta is in the liver and spleen and is responsible for the formation and coloration of Some individuals are prominent in one Dosha, or the blood. There are seven types of these constitutions. element. In others, two humours exist in relatively Pachaka Pitta is in the intestines and helps in equal proportions. All three elements are digestion. - Bhrajaka is in the skin and gives skin its constitution, but is very rare. prominent in some individuals, which is the best There are four principal factors responsible for colour.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume IX Issue:7&8 1997 18 the constitution of the body: Sleep Vatish people have less sleep and in old age they tend towards insomnia. 1) Maternal 2) Paternal Pittish people have moderate sleep. They may wake up, but they can go to sleep again. 3) The state of the pregnancy of the mother and the season. Kaphish people have a very deep sleep and have difficulty in waking up. 4) The food that the mother takes during pregnancy. According to this constitution, every person has different physical and psychological qualities. Illness tendencies Vatish people generally have illnesses of the nervous system, like pain, arthritis and mental disorders: Body Structure Vatish people are tall, thin, with prominent bones and usually of light weight. Pittish people have febrile, infectious and inflammatory illnesses. People with more Pitta are medium-sized, their weight is also medium and they have good rSpiratory tract like bronchitis and asthma and Kaphish people generally have ailments of the muscles. they tend towards obesity and diabetes. Kaphish people are short, stout, with more weight and they tend towards obesity. The above illnesses are because of an excessive humour, or element, in the body and so medicines are used to balance them. Eyes Nadi Pariksha, or pulse examination, is another Vatish people have small and dry eyes, brown, important examination in Ayurveda, which is carried out with the help of the radial artery. The disturbed doshas are felt with the index, middle and ring fingers of the right hand. Every examination has its own rules and regulations dull and unsteady. Pittish people have medium-sized, thin, piercing eyes which become red very easily. Kaphish people have wide, prominent, oily and is carried out according to themn. eyes, which are very attractive. These were the physical qualities, now let's look at the psychological. The Treatment Treatment is of two kinds I First is treatment of a healthy person, to prevent him from catching diseases and to maintain his Vatish people have a poor memory. They notice positive health, called Rasayana or Vajikarma. In things easily, but they forget them also very this treatment some medicines, tonics and Memory physical exercises are given. "easily. Second is treatment of diseases. This is again of two types: Pittish people have a sharp and elear memory. They remember everything for a long time. Shodhana, or Panchakarma, which is the Kaphish people understand things very slowly, but when they understand something, they never elimination of excessive doshas. Body massage forget it. with medicated oil is also included. Shamana. In this the increased or decreased doshas, or elements, are balanced by medicine. Emotional tendencies In Ayurveda, herbs, minerals and some Vatish people are fearful, anxious and are nervous nurified metals are used as medicine. All these or mentally depressed. Pittish people become angry and irritable. things are natural; according to Ayurveda, whatever is in Nature is in our body. So Ayurveda believes in curing people with natural Kaphish people are calm and sentimental.

 Volume: IX issue: 7 & 8 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 19 things. These medicines are used in the form of Ayurveda and Yoga juice, powder, tablet, paste, infusion, decoction, So far we have looked at the medicinal part of milk preparation and so on, according to the herb Ayurveda. But in Ayurveda, to cure physical, and need of the patient. The way of preparing mental, and spiritual problems there is another these medicines is also very natural, pure, and method called Yoga. According to Ayurveda, the traditional. No chemicals are added. Every spirit, which is part of a supreme energy within medicine has its own quality and acts very effectively if used in the proper manner. Most of Therefore we must live according to the the medicines act as a tonic and they do not have of our spirit. side effects. They go to the root of the illness us, is responsible for good health and peace. purpose any and remove it completely. Disease indicates that we have lost contact with our spirit. Ayurveda says that to have good health, everyone has to have four principle aims of life: Some Ayurvedic Medicines - First is Dharma, meaning doing the right things for ourselves and for society. Amalki is an herb whose fruit is used as a medicine. It is very rich in vitamin C and is thermostable. It is excellent for nourishing the body, for eyesight, hair and skin diseases, and also for diabetes and hemorrhages. Second is Artha, meaning wealth or the means of livelihood. Third is Karma, meaning the satisfaction of our desires according to Dharma. - Fourth is Moksha, which is self-realization, the most important state in human life. Self- realization means the union of the spiritual energy within us with the divine power. Three medicines are used together: ginger, pepper, and pipali. In combination they are called Trikatu. They reduce Kapha, Vata, and fat, they stimulate digestion and are useful for bronchitis, pharyngitis, and sinusitis. According to Ayurveda, behind this gross The root of the plant Haridra is used as a medicine. It gives good complexion and is used physical body there is a subtle body composed of for many skin diseases, allergic reactions, asthma, a life force, or spiritual force, called Kundalini. As hemorrhage, and is also a mild antibiotic. The plant Brami promotes very good sleep and there are channels in the subtle body through memory and is used mostly for nervous which this spiritual energy flows. These are called exhaustion and epilepsy. there are channels in the physical body through which fluids or secretions flow, in the same way nadis. There are three nadis in the body: central, right and left. In modern science these three nadis correspond to the central nervous system and to the The regular intake of Tulsi, also called Sacred Basil in India, increases immunity and has a very good effect on the mind, giving mental peace. The roots, leaves, and pips of Eran are used as sympathetic nervous system. They run through a medicine. The oil prepared from its seeds is different energy points, which are called chakras. useful for rheumatic diseases, gout, In modern science the chakras correspond to the different nervous plexi. gout, and rheumatoid arthritis. In ancient India, the method used to know Guduchi is a plant used for chronic fever, especially the tubercular type, and is a very good about the nadis, the chakras, and the spiritual medicine for the liver and spleen. energy within us called Kundalini, and to experience self-realization, was called Yoga. Yoga Kumari is used as a tonic specially for the liver. It regulates peristaltic movement in the mental, and spiritual problems. Ayurveda and intestines, promotes digestion, and relieves yoga originate from the same spiritual science, in constipation. very important in Ayurveda for curing physical, is the form of the sacred books of the Veda. And now we are very lucky that in these modern Kupshur acts as a diuretic, used against stones in the urinary tract, diabetes, and uterine times Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi discovered disorders. a new пеw Yoga called Sahaja Yoga.

 Volume: ix Issue: 7&8 1997 20 Divine Cool Breeze When all the energy centres and nadis are clear, diseases cannot take hold. Sahaja Yoga The word Sahaja means born within you, or spontaneous. And Yoga means union. So in Sahaja Yoga the spiritual energy within us rises Ayurveda and Yoga are very close to each other. spontaneously, pierces the anterior fontanelle bone She knows Ayurveda very well and she herself n the top of the head and unites with the divine Sstudied medical science. Ayurvedic medicines are power, giving self-realization. The awakening of totally natural and without any side effects. Their the Kundalini is not a hypothesis or a supposition etficacy is increased when the patient practises but is an actualization on the central nervous Yoga. When a person has his spiritual energy system. Sahaja Yoga has been medically proved in awakened and his chakras and nadis are clean the medical university at Delhi in India. Many and enlightened, Ayurveda medicine acts much countries have accepted it and have given many awards to Shri Mataji for this great work. Now Sahaja Yoga is in 80 countries of the world. Shri Mataji told me to learn Ayurveda because more effectively and quickly. Now I think we should stop here, and take a golden opportunity to know about Sahaja Yoga I have been practising Sahaja Yoga for 21 years and experience self-realization which is the real and have seen that because through Sahaja Yoga aim of human life. I am grateful to the Sahaja our nadis and chakras are clean, many illnesses Yoga Association for giving me the chance to talk such as asthma, blood cancer, epilepsy, heart diseases, and mental disorders have been cured. about Ayurveda and its relation with Yoga. Thank you very much. Dear Sahaji, have photographs which you feel would be suitable for the cover If you or to illustrate an article in the Divine Cool Breeze, please send a copy and/or a negative to the address below, alongwith the place and date, if known. We welcome original illustrations, decorations and border art and articles about Sahaja Yoga in the country/abroad. Your suggestions for the improvement of Divine Cool Breeze are also welcome. Address: O.P. Chandna 463, Rishi Nagar, (Rani Bagh), Delhi - 110 034 Phone : 7013464

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume IX Issue: 7&8 1997 21 News from Around the World March 1997 Australian National Puja Mataji had reminded us earlier in the week that Shri Shiva cools us down. and Public Programs The Puja setting was prepared during the Although Shri Mataji would not be visiting Australia (Shri Mataji's tour to Asia was cancelled morning, the decorations consisting of paper this year), we still felt it necessary to meet for a flowers forming the backdrop and blending into yearly National Puja and Seminar. We decided to real flowers which covered the stage, About 400 celebrate Shivaratri Puja and host two major yogis had gathered to perform the Puja to Shri public programs in Sydney the week after the Mataji in the aspect of Shri Shiva. Puja when the vibrations would be strongest. As the public programs of the future will most The Programs likely be presented without Shri Mataji's physical It had been decided to approach the Public presence, these public programs were telt to Programs as if Shri Mataji were coming in person. represent the beginning of a new phase in our This meant a major advertising campaign, evolution as Sahaja Yogis. Life for us is Sahaja postering, handbilling, and the participation of the yoga, our goal is to ascend and to help others to entire collective. We decided to hold programs in ascend. As a collective we were beginning down two separate venues; for the cost of one that path where much of the work and advertising campaign we held programs in two responsibility for the spreading of Sahaja Yoga different regions of Sydney. will be upon us. The first program was held at 7:30 p.m. at the Masonic Centre in the heart of Sydney. Each year thousands of people gather to see Shri Mataji. This year we chose a venue which would seat 650 yogis from all the states of Australia, as well as people. The positive desire and vibrational New Caledonia, New Zealand, Asia, and Europe support of the collective towards the programs began to assemble at the site recommended by was inspirational. It is this collective dynamism The Puja During the afternoon of Saturday, March 1st, Shri Mataji. which will fill venues in days to come. On the night of the program the hall was full The daylight hours were mostly unscheduled, people spending their time meditating, in the joy with about 350 new people and many yogis in of reunited friendships, or ascending through the attendance. The program began with miracle purification of honest labour in the kitchen. In the slides and music provided by the bhajan group. pleasant hours of early evening on Saturday, we assembled in the main pendal for a concert. It leader of Victoria, Uncle John Henshaw. He is began with a performance by the local bhajan retired Senior Lecturer from one of Australia's group. The first piece was purely instrumental, most eminent places of learning for young artists. beginning with solo pieces played upon the He is a dignified and widely respected figure Indian flute, guitar, dholak, and western flute, both within and outside the Sahaja collective. His leading into poetry followed by bhajans. The bhajan group is in the final stage of considerable knowledge and experience in areas preparation for recording "Music Of Joy II." It of spirituality and the history and philosophy of promises to live up to all our expectations. Western culture. Following the music we were treated to a drama written by Brian Bell based upon the ways and any true joy, which can only come from the spirit. means of the false gurus and their advocates. After the heat on previous days, the sun rose gloriously on a refreshingly cool Sunday. Shri to the next stage of human spiritual evolution. All The introductory talk was delivered by the introduction to the program drew upon his He said that our Western lifestyle robs us of He suggested that we can all become much more than what we are, and that we can break through

 Volume : IX issue: 7& 8 1997 22 Divine Cool Breeze was last with us, She requested that we purchase this, he said, had been made possible through the grace of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, the greatest a country property. We are in the process of spiritual being on the planet today. Although she purchasing what will become the Australian was not present tonight they would still be able National Country Property at Balmoral Village to experience self-realization. This led to the video of Shri Mataji, then the process of self-realization. The silence of the meditation was enriched with the first notes of Vishwa Vandita played on the saxophone, and the mood of the audience deepened as the vibrations Sunday April 20th was a blessed day for the of the music filled the hall. Shri Mataji has said Sahaja Yoga collectivity that listening to this music would help establish Approximately 300 people gathered in the very self-realization. This was certainly our experience. beautiful ballroom of the Rembrandt Hotel, where Following the meditation, the majority of the new people raised their hands to confirm they waiting over two hours, as they had attended the just over one hour's drive south of Burwood. Chris KiryacoR, Australia News from Thailand of Thailand. Shri Mataji usually stays. for a public program. Previous session, a medical conference given by Dr. Umesh C. Rai on the benefits of Sahaja Yoga the evening talked about the importance of establishing the experience of self-realization by meditation on psychosomatic and various attendance at the meditation workshops in the coming weeks. The mood amongst the Yogis at the program Shri Mataji's grace was expressed through their could best be described as buoyant and excited; everyone was looking forward to the second program. The vibrations at the program were very willingness to take the time to learn about Sahaja strong. We had approached the program as if Shn Yoga's holistic approach to medicine. Mataji were coming, and our feeling that evening was that indeed She was. diseases. The quality of the seekers gathered there by attentive listening, the relevant questions they asked, their respectful attitude, and their Dr. Rai gave an outstanding talk, with slides at the presenting research and analysis, in support of his statement that "within' a few weeks of a Sahaj The second program was held Parammatta Town Hall on Friday, March 7th. Parammatta is one of the largest population Prakash also gave a brilliant and joyous program centres within the Sydney region and has always before a very receptive public. attracted many seekers to programs we have held there. The hall was full with about 250 new treatment, one can cure most of the diseases." A journalist from the daily national English people and the same number of yogis. The format newspaper, The Nation, had interviewed Dr. Rai of the program was similar to the first; again the in depth earlier on. He asked numerous questions vibrations were very strong. At the end of the with deep and sincere interest in Sahaja Yoga. A meditation process everyone in the hall raised long and wonderful article came out of this their hands in recognition of the gift of self- Another journalist, from Thai Rath, also attended the publie program. The article that followed, published in this very popular Thai newspaper, brought a crowd of people to our weekly Sunday afternoon meditation. In addition, several hundred people have called the centre, turning us into full- time telephone operators, with calls coming every realization. Following each program, a survey conducted to discover what had brought the seekers to the programs. Here are the results: Colour posters (shop windows) Local newspapers was 35% two minutes for the first two days. 20% This double program, a medical conference followed by a public program, really generated tremendous vibrations that most of the newcomers in the hall were able to feel, including two monks and a highly placed teacher in a 15% Daily newspapers 10% Large wall posters 10% Hand bills 10% Friends Also of note in Australia, when Shri Mataji Buddhist meditation centre.

 Volume: IX IsUB: 7& 8 1997 23 Divine Cool Breeze was preceded by another great happening, one month before, when Franz and Jean-Luc from Austria and Jasna from Bosnia held a Sahaja Yoga program for a gathering of seekers in Sarajewo. The three pioneers drove together from Banja Luka in Serbian-held territory, where Jasna was at a time when Shri Mataji usually blesses the visiting his family, to Sarajewo on Saturday, country in person, no doubt Our Holy Mother's February 22nd. Despite the fear and heaviness that still lingers in the land from the war, they May the strength, love, and vibrations of the had a joyful journey, enjoying the first signs of collectivity of 60 or so yogis be able to clearly springtime in the otherwise barren landscape. reflect Shri Mataji's vision so that the seekers find They were heartily welcomed by several seekers of truth on the following sunny morning. After the experierice of self-realization, the new Sahaja Yogis enquired again and again when their new friends would return. Anyone interested in Coordinating a visit to the Bosnian capital please contact Franz Mekyna in Austria for further information. (Telephone 43, 02266, 67167 The Thai collectivity had worked very hard for this event, putting all their heart and energy into postering, cotacting the media, sending letters to hospitals, then phoning doctors individually to make sure that they would attend. The success of the evening was surely a beautiful reward. Held attention illuminated this unique event. here the end of their search. Tanine Sreshthiaputra, Thailand First Sahaja Yoga Programs in Croatia and Bosnia Jai Shri Mataji Golden Builders). On the most auspicious day of the year, the 21st of March, a Sahaja Yoga public program was held Experiences in Norway in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia. Much enlightened, loving attention has been on Andrea and Venzi for physically working out Zagreb the The Norwegians are very ardent seekers. As a last few months! With some help from Austria, these yogis carried out a postering campaign that organizations have established a presence in this brought about 40 genuine seekers for their self- realization. The program was lead by Dusan, the leader of neighbouring Slovenia, who was accompanied by three cars full of Slovenian yogis. Oslo on a snow and ice trip across the Most of the seekers who attended were quite Hardangervidda mountains, to the city of Bergen. young, and seemed to have enjoyed a strong We accompanied Rita, who has done a lot of experience. We are hoping that many will return each Wednesday for the follow-ups! Part Two result, all kinds of religious and pseudo-religious country. On April 4th, 1997 three Belgian yogis started from the newly founded Sahaja Yoga centre of work for the Oslo courses (and because of her unbreakable enthusiasm is called by some "sweet little bulldozer"), and were guided by a huge Croatia has for centuries been the southeastern stronghold of Catholicism in Europe. Beyond its snow plough through house-high snow walls to borders lay the lands of the Orthodox church., our goal: the city of Bergen. and still further East and South, the Islamic peoples. Just 30 kilometers outside of the Croatian capital, one finds the remains of villages recently Norway's gate to the world. Bergen is protected ravaged by war. On the lighter side, Croatia has by seven mountains and covered all over with a long, beautiful coastline on the Mediterranean Sea. The cuisine of this country is an interesting is on a peninsula, surrounded by innumerable mixture of Hugarian (goulash), Austrian (apfel- small islands. What is so beautiful about Bergen struedel), and Italian (excellent pizza!), as well as other specialities. The young people generally trees than people, and more calmness than in any understand English, and most of the older generation know German apart from their own mother tongue. Bergen is the second largest town of Norway and was once the capital of this coutry. It still is beautiful lakes, fjords, trees, and flowers. The city is that there is more nature than houses, more other city we know. We were met by two lovely ladies, Christa-Lis and Rita, who had been postering and distributing leaflets in the preceding weeks. They This historic moment on the Balkan Peninsula

 Volume 1X ssue: 7-8 8 1997 Divine Cool Breeze had arranged for us to meet 16 new seekers in Bergen's alternative "Knutepunkten" (junction) to asked for, as She always does. talk to them about the new perspective of Sahaja Yoga and Shri Mataji, to give them realization, centre of Oslo and six new people came. After and to help them understand and experience how being worked on, a young girl with thyroid gland vour life changes for the best after Kundalini pain said that she didn't feel the pain in her left Shri Mataji gave us much more than we had The same evening we had meditation in the rising. throat and left shoulder anymore. "As if it had The next evening we met most of the 16 been anaesthetized with a very sweet injection, seekers again, as well as five new ones: All she said. After this she felt better and was literally doubts and distrust for the new experience had overflowing with Kundalini. We also met some gone and were replaced by friendship, openness, remarkably balanced people there. and even love. It was a wonderful experience, as self-realization and collective meditation always is. Most of our new brothers and sisters felt very too eager to give up tantrism and other nonsense, happy and could see a new perspective for and to recognize and embrace the truth. We all themselves and for Norway. For some, their felt the Paramachaitanya very strongly. Shri Mataji vision extended as far as Scandinavia, and even Herself must have been there, because we really the whole world! But the top of the bill was the Tonsberg program. We met 16 new yogis, who were only were connected to the Nirmal Vidya of the Virata. On Sunday we were invited to the birthday We were answering questions we had never heard party of Christa-Lis where, for the third time in of before. One of us, who doesn't speak English, three days, we met our new brothers and sisters in Sahaja Yoga and a few new ones: the youngest Yoga as if she did this every day. We worked on being 11 and the eldest 74 years young! Between cake and tea we gave an introduction, heard a happy. Some of them just couldn't leave and talk of Shri Mataji and had the experience of self- when they did, they were crying for joy, realization again. We worked on people, answered overflowing as they were with vibrations. a lot of questions, went out to look at the comet, and ate some more cake. Finally, we exchanged and wider and softer and more filled with addresses, promised to come back again, and send more information in the meantime. At the before. We felt and still feel as if Norway has end of the evening we were hugged by almost surrendered to the Adi Shakti and will blossom everybody as old and very dear friends. When we got back to Oslo, they phoned to tell us that in just one day they had organized Mataji.! Norway ahoy! addresses, phone numbers, a place to meditate, and an appointment for next week. Once again was talking about Shri Mataji and about Sahaja each other, making us and each other extremely When we drove back to Oslo we felt stronger Satchitananda than any Viking can ever have felt a thousand-fold. Norway is ready to be the flute of Shri = Sidsel, Rita, Mariette, and Jos

 SAHATA YOGA TEMPLE ఆడఖల బిు

 "In Sahaja Yoga it is compulsory that you should be happy, you should be joyous and you have to be joyful."



----------------------

1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : IX
Issue : 7& B
1997
"Like amall children you must have a very clean heart to accept, to nbsorb the benuty of
peace that
anything
Her Holiness Mataji Shree NiTTAla Devi
Birthday Puja, Delhi (21.3 1007)
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Sahaja Yoga World Centres
1
Shree Adi Shakii Puja
- 1997
Shree Adi Shakti Puja Talk -25 May, 1997
Talk by H.H. Mataji Shree Nirmata Devi - 18.1.1983
11
Ayurvedie Medicine - History, Application and
16
Connection with Yoga
News from Around the Wortd:
March 1997 Auslralian National Puja
and Public Programs 21
News trom Thailand 22
First Sahaja Yoga Pragrams in Croatia and Bosnia
23
Experiences in Norway Part Two
23
Back Cover illustration by Sharat Sameer
Yogi Mahajan
Edited by
Published by: V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Münirka VIhar
New Delhi-110 067
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue : 7& 8 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
Sahaja Yoga World Centres
Mr. Phillip Zeiss
Kastanienstrasse 19
D 14624 Dallgow
Germany
Phone:
Mr. Daniel Oyono
B.P. 11771 Yaounde, Cameron
Phone:
Mr. Mohammed Said Ait-Chaalal
27 Avenue Pasteur
Alger, Algeria
Phone:
Works:
(237) 22 73 97 (Joseph Tsala)
(213) 64 81 22
(213) 64 95 23
home: (49 3322) 20 88 70
(49 30) 315 25 66
(493322)20 24 73
ganeshiat @cs.tu-berin.de (karsten Radatz)
Jay Chudasama
390 Dixon Road #612
Etobicoke OT
Canada M9R 1TR
Phone:
Fax:
work:
Fax:
Mr. Mariano Martinez
Cuyo 937, Martinez
1640 Buenos Aires, Argentina
Phone/Fax: (54 1) 798-9378
E-Mail:
(1-1416) 614-7338
(1-416) 614-9521 (ashram)
Vaibhav Khopade & Thodoris Xouleis
Alkamenous 66-68
104-40 Athens
Greece
Phone/Fax: (30-1) 822 9262
Nadjilem Tolasde Moudjingar
c/o Ndoubalengar Mdgaou
S.A.C. N.P. 185
Ndjamena, Chad
Nikkhil & Raani Varde
Palm Apts 11B, Palm Beach 6D
(Dutch Caribbean), Aruba
Phone:
Fax:
E-Mail:
(297) 839 662
(297) 839 253
nash@setarmet.aw
Mr. Henno de Graaf
Мг. Неппо
Varikstraat 1
1106 CT Amsterdam Z.0., Holland
Phone:
Fax:
E-Mail:
Lyndan de Valle
Room 304, Foreign Students Building
Capital University of Economics & Business
Hongmiao, Chaowai
Beijing, China
Phone:
Mr. Michael Fogarty
20 Holly Street
Castle Cove NSW 2069, Australia
Phone/Fax: (61 2) 9417 5572
E-Mall:
(3120)697-2038
(3120) 697-5131
degraaf@euronet.nl
(86 10) 65 06 11 88
(86 10) 65 00 60 91
esis etpgi.com.au (John Dobbie)
Mr. Alex Henshaw
Flat D, 6/F, Lei Shun Court
116 Leighton Rd.
Causeway Bay, Hong Kong
Phone:
Fax:
Mrs. Marie-Laure Cernay
Diag 110-Nr 19-15
Bogota, Colombia
Phone/Fax: (571) 214-3971
E-Mail:
Dr. Engelbert Oman
AuhofstraBe 231/3/1
1130 Vienna, Austria
Phone:
home: (852 2) 573-8201
(8522)504-4779
(852 2) 504-4965
work:
(43-1)877 7411
Fax:
E-Mail:
norbert klimt@south-
smtech@hkstar.com
Dr. Wollgang Hack
Schonbrunner Alle
2331 Vosendorf, Austria
Phone/Fax: (43-1) 609 1131
Cell Phone: (66-4) 422 5686
america.notes.pw.com
Mr. Gyorgy Pohi
Avar Ut. 17b
H-1183 Budapest
Hungary
Phone/Fax: (36 1) 218 04 93
Work:
E-Mail:
Michel Bikindou
33 rue Owando-Ouenze
Brazzaville, Congo
Mr. Radim Ryska
Koziskova 511
250 82 Uvaly, Czech Republic
Phone/Fax: (42 2) 997 23 10
Work:
E-Mail:
Shri K. Madhusudan Pillai
C.C. 85, ALBA
Post Box 570
Bahrain
Phone:
(36 1) 169 53 41
lovasa ludens.elte.hu (Agnes Lovas)
Mr. Yogi Mahajan
9, Bhagya Chintamani Society
Paud Road, Opp. Octrol Post
Kothrud, Pune 411 029, India
Phone:
(42 2) 519 33 94
ryska @s3.msmt.cz
(973) 702 148
Belarus
Minsk, UI. Ilimskaya
Domi kv 56
Korotky Oleg
Phone:
Work:
Mr. Rasmus Heltberg
Hammelstrupvej 40, 2. tv
2450 Copenhagen SV, Denmark
Phone:
Work:
E-Mail:
(91 212) 33 58 85
Prof. Dr. U.C. Ral
International Sahaja Yoga Research &
Health Centre
Plot 1, Sector 8, CBD
Navi Mumbai, India
Phone:
Fax:
(45)3545 60 15
(45) 35 32 44 00
rasmus.heltberg@econ.ku.dk
(7 0172) 62 68 27
(7 0172) 66 02 13
Bernard Cuveller
Rue Piervenne 58
B 5590 Ciney, Belgium
Phone/Fax: (32 55) 428 265
E-Mail:
Alexel & Galina Kotlov
Rohu 109-14
EE-3600 Pdrnu, Estonia
Phone:
(91 22) 757 6922
(9122) 757 6795
cuve skynet.be
(372 44) 36 043
Mr. Paresh Duncan
11 Raglan Road
Dublin 4, Ireland
Phone:
Mr. Raine Salo
Javier Valderrama
Los Pinos, Bloque 7, Apartamento 102
San Miguel, LaPaz, Bolivia
Phone:
Fax:
Kuusikallionkuja 3 B 27
02210 Espoo, Finland
Phone:
(353 1) 660 7723
(3589)855 0934
(358 9) 621 4262
tuomas@cute,fi (Tuomas Kantelinen)
(591 2) 790 870
(5912)391 782
Oleg Kotilarsky
c/o Philippe Scheimann
30 A #3 Avoda St.
63821 Tel Aviv, Israel
Phone:
Fax:
E-Mail:
Mr. Edson Almeida
Cond. Rural Vivendas da Serra
Modulo C. Casa 4
Rod. DF-150, km 2,5 (Sobradinho)
Brasilia DF 73070-014
Brazil
Phone:
Cell Phone: (55 61)983-9821
E-Mail:
Mr. Antonio Mendes Nazare
47 Avenue du Muguet
93370 Montfermeil, France
Phone:
Fax:
E-Mail:
(972-3) 507 3911
philips @well.com (Philippe Scheimann)
E-Mail:
(33-1) 43 30 57 25
(33-1) 43 30 73 18
asy@world-net.sct.fr
Mr. Guido Lanza
Vocabolo Albereto 10
(5561)501-0834
02046 Magliano Sabina, Italy
(39-744) 919-815
(39-744) 919-122
(39-744) 919-904
nirmala @etr.it
Phone:
Patrick Desire Akouma Nze
B.P. 146
Libreville, Gabon
marino @if.utrj.br
Fax:
E-Mail:
Mrs. Rosa Alexieva
clo Bulgaria
Sofia - 1126
Galitchiza St. 25
Mr. M. Konstantinov
Phone/Fax: (35 92) 628 024
E-Mail:
Georgia
380094 Tbilisi
UI. Sabutalo-Kutuzova kor 2, kv 13
Sandro Chubinidze
Jean-Claude Laine
01 BP 2887
Bouake 01, Ivory Coast
Phone:
E-Mail:
work: (225) 63 25 14
Amon AlricaOnline.co.ci
Ivdei @ vmei.acad.bg
(78832)38 95 24
Phone:
(Amon Ettien)
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze a Volume: IX issue 788 1997
Sahaja Yoga World Centres (contd.)
Dr. Rajiv Kuma
20, V Madrigai Street, Corinthian Gardens
Duezon City 1100, Metro Manilla,
Philippines
Phone
Mr. Philippe Carton
Himonya 6 chome 7-a
Meguro-ku
Tokya 152. Japan
Phone/Fax
E-Mail
Roll Carisson
Valhallanvagen TH
5-11422 Stockholn
Sweden
Phane:
E-Mal
(46-0)
(6T-3) 3760 4434
pcartonsottiab.co.jp
16 77 17
(632 633 5633
(632) 632 2381
(632) 632 5709
ikumar mait asiatitavbank org
toit.cartssonstocktatm mailiteta.com
la.com.
Fax.
Work
E-Mal.
Mr. Armeau de
2 bia, Chemin Sous-Vole
1295 Mies, Switzerland
Phone/Fax
Kaibermaten
486 008 chimkent
Mp. Tomanz Komack
UL Baczynskiego 20 m 17
05-092 Lomiariki inr. Warnew
Poiand
Phora/Fax
(41 22) 779 20.37
Bondareriko Dima
Phane
17 3252) 12 13 B8
ME Wen-Cheng Lu
2F. No. 13, Alley 3, Lane 106
Sec 3, Ming Chuan East Rd
sung Shan Distrct
Taiphi City. Taiwan (R.O.C.)
Phone:
(48 22) 7513520
Didier Gauvin
French School of Narobi
(Callege Diderut)
P.O, Box 47525
Nairobi, Kenya
Phone
Calarina de Castro Freire
R. Garcia de Crta, 70-1C
Lisboa-1200, Portugal
Phone
Eome (8BE 2) 715 5208
351-1) 396-314g
(254 2) 56 62 59
Prakash Sreshthaputra
Apt 38, 19 Sol Samanchan
Sukumvit 42
10110 Bangkok, Thailand
Phone/Fax
Mr. Dan Costian
Sir. Constantin Nacu No.8
70219 Bucharest. Romania
Phone
Fax
EMll
Ms Iriria Solomenikova
Riga, Latvia
Phone
(0132) 25 93 42
(66-2) 391 44 75
(40-1) B13-58-82
(40-1)912-69-94
dcostian syrom.sfos.ra
Gertruda Sargaunane
Staneviciaus 66-64
Vilnius 2029
Lithuania
Phone:
E-Mall
Claire Cupari
13 Starboard Drive, Schooner Coun
Westmoonings, Trinidad
Aussin
Tertaetmt.wow.nut (Tettance Aleong)
142700 Mascoskaya Oblast
(37 02) 47 81 43
vkaEpubost. (suby lo Gartruda") Vidnoe-2, UL Vokzalriaya 19
E-Mail
Dr. Bohdan Shnhovych
Phone Fax:
E-Mail
Tunisia
do Mr. Yaucel Brahimi
Roggegasse 40
1210 Wien, Austria
Phone:
(7 095) 5413745
bogdan@sahaja msk su
Goitchoo Stevkovski
Partenie Zogralski 77A
01000 skopje, Macedonia
Phone (389
home (43 1) 2929 956
Aziz Gueye
s/o de Serigue MBeye Gueye
Direction CFAO-BP 2631
Dakar, Senegal
91) 22 62 75
Hilat Koray
Cayirbasi cad 8-4
Buyukdere B0B90
Istanbul, Turkey
Phone
Fax,
E-Mail:
Mr. Ivan Tan
17, Jalan 14/52
46100 petaling Java
Selangor, Maiaysia
Phone
Fax
E-Mal
Mr Erie Sopholas
Belönle
Mahe Seychelles
Phone
(00) 212 218 1232
的2125159670
Cicaksa donuk tomtr (Satfet Cicekdag)
(60 3) 774 4750
(60 3) 718 7128
rhertanjanng my
(248) 24 400 ext 545
ME Patrick B. Shorif
po Siera Rutile Limited
PO. Box 59
Freetown, Sierra Leone
Phone
Talex:
Ukraine
Kiev-252-190, Estonskaj 5/80
Galina Sabirova
Phone:
Graciela Vazquez-Diaz
Tejocotes 56-201
Col del Valle
Mexico D,F 03100
Mexico
Phone/Fax
E-Mail:
(7 044) 442-68-71
(232) 25316
3259
Frank Glannasi
Al Faheemi Building, Cathay Lid
PO Box 25421
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Phone
(52 5) 575 1949
indoamci@tn.netmx
Siivestor irs
clo Etika Hutacova
Polnohospodarska 32
Vrakuna Bratislava 62107, Slovakia
Phone
E-Mail
Semmerova)
Mr. Herbert Wiehart
Gourmet Vinna
Chha 1-705
Thamel, Kathmandhu, Nepal
Phone/Fax
(971 2) 31 29 95
ME Derek Lee
Shudy Camps Park House
Shudy Carmps
Cambridgeshire CB1 6AD
United Kingdom
Phorie
Work
Fax
(42.7)24 95 16
GeImimerov@cvtstuba.sk (suska
(977 1) 41548E
Mr. Geotf Platord
Francis Curtis Ave, Biockhouse Bay
Auckland
New Zediand
Phone Fax
E-Mail
Mr. Dusan Hados
Valjceva 6
1360 Vihnlia. Slovenia
Phone
EMail
(44 179) 958 A68E
(44 122) 363 271
(44179) 958 019
(64-9) 627 922594
Twba uctrogen.ne (Detashin Bhatacharjen)
(386) 61 755369
troha @Int.uni-lj s (Bostjan Troha)
Mr. Manoj Kurmar
75 South Franklin Avenue
Bergentield NJ 07621, USA
Phone
Fax:
E-Mail:
Dr. Siva Govendel
PO Box 729 Laxmi 3207
Natal, South Africa
Phone
Fax:
E-Mail.
Sidsel Mugtord
Myrlia 31
1453 Bjornemyr
Norway
Phone Fax
E-Mall:
(1-201) 384-5034
(1-2011 384-0820
manoj_kumar@merck.com
(27-331) 424484
(27-331) 425685
G=Deena S-GovenderOU-1751PMFS
TMZA LINIOLANGATE
(47 56) 915608:
mugford@online no
E sprit.com
Virpinia Cury
Cale Leyenda Patria, 2990/201
Villa Biaritz
Montvideo
Uruguay
Phone:
Melise Rodriguez
Calle Louis Pasteur 1271
San Isidro, Limi
Peru
Phone:
Mr. Jose-Antonia Salgado
Santa Virgilia 16
28033 Madrid, Spain.
Phone
Fax:
(34-1) 764 3767
(54-1) 564 1457
(59 82) 717 899
7315
(
51-74) 227
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Volume IX I
sue: 7& 8 1997
DIvine Cool Breeze
ESUA
Shree Adi Shakti Puja 1997
Cabella, 23-25 May
HE Adi Shakti Puja was performed in
Not pasta again !' came from the man just home,
Cabella with the hosting countries being and people were tired of waiting for everyone to
come to eat, so they started the mantra quickly
so people would hurry up. Of course the phone
Belgium, Holland, Spain, Finland, Sweden,
Denmark and Norway. We enjoved sunshine, cool
nights, and warm days, along with the pleasure rang and disturbed everyone while eating, and
of again being welcomed to these Divine grounds. when about 40 people wanted to attend the
The flower room was once more filled with the evening's Sahaja Yoga program, it was Too much
most beautiful scents from all the flowers. The !Not possible.
roses were tremendous with big thick stems and
they were just beautiful. (I have never seen such
roses.)
The second act was an improvement on the
first act. The manners improved slightly but still
vou could feel the tension and it took a third act
to get the act together.' The audience was
thrilled, but Shri Mataji commented afterwards
Entertainment Evening
We are all anxiously awaiting Shri Mataji's arrival that, It is just like that some places,' so many
at the entertainment evening, and the very special yogis and yoginis had to introspect as well as
experience of this moment. All our little hearts are laugh at our own silly behaviour.
so excited and the sight of our Mother fulfils all
the little hearts so much that the little hearts performed an Indian candle dance. The Belgians
become bigger to fit it all in. And sometimes the
love is so tremnendous that the hearts get so full Song, Mama. They also performed a play in which
of love and it overflows and manifests in tears,
It must be the lovetears that come because it
feels like we have been a little lost again and the performances with humour, dance slides, videos,
sight of our Mother reassures us that She is quotes of Shri Mataji and singing, to demonstrate
always with us.
Later four Belgian girls came up and
sang a beautiful sorg devoted to Shri Mataji, Your
the central focus is a lady who wants to go into
meditation. Meanwhile there are many different
the problems, peace, joy, surrender, and
The entertainment evening started beautifully collectivity in her meditation. In the end she joins
with the children from Holland singing The Mouse
of Shri Ganesha so sweetly, and they all had big English about the visions for the coming world.
mouse ears on their heads. Again the joy tears Next, an Indian dance was performed showing
entered our eyes. The beauty of innocence seems
also to have this effect of overflowing the heart. also a video made by the Antwerp Yuva Shakti
At the end of the song, the big screen focused on
the little boy who did not sing at all, just sitting Wake Lip World was sung later in the evening.
down looking at everyone a little seriously with
his little mouse ears on his head. A moment of they have a wonderful feeling of rhythm which
quietness occured and then he spontaneously did really awakens the heart (anyone being on the left
namaskar. The timing was perfect, and this got would wake up for sure!). This rhythm gives the
the evening started with lots of laughter.
The theatre act from Holland simulated more limits. The spanish sing beautifully and it
'ashram life.' It was in three acts, the first one is always a pleasure to listen to them. They
showing the not-so-ideal way of living. The story represent the atma, the spirit, on the world chart,
was set around dinner-time when peaple came
back from work, others were cooking, and some.
were still playing on the computer. The comment,
the collective when they sing a qawwali in
the ten incarnations of shri Vishnu. There was
about surrender with the song, Our Holy Mother.
The Spanish delivered a heavenly drum solo.
feeling of really being alive, and that there are no
and it can be felt through their performances very
much.
The Finnish performed
traditional
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volune : IX Issue:788 1997
Scandinavian-Finnish dance which expressed the in the background!) The evening was as
brother-sister relationship. It was a very collective wonderful as the previous year and we all
dance performed by eight yogis, and at the end enjoyed, laughed, and introspected through the
the audience was invited to join in a ring dance. evening.
It was not too difficult and great fun. They wore
beautiful traditional costumes which represent The Puja
different parts of the country. They also showed
us a video from the collectives in Finland.
Sakshi from Holland also very bravely before the puja to cool us down and get us ready.
performed a raga, and when her partner could
not make it she had a stand-in to accompany her,
but the second microphone did not work so we
could only hear Sakshi. Incredible! Shri Mataji and
Sir C.P. were impressed and there was big
applause and admiration from all of us.
Beautiful violin music was also played and we
all entered Nirvichara imnmediately. One of them
was from Jules Massenet's Meditation. (It is funny countries. Thank you again, Mother, for making
because as I am sitting here trying to remember
the details of every performance so I don't miss
anything, this piece of music came on my radio
We were nicely sprinkled with some drops of rain
The puja was tremendous, and the main message
was that we really have to introspect and face
ourselves to go deeper. Do the simplest things
like footsoak and clear ourselves regularly.
Manifest our desire in our daily lives, and give
realization.
On the Monday it was packing up again to go
back home, and we were full of vibrations. We
left the Holy grounds to spread the love to our
it all possible.
- Sidsel Mugford, Norway
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Valume IX lssus: 7&8 1997
Shree Adi Shakti Puja
Cabella Ligure, 25th May, 1997
Talk by H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
WODAY we are going to do the puja of Adi as it could, and then it manifested on the surface
Shakti. It is a difficult subject, to talk about of the earth as different chakras. So it's
Adi Shakti, because it is not easy to tremendous similarity that we have with Virata,
understand that Adi Shakti is the power of the Mother Earth and the human beings. If all of
Sadashiva. Sadashiva is the God Almighty- She them are being reflected by the Adi Kundalini, so,
is his breath, as some people call it, some say she
is the desire and some say that she is the entire If is not understood by human beings how they
power of Sadashiva and Sadashiva cannot do are connected to this Mother Earth. This
anything without her powers.
This subject has been described by many creating different centres in the Mother Earth and
people in various books in different ways. But ultimately broke through Kailasha. And, I don't
actually we need not go to the background of the know how many of you have been to Kailasha?
creation of Adi Shakti - for that at least you
need at least seven lectures. But we'll come to the Kailasha.
point where Adi Shakti started working on this
Mother-Earth.
there has to be a great cornection between them.
Kundalini passed through different centres,
You will see tremendous vibrations flowing out of
Now the way we insult our Mother Earth,
what we are doing is we are insulting the Adi
The first thing is, we must know, that she Shakti. So many ways there are, we should
created Kundalini in the Mother Earth itself and respect the Mother Earth. I mean it was an Indian
custom to begin with, when you got up from
It is very interesting. So the Mother Earth your bed and you touched the Mother Earth with
becomes a very important thing for us. If you do your feet you have to say, "Oh! Mother Earth
I am touching you
do not know how to respect ourselves. The with my feet." All the movements of Mother
Earth are controlled by this inner Kundalini which
is the reflection of Adi Shakti. The gravity that it
she created Shri Ganesha out of the Mother Earth.
not know how to respect the Mother Earth, we please forgive me because
expression of Adi Shakti within you is the
Kundalini, no doubt. That is the reflection of Adi
Shakti in you. But the reflection in the Mother has also is the manifestation of the Kundalini of
the Mother Earth.
Earth is also expressed, as you all know, in
different places, different countries, different cities
Now, why we are suffering in this beautiful
as the manifestation of chakras and Adi Shakti's planet because we do not respect what we have
creations. It was very important first to create a
to respect the most. Mother Earth is to be
very Holy Mother Earth for human beings to be respected. Meaning what? Meaning that whatever
is created on this earth, by the movement of the
earth, by the sea, by all the elements, has to be
born on them.
So the reflection of the Adi Shakti, as
Kundalini first, was on the Mother Earth. respected. Today's problem is pollution, all kinds
Kundalini is a, we should say is a wee part of the
Adi Shakti or we can say that she is the desire people never understood the importance of all
- pure desire- of the Adi Shakti. So Adi Shakti these five elements which are supportive of our
is the desire - complete desire of Sadashiva, and
Kundalini, Adi Kundalini – is the desire
complete desire – of Adi Shakti. Now this one
as first expressed in the Mother Earth, inside the building the house, they will do the Bhoomi
Mother Earth. Inside the Mother Earth the Pujan, means they will respect the Mother Earth.
Kundalini came up in such a way that it cooled
down the inner part of the Mother Earth as much could be an earthquake- which means that this
of things people talk of, the reason behind it,
life.
So to respect the Mother Earth people do
Bhoomi Puja. Many people when they are
Because if she is not being respected may be there
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Volume: IX Issue: 7& 8 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
Mother Earth understands, knows and acts. It acts
in such a manner that human beings don't where we lived, they were crossing since long
understand why such things happen.
crossing each other at a place called Oxtead,
but we lived there later on. So Mother Earth also
Now we can say that in a place called Latur, organizes and arranges things for saintly people.
it was Shri Ganesha's 14th day and they had to It is very interesting to see how the Mother Earth
submerge the statues into the sea or into the river, guides you in a proper way. I mean, I don't know
so they went all out singing, dancing. After how many instances I can give you but we don't
coming from there, they all started drinking and understand the value of the understanding of this
drinking is not liked by Mother Earth at all. If Mother Earth and her loving protection for all the
you are drunk and you are walking on the road saints. In the same way we have to understand
you fall down. It so happened with their drinking how the whole atmosphere, the rain, comes in at
that a big earthquake broke in and all those who the right time, the moon, the sun, everything
were dancing, drinking all of them were engulfed works out in such a beautiful manner because
into that earthquake by Mother Earth. Only our they know it's a saint. They know these are
"centre, which is there, was surrounded by a big Saintly people sitting here. They know that they
gap but nothing happened to our centre, and not are pure, that they are the essence of life and they
one single Sahaja Yogi was ruined by that. We can should be looked after, they should be cared for,
understand because we are Sahaja Yogis, how the they should be bothered for. It is not bothered
Mother Earth has acted to save those people who about people who are of no use. For example
were Sahaja Yogis. So the understanding of
Mother Earth about saints is very great. She
knows who is a saint, she knows the feet of a
saint and that's why you know, so marıy things ritualistic people, going for a ritual which, in the
were created like Moses. He went to the sea and discretion of the Mother Earth was of no avail
the Mother Earth came up for them to walk and of no advantage to them. But nobody learns
through. If all the jews had walked it would not
have worked, but it was Moses and his saintliness
that the Mother Earth herself came up and
helped. In the same way when Rama was
building a big bridge between Lanka and India, there? By going there what is proved that it is not
the Mother Earth came up as a bridge.
now for Haj, 50 many people went and so many
were killed. Some went to Amarnath and they
were killed because they were not saints, just
from this, nobody learns. When so many people
were going to Amarnath were killed, Pakistan
said "See they should not have gone to this
Amarnath, it is a false place, why did they go
a holy place." But when the Haj thing took place
So we should not try to cuurse the Mother Earth to explain this Haj business and the dying of so
for any mishaps on this Earth. If people are many people. The reason is this, that these people
saintly they will be always protected by Mother have been going to Haj all the time. Once there
Earth. She will always try to give themn whatever
they want. You can see in a minute way, that troubled and killed. Now this is it. Now what is
supposing now, in our Cabella here, the roses are Mother Earth suggesting is that going to these
of such a big size, such a big size of roses you places, Holy places they are really holy, no
won't find such big size in the whole world, but doubt –, vou are not doing any spiritual ascent.
was a stampede with 32,000 people injured,
we have here such big ones. In Pratishthan we
had flowers Sunflowers- so big as that, one places which are really holy, that cannot be
man could not lift it. Now how is it all this is challenged, they are Holy places. You must be
happening in particular places? It is the Mother knowing that I was born in Chhindwara, and
Earth who knows, who is living here, who is Mecca and Chhindwara are on the same cancer
walking here on her back we should say, on her line. How is it? What is about Mecca? Mecca is
Soil, because Mother Earth understands Makeshwara Shiva, it is a Shiva. Why did
You are not achieving anything by going to these
vibrations.
Mohammed Sabib ask people to worship a stone?
Now certain places we say that are very Holy. He didn't believe in stones, he was against all
How have they discovered that these places are kinds of idol worship, then why did he say this
Because of magnetic forces. The black stone, which is there, has to be
magnetic forces in England, I was surprised, were worshipped- for that people have to go there.
Holy?
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX Issue: 7 & 8 1997
of Adi Shakti, then we should be pure, absolutely
What was the reason? Because he could feel the
vibrations, he could feel that it's a Swayambhu- pure, like the white stone. Even one black drop
so he said it. So all the muslims are going there
like mads. By going there nobody has improved. the white, it shows. You should be so white, that
I have not seen anybody improve by going to anything, any minute black spot also should be
Mecca. It's just a kind of a ritual. They think if
they go there when they will die tomorrow they If that height is achieved by pure life, by pure
will tell God - see now we have a certificate, we thinking, by pure heart! It is not necessary to
have been to Mecca.
(that's why I worn today the white sari) falls on
seen by you and in others also to be felt by you.
manipulate anything. No, no need at all. It's all
Like our Pope once upon a time used to give natural, like the Mother Earth. Does she
certificate that when you go to heaven you can manipulate anything? Nothing, just see how
show the certificate that now you are a real
Christian. In this way, all these artificial things
came up, but there is reality within. The spontaneous, her activity is so spontaneous we
difference is that reality is for the real people and
not for false people. But this ritualism has grown
too much. Like in India we have many heights of shrubs and trees! How she grows with
Swayambhus created by the Kundalini again I
would say, and which are really worshipped. I
have been to most of them and I was surprised
that most of the pujaris were suffering from some
sort of a serious disease. Like one was a Shakti and that is this Mother Earth. So first we
paralyzed fellow. He said, "We are serving this
God here, and this is Swayambhu, then Mother
how is it that we are suffering from these good. For meditation if you can sit on the Mother
diseases?" I said, "Because you are just making Earth it will be extremely good because the
money. You cannot make money out of God. If special quality of the Mother Earth which also I
you don't want to serve God, don't stay here. But
if you want to serve God then you can stay here,
but don't make money out of this." It is very
common. I have seen, that those people that make
spontaneous she is! You put a seed in the Mother
Earth and see how it sprouts! She is so
never wonder about it. See different types of
flowers, different types of fragrances, different
such balance in every place! In every minute
atom and molecule of that Mother Earth there is
sense.
So before us is the best reflection of the Adi
must respect the Mother Earth. I like you people
because you are sitting on the ground. It is very
have, unfortunately, that I suck your problems.
She too sucks your problems and when she sucks
your problemns, you get rid of them without any
difficulties. So if you cannot say, sit on the ground
money get paralysis. I have seen it.
It is a very deep understanding. All these marble, or something which is natural on which
elements, Mother Earth, everybody has about you should try to sit. But if you sit on the plastic
everything. Because their Kundalini is not like
your Kundalini, which is though in itself is pure, going to help you? The plastic? That's why I
but because of your human endeavours, human request you always that use natural things,
mistakes, ego, super ego –all sorts of because natural things can absorb your problems
nonsense - the Kundalini is not so sensitive, nor
does it tell you what is happening. It has to be
very alert, sensitive, spirituality within you, by mental line, what do we do? We go on arguing,
which you can say immediately what you think, explaining, going on and on and on. There's no
what you know, what you understand about
anything. But the problem is that this doesn't
exist. Why is it that you should not be so spontaneous – immediately you will know, what
sensitive? On the contrary, I have seen, if their
mind works against somebody, then they start communicate. You don't need much thinking
saying, "You are catching on this, you are about it because you can absorb even the thought
catching on that." Actually the person who is
saying that is catching. So with this thing one has
to understand that, if we are the true reflection
then
take a stone to sit on or you can have
you
and do your meditation
I don't know what is
very well. Unnaturally also we live, otherwise, it
is on the physical line, also on mental line. On
end to it. One should get headache with all that.
But if you are spontaneous, if you are very
the other fellow is trying to do, or to say or to
of another person. Absorb doesn't mean that you
take the bad thing of that person but it is like
sieving out. You absorb what the other perosn is
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue: 7& 8 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
saying and sieve it out.
Now the problem of this Adi Shakti is this, she comes very much closer to my attention, then
that I decided, that I will have all of you enter I
into my body, absorb all of you. It is a very
dangerous game, I know, but I did play because why are we in Sahaja Yoga? We are in Sahaja
I am supposed to do it, at this stage of time that Yoga to ascend, to go higher and higher, as you
I should absorb you, all in my body. So with you, sang yesterday. It was very entertaining yesterday
all your problems have also gone into me, all
your troubles have also gone into me. But by higher and higher. Really it was very joy giving,
absorbing it, see, it's like the ocean to which you
have put and you are cleansed, but what about
the ocean? Ocean has still got your problems and
things lingering and they are very troublesome.
So the best thing would be for you to cleanse
yourself. Cleansing is very important through much of this, which is very bad because you are
introspection. But it doesn't mean thinking, it
never means thinking. But introspection means
meditation and that you all should meditate.
that, or a lady like that, is full of problems and
I have to take up the cross
it's like this.
A very simple understanding should be, that
the way you talked about your ambition to be
no doubt. But what are we doing about it? What
are we trying about it? Seriously we must think,
are we meditating? Are we all doing something
to elevate others also, to give realization to
others? Especially women, I have seen don't do
the mothers. You have to go all out to give
realization to others. But men are more active that
and women are not. So it works the other
way
I must tell you we had a meeting of the way round. Now on one side the men are, I
leaders and they came out and sat in the drawing meditate and men do the outside work. It's sort
room. As soon as they had assembled, I had such
a severe pain in the stomach and I had such a
bad diarrhoea that you cann't believe. Now who division, that you meditate at home and we will
had got those problems, I don't know. But as a
mother I don't mind anything, as long as you
get well and purified. Just like as the Mother
Earth cares for you, I also care for you. And just done. Supposing now you meditate and you don't
like as the Mother Earth loves you, I also love spread Sahaja Yoga. You will never ascend.
you, whether you are bad or good, it is not the
point. But to be kind to me, if you could try to
be really good Sahaja Yogis, not the show-offs, thinks, why should I make her a saint? What is
not business like, not only thinking type, not
argumentative, not criticizing others, if you just for one person to become a saint and sit
try to meditate everyday 10 to 15 minutes, I tell
you, my health will be first class. Because I have
taken your injections inside and they start a collective happening. So if you are not helping
torturing my life for nothing at all. You see so
now it is a risk I have run and I am sure you
are all very sensible people and you will body if one organ says, alright now I am alright,
understand that your mother shouldn't suffer. I am not going to work out or one cell says that
This is everyday crucifixion for me sometimes
you know and I don't know what to say, for
example, the other day in Delhi, one gentleman, not work. It's a living organism. I have told you
who is a leader, came to me, to see me and my hundred times, when it is a living organism it has
one foot started going like that, and paining so
much. I mean, I didn't know what to tell him
that you get out now? Because I just cann't hurt
him but I said, "What's the matter, where have are no more a Sahaja Yogi. I wouldn't call a
you been, what did you do?" So he realized and
he went out and really it improved. Nearness realization to one person. He cannot be a Sahaja
also, I think, has an effect, because if a man like Yogi. Sahaja Yogi has to give realization to others.
think, are active but don't meditate. Women
of a part time, or you can call it a good labour
all go out. It's not going to work out.
So one has to meditate and one has to also go
out to spread Sahaja Yoga. Both things have to be
all
Because after all this Kundalini, you see, she is a
sensible woman -
she is very sensible. She
the use? Sahaja Yoga is not individualistic, it's not
somewhere. It's not like that. It is not meant for
one person, for oneself. It's not individualistic, it's
to the collective, Kundalini says alright, you are
alright as it is just like our body. You see in our
I am not going to grow now. It is alright. Why
should I worry about the whole body? It would
to grow. It has to grow and also to absorb. To
have energy you have to meditate and you have
to grow. If you don't grow, you are finished. You
person a Sahaja Yogi who has not even given
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue : 7 & 8 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
Apart from other activities, the main activity happen. What happens is, once they are married,
should be how we give realization to others.
Unless and until we really look after that side of
life we can never never grow in Sahaja Yoga.
then either they will quarrel, they will ask for
divorce. If that doesn't happen, luckily, because in
Sahaja Yoga it is so easy to get married. If that
doesn't happen, then they start having their own
For example now, take my position. I am
alright, I am complete. I have no problem. But family, their own homes, they are again becoming
why did I work so hard and wanted so many
Sahaja Yogis? Why? What was it? I don't have to
grow either. I am overgrown already. I don't have your responsibility. See this Mother Earth, how
to do it, but why? What is the need? The need
is like this. The need is of love. I have so much of nothing but soil, some mud – but look at her.
love that I have to channelize it. If I don't I will
suffocate. I cann't love myself. So, this love has
to spread. For that, I have to have you people is careful! While you, though you have been
who can take this love to others and make them blessed so much, by everything, are you thinking
happy. This is a kind of a vision I have. And in of giving it to others?
this special time, it was promised by many
people, by many saints and it is so obvious that
you are all specially chosen for this kind of thing. must say, but still, Christianity spread out. Islam
Now how far you understand your importance was not a very good job either, it spread out. All
is a different point. You do for your emancipation, those bad jobs have spread so much. So why not
alright, you meditate. But if you are not
channelizing the love, the divine love, what is the has to go to various places. Try and find out
use? Now supposing I repair something very where you can go and talk about it and do
nicely. I repaired this machine nicely something good to others and help them,
(microphone), put it right, everything, and I don't somehow, to rise above these common existence
speak what is the use of having this? In the of misery, unhappiness and destruction. The time
same way, if you work very hard- I know
people who get up at 4 o'clock, have their baths,
do meditation, sit down, in the night again they have to be much faster, we have to go much
sit down for meditation. But they never go out, ahead and we have to create much more Sahaja
they never talk to others, they never spread Yogis through our, consistent very intensive effort.
Sahaja yoga. They do not give divine love to
others. So how can this great problem of this by the way - and this is where we are failing
world be solved, that it has no love. It has never
known divine love, it has to be given to them.
They have to feel this divine love, this power of we be like you? After all, you are Adi Shakti.
Adi Shakti. They have to know it, otherwise you Many people say that you are Adi Shakti, so
are being selfish, I would say. That you had a
nice time having all of this and you are not things like that. But why should I ? Why should
giving it to others. This is the reason why Sahaja I? What is the need? So in that reflection that you
Yoga sometimes fails to create a proper balanced
personality in a human being.
very small, very very small, very limited. Did you
come to Sahaja Yoga for that? You have to realize
she knows her responsibility. She is just made out
How she is conscious, how she is particular, how
she works it out, how she is attentive, how she
With 12 disciples, whatever was the problem
of Christianity, I mean it was not a good job,
the good job of Sahaja Yoga? It has to spread, it
is very short and I think if you see the time, the
rate at which we are moving is not proper. We
But it is a side issue, by the way, Sahaja Yoga is
in our responsibility. We have to learn from the
Mother Earth. You might say that Mataji, how can
what? You see, with one finger you can move
are me, in that reflection that the Mother Earth is
me, in that beautiful creation within you, you
people are like this, that now supposing have to become very sensitive to the need of the
a Sahaja Yogi has married another Sahaja Yogini, world. What is the need of the world? Today if
take a position like that. Now my desire is that you fail the whole thing will fail forever. Only
they should develop a complete understanding of very few will be there. So the need for you is to
each other, have love for each other but have love spread Sahaja Yoga because this love is not only
for Sahaja Yoga and for others. This is the only for you. It is not only to be enjoyed by you, it is
way we can justify marriage in Sahaja Yoga. to be enjoyed by as many possible in the whole
world.
Some
Otherwise why should they marry? But it doesn't
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : IX Isue: 7 & 8 1997
10
So today we have to decide that as the
children of Adi Shakti, we have to go all out, you will talk about Sahaja Yoga, know about
every where, every corner, we have to shout and Sahaja Yoga. There are many who don't know
we have to tell loudly what is the time in which anything. Also it is very surprising there are
you are living and what is the responsibility that Sahaja Yogis who don't know anything and
you have to fulfill as Sahaja Yogis. There must be create problems for me. Like marriage you cann't
some reason why you are here. Like in the
beginning Sahaja Yogis used to ask me "Mother, husband. All sorts of non-sensical problems
was I this last life, was I Shivaji last life" I said, people create for me in Sahaja Yoga. Are you here
"What is the use?" You might have been
anything. But what you are today, is much higher.
Try to understand. You might be, say Nepoleon.
You might be say one of the kings or may be one
of the queens somewhere, so what! What did they with more enthusiasm and joyfully. You don't
do? Did they raise anybody's Kundalini? Did they know what joy you get when you give realization
have any power? Even the disciples of Christ or
even Mohammed Sahib's disciples, could anyone
do it? Did they have any understanding of
Kundalini? Did they have any love for others that
they should give them realization? There were Yoga the want disappears into this desire that
some sufis, they never gave realization to anyone. "my God this man is going
There were so many saints who never gave and give him realization?" On the street you will
realization to anybody. Mohammed Sahib never
gave realization to anybody. Gautama Buddha you something" and you will make him sit down
never gave realization to anybody. Think of it,
Christ never gave realization to anybody. like mad. You will say, "Oh no, no, look at this,
Anybody!! Krishna did not do it, Rama did not
do it. Nobody but you can do it ! You can do it give him." You will have to go to churches, you
and you know everything about Kundalini. It's a
very big thing because you are children of the
Adi-Shakti. You are here and your Mother is here.
It's a very very fortunate thing for me that you without any fear, without any malice. You can
are here. I am very proud of you, but again and talk to them and you should tell them, now we
again I have to tell you that the work has to be are here to help you for your good. We have not
done with a faster speed. We have to move with come here for our good, but for your good, now
a faster speed and get more people to Sahaja listen to us and I am sure, very sure that the
Yoga. It's rather, rather difficult for me to say Kundalini within you will be very happy. She is
something forcefully, that is not my nature you not happy, you see, she is not happy with people
know. I can't get into tempers and cannot get who are not using her fully. So she will be very
angry and I can not forcefully say something to happy to help you and to do the needful for the
you. But if you fail then the only thing will be emancipation of the whole world.
that, you have failed me completely. It means
that, nothing less than that and if you don't want
to do it then I would request all of you to take a
vow today that you will spread Sahaja Yoga and
now live with the wife, you cann't live with the
to create problems or to remove problems of
people?
So, on the whole, we have done well, I must
say, but it's not the final, we have to work faster,
to somebody. The most joyful moment is when
you give realization to others. Now you just try
once and you enjoy it and then you want to do
it more and more and more. Now after Sahaja
should I call him
see some one and say, "Come here, I want to give
and give him realization. This will be your style,
let us
this gentleman is without realization
will have to go to universities. You have to go to
all such congregations where they have no idea
about what they can achieve, and then tell them
May God bless you.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue: 7.&8 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
11
Talk by H.H. Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi
18th January, 1983
O now we are coming to the end of our first it will work out. Let us face the things as they
half tour. Now we have to look back upon are and not to be conditioned by anything else.
ourselves and try to find out what have we
achieved out of this.
You have to achieve a certain depth within
yourself to even enlighten the mantra.
First of all you should have clear-cut
vibrations, minimum of minimum. If you have
certain chakras, with the photograph, pay due
We must understand that, Sahaja Yoga is not
done through brain activities. Like many people
think, that if you just tell yourself: "You have to
be like this", it will work out. If you have to, all respect to the photograph, it's only the
the time, inform yourself that "Oh, you must get photograph which is going to work it out,
rid of a particular problem", it will be alright. Or nothing else - or if I am there. But once if you
some people think that if they tell somebody that: have achieved a certain state of enlightenment,
This is wrong with you and you should get then you can use mantras otherwise also, it will
well", it will be alright. It is not so, because help you.
Sahaja Yoga does not work on mental level. It
works on spiritual level, which is a much higher
level, than the mental level.
But first of all your heart must be clear.
I have found out in general, there are two
chakras, overwhelmingly, not working alright in
most of the western people. First is the heart.
That means; heart is not clear, that heart is not
how to work out your machines. Perhaps people clean, that in the heart you still are a small
still live on mental level and try to solve person; in the heart you have not placed your
problems on mental level. And that's why all the Mother. You have to purify your heart, by looking
at the photograph and putting all loving feelings
problem with any chakra or there is anything about your Mother, understanding Her work and
catching, or you find that there is something putting Her into your heart. If the heart is not
wrong, no use working it on any other level, but clear, then everything has no meaning, because it
spiritual level. Some people believe that if they is a dark heart which is doing all these things.
have dressed up like something, or if they The heart has to be clean, absolutely surrendered
outwardly behave like something, they become and must try to put Me before everything else. I
that. That is not true. Like we have hippies in the can tell you because we are all Sahaja Yogis. I
cannot say this to people who are not Sahaja
So what you have to do, is to understand, how
to correct your chakras, and you must understand
problems start coming up. Now if you have a
west and they think that they have become
primitive. You do not become primitive by any Yogis.
means, because you are so overdeveloped that
you can not become primitive. So by just doing
something mentally, we do not become that.
Now we always try to relate Sahaja Yoga from
our own terms, not from the terms that belong to
God. God is what He is. He cannot change
Now this mental level can go even further in Himself; you have to change. So whatever we
a subtler way, into people, some of you might feel think about God, we want to put on that. For
that by knowing some of the Aaratis and things example if someone thinks that he tries to be nice
by heart, you will achieve weight, is not true also, or good to me, or if he is close to me, so called'
because that is also just words. But if that is an and if he thinks that he is organizing better or he
awakened thing within you, then they become a is doing this work or that work or anything else
"Mantra' and then you can work it out. But first like that, where he feels that he is important
of all you must achieve a certain standard to have because he is doing this job or that job, then one
that power to create the Mantras. Also when you must know that all this is mental. Actually you
are doing nothing. Whenever you try to do
say some 'aarati', it is not necessarily possible that
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX Issue 7&8 1997
12
something, you really confuse yourself and out. You just cannot think about it. Whatever you
confuse Me also. We have seen yesterday's may try to do through your thought, you cannot
example. I was sure that they had to go next day, achieve any results in Sahaja Yoga. You have to
use your hands, you have to use you feet, you
away and they found that the tickets were have to soak your feet in the water, because water
brought for the next day. This knowledge comes is the ocean. All these five chakras or say six
chakras which are, I say five because the one is
said, you better not come. I did not know what the mooladhara chakra, which is the first, and the
seventh and the topmost is the brain. So in-
between five chakras, which are there, are to be
happen. So this clear-cut idea comes to you handled fully, with the idea that they are basically
when your heart is clear. But first of all people made of matter, and the five elements constitute
do not understand that you have to work it the body of these chakras. Now these chakras, if
through your heart and not through your brain. they are to be corrected, we have to correct them
When we have to work out things through our by taking out all the problems of these chakras
brain, we try to develop our brain, isn't it, by into the elements from which they have come. For
memorising, by practising something, teaching example a person, who is very right sided has to
our brain how to think, how to go this way, that give a balance by the left side. Of course raising
way. We try to train our brain. Now we have to with a hand is alright, but what about the
train our heart in Sahaja Yoga, and to train our element? Right sided person has all the elments
heart in Sahaja Yoga one has to know first of all which give heat, we can say the light, we carn say
the fire. So, for people who are right sided the
The limbic area actually represents the heart. And light is not going to help much. Like if you put
the light before the photograph and those who
are ego oriented people, if you just use the light,
working but it is only mental projection, and you it is not going to work out. So what is going to
will feel that I am doing it from heart. That's work out is Mother-Earth and the water element
which is cooling. Even ice is very helpful to
Now then supposing what should we do, if we people who are right sided. So all cooling effects
have weak heart. You might say, you should try should be used for correcting your right
to sort of tell yourself that, that's not good and sidedness. So that you cool it down. Same about
this is not good, this and that and all kinds of food. In food, those who are right sided people,
mental suggestions or auto suggestions or this is should take to foods which are left sided, that is
the way psychiatrists and all that give you carbohydrates, it means they should become
suggestions. That's again mental. So that's not the partly vegetarian or quite a lot of vegetarian, and
way it is going to work out. We must understand should eat things at the most like chickens but
that what we have to do is to raise the left side not fishes, not sea food because they are all hot.
and put it to the right side. There is no other way. That's how you treat material side of your
You have to just work it out with your hands. chakras. Now the left sided people should use
Your hands are working it out and not your again the 'deepa' - the light, or the fire to correct
their left side. Also in food, such people should
take more to nitrogenous, means, proteins and
foods like that. They should take more proteins.
but nobody would listen to me and they rushed
to you, if you are clear hearted. As yesterday, I
was the situation there. 1 just said, "don't come.
Finished, because I krew that it was going to
that it is enveloped either by ege or by super-ego.
if there is ego, heart will always be so called'
heart. It will not be the real heart that will be
my
not so.
brain. So use your hands, and the methods of
Sahaja Yoga.
Now every one must have a regular sitting in
the water everyday. That's important 'Every'
morning you 'must' do you meditation, because basic thing is Kundalini, and the Kundalini as I
on mental level, we tell, we have been with told you is pure desire. Again listen to it
Mother, alright. This exposure is alright. You carefully- "Pure desire'. That means all other
came, you saw how Indians are and how they desires are impure. There is only one pure desire
are, and how they are good for Sahaja Yoga. But and that is to be one with the divine, one with
after seeing all that, you have to know that Sahaja the Brahma, one with God. That's the 'only' pure
Yoga is to be worked out and not to be thought desire. All other desires are impure. So train your
Now as far as Sahaja Yoga is concerned, the
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Volume: 1X issue: 7& 8 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
13
mind gradually to achieve that desire main thing. don't feel bad about it. That's one of the signs that
If you train your mind in that fashion then you Sahaja Yoga has not yet developed. If I scold you,
can develop pure desire, se all other desires will
negate gradually. Alright. Now this desire, to be
one with the divine, is the purest and the highest. away. So accept it just as a correcting point that
And to achieve that, what have we to do? To is good for you. Some sort of a thorn is within
achieve that you have to keep your mother you, which has to be takeri out by another thorn
pleased, very simple. Adishankaracharya has said
that you don't bother about anything, just keep understanding the compassion of your Mother
your Mother pleased. You have to be simple you will not mind my saying anything to you,
person; do not try to be cunning with Me or ny correcting you or my telling you that this is
clever with Me. I know everyone well. So try to
tell yourself that "I should say things, I should who do not have a good heart, clean heart cannot
behave in a manner that will please my Mother". understand this. They cannot understand this,
Supposing you are in Sahaja Yoga, and you are very difficult. So you keep your heart clean
doing wrong things, it is not going to please Me towards your Mother. Whatever, I do for you, is
at all. " So how to please Mother?" – That, you just a blessing, always a blessing for you.
should try to see for yourself. What kind of a
thing pleases me the best. I am also a very simple that.
person, so I want a simple hearted person
is simple hearted. For example, a person who
tries to show off too much, tries to be always the suggesting that you are still very very
first, or tries to be always the sort of a cinema
star, I don't like such person. You have to be very materialistic. It becomes subtler and subtler and
quiet and extremely shy about showing off subtler. So try to understand that matter is not so
yourself. Do I show off that I am Adishakti? I do important. Matter is just there to please each
not. I live like you, absolutely like you. Do I try other, specially to please your Mother. It has no
to show off? Then why should you try to show
off to me? So that kind of a person is no good.
it is because there is something in you which has
to go away and which I must scold, so it will go
and Mother has taken it out. Once you start
wrong, becauIse I have to do that. Those people
Whatever I do for you is a blessing, remember
who
Now another chakra, which is horribly caught
with most of you is your Nabhi chakra,
up
materialistic. In small small things also we are
other value whatsoever. So you should not try to
be materialistic in the sense that, you see, for a
little thing, you have to do this, for a little you
There is no need to be tense. If I find something have to do that. Nothing is important, if it works
wrong with you, if I scold you also, it is for your out well and good. So you see Nabhi Chakra is
good. If I say a good word it is for your good. very individualistic, very individualistic. It is
My Sahaja Yoga works this way. I have no malice everybody's personal thing. If your desire is only
against anyone in the whole world, no malice at upto Lakshmi point, that you want to have more
money, or you care for little things, here and
nothing but compassion. But in compassion there, without any spiritual value to it, then your
sometimes I have to scold and in the same Lakshmi tattva, at the most might be awakened.
But this Lakshmi tattva has to become
compassionate manner. So both ways it helps you. Mahalakshmi tattva. That is for our ascent and
It helps you both ways. So thank God that you just to get into that Mahalakshmi tattva, what you
have somebody, who will correct you at the right have to do is to use all your material things and
time, for your good, because you are saints, and your material being in such a way that you please
you have come on this earth to establish God's me. That is 'very important'. Everybody must
Secondly, you should not be tense with me.
all, and no anger for anyone in the world. I have
compassion I have to speak in a
very
kingdom. That's what you have to do. And if you
are the people who are not respected, who are not
understand.
I want you to understand that when you dress
sensible, who haven't got the dignity, who behave up also, certain things I don't like at all - like
dishevelled hair - at all. That might be a fashion,
So this Heart Chakra is to be looked after, that or whatever but I don't like it. Always must be
with your heart, desire you will keep your properly combed, properly done hair. These
Mother pleased. Even if I am angry with you, modern things you should give up, of dishevelled
in a cheapish way, how can people accept you?
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze a Volume: IX Issue 78 8 1997
hair, because this is a sign of pucca (real) Bhoot Bombay to buy this", that's a wrong idea.
coming in. If you have dishevelled hair, the
Bhoots, recognize the person and they get into
such a person, who has dishevelled hair. So try of that, what we see outside is not good for
to make your hair in a proper way. See now vibrations. But if your attention is inside you
Indians, how they make their hair. Look at them. "will not' buy anything that is not good for
They all make their hair properly, because I have vibrations or you will not own something, you
nothing to do with your hair. I am not a hair will just throw it away. But the attention is
stylist person or anything, but if you do not outside and because of that you just don't know
your hair properly combed and done then how to judge a thing. Nabhi Chakra has to be
definitely you are in for trouble. So take heed to
these things.
Now attention has to be inward, all the time.
I have seen that our attention is outward. Because
have
attended to. For that you do not have to think,
you have to work it out. See which side of Nabhi
Then some people have a habit of being is catching. If the right side is catching, for you
the sugar is the best. Sugar represents many
things. Sugar also means your tongue should be
not because it is material, but it is very important sweet. You should talk sweetly. People think if
that if it is not so, that kind of material will you talk sweetly to someone than people will
start thinking that you are good for nothing or
you are absolutely a meek person. You have to be
meek. We have to be meek arid humble. We must
learn how to talk sweetly to each other, and if
untidily dressed. That's also not a good thing. You
have to be tidily dressed; clean and tidily dressed,
attract all the bādhās into it. You must keep
yourself clean and neat because these badhas
should not enter. All these ideas that have come
to the west have come from some satanic force.
It does not look beautiful. In any way it does not you don't understand how to speak, then take
look good for any spiritual person. We have to
change our styles that will be appealing to the tongue sweeter and sweeter and your ideas will
divine and not to the bhoots. We do not want any
bhoot to come on to us. If understand this Criticising.
simple fact, then you may start dressing up in a
way, that may not be modern, may not be suggested. For the left sided people
ancient, whatever it is, is neat and clean, spick sided people should take salt more, and with salt
and span. Otherwise also if you see to the matter they can solve many problems, because salt gives
point more and more, no use accumulating them a personality, a composure by which they
thousand and one things, which are plastic in
temperament and nature. You should have few dignified and also not very lethargic. So the speed
things which have spiritual value, not all
extraordinary things that we try to have, because be in the centre. It should not be lethargic, nor
they have no spiritual value. So try not to should be too quick and fast and hectic.
accumulate all these nonsensical things to you.
Gradually you will find, you will reduce. You go point of everything. Everything in the centre, one
on reducing, You will have simpler lives, better
things and spiritual things. W.hatever you buy, see
the vibrations and then buy, otherwise you don't much and if you are fast, try to reduce your
buy, because all kinds of nonsensical bhoots will speed by 'alertly' looking at it. You have to be
be in your house and you will be troubled. So alert: see - "my speed is going up. There is no
whatever you want to buy you must see on
vibratory awareness. If you cannot understand, do not talk at all, are also not good. So those who
ask somebody else, a Sahaja Yogi, to help you, talk or those who do not talk have to understand
But don't go on buying things just because you only one thing, whatever we talk, we talk in the
think, they are cheap, or they are nice or good. centre. Once you understand that, your responses
So try to buy things which are vibrationwise
alright and if it is not so, finish it. It's nothing beautiful. Now this is all I can say at this time
important, I must buy this, I have to go to because the time is short also for us.
more sugar, vibrated sugar. That will make your
be sweeter about other person than harsh or
you
So, for the right sided people sugar is
salt. Left
can express themselves in a way, which is
of your talks or behaviour or everything should
So you will understand, Sahaja Yoga is central
should try to do, not one extreme or another
extreme. If you talk too much and jabber too
need for me to talk. Let me stop." But those who
to things will be absolutely central, balanced and
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : IX Issue: 7& 8 1997
15
We have all enjoyed our stay all over, I think
so. You all have been happy all over and we have through your super-ego. I am not very happy, 1
worked it out very well, and it has been quite a
lesson to all of us and also a very great have to be in joy. And these things can work out.
experience of enjoyment. So not to feel guilty You should have patience with yourself, love for
about anything, because by feeling guilty you do yourself and dignity that you are Sahaja yogis.
not get over it. Feeling guilty is an escape. you
must face it. You must face it and see, correct
yourself and be one with it. That is a much better people who are only worried about others. Worry
way, than to just to go on feeling guilty or about yourself and see only the good points of
aggressive. That's not the way, because as I said others. Not the bad points, but good point of
it's all mental.
LIE
ego or "very unhappy" because it is troubling
am not very unhappy, that's not the way. You
Every individual has to work it out for himself
so the whole can be alright. There could be some
others, and also if somebody has to tell you that
So you understand these few points on these you must organise, go fast and all that, do not
two chakras, Nabhi and your Heart. If you
understand these two points clearly, that you Very quick. We have to do so much work in this
must keep it clear, and the expression of that will
show in your behaviour, in your dress, in your very quick and we have to be very prompt and
walk, gait, talking and everything outside.
But you cannot go from outside. Supposing
somebody says that, "Mother, I have combed my
hair very well so I am alright". It's not so. Not compared to you, and I am so much older
necessarily. Even if you have combed your hair, Compared to you people. Alright, you can say that
you might be possessed by a bhoot. But at least Mother you are Adishkati. It's alright. But I am
there is less chances. So one has to understand your ideal. In any case if somebody is your
that it has to be worked out. I think this must be ideal, try to become like that person, try to imbibe
really screwed into your head that Sahaja Yoga is those qualities in you.
to be worked out. You cannot just tell yourself,
"Oh I am very happy" because it pampers your
feel bad. We have to be like that, we have to be
world we have no time to waste. One has to be
healthy about it.
As you know that in this trip you have seen
that how much workI have been doing
May God Bless You.
in
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Divine Coal Breeze a Volume: IX Issue 7&8 1997
Ayurvedic Medicine
Its History, Application, and Connection with Yoga
The following is extracted from a talk given by Dr. is not considered only as a physical body, but the
Syjata Kenjale in Verona, Italy. She is a Sahaja Yogini sense organs, the mind, and the soul are also
who graduated in Ayurvedic Medicine with the included. So, according to Ayurveda, health is not
encouragement of Shri Mataji. At the end of the talk, only a state of freedom from disease, but also a
the audience was offered the experience of self- state in which uninterrupted physical, mental, and
realization.
spiritual happiness are enjoyed.
The main aim of Ayurveda is to help those
who are ill to cure their diseases or unbalanced
state. It helps normal, healthy people to restore
principles, methods of diagnosis and positive health arnd prevent exposure to diseases.
treatment, and, last but not the least, its relation When a person is examined, the person is
with yoga and ultimately, Sahaja Yoga. It is a very considered as a whole; we cannot divide him or
interesting subject and I hope you will all enjoy her into parts. If something falls on our leg, tears
come into our eyes, net from our feet. This shows
that all organs are connected to each other. So
Ayurveda does not allow symptomatic treatment,
but mind, soul, and body are treated together.
oday we have all gathered together to
know about ayurveda: its history, basic
it.
What is Ayurveda?
Ayurveda is Nature's gift to us. It is a very
ancient science, born in India and practised before The Human Constitution
4,000 B.C. According to Indian mythology,
Ayurveda was originally propounded by God. Ayurveda focuses on every aspect of life: day-to-
Brahma is the primordial factor who created this day life, diet, physical exercise, psychology, and
universe, and the original propounder of spirituality. According to Acharya Atreya (a
Ayurveda. This knowledge was transmitted by famous teacher), Nature is called Prakriti, and the
Brahma to other gods like Adaksha Prajapati and
Ashwini Kumar. Then Indra, leader of the gods, part of Prakriti. So the human body is a small
received this knowledge and transmitted it to part of Nature. Nature is composed of five basic
disciples like Atreya, Bharadvaja, Kashyapa, and
Dhanvantari. The disciples transmitted this
knowledge to their disciples and thus this divine human body this Panchamahabhuta is represented
knowledge came on Earth to serve all mankind.
human body is called a Purush. Purush is a small
elements: earth, water, air, fire and ether. These
five together are called Panchamahabhuta. In the
in the form of Doshas; Dhatus, and Malas.
The three basic elements in the body are called
Then, to study it better, it was divided into
eight specialized branches, like Kaya Chikitsa, Doshas. These are active and are responsible for
which means internal medicine, and Shalya all bodily functions, growth, and decay. The first
Chikitsa, which is general surgery. Many books Dosha is Vata or air element. Second is Pitta or
have been written on this subject. Famous ones
are: Charak Samhita and Susruf Samhita.
Ayurveda is also a part of Vedic science. Veda is
an integral spiritual science in the form of sacred body.
books, which gives knowledge about life.
Ayurveda is a part of it which deals with Doshas, or elements, is responsible for good
physical, mental and spiritual life..
Ayurveda is a Sanskrit word composed of two day, month and season. For example in childhood,
words: Ayus and Veda. Ayus means life and veda Kapha, the water element, is greater. In middle
means knowledge. Thus Ayurveda is a science, or
knowledge, of life. In Avurveda the human body
fire element. The third one is Kapha made up of
water and earth.
They are found in different quantities in the
The correct balance between these three
health. They increase or decrease according to age,
age, Pitta, the fire element, is more, and in old
age, Vata, the air element, is prevalent.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX. Issue: 788 1997
17
In Ayurveda there are six tastes of food: swveet, Kapha: The Water Element
salty, sour, pungent, bitter, and astringent. These The third Dosha is Kapha, or water element. It is
tastes also increase these Doshas, or elements. For mainly situated in the stomach, heart, and tongue
example, Pitta, the fire element, is increased by a and is responsible for the connection in joints and
pungent taste and is reduced by a bitter taste.
bones, the solid nature of the body, and its
strength.
There are 20 types of diseases caused by
Vata: The Air Element
The first element, Vata is mainly situated in the disturbed Kapha, such as anorexia, laziness,
intestine, pelvic region, and bones. It governs all diabetes, mucus expectoration, obesity, hardening
nervous functions and is the originator of all of the blood vessels.
movements in the body. There are 80 kinds of
possible diseases due to disturbed Vata, such as
arthritis, stiffness, paralysis, heart disease, and to position and function
hypertension.
Vata is divided into five types according to
position and function:
- Prana and Udana are in the head and upper
part of the thorax and they are responsible for
the voice and breathing.
Kapha is also divided into five types according
- Tarpaka is mainly in the brain and spinal cord,
protecting them from the bories.
Bodhaka Kapha gives us taste.
. Avarambaka Kapha is in the chest and gives
support to the lungs and heart.
Kledaka Kapha is situated in the stomach and
helps the digestion of food.
- Slesaka is in the bone joints and acts as a
Samana is in the intestines and helps in
digestion.
Apana is situated in the pelvic region and is
responsible for all excretory functions.
Vyana is situated in the heart and helps the Diagnosis
heart to pump blood all over the body.
lubricant.
Like the body, the mind also has three qualities,
Sattwa, Raja and Tama, called as Triguna. In
Pitta: The Fire Element
The second element is Pitta, or the fire eleemuent yurveda diagnosis of diseases depends on the
which is mainly situated in the stomach,
intestines, and liver. It governs enzymes,
secretions, and hormones. It is responsible for
digestion, body temperature, and pigmentation.
The diagnosis of a disease is through a brief
examination of the patient in three steps:
1) Darshana, meaning visual observation.
2) Sparshana, meaning touching the patient or
There are 40 types of diseases caused by
disturbed Pitta, including jaundice, acidity, percussion.
burning sensation, pharyngitis.
Pitta is also divided into five types according discussion.
to position and functions :
I Alochaka Pitta is in the eyes and is responsible examination in Ayurveda. Prakriti is the physical
for vision.
3) Prashna, meaning an oral examination or
Prakriti Nidan is another important
and psychological constitution of the body, which
is different in every person. It depends on the
Doshas.
1 Sadhaka Pitta is in the brain and heart and is
responsible for intelligence and memory,
- Ranjaka Pitta is in the liver and spleen and is
responsible for the formation and coloration of Some individuals are prominent in one Dosha, or
the blood.
There are seven types of these constitutions.
element. In others, two humours exist in relatively
Pachaka Pitta is in the intestines and helps in equal proportions. All three elements are
digestion.
- Bhrajaka is in the skin and gives skin its constitution, but is very rare.
prominent in some individuals, which is the best
There are four principal factors responsible for
colour.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume IX Issue:7&8 1997
18
the constitution of the body:
Sleep
Vatish people have less sleep and in old age they
tend towards insomnia.
1) Maternal
2) Paternal
Pittish people have moderate sleep. They may
wake up, but they can go to sleep again.
3) The state of the pregnancy of the mother
and the season.
Kaphish people have a very deep sleep and
have difficulty in waking up.
4) The food that the mother takes during
pregnancy.
According to this constitution, every person
has different physical and psychological qualities. Illness tendencies
Vatish people generally have illnesses of the
nervous system, like pain, arthritis and mental
disorders:
Body Structure
Vatish people are tall, thin, with prominent bones
and usually of light weight.
Pittish people have febrile, infectious and
inflammatory illnesses.
People with more Pitta are medium-sized, their
weight is also medium and they have good rSpiratory tract like bronchitis and asthma and
Kaphish people generally have ailments of the
muscles.
they tend towards obesity and diabetes.
Kaphish people are short, stout, with more
weight and they tend towards obesity.
The above illnesses are because of an excessive
humour, or element, in the body and so
medicines are used to balance them.
Eyes
Nadi Pariksha, or pulse examination, is another
Vatish people have small and dry eyes, brown, important examination in Ayurveda, which is
carried out with the help of the radial artery. The
disturbed doshas are felt with the index, middle
and ring fingers of the right hand. Every
examination has its own rules and regulations
dull and unsteady.
Pittish people have medium-sized, thin,
piercing eyes which become red very easily.
Kaphish people have wide, prominent, oily and is carried out according to themn.
eyes, which are very attractive.
These were the physical qualities, now let's
look at the psychological.
The Treatment
Treatment is of two kinds I
First is treatment of a healthy person, to prevent
him from catching diseases and to maintain his
Vatish people have a poor memory. They notice positive health, called Rasayana or Vajikarma. In
things easily, but they forget them also very this treatment some medicines, tonics and
Memory
physical exercises are given.
"easily.
Second is treatment of diseases. This is again
of two types:
Pittish people have a sharp and elear memory.
They remember everything for a long time.
Shodhana, or Panchakarma, which is the
Kaphish people understand things very slowly,
but when they understand something, they never elimination of excessive doshas. Body massage
forget it.
with medicated oil is also included.
Shamana. In this the increased or decreased
doshas, or elements, are balanced by medicine.
Emotional tendencies
In Ayurveda, herbs, minerals and some
Vatish people are fearful, anxious and are nervous nurified metals are used as medicine. All these
or mentally depressed.
Pittish people become angry and irritable.
things are natural; according to Ayurveda,
whatever is in Nature is in our body. So
Ayurveda believes in curing people with natural
Kaphish people are calm and sentimental.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Volume: IX issue: 7 & 8 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
19
things. These medicines are used in the form of Ayurveda and Yoga
juice, powder, tablet, paste, infusion, decoction, So far we have looked at the medicinal part of
milk preparation and so on, according to the herb Ayurveda. But in Ayurveda, to cure physical,
and need of the patient. The way of preparing mental, and spiritual problems there is another
these medicines is also very natural, pure, and method called Yoga. According to Ayurveda, the
traditional. No chemicals are added. Every spirit, which is part of a supreme energy within
medicine has its own quality and acts very
effectively if used in the proper manner. Most of Therefore we must live according to the
the medicines act as a tonic and they do not have of our spirit.
side effects. They go to the root of the illness
us, is responsible for good health and peace.
purpose
any
and remove it completely.
Disease indicates that we have lost contact
with our spirit. Ayurveda says that to have good
health, everyone has to have four principle aims
of life:
Some Ayurvedic Medicines
- First is Dharma, meaning doing the right
things for ourselves and for society.
Amalki is an herb whose fruit is used as a
medicine. It is very rich in vitamin C and is
thermostable. It is excellent for nourishing the
body, for eyesight, hair and skin diseases, and
also for diabetes and hemorrhages.
Second is Artha, meaning wealth or the means
of livelihood.
Third is Karma, meaning the satisfaction of our
desires according to Dharma.
- Fourth is Moksha, which is self-realization, the
most important state in human life. Self-
realization means the union of the spiritual
energy within us with the divine power.
Three medicines are used together: ginger,
pepper, and pipali. In combination they are called
Trikatu. They reduce Kapha, Vata, and fat, they
stimulate digestion and are useful for bronchitis,
pharyngitis, and sinusitis.
According to Ayurveda, behind this gross
The root of the plant Haridra is used as a
medicine. It gives good complexion and is used physical body there is a subtle body composed of
for many skin diseases, allergic reactions, asthma, a life force, or spiritual force, called Kundalini. As
hemorrhage, and is also a mild antibiotic.
The plant Brami promotes very good sleep and there are channels in the subtle body through
memory and is used mostly for nervous which this spiritual energy flows. These are called
exhaustion and epilepsy.
there are channels in the physical body through
which fluids or secretions flow, in the same way
nadis. There are three nadis in the body: central,
right and left.
In modern science these three nadis correspond
to the central nervous system and to the
The regular intake of Tulsi, also called Sacred
Basil in India, increases immunity and has a very
good effect on the mind, giving mental peace.
The roots, leaves, and pips of Eran are used as sympathetic nervous system. They run through
a medicine. The oil prepared from its seeds is different energy points, which are called chakras.
useful for rheumatic diseases, gout,
In modern science the chakras correspond to the
different nervous plexi.
gout, and
rheumatoid arthritis.
In ancient India, the method used to know
Guduchi is a plant used for chronic fever,
especially the tubercular type, and is a very good about the nadis, the chakras, and the spiritual
medicine for the liver and spleen.
energy within us called Kundalini, and to
experience self-realization, was called Yoga. Yoga
Kumari is used as a tonic specially for the
liver. It regulates peristaltic movement in the mental, and spiritual problems. Ayurveda and
intestines, promotes digestion, and relieves yoga originate from the same spiritual science, in
constipation.
very important in Ayurveda for curing physical,
is
the form of the sacred books of the Veda. And
now we are very lucky that in these modern
Kupshur acts as a diuretic, used against stones
in the urinary tract, diabetes, and uterine times Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi discovered
disorders.
a new
пеw
Yoga called Sahaja Yoga.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Volume: ix Issue: 7&8 1997
20
Divine Cool Breeze
When all the energy centres and nadis are clear,
diseases cannot take hold.
Sahaja Yoga
The word Sahaja means born within you, or
spontaneous. And Yoga means union. So in Sahaja
Yoga the spiritual energy within us rises Ayurveda and Yoga are very close to each other.
spontaneously, pierces the anterior fontanelle bone She knows Ayurveda very well and she herself
n the top of the head and unites with the divine Sstudied medical science. Ayurvedic medicines are
power, giving self-realization. The awakening of totally natural and without any side effects. Their
the Kundalini is not a hypothesis or a supposition etficacy is increased when the patient practises
but is an actualization on the central nervous Yoga. When a person has his spiritual energy
system. Sahaja Yoga has been medically proved in awakened and his chakras and nadis are clean
the medical university at Delhi in India. Many and enlightened, Ayurveda medicine acts much
countries have accepted it and have given many
awards to Shri Mataji for this great work. Now
Sahaja Yoga is in 80 countries of the world.
Shri Mataji told me to learn Ayurveda because
more effectively and quickly.
Now I think we should stop here, and take a
golden opportunity to know about Sahaja Yoga
I have been practising Sahaja Yoga for 21 years and experience self-realization which is the real
and have seen that because through Sahaja Yoga aim of human life. I am grateful to the Sahaja
our nadis and chakras are clean, many illnesses Yoga Association for giving me the chance to talk
such as asthma, blood cancer, epilepsy, heart
diseases, and mental disorders have been cured.
about Ayurveda and its relation with Yoga.
Thank you very much.
Dear Sahaji,
have photographs which you feel would be suitable for the cover
If
you
or to illustrate an article in the Divine Cool Breeze, please send a copy
and/or a negative to the address below, alongwith the place and date, if
known. We welcome original illustrations, decorations and border art and
articles about Sahaja Yoga in the country/abroad.
Your suggestions for the improvement of Divine Cool Breeze are also
welcome.
Address:
O.P. Chandna
463, Rishi Nagar,
(Rani Bagh), Delhi - 110 034
Phone : 7013464
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume IX Issue: 7&8 1997
21
News from Around the World
March 1997 Australian National Puja
Mataji had reminded us earlier in the week that
Shri Shiva cools us down.
and Public Programs
The Puja setting was prepared during the
Although Shri Mataji would not be visiting
Australia (Shri Mataji's tour to Asia was cancelled morning, the decorations consisting of paper
this year), we still felt it necessary to meet for a flowers forming the backdrop and blending into
yearly National Puja and Seminar. We decided to real flowers which covered the stage, About 400
celebrate Shivaratri Puja and host two major yogis had gathered to perform the Puja to Shri
public programs in Sydney the week after the Mataji in the aspect of Shri Shiva.
Puja when the vibrations would be strongest.
As the public programs of the future will most The Programs
likely be presented without Shri Mataji's physical It had been decided to approach the Public
presence, these public programs were telt to Programs as if Shri Mataji were coming in person.
represent the beginning of a new phase in our This meant a major advertising campaign,
evolution as Sahaja Yogis. Life for us is Sahaja postering, handbilling, and the participation of the
yoga, our goal is to ascend and to help others to entire collective. We decided to hold programs in
ascend. As a collective we were beginning down two separate venues; for the cost of one
that path where much of the work and advertising campaign we held programs in two
responsibility for the spreading of Sahaja Yoga different regions of Sydney.
will be upon us.
The first program was held at 7:30 p.m. at the
Masonic Centre in the heart of Sydney. Each year
thousands of people gather to see Shri Mataji.
This year we chose a venue which would seat 650
yogis from all the states of Australia, as well as people. The positive desire and vibrational
New Caledonia, New Zealand, Asia, and Europe support of the collective towards the programs
began to assemble at the site recommended by was inspirational. It is this collective dynamism
The Puja
During the afternoon of Saturday, March 1st,
Shri Mataji.
which will fill venues in days to come.
On the night of the program the hall was full
The daylight hours were mostly unscheduled,
people spending their time meditating, in the joy with about 350 new people and many yogis in
of reunited friendships, or ascending through the attendance. The program began with miracle
purification of honest labour in the kitchen. In the slides and music provided by the bhajan group.
pleasant hours of early evening on Saturday, we
assembled in the main pendal for a concert. It leader of Victoria, Uncle John Henshaw. He is
began with a performance by the local bhajan retired Senior Lecturer from one of Australia's
group. The first piece was purely instrumental, most eminent places of learning for young artists.
beginning with solo pieces played upon the He is a dignified and widely respected figure
Indian flute, guitar, dholak, and western flute, both within and outside the Sahaja collective. His
leading into poetry followed by bhajans.
The bhajan group is in the final stage of considerable knowledge and experience in areas
preparation for recording "Music Of Joy II." It of spirituality and the history and philosophy of
promises to live up to all our expectations. Western culture.
Following the music we were treated to a drama
written by Brian Bell based upon the ways and any true joy, which can only come from the spirit.
means of the false gurus and their advocates.
After the heat on previous days, the sun rose
gloriously on a refreshingly cool Sunday. Shri to the next stage of human spiritual evolution. All
The introductory talk was delivered by the
introduction to the program drew upon his
He said that our Western lifestyle robs us of
He suggested that we can all become much more
than what we are, and that we can break through
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Volume : IX issue: 7& 8 1997
22
Divine Cool Breeze
was last with us, She requested that we purchase
this, he said, had been made possible through the
grace of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, the greatest a country property. We are in the process of
spiritual being on the planet today. Although she purchasing what will become the Australian
was not present tonight they would still be able National Country Property at Balmoral Village
to experience self-realization.
This led to the video of Shri Mataji, then the
process of self-realization. The silence of the
meditation was enriched with the first notes of
Vishwa Vandita played on the saxophone, and the
mood of the audience deepened as the vibrations Sunday April 20th was a blessed day for the
of the music filled the hall. Shri Mataji has said Sahaja Yoga collectivity
that listening to this music would help establish Approximately 300 people gathered in the very
self-realization. This was certainly our experience. beautiful ballroom of the Rembrandt Hotel, where
Following the meditation, the majority of the
new people raised their hands to confirm they waiting over two hours, as they had attended the
just over one hour's drive south of Burwood.
Chris KiryacoR, Australia
News from Thailand
of Thailand.
Shri Mataji usually stays. for a public program.
Previous session, a medical conference given by
Dr. Umesh C. Rai on the benefits of Sahaja Yoga
the evening talked about the importance of
establishing the experience of self-realization by meditation on psychosomatic and various
attendance at the meditation workshops in the
coming weeks.
The mood amongst the Yogis at the program Shri Mataji's grace was expressed through their
could best be described as buoyant and excited;
everyone was looking forward to the second
program. The vibrations at the program were very willingness to take the time to learn about Sahaja
strong. We had approached the program as if Shn Yoga's holistic approach to medicine.
Mataji were coming, and our feeling that evening
was that indeed She was.
diseases.
The quality of the seekers gathered there by
attentive listening, the relevant questions they
asked, their respectful attitude, and their
Dr. Rai gave an outstanding talk, with slides
at the presenting research and analysis, in support of his
statement that "within' a few weeks of a Sahaj
The second program was held
Parammatta Town Hall on Friday, March 7th.
Parammatta is one of the largest population Prakash also gave a brilliant and joyous program
centres within the Sydney region and has always before a very receptive public.
attracted many seekers to programs we have held
there. The hall was full with about 250 new
treatment, one can cure most of the diseases."
A journalist from the daily national English
people and the same number of yogis. The format newspaper, The Nation, had interviewed Dr. Rai
of the program was similar to the first; again the in depth earlier on. He asked numerous questions
vibrations were very strong. At the end of the with deep and sincere interest in Sahaja Yoga. A
meditation process everyone in the hall raised long and wonderful article came out of this
their hands in recognition of the gift of self- Another journalist, from Thai Rath, also attended
the publie program. The article that followed,
published in this very popular Thai newspaper,
brought a crowd of people to our weekly Sunday
afternoon meditation. In addition, several hundred
people have called the centre, turning us into full-
time telephone operators, with calls coming every
realization.
Following each program, a survey
conducted to discover what had brought the
seekers to the programs. Here are the results:
Colour posters (shop windows)
Local newspapers
was
35%
two minutes for the first two days.
20%
This double program, a medical conference
followed by a public program, really generated
tremendous vibrations that most of the
newcomers in the hall were able to feel, including
two monks and a highly placed teacher in a
15%
Daily newspapers
10%
Large wall posters
10%
Hand bills
10%
Friends
Also of note in Australia, when Shri Mataji Buddhist meditation centre.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Volume: IX IsUB: 7& 8 1997
23
Divine Cool Breeze
was preceded by another great happening, one
month before, when Franz and Jean-Luc from
Austria and Jasna from Bosnia held a Sahaja Yoga
program for a gathering of seekers in Sarajewo.
The three pioneers drove together from Banja
Luka in Serbian-held territory, where Jasna was
at a time when Shri Mataji usually blesses the visiting his family, to Sarajewo on Saturday,
country in person, no doubt Our Holy Mother's February 22nd. Despite the fear and heaviness
that still lingers in the land from the war, they
May the strength, love, and vibrations of the had a joyful journey, enjoying the first signs of
collectivity of 60 or so yogis be able to clearly springtime in the otherwise barren landscape.
reflect Shri Mataji's vision so that the seekers find They were heartily welcomed by several seekers
of truth on the following sunny morning. After
the experierice of self-realization, the new Sahaja
Yogis enquired again and again when their new
friends would return. Anyone interested in
Coordinating a visit to the Bosnian capital please
contact Franz Mekyna in Austria for further
information. (Telephone 43, 02266, 67167
The Thai collectivity had worked very hard for
this event, putting all their heart and energy into
postering, cotacting the media, sending letters to
hospitals, then phoning doctors individually to
make sure that they would attend. The success of
the evening was surely a beautiful reward. Held
attention illuminated this unique event.
here the end of their search.
Tanine Sreshthiaputra, Thailand
First Sahaja Yoga Programs in Croatia
and Bosnia
Jai Shri Mataji
Golden Builders).
On the most auspicious day of the year, the 21st
of March, a Sahaja Yoga public program was held Experiences in Norway
in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia. Much
enlightened, loving attention has been on Andrea
and Venzi for physically working out Zagreb the The Norwegians are very ardent seekers. As a
last few months! With some help from Austria,
these yogis carried out a postering campaign that organizations have established a presence in this
brought about 40 genuine seekers for their self-
realization. The program was lead by Dusan, the
leader of neighbouring Slovenia, who was
accompanied by three cars full of Slovenian yogis. Oslo on a snow and ice trip across the
Most of the seekers who attended were quite Hardangervidda mountains, to the city of Bergen.
young, and seemed to have enjoyed a strong We accompanied Rita, who has done a lot of
experience. We are hoping that many will return
each Wednesday for the follow-ups!
Part Two
result, all kinds of religious and pseudo-religious
country.
On April 4th, 1997 three Belgian yogis started
from the newly founded Sahaja Yoga centre of
work for the Oslo courses (and because of her
unbreakable enthusiasm is called by some "sweet
little bulldozer"), and were guided by a huge
Croatia has for centuries been the southeastern
stronghold of Catholicism in Europe. Beyond its snow plough through house-high snow walls to
borders lay the lands of the Orthodox church., our goal: the city of Bergen.
and still further East and South, the Islamic
peoples. Just 30 kilometers outside of the Croatian
capital, one finds the remains of villages recently Norway's gate to the world. Bergen is protected
ravaged by war. On the lighter side, Croatia has by seven mountains and covered all over with
a long, beautiful coastline on the Mediterranean
Sea. The cuisine of this country is an interesting is on a peninsula, surrounded by innumerable
mixture of Hugarian (goulash), Austrian (apfel- small islands. What is so beautiful about Bergen
struedel), and Italian (excellent pizza!), as well as
other specialities. The young people generally trees than people, and more calmness than in any
understand English, and most of the older
generation know German apart from their own
mother tongue.
Bergen is the second largest town of Norway
and was once the capital of this coutry. It still is
beautiful lakes, fjords, trees, and flowers. The city
is that there is more nature than houses, more
other city we know.
We were met by two lovely ladies, Christa-Lis
and Rita, who had been postering and
distributing leaflets in the preceding weeks. They
This historic moment on the Balkan Peninsula
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Volume 1X ssue: 7-8 8 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
had arranged for us to meet 16 new seekers in
Bergen's alternative "Knutepunkten" (junction) to asked for, as She always does.
talk to them about the new perspective of Sahaja
Yoga and Shri Mataji, to give them realization, centre of Oslo and six new people came. After
and to help them understand and experience how being worked on, a young girl with thyroid gland
vour life changes for the best after Kundalini pain said that she didn't feel the pain in her left
Shri Mataji gave us much more than we had
The same evening we had meditation in the
rising.
throat and left shoulder anymore. "As if it had
The next evening we met most of the 16 been anaesthetized with a very sweet injection,
seekers again, as well as five new ones: All she said. After this she felt better and was literally
doubts and distrust for the new experience had overflowing with Kundalini. We also met some
gone and were replaced by friendship, openness, remarkably balanced people there.
and even love. It was a wonderful experience, as
self-realization and collective meditation always is.
Most of our new brothers and sisters felt very too eager to give up tantrism and other nonsense,
happy and could see a new perspective for and to recognize and embrace the truth. We all
themselves and for Norway. For some, their felt the Paramachaitanya very strongly. Shri Mataji
vision extended as far as Scandinavia, and even Herself must have been there, because we really
the whole world!
But the top of the bill was the Tonsberg
program. We met 16 new yogis, who were only
were connected to the Nirmal Vidya of the Virata.
On Sunday we were invited to the birthday We were answering questions we had never heard
party of Christa-Lis where, for the third time in of before. One of us, who doesn't speak English,
three days, we met our new brothers and sisters
in Sahaja Yoga and a few new ones: the youngest Yoga as if she did this every day. We worked on
being 11 and the eldest 74 years young! Between
cake and tea we gave an introduction, heard a happy. Some of them just couldn't leave and
talk of Shri Mataji and had the experience of self- when they did, they were crying for joy,
realization again. We worked on people, answered overflowing as they were with vibrations.
a lot of questions, went out to look at the comet,
and ate some more cake. Finally, we exchanged and wider and softer and more filled with
addresses, promised to come back again, and
send more information in the meantime. At the before. We felt and still feel as if Norway has
end of the evening we were hugged by almost surrendered to the Adi Shakti and will blossom
everybody as old and very dear friends.
When we got back to Oslo, they phoned to tell
us that in just one day they had organized Mataji.! Norway ahoy!
addresses, phone numbers, a place to meditate,
and an appointment for next week. Once again
was talking about Shri Mataji and about Sahaja
each other, making us and each other extremely
When we drove back to Oslo we felt stronger
Satchitananda than any Viking can ever have felt
a thousand-fold.
Norway is ready to be the flute of Shri
=
Sidsel, Rita, Mariette, and Jos
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 SAHATA YOGA TEMPLE
ఆడఖల బిు
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 "In Sahaja Yoga
it is compulsory that
you should be happy,
you should be joyous and
you have to be joyful."
