Divine Cool Breeze 7)11 Volume : 1X Issue: 9& 10 1997 "Truth can be very bitter, can be very painfut, but truth which is adorned with love in just like a flower, without the thoms. Her Holiness Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi (Sahasrara Puja. Canella, May 4, 1997)

 In this Issue: 2. Krishna Puja 23.8.1997 Talk by H.H. Shree Matajl Nirmala Devi to Unity International Foundation 10 Russlan Folk Medicine Conference (Address written by Shree Mataji) 15 The 1997 Latin American Seminar 21 The 108 Names of Love News from Araund the Warid: Medical Conference in Delhi 23 Sahaja Yoga Ensures Peace 23 (Newspaper Article) Award Tor Dr. U.C. Rai 24 Taiwan Publia Program May 1997 24 Cyprus Public Program Report 24 25 Guru Puja in Australis Sahaja Yoga Austria Celebrates the Golden Jubilee of India's Independence Day 26 Self-Realization, Live on Radio 27 Weekly Sahaja Yoga Programs in Sydney 28 E Yogi Mahajan Edited by Published by: V.J. Naigirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Editorial Golden Words he message of God has come to mankind in the golden words of the great prophets and incarnations. The first known message was given by Lord Krishna to Prince Arjuna on the battlefield of Mahabharata known as the 'hitupdesh' or the Gita. But this was an advice given exclusively to Arjuna in the context of his mental blocks and the need of the situation. 5000 years later Lord Jesus Clrist preached the gospel of love and forgiveness to mankind which was compiled long after his crucification called the Bible. In the 6th century the Prophet Mohammad had visions of God's message which he narrated to his wife. 40 years after his death these teachings were consolidated as the Holy Koran by a remote follower. These were the prime sources of God's communication to mankind. The turbulances of History marred by papal manipulations no doubt blurred the lustre of these golden words. Fortunately, in modern times the Divine herself has incarnated as Her Holiness Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi to communicate directly with all humanity for its en masse ascent. But do we listen? Do we listen to only what we want to hear. Often we quote only that which suits our convenience "Mother said this...". Each golden word is a mantra to be read again and again, to introspect and to imbibe. She is not speaking for others, she is speaking to each one of us. It is a common hallucination that she is saying it for others and not for LIS. No incarnation studied human beings and their problems so minutely and deeply as she does. Hence when she speaks the vibrations flow to work out the problem. If we listen with rapt attention and absorb each word, it will work out like a mantra at every chakra. This is Divine Vani' which feels, loves and acts. It is all powerful and all pervading. Yes, when she speaks every word falls like pearls into the ocean. It is Divine music that elevates us to celestial heights and blesses us with ambrosia. Often our intellect tries to argue with what she says. Our own idea, convictions, mental jargans and conditionings start projecting immediately. But we should question ourself, "who are we and what is so important about what we think and say." It is only a mental projection of our programming like a computer throwing out information based on its floppy programme. Therefore wisdom lies in realising our limitations and shortcomings and recognise the truth. The truth is that we are the Spirit, not this body, mind intellect or ego. So why identify and support falsehood against absolute truth whcih is her Divine message. The human intellect tends to find excuses or offer explainations, but of what use are they and to whom. By playing games with ourself we only deceive ourself and hasten towards our doom. Christ warned, "those who are not with me are against me" Nor is there any room for any half hearted commitments, for that will only produce half baked yogis. Hence we cannot mellow down her words for then they would cease to be golden.. In this Blossom time what a golden opportunity is at hand, golden words of the Divine are being compiled in the eternal scripture of Divine Cool Breeze", Let us wear them close in our hearts and flow with the Divine Cool Breeze. Yogi Mahajan

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX isue: 9 & 10 1997 Krishna Puja (Cabella 23.08.1997) Talk by H. H. Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi oday we are here to celebrate Krishna very important in these modern times. Exposure of body is regarded as a great achievement of women. They are trying to become aboriginals "No, let me talk about Krishna only," because we you seel. That time they never had these ideas and they were not so confused, you see. So even if their women were scantily dressed it did not mean that it was some sort of a sex or some sort of a attraction for men. Or men behaving in a Dharma does not mean what we understand as funny manner to show that they have a special attraction for women. I mean why you should? It not. Dharma means our primordial taboos that is absolutely absurd that men should be attracted are built-in in the human beings. About these, I to women and women should be attracted to men. And on the road, on the street, you go, you what we did? We dominated them and also they see this, just that going on. This adharma is the had to change their style of life. The primordial worst, I think, for it is a curse. Because after taboos are only understood if people are trying coming to Sahaja Yoga also people start doing this nonsense, you know. They should all go to the lunatic asylum. They are no good for Sahaja is little bit different in the sense that it is much Yoga. But Dharma gets established as soon as you Puja. I went to America and they wanted me to have a Mahakali Puja. But I said have to first realize what is the strength of this Puja. How we are going to establish Shri Krishna within ourselves. He Himself has said that whenever there is a down fall of Dharma... Hinduism, Christianity or Islamic nonsense. It is think, aboriginals knew belter than we. But then to understand oneself or else whatever has come to them through traditions. Now Sahaja Dharma higher than the Sahaja ideas that we talk of, but have the light of the spirit. is much higher than even what Shri Krishna said At the time of Shri Rama He had to put down or Shri Rama said. First Shri Rama thought best ABCDEF. At the time of Moses also He had to is to give them discipline. People should be serious about life, have full idea about their own being. They should respect themselves. All these put down ten commandments. But Krishna thought the other way round: to establish the Dharma of puure Love, pure Love. So, because He things were written down long time back. Also wanted that Shri Rama's taboos were forced on people, basically when they were göod, they ; just like Islamic, just like Christians. It people; understood that whatever is bad for us we should not do. These are primordial taboos. Now these primordial taboos are built-in within Lus never works. So he thought better to ask them in their freedom they must develop pure Love. Radha who was with him as his power, it is Now supposing I say, "don't drink." You will called Ahladdayini. She is the one who gives joy, go on drinking. If I say, "don't tell lies." You will pure joy. So all these limited type of attractions tell lies. It is the human nature. You see to go end up in trouble. Now drinking is against, you know that. Today they are talking about tobacco, tomorrow they will talk of drinking when they They are free people. Actually, they are not. They will find so many people suffering from horrible are under the spell of all the kinds of allurements livers and die. Then they will taboo it. But it is you can call or temptations which are against a natural taboo for your body. If you do human life. And it is very natural to be a person something all the time which is not good for you, for your good life you are becoming example I have seen children they feel very shy adharmic. This is to be understood very clearly, to take out their clothes. Even small, small boys, that the Sahaja Dharma is that you are just free. I have seen. They won't take out their clothes in Complete freedom, from lust greed and all nonsense. You are above it. You are above. This are described like Ya Devi Sarva Bhuteshu Lajja Dharma is above the Dharma established by Shri Krishna or by Shri Rama. Because you have should be humble and respect your body. It is reached that stage, in complete freedom you have against primordial taboos because they think now they have freedom. Freedom to do what they like. of Dharma. Small children mostly have it. For the presence of others. They feel shy. So all these Rupena Samsthita. So you should be shy. You

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX Issue: 9 & 10 1997 to be Dharmic. Whatever is not good for you, you dropped out. Specially in America it should stop. should not do. I don't have to tell you that you don't do this and you don't do that. Whatever I say may not be acceptable but immediately your looking like some monkey. Monkey is better, I vibrations will tell you. This is Sahaja Dharma, in the Sahaja Dharma you get rid of all kinds of, as they say, Kaam, Krodh, Mada, Lobh and Moh, compare, I tell you. So I asked him "why are you means Lust, Anger, Greed and Attractions. Now if you understand how people are greedyl Greedy for what? This America is dying primitiveness." I said, "but your brain is modern. of consumerism, you see. Now see the trick of the Just by growing your hair like that you think you trade: In America you can borrow any amount of money from the bank. No problem. Now even if afterwards I learnt that he died. Another one like you don't borrow they will send you a letter "Why do not you take twenty thousand cheque, asylum. Like that I met many. Why do you do it? we are sending you? Why not have it? Ah! very rich you become, you see! It is very nice to take the loan: I was told some people used to cone to Ganapatipule Puja after taking loans. I said, "Stop this nonsense!" So they take the loan and then they come to Ganapatipule. All the time their mind is "how will I pay this loan? How will fellow said that "My God! you lost your hand in I manage?" All the time the attention is distracted. Even when you wvant to do something expensive watch from Switzerland." "Really? good to yourself of coming to Ganapatipule. So such a mind is not free. The free mind is that hand is gone. Rollex is a fashion. So these are which has attention completely enlightened by nouveau riche people who have money. the spirit. But problem is, we are still rising out of this human bondage to a higher life of realization. And when we are going to that level taking? I mean supposing, the Italian designers we have to realize that we have to give up all these shackles, all these horrible things within us, like a bird when it is born out of the egg, shakes out all the parts of the egg = sisters, your father, your mother, your husband, everybody. They try to put you down When, they are drinking they say "come along! you better have something to drink. You are not expensive, why? because they are designers. So social, you are useless, you are not up-to-date, wearing this thing from a designer shop, this is what is this nonsense?" That's how a fashion starts. And this collective action of fashion did you? You have no sense of designs, You have no not come from Shri Krishna and not in Sahaja. In Sahaja you are absolutely free from all these you don't need. And nowadays most of them are nonsenses. If you want you can wear good dress, in jail also. Sorry to say but they have money. if Also in England. A fellow came as a hippy. His hair were must say. They don't like what? All put together like a, you can say, I mean there is nothing to having such hair?" He said, "because I want to be primitive. Now we have to take to the can become primitive? You cannot." Then that came and he didn't die but went to lunatic Because that is the fashion. Now Italy, you know is prospering because of all kinds of designers. Now there is a joke about nouveau riche people, in Russia specially. Russians are not like that, normally. They don't accept something because it is a fashion. So one that day!" "Does not matter. But I lost my very What?" "It was Rollex." Does not matter if the They (dogs) don't follow any fashion. I have not seen dogs taking to any fashion. Monkeys make something special for them. They won't think much of it, may be their masters might buy. But not the animals. Now, we don't have to your brothers, your become animals, of course. But we don't have to become slaves of fashion. So there are some shops which are very you know about telling everybdoy, "See, I am from designer shop." That means what about sernse of understanding, what you need and what don't want you need rot. You are free, you And they have made money by befooling you. you are free from money bondage. This is very Specially in America, I was surprised that they important. Money bondage is another thing. I know some Sahaja Yogis who came to Sahaja coming from Italy, designs, Italian designs. Yoga trying to make money out of Sahaja Yoga. Written down Italian design, so they buying it. I You come to Sahaja Yoga for what? To get out of that money bondage. In the Sahaja Dharma your that are available everywhere, such beautiful money is nothing but dust of your feet. Nothing things. But what they believe in is some sort of so important. Then we have such a collective sense of accepting nonsense. That has to be kind of design from this or that. were selling most of the things which were was surprised that such artistic things they create a group madness. Everybody wearing the same

 Volume: IX İssue: 9 & 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze This is not Sahaja Dharma. We are not slaves democracy but against what Abraham Lincon of anything. We are free people. We are not to accept any design or anything. Let the stupid they have a little street in his name. Of course in follow them. We are Sahaja Yogis. Now this also Washington they say they have some nice prevails among people who are supposed to be saddhus. They all dress up, the same way. How can you make out who is who? In Sahaja Yoga or other some people came and wrote against we don't want you to dress up the same way, look the same way, cut you hair the same way. No, you have to be individuals. Because you are free. Freedom is always supported by wisdom. something that is created by God. If there are the That does not mean that you do what you like: All kinds of funny things happen when a person military people. They have to have different does not know what is the light of the spirit. In colours, they have to have different hues. See, the light of the spirit you don't get involved into look at the trees, look at the flowers and look at this kind of collective madness that is going on We are so collective in mad things! I wish they happy. What gives you happiness is variety. could be more collective in wise things. Wisdom Variety is a sign of beauty. If there is no variety, is very important and a joy giving quality of Radhaji, Ahladdayini Shakti has to come within very proud of it. And they think ruining of us. Then when we meet another person in the collectivity, that person should feel happy with people. They have a sense of superiority because 15 wanted. They had such a great man there and beautiful statue. But otherwise his principles are finished. His ideas are finished. Because somehow even in England specially, against the blacks. What business they have to write against same colours everywhere they will all look like the different hues, the sky has just to make us so boring, I tell you, so very boring! But they are themselves. They think they are very great you. they have a certain type of nose, or may be a certain type of lips or may be a certain types of hair. Such stupid things they are. And you join So, He taught the Dharma of Love. Love is not there if you describe because he is black or because he is brown, because he is white. It is superficial. What is black, white and yellow. I hands with them! How can you join hands with really, I don't understand. Here they go to the seashores to make themselves black and there they say we don't want to have any blacks. Very important. I would say that now the Sahaja Specially for Americans. I think this kind of Yogi's who are going back to America should separation I found there among the blacks and the whites. I went to Harlem. Sahaja Yogi's said people. I was very happy to see the South "will you go to Herlem?" I said, "why not?" I am. black. If you call me black I am black. If you call me white 1 am white. If you call me yellow I am yellow." So I am going. And there I had a lecture, they immediately said, "Mother, you are spiritual, you know. So many people were there. Really, I cannot forget. It is one of the most famous place that there is built in that hall and the same hall is built in Australia, where I had addressed many people. I thought just look at this. They that belongs to us, where the sage grows." Sage said, "Mother, Australians copied from us* "Now 1S a kind of a, according to them is a holy plant. these people so sweet, so beautiful I tell you, 1 Alright, "Now we always meet all of us there for could see their heart, I could feel it. And the different festivals because we regard that land as fellow who was trying to compere, after my a holy land. They know so many things, you lecture, he just came. He hugged me, kissed me, I mean he would have even minced me. Little that, so they always used to go there." So natural. boy, about 22 years of age. Such love he felt. And "So what has happened now?" What is your he said, Mother, next time you come you are problem? #The government has sold this land, going to come to Harlem." But I am told that hall this American government, to an Indian." I said, is closed. So the American system somehow or other Indian to return it to us. We will pay him the goes against democracy.- Not: only against morney. them? You want your freedom then be a free person. In the freedom you have to have variety. have a new style of drive. Go to the black American seminar that they had taken specially to aboriginal people. They went and met them. I have met them also and I was so surprised that we know. But can you solve our problem?" I said, "What is your problem?" "Very simple. We have a land" "Then?" "Very little land 5-6 acres of land is a kind of a, according to them is a holy plant. know. This is the holy land and the vibrations for FF "to an Indian?" "Yes. So can you request this " 1 said "What is the name of Indian?"

 Volume: IX Issue: 9 8 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze complexion, this white complexion is the worst of Sindhi! He won't leave you even one single pie." all. I was very fair, very fair till I got married or may for sometime. Then I started becoming darker and can't darker. Because white complexion gets all Kinds help." But I was surprised nobody raised the of things. The light you put on me I absorb. I get voice against this. They should have raised voice, black spots. So what a great thing to be white they should have said the government "Please do not think so. It looks very funny and pale and joyless. People are going to the sea making their body, I think brown and then suffering from cancer of the skin. This kind of stupidity is also They told me the name. I said "My God! He is a Is he going to give you this? I am sorry. I be divine and I may be anything but I return our land. Why do you want to have it?" As it is all Americans are immigrants. They do not belong to that place. They were not owners of that land. So they have no right to keep Very much fashionable. Now in collectivity how somebody's land like that. And then to think they much do we get impressed by these we should are superior. It is very nice: Somebody enters your house and thinks he is very superior and drives out all the people of the family. That is what is happening in America. be on the watch. I saw my grand daughter was wearing a sleeveless dress. I told her "Bete you should not wear sleeveless dress" She said. "It is very hot. I am feeling very hot." She is young. I said, "See these are two very important chakras. If you expose them then you will have problem." She does not like to wear dresses which are above the knees. But she said, And just the opposite is Sahaja Dharma. With such Dharma you take people into your heart, you love them. Your love flows all the time, your compassion flows all the time. To me it is a problem now my body is more compassionate "people wear even above the than myself. I don't even think of compassion. knees." I said "knees, there are very important this body just grasps every thing, problems of others. But T don't think you can have that kind of a body, you should not have. But at least you immediately. "Mother I'll wear a should have a heart which is opened. You see on the street somebody who is a dark fellow. I like black Americans. Once I got down on an airport. So one gentleman, black gentleman "Hello taboo that we should not expose ours these two Darling! How are you here? Very happy to see you. I am happy to see you. How are you?" Then legs, I don't know they have shorter clothes. I once I was travelling in.. Husala was with me, He looked at me, one fellow, very tall, hefty, you know. He said, "Ah! Are you back again?" "Ham!" I said, "I am back, you know me?" "of course, of burka" because she was a Muslim. And by the course, I know you". He had never met me. But I felt happy. I felt very happy. That is the best way to meet people. Supposing you are walking ön the street. You see some black gentlemen wwear such a thing, to come out of the plane. You going. It is a terrible life there, I tell you. It is a terrible life for them. I know I have read books on them. I cried and wept. I felt very sorry. So, as a Sahaja Yogi you should just jump at them. And you should say "Hello! How are you?" Shake hands with them. They won't eut your throat I can tell you. In criminality I don't know who is more criminal in America. Whether they something is not Alhaddayni, keep quiet. Don't are the blacks or the whites. Competing. But if say, What is the need. What is there to be you are kind and if you are loving you can remove that part of criminality which is within them; because hatred can be only washed away you talk sarcastically to others, in a sharp way. by pure love. But people think that they are very But if you talk sweetly what is the harm. This cunning, very superior in cunningness, of course. Otherwise what is their superiority? Only this chakras." We should keep them closed. Otherwise, if these are affected, you will have knee trouble. " Immediately she changed3; blouse from M inside and something from outside." Immediately. Because she knew this is our natural primordial chakras. But nowadays the more you have long don't understand what is in the legs. The whole beauty is in the legs or what? So I met one lady who travelled with me. She was wearing the time we landed in London she took out the burka and the dress was much above the knees. I said "What kind of a Muslim woman is she?" She is worst than even Christians because they won't have to come down on the staircase. No Lajja, No shame, nothing, shamelessness. So Sahaja Dharma is that have shame. You have sense of shame. What you talk to others, what you say to others, how you behave towards them in Sahaja Dharma is Alhaddayni. If you (sarcastic, showing off your brains in your sarcasm. It is not a sign of good breeding that sweetness comes from Radhaji. Now, of course, they have misused her They have made her into

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX Issue: 9 & 10 1997 a sort of a Romeo and Julliet business. It was not that. She wwas Mahalakshmi. So to be a Mahalakshmi after coming to Sahaja Yoga you should know that you shows that you are not of that calibre. To be the should dress up in a way that is perfectly alright. calibre of Sahaja Yoga you should be free of your Once I remember I was in a big party and one gentleman came and sat down "Ha!" I said, "What happened?" "What a relief, Mother! Mrs. Srivastava to see you! See these women. I am fed letters." I do not remember. I don't want to read up. But you came. I felt so relieved." I said what anything about it. So there should be forgiveness. is so relieved?" "You are so serene" so women are serene in Sahaja Dharma. They are not stupid, will feel very releaved and your married life will frivolous, laughing at anything. That is not the way for a woman. Anything happens they must something. Alright, some marriages are really, laugh. I mean if there is something even really very difficult, alright. So you get out. In laughable, that is alright. But something is not Sahaja Yoga we have allowed complete divorce. even laughable they will laugh. That is not the way. This can be ridiculous also. But laugh of think something is superior. Now we have appreciation, laugh of enjoyment is so pure and creates such beautiful atmosphere. I think the whole ecological problem is in our brains and your upbringing. It is not outside. It is inside us which is reflected outside. In Ganesha Now then better not marry and if you marry then Puja I am going to tell you how we are so closely live like an ideal Sahaja Yogi. Also if you are a related to Mother Earth, and how Mother Earth Sahaja Yogini then you can carry on very much and the atmosphere reacts to our behaviour, to better by forgiving all the time. Every time when how we live. In the Sahaja Dharma you give up people tell me "Oh! Mother. You see you must lust and greed very easily that I know. I mean if help me" "Why?" "Because, you know, my they can't even give up then they should not call themselves Sahaja Yogis. The first thing you give "give him up I do not mind. He must give you up is lust and greed. I find it among young people, now, that those who come to Sahaja Yoga talk to her husband he will say "Mother she is they come really very free people. They do not very extravagant". I said "you better give up run after women, women do not run after men. They are together, they sit together, talk together, In Sahaja Dharma the husband-wife relation laugh together but it is purity. In the Quran it is described that when Kyama will come beautiful beautiful. It is not you know we talk of love and women and beautiful men will be there. But they all that here. Very rarely people fall in love and will have no lust and greed. They will be pure. carry on. It is a blessing if you really get that Today you can see that luist and greed is finished, most of you, most of you. Automatically it is finished and now you can see for yourself that forget that you are Sahaja Yogis. In that Sahaja you are free of this bondage. Then our marriages are coming tomorrow. remember. The present is the best. Now if you are sitting here with me enjoying the Ahladdayini Shakti that time you are thinking about the past a very pure woman and she was past. Finished. There is no need to confess. I know after Sahaja Yoga many people wrote letters to me of confessions. And I just said "burn these If there is forgiveness you will be surprised you be very happy. But if you try to remember But must be for some reason. Not because you banned many countries from where we don't want to have girls or from where we don't want to have boys. What is the reason? With experience we have learnt they are not marriage substance. husband does not give me any money." I said money. Why doesn't he give you money?" You Sahaja Yoga, both of you, and da what you like." should be really romantic, should be really kind of a feeling. But mostly it is a curse. So to fall in love is very good but does not mean you Yoga helps a lot, I think, in your married life. Sahaja Dharma is for your children that you bring In the Sahaja Dharma first thing is very up your children not troubling them too much important is forgiveness. If somebody cannot forgive then he cannot be a Sahaja Yogi, Sometimes I know children go astray and try to Forgiveness: How this forgiveness comes in is by follow wrong things, then you must correct them, forgetting the past. Otherwise you will go on saying, "this person tortured me, that person tortured me. He was very mean to me. He was that to me. He did this to me." Shows that you are not of that calibre to understand Sahaja Yoga. be done. It is very wrong thing, you should Because you cannot forgive. What is there to but into a free life. Let them use their wisdom you must tell them, it is your duty. They were not born out of the trees but they were born here from the parents, so it is the duty of the parents to tell them that this is wrong and it should not correct them but that correction should be in a

 IX lssue: 9 & 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze Volume 7. Sahaja way. I will tell you an example. I had a problem once with somebody coming to me and Sahaja Dharmis? Mother has established Sahaja saying "Mother, I cannot do without smoking. I have to smoke." I said "better smoke then, but you can't be a Sahaja Yogi because smoking Love which of course we have. But apart from Sahaja Yogi is a funny caricature, you know, I that we have so many other beautiful facets and can't think of a smoking Sahaja Yogi. How will I such beautiful things within our personalities, look if I start smoking like that?" "Ah! Horrible." I said then if you are my son, you cann't smoke, should be on your own qualities, on your own it looks bad." He gave up smoking. Can you personality and then you will be amazed how imagine? So dealing with your children always your personality is giving you joy, giving you make yourself an example. Yourself part and parcel of that example. So the children don't feel you know. This is something that I have tälked many a times. Children is onething, I tell they can give up everything but not your love. If they know you love them they will not accept weapons in this life time. Without weapons anything that will make you not love, not love things are solved what can you do. But them. This is for definite. Because children are the try to see the beauty as Sahaja Yogis. best people who know about love. Of course I don't know. I feel that in English language 1 been helped, how you have been guided, how didn't see many books about children written you have been blessed! This is Sahaja Dharma. If beautiful, beautiful things. There was one book that was published when I was in London. The low level. It is not the fault of Sahaja Yoga but it children talking about the politicians and they is your style. You are not sensitive. Supposing published I think 5,000 books and that very same somebody burns his hands, so what will you do? day it was finished. So talk to children. Talk to them you will be amazed they are full of honey, feel, he can drink, he can smoke, he can do they are such nice, nice things with them and everything and still he is existing alright. Must be when they talk like that then you are amazed how they say things, how they talk of Sahaja, we have to take example from other good Sahaja how they are expressing their spiritual strength. Yogis and not from the bad ones and how do we Now we have many very good children And also they are absolutely Sahaja. One boy came and he just prostrated himself before me. So I said, "Why trying to fax me. But also in the West another did you do it?" "O! I was getting cool vibrations Pproblem is they like to live in a hermatically from you mother, so I did it." "Is it, you like it?" "Of course" "More than chocolate" "Of course. "You eat them or what" "No need to it, you They don't want to drought. Drought is not know, you feel so happy inside and I feel, Mother, you are putting your hand on my in the fresh air at all. And that is another reason and trying to console me." I was surprised. I said, Where is your heart?" "Here! Here is my heart. I feel it here". You just imagine what love and suffocating life. Once I was in India. It was very what understanding of Sahaja Yoga for these little hot, somebody was driving me but the person children below even 5 years. Now you are all who was there was from Western country. He grown up children of mine. And I wanted to know all the beauties that are within you, that "why?" There is drought. I said "in this country, you have to enjoy. First of all learn to laugh at in India, people live in the open, what is yourself, that is the best way to enjoy yourself, drought?" "What drought you are talking now?" you know. And not to spend much time in the You couldn't open the door, you can't open the mirror, that is another way. If you spend too window, you could not open anything. If you much time in the mirror there is something open anything they will all be dead. So open. As wrong with you? I think personally that it is a kind of passion. You should see inside: Are we Dharma much more than what Krishna wanted to establish. He wanted to establish the Dharma of that we have forgotten to enjoy. So the attention Ahlad, giving you so much of patience with others. To me the whole thing looks like sometimes a joke, because nothing so serious. It is not a Rama's type that you have to be serious. I don't have to kill anybody. I don't use any you, if must you You should be sensitive to see how you have you cannot know that then you live on a very He has no sense, he has no sensitivity, he cannot Rakshasa. I think, I don't know what to say. So Proceed in enjoyment, which is an ocean just an ocean. For example now I came, everybody was sealed rooms, hermatically sealed cars. They are very afraid of draught. I don't know whether they will be thrown away, what will happen to them. coming from some iceberg. So they don't believe heart that people are very suffocating sometimes you know. They just suffocate. They are used to said "Don't open, don't open the window" I said it is about the nature also it is in their private

 Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze Say in India, We see now what is happening in India. All corrupt, horrible this, that, so I said lives. They don't want to open. If somebody comes to their house "Oh my God. Now we will have to share the wines, will have to now share "alright if you don't like India why don't you go the food." They can not share. That is most uncollective. But in India I must say people have stay here. But this is a very corrupt government a good sharing capacity. Because they are still here, very bad." Anywhere you go you will find primitive. They are still primordial. They have not immediately they will see. Because you don't gone out of the way to satisfy their ego. But I think somehow or other in India, people like to share. If you want to please an Indian you tell them, "Tomorrow I will come and I'll have food with you." His wife will jump. She will say, "now what do you like?" "Tell me what food you like" She will jump. But otherwise what happens? As soon as you say "he is coming for food" the wife will say "No! I am going to my mother." Immediately she will have a program. I just don't understand. They will have beautiful houses, get that very deep feeling within you if you are very clean, very beautiful everything. But if Sahaja Dharmi. So this is a new Dharma we have somebody comes to their house they get a shock as if electricity has entered. So for whom is all this? To show off they will borrow money from Krishna's vision is coming true. He describes in the banks even Indians in America they do. They the beginning, I think he was not a good want to have, three Mercedes, four houses, for salesman, because he describes the best first, you what? Borrowing money, borrowing money they see the salesman first will start from 2 rupees and do it. Sahaja Yogis have not to borrow any money. There is no need. You can do away with these things, why to have so many cars? Nowadays people don't even walk at all. We used to go to our school. My father had a car, in India. Nothing doing. We had to walk. We used to climb one mountain. It was about 5 miles, this school, every morning; and in the evening, the questioner I think. So he starts asking questions car used to come. And I would walk with my bare feet. Because of so much vibrations and somewhere else." "No, No, No, No that we will know they are now chosen to change their country. I have taken up many questions now of India. I am going to start working on that level. We have already started in a way for the destitute women, then for other type, of poverty and all that. Just by saying remove poverty, poverty cannot be removed. You have to have feeling for the poor. Then only. But you get that feeling because you are an Indian. You are an Indian? So what? your own brothers, sisters, starving. You established now and this world a new race with a new Dharma which is much above. Even Shri go on to 2,000. But He first told us that you have to become 'Sthita Pragya' means Sahaja Yoga and when Shri Krishan was asked a question by Arjuna "What is the 'Sthita Pragya'?" Then he described the Sahaja Yogi. That is described beforehand. Second chapter is that. Then the question starts - Arjuna was a great "What about this, what about that? What about that?" He goes on explaining to him that you see this is all just a Maya. This is all an illusion now. Get out of this illusion once you get out of this illusion because Arjuna said "they are my him. He said, "How will I know who is your relations, they are my teachers, How can I kill them?" So Krishna said "nobody is killed" He her hand is the one you have to bring" so it is said, "Nobody is killed" But they are being killed to enjoy your nobility, to enjoy your generosity. because they are not following the Satya Dharma. It is very important. And not to side with any So it is alright. Who is your brother, who is your one. You are not identified with them. It is much sister? They are not following the Satya Dharma. So you have nothing to do with them. If you can correct them and guide them it is alright. Otherwise forget it." First deal with people who are straight. Like we should say that we must deal with people who are simple innocent and then you can take to difficult people when you are that good. Otherwise you will come here and Russians. They immediately start seeing what is say "Mother I have got this I have got that" So wrong with us and where do we lack in this. in Sahaja Dharma, you being the spirit, you also Because the collectivity of being in one country, know about others, very well. And you can make chappals I thought were cutting my vibrations. So I used to have chappals in my hands and walk. One day we had a new driver. My father sent daughter?" He said "any girl with chappals in better, now I think, because since you have taken to Sahaja Dharma. I have seen English will tell you what is wrong with English, Swiss will tell you what is wrong with Swiss. Indians will tell you what is wrong with Indians. Actually I learnt from them. I don't know these things are there. Russians will tell you what is wrong with

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX Issue: 9 & 10 1997 You see love is something so great. It not only it out who is who, what chakras they are catching. But the trouble in America I found that helps others, it also helps you. It is so joyous to Sahaja Yogis used to just go and tell somebody give realization to others. But if you start telling you are catching on this chakra." They have come for the first time and you tell him "you, realizations? If you don't know how to give you are very egoistical" He said "How do you realization, better not do it. So to criticize is not know?" Your agnya is catching. May be his own agnya might be catching. Is this the way to pull legs of each other sometimes, just for fun's receive a new person? Is this the way to talk to sake. But not to harm, not to torture, not to make rnew person? See on the contrary you should that person fall. You are all Sahaja Dharmis, you Say "come, sit down. Very nice. You are very have accepted Sahaja Dharma and in Sahaja great" See because they are still ignorant so they Dharma we have to have, pure love of the heart like some sort of a buttering. Then gradually, not hypocrisy and sensible life. Now this pope is because you are doing this just to make him a Sahaja Yogi. Because you love him. Basically that suffering let her have abortion. The one who is is the reason. But as soon as somebody comes in living is more important than the one who is not if you tell him "this is wrong with you. That is living. If somebody wants to have abortion that wrong with you." This is not a pope's business where you go on telling people what is wrong with them. Go and confess to all the silly people. It is not that. What we have to show that vou beings. Like they say the muslim women are like have fallen in love with that person. You are nice to that person because you like that person. But as soon as he comes you give him one shock. So finished. How can you have good relations? Americans have to to learn this. I don't know "Your this Chakra is catching." why did you give the way we can enjoy life. Ahl of course you can f a woman is against abortion. I am not. If child can be born again. According to us nobody dies permanently. Whatever it may be. So this is one way they use it for propagation of human a factory. They go on producing more children, more children. So there are more voters. So the pope knows that; that is why he said "abortion no" Christians should not abort because then there will be less christians to compete with the why Americans think they are very superior muslims. But in Sahaja Yoga we don't have such people and I tell you for wisdom I would not say funny, radical, non-sensical things. We have they are not. They completely lack wisdom. And they misunderstand people very fast. Start important. To understand that these are all taboos judging others is not the way you can have which are there but not for people who have to Sahaja Dharma. Sahaja Dharma is you are in your own; you are in your own; you are in your own realm, in your happiness and joy. Where is the time to criticize others? So the best thing is to show divorce and we have also abortion which is get out of the troubles, we have to act and that is how it works. But to be very frank we don't have to do abortions. It is achieved by Parama Chaitanya. Parama Chaitanya does for me, I don't have to, I don't have to do anything. It is Parama your maximum love to everyone. In that love you should not show your pity but love Chaitanya, it is nice. Because it knows what is to which is again Ahladdayini. This is the message of Shri Krishna but I don't know how many understood it. Now what you find those who are following Shri Krishna, like the Hare Rama things will work out very well. So to understand people they are actually beggars on the street. He is Kubera and his disciples are beggers on the street. Can you imagine? Does it add to his glory you are giving to others. For that you have music as Kubera? be done. How to achieve. And sometimes you are in trouble, they know that you are not leaving things into the hands of the Parama Chaitanya. If you leave into the hands of Parama Chaitanya Sahaja Yoga first and foremost thing is how much you are enjoying yourself. How much enjoyment you have this, that. I was saying that today I So Sahaja Yogis are not like that. Should be won't speak much but somehow with Shri Krishna you cannot keep quiet. He played murli, Bansuri, flute. Look at him. I talk to you but he yourself. But think of the collectivity of yogis. just played murli. He didn't talk so much except Collectivity is not to bring forced people to come for a Geeta you won't find him talking. And to Sahaja Yoga. Once they come to Sahaja Yoga those who read also Geeta are horrible people I they will know the joy of life and you don't have tell you. Those who read Geeta they don't to tell them anything. Nothing has to be told. Just understand what is Shri Krishna's Dharma. If (contd. on page 16) generous. Should not bother too much about yourself. Should not all the time think about sit silently to work and they will feel your love.

 9 & 10 1997 Volume: IX Isue: Divine Cool Breeze 10 Talk by H.H. Shree Mataji Nirmala Devi To Unity International Foundation Hotel Claridges - Delhi 6.4.1997 (Synopsis) s far as efforts are concerned, people have Our country has been divided into 3 more done lots of research, lots of conferences countries, like Burma was a part of our country, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, also Bangladesh. Now if you and also they have tried to convince people that without unity we cannot exist. The go to these countries you will be surprised that reason is that, this world is one, we are all part they are in a mess. The people who fought, who and parcel of this world. But we are not wanted their freedom and separation, most of connected as we are in this body that even if you them wwere murdered get a pin prick the whole body knows about it. Rehman, Bhandaranaike, Bhutto. These are the Because, we are not awakened, our awareness is people who wanted to have the position, so they not such that you can feel this collective started saying we must have a separate state, awareness within yourselves. This collective separate identity. For whom it worked? But still awareness has been talked long time back, but they don't see the point, by getting separated not clearly. In the collective awareness what from the main line, how much they have happens is that the Kundalini, which is your own suffered! power, rises and as a result of that you become part and parcel of the whole and become aware of others and this we call as collective Ukraine people why have you separated from consciousness. To understand properly we must Russia? So to have this idea that we should have the experience of becoming one with the all- pervading power of Divine love. We have heard have not seen any country achieving any better. about it in the Bible, in the Quran. In all our Indian scriptures, it is described that there is a very subtle power which does all the work for us. Now few people believe that it exists and when 1 tell them they think it is something beyond our intellect, but you have to go beyond your mind. This mind of ours which we consider to be fast, I am myself amazed how things are very precious is just made by us through our ego and our conditioning. Mind is a myth because it is created by us and we play into the hands of our mind like we use our computers! Computer There were 2000 people sitting outside and 2000 has been made by us but it is ruling us. In the same way, this mind controls us and we also take people sitting inside the hall.I could not guidance from this mind which is a myth. If I say that, you should not be shocked, because you are very much identified with this mind, but I must tell you if this mind goes off the track, it doesn't matter I will come back. Then I talked to can make anyone mad. It can get identified with any person or stupid thing as something very useful. So it can lead human beings to wars, all kinds of things that will remove unity from our hearts. For example I was talking to someone who wanted to have a separate state. I said. sit on the stairs. You will be amazed, about 6000 "Why do you want to have a separate state?" He people came. Those who were inside, those who said, "then we can have two Prime Ministers." I Were outside, many others, I said how have you said, "why", because he wanted to become the prime Minister. Sheikh Mujeeb-ur- 1 have seen in Russia, now Bela Rousse is trying to come back in Russia and I asked the separate from one country to another country, I When you get your self-realization, then what happens that you develop within yourself a new dimension by which you feel the collective consciousness. You can feel on your finger tips, what is wrong with you and what is wrong with others. So, once that happens the unity comes so happening in Sahaja Yoga. I went to Russia,, I was shy of talking, but understand, how could these Russians take to me so easily. But they said what about us, we can't come inside this hall because it is full. I said it them and all of them got realization. I came out they were still sitting there. They said what about us, I said alright, come tomorrow I will be there in the morning. In Russia we have lots of big beautiful gardens so I said you better come, I will taken to me? What have I done for you? What makes you think that I can give you something

 Volume: IX ISUD: 9 & 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 11 special? They said its so obvious. I was surprised you know yourself, you cannot know God. You at their sincerity and 1 found Russians, also other should know yourself, there should be self- Eastern block people are extremely sensitive. One knowledge and this knowledge takes you beyond of the reasons for their sensitivity is perhaps your mind and beyond science. because they feel that they were oppressed or whatever it is, but the thing is, they have lost first of all it is amoral. There is no morality and their sense of conditioning. They are not possessive. They were told by the government that you can take your flats and live there vou don't feel anything because it is immoral. happily. They said no, no we don't want flats. They have no sense of possession at all. Their's is a clean slate. Another thing, they do not have any conditioning because they were not told artificially practice something like a moral about any religion, they were not told about God, such people can become extremely dry and also about all these things which are creating hot tempered. It should come from within that problems in our country. I was so surprised that these people took to Sahaja Yoga so easily, in the spirit. You are not this mind, you are not this next program that I had, there were 10,000 people. It was amazing. I don't know Russian language. They were so sweet and so nice and should become. Becoming is the point. If you there we had a program of 250 scientists. I must become that then you will be amazed how great say Russia has developed science in such a subtle manner, they have very great scientists and they conscious but also you become a fountain of all were there and I started telling them about science. If 1 start on something else, I thought it happens, you cannot bring unity e.g. now I have won't be so good, so let uS start on science. One of them got up and said, Mother we have had enough of science, can you please tell of the science of the Divine. One thing I have noticed about them is that they are really very all with several hippies, gradually it grew into introspective. I asked them, are they worried such a sweet thing that we could get into Russia, about the coup that is happening in Moscow? into Eastern block, all the European countries, we They replied why should we worry, we are in the Kingdom of God. Intellectual people have their brains very much gains that from South America, he says what with their thoughts and their ideas. Somebody about South America? When are you coming to meets one type of a person, he becomes very South America? We need you very much there. right-sided. Another meets another type he When I went there I found there were so many becomes identified. You go and listen to seekers, they were not interested in power, somebody's lecture, that lecture goes into your head, so all the time your brain is covered, all the time by these outside items which are not yours. Unless and until they are your experiences, they Russia, there 25 Germans came to Moscow. I said are not clear. To get that experience is very easy. how are you here, they were Sahaja Yogis. They Of course our country is a country of great Yoga, said. Mother, don't you think that we Germans I must say. Even in China when I went there they have killed so many Russians, don't you think came and asked me, Mother is this the treasure of our rich Chinese? Treasure of spirituality is India. They have read about it, they know about it, they are just waiting to get something out of us but here I find not that much. Here we have gentle that you won't believe that they have no time to pay attention to ourselves, to know anything of Hitler in them. yourself which is told by every one. Christ has said, Mohammed Sahib has said, unless and until Germans, they went to Israel. I said why did you Science as you know has its own limitations, so with science you cannot go any further, you can kill people, you can destroy countries and Now morality doesn't mean outside restriction but it means compassion, love, pure love, you understand what is to be done. But if you you should know that you are nothing but a pure ego, this emnotion but beyond that you are the pure spirit. Even knowing is not enough, you you are. Not only that you become collectively love and compassion. Unless and until that been working in Sahaja Yoga which I would not call government level, or in any way official level. I never tried to disturb my husband's office or anything, but I just started on my owrn. First of went to America and to South America. Because, just people felt that. See because if one person money, nothing-just seeking. Now, I must tell you a sweet story, twice they have shown their sweetness. First when I went to that its our duty that we should come and give them what we have got? Such love and such compassion! These Germans are so soft and so Then they went, Austrians, they are also

 12 Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze go to Israel, there was no arrangement or example, the first chakra which we call anything, just they went and stayed there. They Mooladhara, this chakra is made of carbon atoms. said Mother, the thing is that we felt very Now if you take a look at carbon atoms what you responsible for these Israelis, Jews, because so many have been killed in our country and we from left to right it looks just like Omkara, the cannot forgive ourselves and so we have to do same thing looks like Omkara but if you see from something about it. Imagine Germans knowing down upwards, you will see alpha and omega. Israelis and talking to them and caught hold of Christ has said, I am the alpha, I am the omega some young people say about 30 or so. But I was amazed that I asked the Israelis, I said how are be proved. Another thing is that, once you get you here? They said why not, we want to make your self-realization you start feeling cool breeze friends with Muslims, so we have to be here. I coming out of your hands and you can feel the said very good idea. Automatically, they are all pervading power all around you. Now with working out this unity. I don't tell them, they just this thing you can say that what centres you are do it on their own understanding. What is needed catching because there are seven centres on the is an inner understanding, inner unity not right hand, seven centres on the left hand. You outside. This is what is that we human beings are can easily feel on your finger tips the different capable of doing tremendous thing if we fall into the ocean of compassion and we do it in such a sweet manner that you can't believe that they are human beings, that they have gone absolutely with them. If you take about 10 children, tie up beyond the limitations of human life. The other day I read a news about a somebody before them ask the boys, what is he gentleman who was saying that I am going to catching, they all raise one finger, all of them the start a Jihad. For what? To get rid of all the same, because it is absolute knowledge. Suppose immorality they have in the West and all sorts of they raise the index finger, something wrong with things, the drinking and all other things. So one Sahaja Yogi telephoned to me that Mother what not spoken, how do you know? I said it is is the need to do Jihad for all that, just do Sahaja communicated by this knowledge, through this Yoga, you will get rid of all these things. We all were drunkards, we all were doing all sorts of nonsensical things, we were doing immoral of false gurus, some of them, really have come things, you don't have to do Jihad for that, you out making big money and especially they take just get it yourself. So much clean and so much above all that all things, in Sanskrit we call it has big position and they approach them. These 'Upadhi', they just fall of, it happens. I assure people actually you can find them out on your you it can happen to you also, its nothing special, fingertips. Because if anybody is like that, you because this Kundalini when it rises, it does work just start feeling. It is written in the Quran that out. She is your own Mother, she knows your fingers will speak, that your hands will everything about you and the way she gives you speak at the time of 'Qayama' at the time of your second birth is very good, you all are capable of getting it, especially Indians. We have yourself and others. Supposing you know how to so many 'sufis', like lotuses they have come out and the rest is still the same. Now, we have to understand that we Indians are born in this great country of Yoga because of our previous life. The problem is that we are not taking advantage of spiritual being. So you can; and that's the the Yoga Bhumi, which is in your power and can personality where we have a complete human give you all the blessings of the Divine. We have being, not only within himself but there will be tried and we have noted down. will see, you will be amazed that when you see and he is the incarnation of Shri Ganesha. It can centres. Even a small boy or anybody can feel that. Anybody can tell you what's wrong with or you can even tell them what's wrong you their eyes, they are realized souls and you put the throat, he will say how do you know, I have power that this is wrong with this man. We are in this country, also suffering from lots to the rich. They go in any city and find out, who resurrection, they will speak and tell you about control and also how to correct your centres, you can correct the centres of others. Because all these seven centres are responsible for your physical, mental and emotional being and above all your no conflict, he will be absolutely peaceful and outside also he will be very genuine and very many things I can tell you that you have the loving and he will win over. We had a Sahaja souls, so many things that have not been Yogi, I think in London and then he went to Italy. In Italy he told me, Mother, I am feeling very The Meta science part is there. There are so explained so far, through Sahaja Yoga, for

 & 10 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX Issue: 98 10 1997 13 frustrated, I am feeling very lonely, there are no many of them now, surprising, Sahaja Yogis. I said alright, then we had a program and so many became Sahaja Yogis and then we are amazed that how in Rome, how there used to be like Sufis, they suffered so much many thousands are there who are Sahaja Yogis. and then running to one unit in turkey, one in Like this Sahaja Yoga started spreading, not by Tunisia and one everywhere. I went to Tunisia, I me so much but by people who went from here to see. Like one seed that is transferred from here all these petty problems have finished, of course to there, like that many seeds are transferred, it cures you. That's nothing great, it cures you they sprout and Sahaja Yoga tree prospers. and gives you complete mental peace, completely, Among these Sahaja Yogis there is so much love, you are at peace with yourself and with others its very surprising, extremely surprising. Now in Africa also there are 400 very strong you just watch, you don't react just watch and Sahaja Yogis, I have never been to Africa so far. It is amazing that there are 400 Sahaja Yogis in just change completely the panorama of your one city of Africa. Now what they are doing just collecting more, more and more of Sahaja amazed. What has happened to this gentleman, Yogis and that's how they are working. This is what it is that, if you are wanting to have peace of mind, this is what you call a Mother's temptation, Pralobhan' as they call it. personality, the human personality as described in The Mother says alright take your medicine, then I will give you a chocolate. In the same way you can say, if you really want to have peace of mind, twice. Now once you become one with the if you really want to have unity, it will work out. It is a very great 'Vidya' as I told you in the very the word, it is not like you put a sign board - beginning and if you have this Vidya', Sahaja I am born again'. But if you are born again you Yoga will work very fast because that's the only have a power and the greatest power is that you way in which you can get natural, spontaneous, love and you enjoy your love. This power works. inborn love between people. We have programs every year, every month. We have a program in tell her story. She met me because she was a very far fetched place called Ganpatipule. There working with the U.N. in New York and she got people come from all over the world, some are rich, some are poor. We don't have much Yoga. Then she retired and went to Mexico and arrangements there, you see, for these people her son was stuIdying, very. very young. She because we don't have much money. Whatever it wrote to me "Mother there is some disease which is but they come there, they are put wherever only very few people in my family get when they there is a place, they enjoy themselves. I said don't you think it is uncomfortable, they said and then they get this disease but they are very Mother we are just seeking the comfort of the old, they just die when they get this. But spirit because spirits are so comfortable. They unfortunately my son has got it, he is a young don't bother me, it's not good or that is not good, boy and I don't know what to do." So I started nothing. Just they enjoy that, you should see the wondering what I should do, I was just putting way all the nationalities enjoy themselves. Such a peaceful understanding, such a beautiful flow this, second came, in the third one she was of I never knew there could be so many Sahaja Yogis, I could never understand because only I or 2 here and was amazed how people got their realization and because you develop a witness state by which this helps you to understand yourself better. You being and people who come close to you are such a fighting fellow? How has he become so tolerant, how has he become so quiet and how has he become so much interested in others? The our Shastras is like an egg- A bird is horn twice and also a person who knows the Brahma is born Divine, you are born again in the true sense of Now we have a lady here from Mexico, I will her realization, she went very deep in Sahaja are sick, at a very old age. They get a sickness my attention on it. So first letter came it was like enjoyment. Of course, they pull each others saying should I come, bring the child to you and legs sometimes, that's alright, but all the time all that and the fourth letter came saying that, they are full of joy and happiness. All these petty "Mother I am amazed, my son is completely things like rivalry, competition, all this drops off. cured." Its not a miracle, it looks like that but so They have no liking for all this because they have many patients have been cured. So many have already become saints and this is said by so many changed their lives through Sahaja Yoga. So that these are men of God and they become the curing is just a Pralobhan' as you call or a inheritors of the Divine love. They are not only temptation for you to understand more than it. capable but it is their birth right. We have so This is not the end of it. I met so many wrestlers

 Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 14 use your freedom. I have seen some people who have got their realization, they go very deep into it but some take, they say just alright, its like the and everything should think that its better that I parable of the Christ that some seeds got should get peace. So to get peace to get collective sprouted and fell on the marsh, but the depth, consciousness and to become one with the Divine people just jump into it. I am myself surprised Power, it is the greatest opportunity to all of you how people all over the world have worked it out and how such love and unity of a real nation of absolute understanding and joy giving unity who said, Mother, give me peace because I am on the verge of collapsing. So I can't understand someone who has the best health, best muscles and to all the world, enjoy the inner unity that exists. exists! Now this is the point, that's very important, I cannot force you. It is your freedom. You have to Announcement meditation keep popping us, so we've been continuing our weekly morning meetings. If you are interested in running Sahaja meetings in this way, contact the US consulate or Embassy in your city to find out about the International Women's Club. If you become a member, you'll have a better chance of being able to have more than one meeting (in Barcelona, it's Giving Sahaja Yoga Programs At International Women's Associations Worldwide Dear Sahaja Yoginis: We'd like to let you know about the possibilities of giving programs and Sahaja Yoga courses through the American and International Association of Federated Women's Clubs, which has branches only $US 45 per year). Many ladies are interested worldwide in many major cities (those with foreign embassies and consulates). In Spain, we've given programs in Madrid and in Barcelona, where we have been running ongoing weekly Conference last year in Beijing, China. You meetings for a year. At the Adi Shakti Puja in May, Shri Mataji stressed the importance of ladies being more involved in spreading Sahaja Yoga directly, and this could be one possibility. These women's associations are dedicated to Spain. Hope you'll find open doors in these welcoming women who are newcomers to a city. international organizations in your cities as well. fund raising for charity, as well as all kinds of We have found the women to be very open and educational and social activities in general. Members are women from all over the world of in hearing about Shree Mataji, especially when referring to Her panel presentation on women and world peace at the International Women's probably need to speak fluent English to run a program and ongoing course. We have really enjoyed spreading our Mother's vibrations in the international communities in friendly. We have heard that some of the major women's clubs are in Tokyo, Mexico City, Milan, all ages and backgrounds: wives of diplomats Paris, etc. Please contact Christina Rosi or Celia (consuls and ambassadors), housewives with young or grown children, working mothers, business women, retired ladies, etc. In Barcelona, we've given realization to ladies from the USA, Mexico, Cuba, Canada, Brazil, Germany, England, Portugal, Holland, Denmark and Spain. Throughout the year, ladies interested in Silvestre in Barcelona if you have any questions. Phone and fax number : (34) 3.634.0568 Address: C/Pere Boronat 34, 1-2 08690 Sta. Coloma de Cervello Barcelona, Spain Good luck!

 Volume: IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 15 Russian Folk Medicine Conference September 1997 Note: This talk was written by Shree Mataji for Mother Earth. The only thing is, they did not presentation at the Russian Folk Medicine Conference know how to awaken this Power which sleeps in the base of the spine known as sacrum. That means that the Greeks knew about the sacredness in Russia in September, 1997. onoured and respected guests, allow me to talk about Sahaja Yoga and the way it of this bone, but all of them knew about the acts. Sahaja Yoga treats the roots of the primordial taboos relating to the body (in Sanskrit problem and not just the leaves of the tree. It known as Serara), and the Spirit or the Atma does so by raising the Primordial Force in every Tattwa. All this has been described by great seers human being which then treats the inner energy and saints like Markandeya, Adi Shankaracharya, centres, or chakras, automatically. It has its own intelligence and compassion and knows what is wrong with you better than you know yourself. Nanaka and Jnanadeva. Luckily, Christ also said that, "I'll send you the Holy Ghost," and Mohammed Saheb said that the It helps to restore primordial principles in 12th Imam shall come. Indian scriptures also have every human being, innate principles of predicted in the Nadi Granth, written by the primordial taboos which altogether give a person originator of astrology, Bhrigurishi, that in the year 1970 (which has been recalculated), the force of this energy is, in fact, made of these discovery of the Sahaja System will manifest. Shree Mataji Nirmala Devi, who is born of the royal dynasty of the Shalivahans, propounded all Let's move on to the concept of folk as in folk the knowledge about Kundalini and en-masse medicine. Anything folk is that which came awakening of the kundalini, and also the en- through the experiences of common people masse actualization of Self Realization. By this through the generations and was recorded by the method of spontaneous awakening, thousands people. These experiences were recorded all over and thousands of people have been connected to the All-Pervading Primordial Force of Life true innate morality, health and peace inside. The primordial and real principles which are constant and do not change. the world. In the beginning, even in allopathy, people (Paramachaitanya). She not only worked out the believed in three "doshas" in Sanskrit, just like in awakening and the union with this Primordial Ayurvedic medicine. But Ayurvedic went beyond Force, but she gave the complete knowledge that and they found that there is a residual force which is primordial in nature and when it is awakened it passes through seven energy centres in the spinal cord and the brain and it connects to the All-Pervading Primordial Force. about our subtle system. In Russia itself, so many thousand have been cured and people's lives have been changed. They have become really transformed and have become very loving, compassionate and peaceful people. They are free Those who went into the research of this in from greed and lust which is unsocial behaviour. India were called as Nath Panthis. Nath means "master" and Panth means "way," i.e., way or road of mastery. Machhindernath and Goraknath were two of these saints thousands of years ago. These two and others travelled extensively. They get established and even in the aboriginals who had visited the land which is now Ukraine because in the museum you can find ancient knowledge of Reality, these primordial principles pottery with paintings of these chakras. In Australia, they also have the Mother culture exposes all kinds of falsehood that people are amongst the aboriginals as well as amongst the aboriginals of America and Canada. The Mayan culture of Maxico believed in the Mother and realization to others as their awareness has a new dimension of collective consciousnes. So, all the primordial taboos for human beings were mutilated by modern life and had lost their get reestablished. This knowledge is so clear and practising such as sorcery and black mnagic. Also, it throws light on the modern science of medicine. But western minds are so closed that

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997 16 we don't want to see something that is so unique and absolutely based on Reality. This power is awakening or for your spiritual ascent. based in you. It's an actualization of an experience that you feel. A cool breeze flows out of your fingertips and out of the top of your head and this is described in most of the scriptures. You are not left in the dark, but you can feel the centres in you, which are in jeopardy, on your fingertips and in your body. Also you can feel others' centres. If you know how to cure your centres you can cure others' also, for which you do not have to pay. It is a living process of evolution so you do not have to pay for This unique method is not against science. What civilization western western or consumerism has done is given us blind progress but with Sahaja Yoga you can achieve progress of the real kind because there is light. This way Russia will become a land of real morality and inner spirituality capable of leading the world into the twenty-first century. Congratulations to all Russians. (contd. from page 9) they don't understand Shri Krishna how they will understand Sahaja Yoga. So for all of you is to practice on love, on forgiveness, on appreciating others, on giving joy to others. Some of the Sahaja Yogis have been very kind to me. Once I went to the shop to buy a saree for myself. The saree was very expensive for my purse. So I didn't buy. So let it "this colour suits me alright but does not matter." I didn't have so much money to buy. So that Sahaja Yogi bought that saree and on my birthday gave me and really I could not see it because my eyes were filled with tears. Just a small thing like that. Normally I do not expect you to do anything for me. No. But small, small things make me so happy. But even if you, do this to somebody he may not understand, may not realize, may not feel it. But if you are a Sahaja Yogi you will. So thank you very much for all this that I have said to you, try to enjoy yourself and make others enjoy you. May God bless you. =

 Volume: IX Isua 9&10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 17 The 1997 Latin American Seminar contributed to our enjoyment of the food. We ate some fruits and vegetables I had never seen near Rio de Janeiro, Brazil hosted by the before. The day ended with the Brazil Yuva Shakti singing bhajans. The next day, the seminar he first ever Latin Ammerican seminar was held on March 27 to 30 at "Sitio" Santa Anna yogis from Rio. Over 200 yogis attended from Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Peru, Uruguay, Italy began. and Canada. Programs and Collectives Purpose of the Seminar We started with a discussion about programs and The purpose of the seminar was for the yogis to collectives. The purpose of the discussion was to get to know each other and to become one collective throughout Latin America. Another goal Suggestions. was to initiate the expansion of Sahaja Yoga in other countries. The seminar was conducted in a mix of Spanish and Portuguese (Portuguese + Español = any problem communicating! The trip to the seminar site north of Rio took of the basic concepts of Sahaja Yoga. Each about one hour from the airport. On the way we had a quick look at the famous sights around Rio. Program topics include: We saw Sugarloaf and the famous mountain Corcovado with the statue of Jesus on top, both swayambhus: Sugarloaf to Shri Shiva and Corcovado to Shri Ganesha. share ideas, experiences, problems, and We learned that in Colombia weekly public programs are often held simultaneously in three areas of Bogota. After the introductory program there is a follow-up course of 14 weeks: The goal is to give a practical and general understanding Portuñol?) but ne one seemed to have program is prepared by a small group of yogis. • The Subtle System • The Kundalini • What is Meditation and How to Meditate We left the main highway and drove a few kilometres up a dirt road to our beautiful camp site by a small river in a quiet lush valley. Accommodations consisted of large rooms with bunk beds. Everyone registered and received a name tag showing their country and city. In total there were 213 yogis, including 25 children. Towns represented from Brazil were Belo Horizonte, Brasilia, Porta Alegre, Belem, Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, Sao Paulo, Sao Luis and Vittoria. •The Qualities of the Chakras *The Elements. • The Principle of the Guru • The Attention * Jesus Christ • Deities and Mantras The Opening of Sahasrara • The Spirit Collectivity • The Paramachaitanya Collective Shoebeat Just before dusk everyone gathered for a collective shoebeat. We all set in a large circle on the grass and collectively shoebeat the problems of the 14 weeks is to give a practical, general affecting Latin America. It was a profound understanding of the basic concepts of Sahaja experience and a spectacular sight. We sang bhajans while waiting for supper. long, about 20 minutes maximum Everyone joined spontaneously sharing the collective joy. The food was simple but delicious. of audio or videotapes of Shree Mataji's talks are Surely the collective vibrations and clean fresh air The courses are not a progression through the chakras and their qualities. Instead, the basic idea Yoga. The talks are more general and not too Overhead transparencies and selected excerpts used to assist the presentations. An overhead

 Volume : IX Isue: 9 & 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 18 transparency(acetato) of Shree Mataji's photograph Many smaller centres are emerging around the is projected on a large screen. This is very larger ones in Rio, Brasilia, Salvador and Belo impressive and powerful! The presentations attempt to generate and maintain curiosity about Sahaja Yoga in new Programmes in Argentina people by presenting information as well as opportunities to experience the vibrations in Argentina has a small but devoted collective. The meditation and by being "worked on" by the yogis. Without the practical nature of the those in North America. People do come when programs, Sahaja Yoga would just sound like any metaphysical" group. Horizonte. obstacles to growth in Buenos Aires are similar to Shree Mataji comes but they don't stay. The collective state "collective energy" -is important for keeping new people. Dynamic energy, love and collectivity is what generates the collective energy. Various points were mentioned: After the 14-week course there are seven more sessions which provide more details about the chakras. It is important to remember the auspiciousness of putting up posters of Shree Mataji. Each poster is an act of worship. In India sometimes they even put kumkum on the poster when hanging it-like a Puja. The yogis have a responsibility for the new people. New people are lost due to stupid things such as the yogis' lack of maturity and desire. The details at the programs are important. The yogis must know what to say and how to behave in front of new people. In Colombia they are now doing a ten-week series on the 10 Gurus in which they emphasize the basic message of each Guru. Many people are getting realization. Recently there were 230 people at programs in Barranquila, Colombia and 100 at the follow-ups. This many people came from -only putting 30 posters for the first program! Now 25 are still staying. And recently in Bogota 500 people came to a public program and now 200 are staying on for the follow-ups. New people take varying amounts of time to establish. It is different for everybody-some may take two weeks, others two years. Some of the first Brazilian yogis got realization and went to India right away. They came up very Other key points for public programs were discussed : . It is essential to clarify key terms and definitions. New people have their own concepts and ideas about what meditation is, what a Guru is, etc. fast. Yogis need discrimination to know how long new people need to establish. They need to know who is ready and when they are ready. . The people are seeking but there needs to be more dedication and more attention on the new people by the yogis. The yogis must make time and be available to communicate with the Always the yogis must have open hearts to the new people. Everyone can watch and see how to help the new people. The leader can help by assigning different yogis to help particular groups of new people. It is most important to remember that Divine new people. The yogis need to establish a relationship with the new people and support them. The yogis need to develop their own qualities. They need to manifest sincere love for people-the capacity to give peace and joy. discretion is vibrations. The new people need to feel their sincere love. The need to get a feeling of security. Mahatma Gandhi was quoted to emphasize an important point. A journalist asked Mahatma Gandhi, "What is your message?" Mahatma Our devotion to Shree Mataji must show. This is the most important thing. Gandhi replied, "My message is my life." Javier, now living in Bolivia, spoke of things that happened while he was living in Italy. Many changes have been initiated in Italy. Within two Brazil is a very large, dispersed country. Many months of performing a havan in which 1,000 places in the country still don't know about names of the Devi were chanted, there were Sahaja Yoga. The collectives are located far apart. complete transformations politically and with the Porgrams in Brazil

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX issue: 9 & 10 1897 19 Mafia. Bandhans, havans and pujas were what None of these ideas about Vishuddhi are new. worked things out. However, none of these It is very important to read and listen to Shree Mataji's talk. All is there. Our awareress must grow to see the problems and then work it out by the cleansing techniques of Sahaja Yoga, "techniques" work without collective desire. Havan There was a havan on the second day in which including shoebeating and havans. we offered the negativity affecting America. The havan was long but intense. The attention was Chastity very good without going to the left. Chastity is very important-even more so in Brazil with such extremes as the Carnival. The base of dharma is innocence. There is great Evening Entertainment Program There was an evening program with music and strength in the link between brother and sister. It dancing. The Argentinians performed some traditional dances. Then the Colombians is very difficult for young people in this society to be happy without a "girl friend" or "boy friend." The Yuva Shakti can show young people the true joy in Sahaja Yoga. performed a play with dances from different regions of Colombia. After these presentations there were many beautiful songs. The integration of the musicians was beautiful. The Yuva Shakti of Brazil introspection performed some beautiful songs and the Introspection is very important for the left musicians from Argentina, Brazil and Colombia Vishuddhi. Introspection must look at ego and performed together. superego. Introspection to see ourselves is always the hardest. The Third Day The third day began with meditation. As always, there was music. Remember that Shri Vishnumaya is the force of truth, the force to divulge the truth. After breakfast there was some time to relax, Self-Esteem go for footsoaking and collectively enjoy the beautiful surroundings. Some of us went to swim The lack of self-esteem manifests in Latin America to a very great degree. There is a feeling of inferiority to other countries. Latin American countries feel that they need the help of other governments. But really Latin America is very in nearby waterfalls. Qualities of Left Vishuddhi Recently in Colombia there was a national Tich in resources. All that is required is there. seminar. The Seminar focused on the importance of the left Vishuddhi. Many points from Shree Mataji's talk in the Culture of Ego 1982 Belgium Vishnumaya Puja were discussed. Another point was raised resulting from the The Vishuddhi is very important because the previous discussions: connection from heart (spirit) to Sahasrara goes through the 1left Vishuddhi. A true open-hearted person has heart equal to There are no values. The reality is that we are spirit. For example, when we are not sincere, children of Shree Mataji. the head says but the heart knows. One gets left Vishuddhi problems from lack of sincerity, lack of diplomacy, communication problems, Basic Techniques and Protocol susceptibility, reaction, justification and It was felt that it would be good to distribute escapism. - The guilt from the Catholic church causes deep of the countries are isolated and do not have any problems of the left Vishuddhi. Life is lived orn experienced yogis. It is possible they could guilty/not guilty basis. There is always the develop different techniques that do not follow built-in pressure of fear and guilt. Old civilizations were connected with Mother Earth. Now we only have a culture of the ego. - guidelines on how to do pujas and havans. Some the protocol.

 Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997 20 Divine Cool Breeze The Final Day Puja Before the puja we watched a video of the 1985 We watched a video of the August 4, 1985 Birmingham, England Vishnumaya Puja. This talk Ganesha Puja in Brighton, England, "Your Power was very relevant to the day's previous is Chastity." discussions about Vishuddhi. After the video the final discussions of the seminar were held. Following this everyone The collective Shri Vishnumaya Puja started in the evening and lasted to after 3:00 a.m.! The Puja expressed many thanks to the Rio yogis for such was a very deep experience of integration and joy. Nobody wanted it to end! There were many gifts from the Brazilian yogis experienced the event. We touched a depth we to all the visitors. There was incredible generosity, had never felt before. The vibrations and joy were work and dedication put into the gifts. The Yuva Shakti and even the young children made gifts been physically present! during the children's programs during the hard work and dedication in hosting the event. It is impossible to put in words how we all so strong that it seemed as if Shree Mataji had The seminar was very important on a subtle as well as a practical level. It improved the seminar. The Argentinian collective presented a fantastic integration of the Americas by our collective painting. It depicted a view of South America as seen from space. The continent appeared to be in a real and practical sense through discussions afloat in an ocean of lotuses. Standing on top of and just meeting new brothers and sisters. the land of left Vishuddhi was Christ. Above all this under a bandhan of angels was the image of American Seminar! = Shree Mataji's face smiling, Her divine love over South America. attention on the vibrations. There was a change We all look forward to the Second Latin -Ian Butterworth, Calgary, Canada After the puja and gifts the bhajans continued until almost daylight. Publications Nirmalitas contact : The first issue of the Colombian Spanish Sahaja Yoga Newsletter Nirmalitas was issued. Anyone requiring copies can contact the Colombian Collective. Nirmalitas was originally produced by Spain and then by Argentina. Vishwa Nirmala Dharma Sociedade Sahaja Yoga do Brasil Gustavo Volker Luedman SQN 209 Bloco "J" Apt. 405 CEP 70854-100 Brasilia DF Meta Modern Era The Portuguese translation of Shree Mataji's book, Meta Modern Era, was unveiled. It is being sold for 15$ Reals (about $15 US). Anyone interested in getting the book can Tel: (061) 349-2103 (061)272-2093 Fax: (061) 273-3539

 : 9 & 10 1997 Volume: IX Issue Divine Cool Breeze 21 The 108 Names of Love Say each name as follows: in every movement of Your eyelashes in the cosmic tapestry of Your Leela "Om Sakshat Shree Mataji, You are the Love ...in the First Sound, in the fervent prayer of all Your bhaktas in the blessings from Mahakaruna of caring motherhood in every living cell in the eternal spring of compassion's deepest well which makes the world go around Shree Adi Shakti Adoration to Thee.". in the First Sound from beyond Infinity for which the whole world dances in the first dance pouring through everlasting streams of ambrosia in the ecstasy of spiritual bliss in Your Pradakshina around the Father that twinkles in the stars in the smile of all the mothers that sings in the wind in the mane of the white horse that glitters in the crystal of snow that crushes the citadels of evil and hate that germinates in the flower in the sap of the tree in the caress of the sun that is taught by Shri Viratangana which will arrest the decline of human civilization which purifies in the Mooladhara in the majesty of the mountain in the foam of the water in the music of the sea which creates in the Swadhishthana which evolves in the Manipura which grants total protection and security in the ocean of Your eyes. which grants Oneness in the quiet splendour of meditation for Your bhaktas which forgives which resides in the house of Nirmala in ananya bhakti that is secret which crowns the dome of the house of Nirmala that is sacred which flickers on the tips of the tongues of fire which bubbles in elated joy that nourishes bliss that rests on innocence in whose Name the Kundalini rises that all creatures seek for which there is no name that melts the ice age of this Kali Yuga before which Lord Gabriel bowed that shines in the light of the Golden Age between the vahana and his rider that cools the scorching heat of aggressiveness belween the seeker and his desire that warms up our closed hearts between the wave and the shore which gives auspiciousness which gives shape to beauty which gives radiance to goodness which gives balance to justice which gives strength to righteousness between the vibrating atoms in the sound of silence You are the primordial source of love that cooks the food that rules the planets which opened the eyes of Parameshwara which gazes beyond unknown horizons which flows from the matted hair of Shiva which walks over the water

 22 Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze which heals that is enjoyed through adoration which empowers that is detached, immaculate and complete that is the touch of divinity which transforms whose body is Chaitanaya that is the taste of divinity that is the fragrance of divinity whose leela is the universe whose fingers move on the rays of the dawn that is the essence of divinity that inspires divine diplomacy whose dress is a pink silk saree whose seats are Pratishthan, Cabella and the hearts of the bhaktas that is the call of Shri Krishna's flute that called Lazarus back from the dead whose hymn was sung by Kabir, Gibran, Dante and Goethe whose graciousness was rendered by Botticelli, Giotto, Raphael and DaVinci beyond any expression beyond all imagination which is the radiance of the Sahaja Sangha which is the magnet of the Sahaja Sangha whose melody echoes in the notes of Mozart and Pannalal Ghosh that binds the mother and the child whose worshippers are the Trimurtis that binds God and His Creation whose bounty enraptures the Trilokas which disturbed the placidity of the Destroyer of the Tripuras which walked in the steps of Sita, Rukmini, Radha and Mary that made us free that made us Sahaja Yogis that made us behold the glory of God that is Nirmala moulded in the paste that made Shri Ganesha Schwartzsee Sahaja Seminar, Switzerland that is approached through devotion Winter 1995 that is met through surrender

 Divine Cool Breeze Volurne : IX issue: 9& 10 1997 23 News from Around the World Medical Conference in Delhi stroke 16 years previously and had a certificate of er Holiness Shree Mataji Nirmala Devi permanent disability, but was now living a full and active life, thanks to Sahaja Yoga. A Н; was the main speaker and guest at a medical conference on Sunday, April 6th neurosurgeon explained that immunity to disease could only be achieved through balance, and that in Delhi. The topic of the conference was "The Art of Healing and Sahaja Yoga." The conference was sponsored by the Indian Medical Association, New Delhi branch. the Hippocratic tradition was a holistic tradition. Prof. Rai talked about the relationship between high tech", stress, and psychosomatic diseases. The program began with Sahaja bhajans, He said that patients practising Sahaja Yoga have including Vishwa Vandita, sung by Hemlata. Ten measurably lower levels of adrenaline, a lower heart rate arnd a decrease in blood lactic acid. He S.C. Nigam and Prof. U.C. Rai. Each talked about described an experiment in which two groups of mice were subjected to identical conditions- medicine, including the history of the stress and the introduction of cancer cells. The relationship, and cures achieved through Sahaja only difference between the two groups was one Yoga. One speaker said he was paralyzed by a had a lever which could be pressed to stop the speakers sat at a table on the stage, including Dr. the relationship between spirituality and SAHAJA YOGA ENSURES PEACE Yoga, particularly in diseases where modern medicine has no cure. He said that a number of psychosomatic diseases have no cure in modern medicine and a patient has to be put on medicines all the life. The Hindustan times, Delhi, 7th April, 1997 "If a person wants to have peace in mind and unity of mankind, practising Sahaja Yoga is the only way out," said Dr. Nirmala Devi, founder of science of Sahaja Yoga and the personality who had spread across its message in various countries of the world. She was speaking at a function organized by Unity International Foundation in the capital (Delhi) practical experience has shown on Sunday. Former Governor G.C. Saxena and Mr. B.Satya Narain Reddygraced the oceasion. Dr. Nirmala Devi said that the concept of collective consciousness in the people is very Important for world peace and this can happen by traditional medicines. On the other hand, 80 only when self-realization oceurs. She also informed about the medical benefits of Sahaja Yoga and its popularity in various countries of the world. "Sahaja Yogis all over the world are very much aware about each others' problems and they are capable of doing wonderful things," she said. Mr. R.N. Anil, Secretary General of the Unity world. For the treatment of patients, an International Foundation, New Delhi also announced the conferring of the Unity Award for International Understanding to her later this year. Dr. Umesh Rai, Director, International Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre, New Bombay spoke on the medical benefits of Sahaja "Sahaja Yoga is very useful in the management of hypertension, epilėpsy, insomnia, diabetes, migraine, bronchial asthma along with à host of other related diseases," he said. Dr. Rai said that extensive research and that psychosomatic diseases are managed much more effectively by the practice of Sahaja Yoga. Commenting on the epilepsy patients, he said that 40 per cent of the patients are not cured per cent of the patients are cured by the practice of Sahaja Yoga. He dwelt in length on its benefits in patients having hypertension and also heart disease. Sahaja Yoga was discovered by Dr. Nirmala Devi in 1970 and is gradually becoming popular in a number of countries all over the institution has been made operational in Mumbai where treatment is done by cosmic vibrations. Her program of self-realization is now practised in 65 countries all over the world.

 Volume : IX issue: 9 & 10 1997 24 Divine Cool Breeze stress; that group did not develop cancer. The presented a paper on the effects of Kundalini stress-relieving mechanism for humans is Sahaja awakening. Yoga. Shree Mataji began her presentation with, "I Taiwan Public Program, bow to all the seekers of truth." She explained that science was amoral and did not go to the roots, that it developed through criticism and the In the spring time, the Taiwan collective launched challenge of knowledge, not through the a small-scale public program as if Shree Mataji awareness of the absolute. However, she added, were physically present. The program was held medical science is needed to help us understand Sahaja Yoga. Shree Mataji called India the Yoga hoping that the worldwide collective vibrations bhoomi, and said the great, traditional, spiritual from puja would be strong and support us. knowledge of India was the foundation of medical science. Her lecture included quotations picture in two major newspapers continuously for from Gyanadeva, Guru Nanak and Kabir. May 1997 on May 3rd, right before Sahasrara Day. We were We put an advertisement with Shree Mataji's three days right before the program date. Posters that were very beautifully printed with Shree chakra and the diseases caused directly or Mataji's picture and the snow-covered Himalayas indirectly by its imbalance. For example, if heat (next to the Dharamsala school) in the from the over-stressed liver affects the right side, background were put up all around Taipei city in order to permeate the seekers with divine Her talk concentrated on the Swadhishthana there is a massive heart attack and a sudden collapse. If the heat affects the left side, the heart vibrations. becomes lethargic and does not supply enough blood to the brain; the left side of the brain becomes paralysed, which is manifested on the 65 seekers attended in a venue with a capacity for 80. Dr. Hara first gave an introduction to Shree Mataji and Sahaja Yoga. After that, a half right side of the body. Shree Mataji good- hour introduction to the subtle system was given naturedly addressed not the patients with which also focussed on answering two questions: What are we seeking? and What is true meditation? This was followed by Shree Mataji's video tape from the Albert Hall, England public program, which was presented with Chinese subtitles. We then used an excerpt from a 1995 public program video tape in which Shree Mataji guides the problems with Swadhishthana, but the doctors seated on the stage beside Her. She talked about the speediness and futuristic outlook of doctors, caused by using their brains too much. At the end Dr. S.C. Nigam invited all the doctors present to come and experiment in the meditation centres and assured them of being seekers through self-realization. able to cure any disease with patience and meditation. Only a few seekers acknowledged feeling vibrations on top of their heads and on their Our Divine Mother was also wished "Happy hands; Chinese are usually very conservative. The Anniversary" as 7th April was Her Golden Jubilee seekers were in a serious yet very pleasant mood wedding anniversary. Interestingly, the 7th was also World Health Day. the whole evening. The first follow-up program on Tuesday, May 6th drew 38 seekers. We were very happy with the success of this attempt to have a public program without Shree Mataji's physical presence. The seekers who attended are mostly middle-aged or older. Hopefully they will be sensible, and stay discoveries and research in the field of energy through the three-month beginner's course. Award for Dr. U.C. Rai Dr. U.C. Rai was conferred the "Vladimir Vernidzky" award for making significant information science. Dr. Rai, a Sahaja Yogi who is currently director of the international Sahaja Yoga Medical and Research Centre in Mumbai, was Sarvesh Paulo Su, Taiwan presented the award by Professor J. Halperin in Cyprus Public Program Report Moscow on August 30. He also attended the third International Congress of Folk Medicine of Russia, 27th and 28th of July went very smoothly with which was held under the aegis of the All Russian Scientific and Research Centre. He The two public programs held on Cyprus on the 12 seekers on the first day and 17 on the second. All the seekers were genuine and approached

 Volume: IX Issua: 9 & 10 1997 Divinie Cool Breeze 25 Sahaja Yoga with a cautious but open mind. They much of their spare time. We were young and all felt the cool breeze and said that they would perhaps naive, thinking we could change the return. world overnight. It is taking a bit longer, but Five yogis went to Cyprus from Athens, joined change it most certainly has and we have all by Inna who lives on the island, two yogis from Played a role. France, and a new yogi who is a Cypriot but studying in Athens. The vibrations on the island changed with the placing of the first poster, and when the yogis the city we are so busy with so little time, but returned to the Athens airport a week later, the vibrations were as if they were coming from a puja in Cabella. The seekers said that if the programs were at another time (not in the skies and winter sunshine. Crossing Australia we summer) there would be a much bigger response. So there are tentative arrangements to go back in land of Shri Ganesha. November or December. Times have changed. Many life experiences, some difficult, yet we still need that enthusiasm more than ever. There is much yet to achieve. In we need to take sometine for ourselves, for each other to feel the collective. Winter time in Brisbane promised clear blue are reminded how expansive and beautiful is this We arrived at Shree Mataji's house at Wamarun In the meantime, Inna is alone on the island mid-morning on Saturday to be greeted by Sahaja and would like to be contacted by any yogis Yogis from Melbourne, New Zealand and Cairns. passing through. Inna Angelidou 35 Kimonos Akropolis By the commencement of the puja, there would be around 150 yogis gathered to worship the World Guru for this age. For many of us it was the first time we had seen the completed Wamarun Ashram: The house had been constructed fromn bricks handmade from Lefkosia Tel. : 35 72 425128 By Shree Mataji's grace, may a collective be the clay delved from land on the property. The established on Cyprus soon. Jai Shree Mataji! - Johanna Klinge, Greece building took many years to complete, made possible by Shree Mataji and achieved through the labour of the yogis. The strength of the vibrations present certainly are a just reward for the effort. Guru Puja in Australia It is always the same whether it is India Tour or national Guru Puja was to be held began by Cabella. Whenever we gather together there is always i joy that is ever-present. Everywhere there were ashram at Burwood in Sydney. Just under 50 smiles on people's faces and time was spent yogis from New South Wales and the Australian forming new and re-establishing old friendships. In the afternoon a havan was held to remove negativity and any obstacles preventing the Sleeping on a bus is never easy, yet the hours success of the public program that night. The rolled past because we were travelling to take local yogis had arranged this program to take part in the work of Sahaja Yoga. When we make advantage of the boost in vibrations which comes an effort, sometimes a "sacrifice," to play our part when yogis visit. The musicians gathered on stage to begin the program, the songs came out fine work out effortlessly. When we are older we will and strong, and the vibrations began to flow. The audience warmed to the music and we could feel their hearts open as the tired looks on their faces Our journey to the place where the Australian boarding the bus in the early evening at our Capital Territory took their places for the 17 hour journey to Brisbane. in collective events, then everything seems to look back on these opportunities and the days we shared together. were washed away by the vibrations. This trip brought back feelings of journeys made many years ago when we all travelled away together to Melbourne. It brought back helping people feel the power of the Divine and memories of a time of enthusiasms, when Sahaja begin to find meaning. It was the most successful Yoga was just starting in our country and those public program held in Brisbane since Shree who are now the older, established yogis were Mataji last visited. fresh-faced enthusiastic youths for whom Sahaja Yoga was everything and to which they devoted We played our role as the bearers of truth, Guru Puja commenced on Sunday at midday. It seemed most appropriate to be holding the

 Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997 26 Divine Cool Breeze of whom had won first prize for singing Indian folk music in his school. We invited him to sing at the evening program and he immediately agreed. puja outdoors within an almost forest setting. We were seated on the earth before our Guru's photograph. The sun was shining upon us, filtered by leaves of the surrounding trees. A warm, gentle breeze blew. We looked up to see a wide, blue sky, the soothing sounds of nature helping to settle the attention upon the spirit. It is so quiet in the country. This is one of the reasons it is so conducive in helping us touch our own inner silence. The program was held in a hotel with a seating capacity of not more than 100 people as a big response was not expected because it was a long holiday weekend. To our amazement the hall was full, with more than 30 new people in attendance. The program started with the leader of Austria welcoming the guest of honour, Ms.Lata Reddy. He then gave a very touching At the conclusion of the puja Uncle John Henshaw thanked our hosts on behalf of us all. He spoke of the national and international feeling speech as to why we as Austrians were of brotherhood and union that this event had established, due in no small part to the hospitality and warmth showered upon us by the Brisbane collective. This puja provided a boost to the Brisbane collective as well as to everyone who celebrating India's Independence Day. He narrated how Her Holiness Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi brought us close to this great land of Bharat the Yoga Bhoomi of this world through the process of Sahaja Yoga. He explained how Sahaja Yoga had given us inner independence from all those things that make us dependent. This was participated. He concluded by saying that he is looking also the dream of Mahatma Gandhi's Swatantrata forward to the opportunity of the Victorian collective welcoming the national collective to celebrate Diwali Puja later this year at a venue near the Victoria/New South Wales border. movement. After the talk, a praise to the Mother, Hé Adi Ma was sung, followed by small excerpts from the film Gandhi. We relived the historic moments of the independence struggle in this film. Then an Indian brother spoke about Shree Mataji's contribution to India's independence struggle. A film about Shree Mataji's life history, The Vision, made by the American Sahaja Yogis, was then Sahaja Yoga Austria Celebrates the Golden Jubilee of India's Independence Day A program was organized by the Sahaja Yoga shown to the audience. Society of Austria to commemorate the 50th The hall was filled with a passionate feeling anniversary of Mother India's Independence Day. of patriotism, devotion, humility and respect for This great auspicious occasion incidentally the Great Mother. Then we requested the coincides with the day Mother Mary departed for audience to participate in a self-realization program, which was conducted through a video cassette of Shree Mataji. The vibrations were very heaven. On the early morning of 15th August the yogis went for the flag hoisting ceremony hosted at the strong and we felt that everybody in the hall had Indian Ambassador's house. At the large public received their realization. gathering the Ambassador read out the message from the President of India. Surprisingly he said that this Independence Day celebration would not be restricted to activities sponsored by the government of India but a joint celebration of all those who wished to undertake it. To add to the joyful tempo of the evening we sang a few devotional Sahaja bhajans and Qawwalis. Our new Indian brother whom we met in the morning sang a beautiful Indian folk song from Gujarat, the birth place of Gandhiji. The function concluded with the presentation of a small gift, Sir C.P. Srivastava's book on Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri, to the guest of honour. She was very touched and happy with the way we celebrated this great occasion, and remarked that After he had finished his statement the Sahaja Yogis presented to him a personal invitation to the evening program organized by them. However, due to his ill health he excused himself and asked his deputy Ms.Lata Reddy to represent she would always call on us for future programs him. The general invitation was then handed out to the others present. Here we met a enlightened audience was then invited to enjoy interesting Indian family who have recently moved into Vienna. They had two children, one organized by the Indian Embassy. The very some Indian snacks. Shantanu Chatterjee, Austria

 27 Volume: IX Issue: 9 A 10 1997 Divine Cool Breeze Self-Realization, Live on Radio Sahaja Yoga can be heard every Sunday from 10-11 a.m. Liallyn Fitzpatrick, another Most broadcasters are familiar with equipment breakdowns and guests that turn up late or don't presenter, "our crisis situations to produce a better program. The well-prepared questions and format seem to fall a bit flat compared to our "emergency' broadcasts, another proof that it all comes together with a little preparation and a lot seem turn up at all. The producers and presenters of Sahaja Yoga Meditation have discovered a philosophy of radio production that deals with these near-radio-death experiences. of faith." ne student, whose compares live radio with the bewildered Due to the non-profit, non- parents spontaneous nature of Sahaja wondered about Sahaja Yoga. "Live radio suits us down commercial nature of Sahaja Yoga Yoga, tunes in each week and to the ground. You can only (hence, no sponsors), fund raising her parents are now relaxed plan so far-it's all about the events keep us afloat. We have a about it; families with children present moment and, really, few generous benefactors who driving along suddenly overcome anything can happen!"and it donate more than a little on a with a bubbly feeling of mirth does. We have had many near- regular basis without whom, as and find each other blasting a well as the enthusiasm and coolness out the top of their funny: equipment breakdowns; participation of the Sahaja heads (a sure sign that the changing-the-studio nightmares; community and 2SER listeners, awakening has occurred); elderly interview subjects who arrive we wouldn't be here. people reporting reduced one minute to air time; the arthritic meditation and saying that they haven't felt so "up" in ages. L3 radio-death experiences, it isn't Fifteen months down the track after pain our To tell you the truth, we didn't know when we began this radio spot if self-realisation would work over the radio. We are here to say it does-and beautifully so-as our listeners will attest. One couple who had their first experience with program and who now practise Sahaja Yoga summed it up, "Anyone can see you're sincere and genuine. The lecture excerpts and personal Sahaja experiences of the people you interview are "box"-everything required for we are a bit better at this and we pictures worth a thousand words, the program-not arriving and hope to do some subject-specific and you don't expect people to having to wing it with and more creative programs this take your word for it-we can whatever's in the car; eloquent, year to better illustrate the Sahaja prove the benefit for ourselves confident guests suddenly view of a balanced world, and and without charge. My husband frozen and I have learned so much microphones. Since no one's collective good will be achieved about ourselves and about what's blasted us vet, perhaps we've one person at a time. Our the sight of that transformation toward the at time. going on around us.' What can we say? It's real and management's just being silent it works. Presenter Heather Shetty coped rather well, or may be John B, John T, Toby P. Peter A, Heather S. Gillian P and to be kind. "The curious thing," says Liallyn F for Sahaja Yoga.

 Divine Cool Breeze 28 Volume : IX İssue : 9 & 10 1997 Weekly Sahaja Radio Programs in Sydney or the past two years, a spontaneous. For example, one from the station supervisors. group of yogis in Sydney, week the topic was "spirit" and Australia, have presented a we couldn't find any suitable Sahaja Yoga radio program on excerpt from the talks we listened England, and have contacted their local community station. to. So we took a talk at random Gerald Wirth in Calgary, who This station, known as Multicultural Station, has the the beginning, and the first ten and Canadian music by yogis largest transmitter in Australia. It has been a huge success, reaching team sit on a discussion panel, interviews, vox populis, anywhere from 2,000 to 10,000 and we invite a third person, poetry, songs, etc. either of people each week. Audience either from the Sydney collective Shree Mataji or the yogis numbers aside, Shree Mataji's or someone visiting from a themselves, please send them vibrations are going out into the different area. Discussion is to Sydney for use in the ether and, judging from how we interspersed with other elements program. feel each week in the studio, (music, quotes, a meditation/self- something positive is happening. realization segment, lecture To prepare for the program, excerpts) throughout the hour. We page is from the 2SER radio we choose a topic for the week, don't rehearse, but we choose a do some research, collect some topic and work out a running Listening Post. . nice quotes, music, poetry and sheet beforehand for the sound suitable lecture excerpts of Shree operator to work from (who is Mataji's and, "with a bandhan also a Sahaja Yogi). Some of the and a prayer, it all comes together team have taken a nationally in the studio, live on-air, by Shree accredited radio course through Mataji's infinite grace." In true the station, and we get some ad- Sahaja F often play IPO recordings compiled in We the from our case of resources, cued is compiling some American radio minutes was all about Spirit. community to use in the program. Ilf any One or two "regulars" from the yogis have recordings of The article about the program on the previous magazine, program's - Liallyn Fitzpatrick, Australia very hoc computer and sound help fashion, it's

 ss "Dedication is the only way to grow further."



----------------------

1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
7)11
Volume : 1X Issue: 9& 10
1997
"Truth can be very bitter, can be very painfut, but truth which is adorned with love in
just like a flower, without the thoms.
Her Holiness Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi
(Sahasrara Puja. Canella, May 4, 1997)
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
2.
Krishna Puja 23.8.1997
Talk by H.H. Shree Matajl Nirmala Devi
to Unity International Foundation
10
Russlan Folk Medicine Conference
(Address written by Shree Mataji)
15
The 1997 Latin American Seminar
21
The 108 Names of Love
News from Araund the Warid:
Medical Conference in Delhi 23
Sahaja Yoga Ensures Peace
23
(Newspaper Article)
Award Tor Dr. U.C. Rai
24
Taiwan Publia Program May 1997
24
Cyprus Public Program Report 24
25
Guru Puja in Australis
Sahaja Yoga Austria Celebrates the
Golden Jubilee of India's Independence Day
26
Self-Realization, Live on Radio
27
Weekly Sahaja Yoga Programs in Sydney 28
E Yogi Mahajan
Edited by
Published by: V.J. Naigirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
Golden Words
he message of God has come to mankind in the golden words of the great prophets and incarnations.
The first known message was given by Lord Krishna to Prince Arjuna on the battlefield of Mahabharata
known as the 'hitupdesh' or the Gita. But this was an advice given exclusively to Arjuna in the context of
his mental blocks and the need of the situation. 5000 years later Lord Jesus Clrist preached the gospel of love
and forgiveness to mankind which was compiled long after his crucification called the Bible. In the 6th century
the Prophet Mohammad had visions of God's message which he narrated to his wife. 40 years after his death
these teachings were consolidated as the Holy Koran by a remote follower. These were the prime sources of
God's communication to mankind. The turbulances of History marred by papal manipulations no doubt blurred
the lustre of these golden words.
Fortunately, in modern times the Divine herself has incarnated as Her Holiness Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi to
communicate directly with all humanity for its en masse ascent. But do we listen? Do we listen to only what we
want to hear. Often we quote only that which suits our convenience "Mother said this...".
Each golden word is a mantra to be read again and again, to introspect and to imbibe. She is not speaking for
others, she is speaking to each one of us. It is a common hallucination that she is saying it for others and not for
LIS.
No incarnation studied human beings and their problems so minutely and deeply as she does. Hence when
she speaks the vibrations flow to work out the problem. If we listen with rapt attention and absorb each word, it
will work out like a mantra at every chakra. This is Divine Vani' which feels, loves and acts. It is all powerful
and all pervading. Yes, when she speaks every word falls like pearls into the ocean. It is Divine music that
elevates us to celestial heights and blesses us with ambrosia.
Often our intellect tries to argue with what she says. Our own idea, convictions, mental jargans and
conditionings start projecting immediately. But we should question ourself, "who are we and what is so important
about what we think and say." It is only a mental projection of our programming like a computer throwing out
information based on its floppy programme. Therefore wisdom lies in realising our limitations and shortcomings
and recognise the truth. The truth is that we are the Spirit, not this body, mind intellect or ego. So why identify
and support falsehood against absolute truth whcih is her Divine message.
The human intellect tends to find excuses or offer explainations, but of what use are they and to whom. By
playing games with ourself we only deceive ourself and hasten towards our doom. Christ warned, "those who
are not with me are against me" Nor is there any room for any half hearted commitments, for that will only
produce half baked yogis. Hence we cannot mellow down her words for then they would cease to be golden..
In this Blossom time what a golden opportunity is at hand, golden words of the Divine are being compiled in the
eternal scripture of Divine Cool Breeze", Let us wear them close in our hearts and flow with the Divine Cool
Breeze.
Yogi Mahajan
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX isue: 9 & 10 1997
Krishna Puja (Cabella 23.08.1997)
Talk by H. H. Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi
oday we are here to celebrate Krishna very important in these modern times. Exposure
of body is regarded as a great achievement of
women. They are trying to become aboriginals
"No, let me talk about Krishna only," because we you seel. That time they never had these ideas
and they were not so confused, you see. So even
if their women were scantily dressed it did not
mean that it was some sort of a sex or some sort
of a attraction for men. Or men behaving in a
Dharma does not mean what we understand as funny manner to show that they have a special
attraction for women. I mean why you should? It
not. Dharma means our primordial taboos that is absolutely absurd that men should be attracted
are built-in in the human beings. About these, I to women and women should be attracted to
men. And on the road, on the street, you go, you
what we did? We dominated them and also they see this, just that going on. This adharma is the
had to change their style of life. The primordial worst, I think, for it is a curse. Because after
taboos are only understood if people are trying coming to Sahaja Yoga also people start doing
this nonsense, you know. They should all go to
the lunatic asylum. They are no good for Sahaja
is little bit different in the sense that it is much Yoga. But Dharma gets established as soon as you
Puja. I went to America and they wanted
me to have a Mahakali Puja. But I said
have to first realize what is the strength of this
Puja. How we are going to establish Shri Krishna
within ourselves. He Himself has said that
whenever there is a down fall of Dharma...
Hinduism, Christianity or Islamic nonsense. It is
think, aboriginals knew belter than we. But then
to understand oneself or else whatever has come
to them through traditions. Now Sahaja Dharma
higher than the Sahaja ideas that we talk of, but have the light of the spirit.
is much higher than even what Shri Krishna said
At the time of Shri Rama He had to put down
or Shri Rama said. First Shri Rama thought best ABCDEF. At the time of Moses also He had to
is to give them discipline. People should be
serious about life, have full idea about their own
being. They should respect themselves. All these
put down ten commandments. But Krishna
thought the other way round: to establish the
Dharma of puure Love, pure Love. So, because He
things were written down long time back. Also wanted that Shri Rama's taboos were forced on
people, basically when they were göod, they ; just like Islamic, just like Christians. It
people;
understood that whatever is bad for us we should
not do. These are primordial taboos. Now these
primordial taboos are built-in within Lus
never works. So he thought better to ask them in
their freedom they must develop pure Love.
Radha who was with him as his power, it is
Now supposing I say, "don't drink." You will called Ahladdayini. She is the one who gives joy,
go on drinking. If I say, "don't tell lies." You will pure joy. So all these limited type of attractions
tell lies. It is the human nature. You see to go end up in trouble. Now drinking is against, you
know that. Today they are talking about tobacco,
tomorrow they will talk of drinking when they
They are free people. Actually, they are not. They will find so many people suffering from horrible
are under the spell of all the kinds of allurements livers and die. Then they will taboo it. But it is
you can call or temptations which are against a natural taboo for your body. If you do
human life. And it is very natural to be a person something all the time which is not good for
you, for your good life you are becoming
example I have seen children they feel very shy adharmic. This is to be understood very clearly,
to take out their clothes. Even small, small boys, that the Sahaja Dharma is that you are just free.
I have seen. They won't take out their clothes in Complete freedom, from lust greed and all
nonsense. You are above it. You are above. This
are described like Ya Devi Sarva Bhuteshu Lajja Dharma is above the Dharma established by Shri
Krishna or by Shri Rama. Because you have
should be humble and respect your body. It is reached that stage, in complete freedom you have
against primordial taboos because they think now
they have freedom. Freedom to do what they like.
of Dharma. Small children mostly have it. For
the presence of others. They feel shy. So all these
Rupena Samsthita. So you should be shy. You
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX Issue: 9 & 10 1997
to be Dharmic. Whatever is not good for you, you dropped out. Specially in America it should stop.
should not do. I don't have to tell you that you
don't do this and you don't do that. Whatever I
say may not be acceptable but immediately your looking like some monkey. Monkey is better, I
vibrations will tell you. This is Sahaja Dharma, in
the Sahaja Dharma you get rid of all kinds of, as
they say, Kaam, Krodh, Mada, Lobh and Moh, compare, I tell you. So I asked him "why are you
means Lust, Anger, Greed and Attractions.
Now if you understand how people are
greedyl Greedy for what? This America is dying primitiveness." I said, "but your brain is modern.
of consumerism, you see. Now see the trick of the Just by growing your hair like that you think you
trade: In America you can borrow any amount of
money from the bank. No problem. Now even if afterwards I learnt that he died. Another one like
you don't borrow they will send you a letter
"Why do not you take twenty thousand cheque, asylum. Like that I met many. Why do you do it?
we are sending you? Why not have it? Ah! very
rich you become, you see! It is very nice to take
the loan: I was told some people used to cone
to Ganapatipule Puja after taking loans. I said,
"Stop this nonsense!" So they take the loan and
then they come to Ganapatipule. All the time
their mind is "how will I pay this loan? How will fellow said that "My God! you lost your hand in
I manage?" All the time the attention is
distracted. Even when you wvant to do something expensive watch from Switzerland." "Really?
good to yourself of coming to Ganapatipule. So
such a mind is not free. The free mind is that hand is gone. Rollex is a fashion. So these are
which has attention completely enlightened by nouveau riche people who have money.
the spirit. But problem is, we are still rising out
of this human bondage to a higher life of
realization. And when we are going to that level taking? I mean supposing, the Italian designers
we have to realize that we have to give up all
these shackles, all these horrible things within us,
like a bird when it is born out of the egg, shakes
out all the parts of the egg =
sisters, your father, your mother, your husband,
everybody. They try to put you down When,
they are drinking they say "come along! you
better have something to drink. You are not expensive, why? because they are designers. So
social, you are useless, you are not up-to-date, wearing this thing from a designer shop, this is
what is this nonsense?" That's how a fashion
starts. And this collective action of fashion did you? You have no sense of designs, You have no
not come from Shri Krishna and not in Sahaja. In
Sahaja you are absolutely free from all these you don't need. And nowadays most of them are
nonsenses. If you want you can wear good dress, in jail also. Sorry to say but they have money.
if
Also in England.
A fellow came as a hippy. His hair were
must say. They don't like what? All put together
like a, you can say, I mean there is nothing to
having such hair?" He said, "because I want to
be primitive. Now we have to take to the
can become primitive? You cannot." Then
that came and he didn't die but went to lunatic
Because that is the fashion.
Now Italy, you know is prospering because of
all kinds of designers. Now there is a joke about
nouveau riche people, in Russia specially.
Russians are not like that, normally. They don't
accept something because it is a fashion. So one
that day!" "Does not matter. But I lost my very
What?" "It was Rollex." Does not matter if the
They (dogs) don't follow any fashion. I have
not seen dogs taking to any fashion. Monkeys
make something special for them. They won't
think much of it, may be their masters might buy.
But not the animals. Now, we don't have to
your brothers, your become animals, of course.
But we don't have to become slaves of fashion.
So there are some shops which are very
you know about telling everybdoy, "See, I am
from designer shop." That means what about
sernse of understanding, what you need and what
don't want you need rot. You are free, you
And they have made money by befooling you.
you
are free from money bondage. This is very Specially in America, I was surprised that they
important. Money bondage is another thing. I
know some Sahaja Yogis who came to Sahaja coming from Italy, designs, Italian designs.
Yoga trying to make money out of Sahaja Yoga. Written down Italian design, so they buying it. I
You come to Sahaja Yoga for what? To get out of
that money bondage. In the Sahaja Dharma your that are available everywhere, such beautiful
money is nothing but dust of your feet. Nothing things. But what they believe in is some sort of
so important. Then we have such a collective
sense of accepting nonsense. That has to be kind of design from this or that.
were selling most of the things which were
was surprised that such artistic things they create
a group madness. Everybody wearing the same
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Volume: IX İssue: 9 & 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
This is not Sahaja Dharma. We are not slaves democracy but against what Abraham Lincon
of anything. We are free people. We are not to
accept any design or anything. Let the stupid they have a little street in his name. Of course in
follow them. We are Sahaja Yogis. Now this also Washington they say they have some nice
prevails among people who are supposed to be
saddhus. They all dress up, the same way. How
can you make out who is who? In Sahaja Yoga or other some people came and wrote against
we don't want you to dress up the same way,
look the same way, cut you hair the same way.
No, you have to be individuals. Because you are
free. Freedom is always supported by wisdom. something that is created by God. If there are the
That does not mean that you do what you like:
All kinds of funny things happen when a person military people. They have to have different
does not know what is the light of the spirit. In colours, they have to have different hues. See,
the light of the spirit you don't get involved into look at the trees, look at the flowers and look at
this kind of collective madness that is going on
We are so collective in mad things! I wish they happy. What gives you happiness is variety.
could be more collective in wise things. Wisdom Variety is a sign of beauty. If there is no variety,
is very important and a joy giving quality of
Radhaji, Ahladdayini Shakti has to come within very proud of it. And they think ruining of
us. Then when we meet another person in the
collectivity, that person should feel happy with people. They have a sense of superiority because
15
wanted. They had such a great man there and
beautiful statue. But otherwise his principles are
finished. His ideas are finished. Because somehow
even in England specially, against the blacks.
What business they have to write against
same colours everywhere they will all look like
the different hues, the sky has just to make us
so boring, I tell you, so very boring! But they are
themselves. They think they are very great
you.
they have a certain type of nose, or may be a
certain type of lips or may be a certain types of
hair. Such stupid things they are. And you join
So, He taught the Dharma of Love. Love is not
there if you describe because he is black or
because he is brown, because he is white. It is
superficial. What is black, white and yellow. I hands with them! How can you join hands with
really, I don't understand. Here they go to the
seashores to make themselves black and there
they say we don't want to have any blacks. Very important. I would say that now the Sahaja
Specially for Americans. I think this kind of Yogi's who are going back to America should
separation I found there among the blacks and
the whites. I went to Harlem. Sahaja Yogi's said people. I was very happy to see the South
"will you go to Herlem?" I said, "why not?" I am.
black. If you call me black I am black. If you call
me white 1 am white. If you call me yellow I am
yellow." So I am going. And there I had a lecture, they immediately said, "Mother, you are spiritual,
you know. So many people were there. Really, I
cannot forget. It is one of the most famous place
that there is built in that hall and the same hall
is built in Australia, where I had addressed
many people. I thought just look at this. They that belongs to us, where the sage grows." Sage
said, "Mother, Australians copied from us* "Now 1S a kind of a, according to them is a holy plant.
these people so sweet, so beautiful I tell you, 1 Alright, "Now we always meet all of us there for
could see their heart, I could feel it. And the different festivals because we regard that land as
fellow who was trying to compere, after my a holy land. They know so many things, you
lecture, he just came. He hugged me, kissed me,
I mean he would have even minced me. Little that, so they always used to go there." So natural.
boy, about 22 years of age. Such love he felt. And "So what has happened now?" What is your
he said, Mother, next time you come you are problem? #The government has sold this land,
going to come to Harlem." But I am told that hall this American government, to an Indian." I said,
is closed.
So the American system somehow or other Indian to return it to us. We will pay him the
goes against democracy.- Not: only against morney.
them? You want your freedom then be a free
person. In the freedom you have to have variety.
have a new style of drive. Go to the black
American seminar that they had taken specially
to aboriginal people. They went and met them. I
have met them also and I was so surprised that
we know. But can you solve our problem?" I said,
"What is your problem?" "Very simple. We have
a land" "Then?" "Very little land 5-6 acres of land
is a kind of a, according to them is a holy plant.
know. This is the holy land and the vibrations for
FF
"to an Indian?" "Yes. So can you request this
" 1 said "What is the name of Indian?"
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Volume: IX Issue: 9 8 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
complexion, this white complexion is the worst of
Sindhi! He won't leave you even one single pie." all. I was very fair, very fair till I got married or
may for sometime. Then I started becoming darker and
can't darker. Because white complexion gets all Kinds
help." But I was surprised nobody raised the of things. The light you put on me I absorb. I get
voice against this. They should have raised voice, black spots. So what a great thing to be white
they should have said the government "Please do not think so. It looks very funny and pale and
joyless. People are going to the sea making their
body, I think brown and then suffering from
cancer of the skin. This kind of stupidity is also
They told me the name. I said "My God! He is a
Is he going to give you this? I am sorry. I
be divine and I may be anything but I
return our land. Why do you want to have it?"
As it is all Americans are immigrants. They do
not belong to that place. They were not owners
of that land. So they have no right to keep Very much fashionable. Now in collectivity how
somebody's land like that. And then to think they much do we get impressed by these we should
are superior. It is very nice: Somebody enters
your house and thinks he is very superior and
drives out all the people of the family. That is
what is happening in America.
be on the watch.
I saw my grand daughter was wearing a
sleeveless dress. I told her "Bete you should not
wear sleeveless dress" She said. "It is very hot. I
am feeling very hot." She is young. I said, "See
these are two very important chakras. If you
expose them then you will have problem." She
does not like to wear dresses which are above the
knees. But she said,
And just the opposite is Sahaja Dharma. With
such Dharma you take people into your heart,
you love them. Your love flows all the time, your
compassion flows all the time. To me it is a
problem now my body is more compassionate "people wear even above the
than myself. I don't even think of compassion. knees." I said "knees, there are very important
this body just grasps every thing, problems of
others. But T don't think you can have that kind
of a body, you should not have. But at least you immediately. "Mother I'll wear a
should have a heart which is opened. You see on
the street somebody who is a dark fellow. I like
black Americans. Once I got down on an airport.
So one gentleman, black gentleman "Hello taboo that we should not expose ours these two
Darling! How are you here? Very happy to see
you. I am happy to see you. How are you?" Then legs, I don't know they have shorter clothes. I
once I was travelling in.. Husala was with me,
He looked at me, one fellow, very tall, hefty, you
know. He said, "Ah! Are you back again?" "Ham!"
I said, "I am back, you know me?" "of course, of burka" because she was a Muslim. And by the
course, I know you". He had never met me. But
I felt happy. I felt very happy. That is the best
way to meet people. Supposing you are walking
ön the street. You see some black gentlemen wwear such a thing, to come out of the plane. You
going. It is a terrible life there, I tell you. It is a
terrible life for them. I know I have read books
on them. I cried and wept. I felt very sorry. So,
as a Sahaja Yogi you should just jump at them.
And you should say "Hello! How are you?"
Shake hands with them. They won't eut your
throat I can tell you. In criminality I don't know
who is more criminal in America. Whether they something is not Alhaddayni, keep quiet. Don't
are the blacks or the whites. Competing. But if say, What is the need. What is there to be
you are kind and if you are loving you can
remove that part of criminality which is within
them; because hatred can be only washed away you talk sarcastically to others, in a sharp way.
by pure love. But people think that they are very But if you talk sweetly what is the harm. This
cunning, very superior in cunningness, of course.
Otherwise what is their superiority? Only this
chakras." We should keep them closed.
Otherwise, if these are affected, you will have
knee trouble.
" Immediately she changed3;
blouse from
M
inside and something from outside." Immediately.
Because she knew this is our natural primordial
chakras. But nowadays the more you have long
don't understand what is in the legs. The whole
beauty is in the legs or what? So I met one lady
who travelled with me. She was wearing the
time we landed in London she took out the burka
and the dress was much above the knees. I said
"What kind of a Muslim woman is she?" She is
worst than even Christians because they won't
have to come down on the staircase. No Lajja, No
shame, nothing, shamelessness.
So Sahaja Dharma is that have shame. You
have sense of shame. What you talk to others,
what you say to others, how you behave towards
them in Sahaja Dharma is Alhaddayni. If
you
(sarcastic, showing off your brains in your
sarcasm. It is not a sign of good breeding that
sweetness comes from Radhaji. Now, of course,
they have misused her They have made her into
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX Issue: 9 & 10 1997
a sort of a Romeo and Julliet business. It was not
that. She wwas
Mahalakshmi. So to be a Mahalakshmi after
coming to Sahaja Yoga you should know that you shows that you are not of that calibre. To be the
should dress up in a way that is perfectly alright. calibre of Sahaja Yoga you should be free of your
Once I remember I was in a big party and one
gentleman came and sat down "Ha!" I said,
"What happened?" "What a relief, Mother! Mrs.
Srivastava to see you! See these women. I am fed letters." I do not remember. I don't want to read
up. But you came. I felt so relieved." I said what anything about it. So there should be forgiveness.
is so relieved?" "You are so serene" so women
are serene in Sahaja Dharma. They are not stupid, will feel very releaved and your married life will
frivolous, laughing at anything. That is not the
way for a woman. Anything happens they must something. Alright, some marriages are really,
laugh. I mean if there is something even really very difficult, alright. So you get out. In
laughable, that is alright. But something is not Sahaja Yoga we have allowed complete divorce.
even laughable they will laugh. That is not the
way. This can be ridiculous also. But laugh of think something is superior. Now we have
appreciation, laugh of enjoyment is so pure and
creates such beautiful atmosphere.
I think the whole ecological problem is in our
brains and your upbringing. It is not outside. It
is inside us which is reflected outside. In Ganesha Now then better not marry and if you marry then
Puja I am going to tell you how we are so closely live like an ideal Sahaja Yogi. Also if you are a
related to Mother Earth, and how Mother Earth Sahaja Yogini then you can carry on very much
and the atmosphere reacts to our behaviour, to better by forgiving all the time. Every time when
how we live. In the Sahaja Dharma you give up people tell me "Oh! Mother. You see you must
lust and greed very easily that I know. I mean if help me" "Why?" "Because, you know, my
they can't even give up then they should not call
themselves Sahaja Yogis. The first thing you give "give him up I do not mind. He must give you
up is lust and greed. I find it among young
people, now, that those who come to Sahaja Yoga talk to her husband he will say "Mother she is
they come really very free people. They do not very extravagant". I said "you better give up
run after women, women do not run after men.
They are together, they sit together, talk together, In Sahaja Dharma the husband-wife relation
laugh together but it is purity. In the Quran it is
described that when Kyama will come beautiful beautiful. It is not you know we talk of love and
women and beautiful men will be there. But they all that here. Very rarely people fall in love and
will have no lust and greed. They will be pure. carry on. It is a blessing if you really get that
Today you can see that luist and greed is finished,
most of you, most of you. Automatically it is
finished and now you can see for yourself that forget that you are Sahaja Yogis. In that Sahaja
you are free of this bondage.
Then our marriages are coming tomorrow.
remember. The present is the best. Now if you are
sitting here with me enjoying the Ahladdayini
Shakti that time you are thinking about the past
a very pure woman and she was
past. Finished. There is no need to confess. I
know after Sahaja Yoga many people wrote letters
to me of confessions. And I just said "burn these
If there is forgiveness you will be surprised you
be very happy. But if you try to remember
But must be for some reason. Not because you
banned many countries from where we don't
want to have girls or from where we don't want
to have boys. What is the reason? With experience
we have learnt they are not marriage substance.
husband does not give me any money." I said
money. Why doesn't he give you money?" You
Sahaja Yoga, both of you, and da what you like."
should be really romantic, should be really
kind of a feeling. But mostly it is a curse. So to
fall in love is very good but does not mean you
Yoga helps a lot, I think, in your married life.
Sahaja Dharma is for your children that you bring
In the Sahaja Dharma first thing is very up your children not troubling them too much
important is forgiveness. If somebody cannot
forgive then he cannot be a Sahaja Yogi, Sometimes I know children go astray and try to
Forgiveness: How this forgiveness comes in is by follow wrong things, then you must correct them,
forgetting the past. Otherwise you will go on
saying, "this person tortured me, that person
tortured me. He was very mean to me. He was
that to me. He did this to me." Shows that you
are not of that calibre to understand Sahaja Yoga. be done. It is very wrong thing, you should
Because you cannot forgive. What is there to
but into a free life. Let them use their wisdom
you must tell them, it is your duty. They were
not born out of the trees but they were born here
from the parents, so it is the duty of the parents
to tell them that this is wrong and it should not
correct them but that correction should be in a
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 IX lssue: 9 & 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
Volume
7.
Sahaja way. I will tell you an example. I had a
problem once with somebody coming to me and Sahaja Dharmis? Mother has established Sahaja
saying "Mother, I cannot do without smoking. I
have to smoke." I said "better smoke then, but
you can't be a Sahaja Yogi because smoking Love which of course we have. But apart from
Sahaja Yogi is a funny caricature, you know, I that we have so many other beautiful facets and
can't think of a smoking Sahaja Yogi. How will I such beautiful things within our personalities,
look if I start smoking like that?" "Ah! Horrible."
I said then if you are my son, you cann't smoke, should be on your own qualities, on your own
it looks bad." He gave up smoking. Can you personality and then you will be amazed how
imagine? So dealing with your children always your personality is giving you joy, giving you
make yourself an example. Yourself part and
parcel of that example. So the children don't feel
you know. This is something that I have tälked
many a times. Children is onething, I tell
they can give up everything but not your love.
If they know you love them they will not accept weapons in this life time. Without weapons
anything that will make you not love, not love things are solved what can you do. But
them. This is for definite. Because children are the try to see the beauty as Sahaja Yogis.
best people who know about love. Of course I
don't know. I feel that in English language 1 been helped, how you have been guided, how
didn't see many books about children written you have been blessed! This is Sahaja Dharma. If
beautiful, beautiful things. There was one book
that was published when I was in London. The low level. It is not the fault of Sahaja Yoga but it
children talking about the politicians and they is your style. You are not sensitive. Supposing
published I think 5,000 books and that very same somebody burns his hands, so what will you do?
day it was finished. So talk to children. Talk to
them you will be amazed they are full of honey, feel, he can drink, he can smoke, he can do
they are such nice, nice things with them and everything and still he is existing alright. Must be
when they talk like that then you are amazed
how they say things, how they talk of Sahaja, we have to take example from other good Sahaja
how they are expressing their spiritual strength. Yogis and not from the bad ones and how do we
Now we have many very good children And also
they are absolutely Sahaja. One boy came and he
just prostrated himself before me. So I said, "Why trying to fax me. But also in the West another
did you do it?" "O! I was getting cool vibrations Pproblem is they like to live in a hermatically
from you mother, so I did it." "Is it, you like it?"
"Of course" "More than chocolate" "Of course.
"You eat them or what" "No need to it, you They don't want to drought. Drought is not
know, you feel so happy inside and I feel,
Mother, you are putting your hand on my in the fresh air at all. And that is another reason
and trying to console me." I was surprised. I said,
Where is your heart?" "Here! Here is my heart.
I feel it here". You just imagine what love and suffocating life. Once I was in India. It was very
what understanding of Sahaja Yoga for these little hot, somebody was driving me but the person
children below even 5 years. Now you are all who was there was from Western country. He
grown up children of mine. And I wanted to
know all the beauties that are within you, that "why?" There is drought. I said "in this country,
you have to enjoy. First of all learn to laugh at in India, people live in the open, what is
yourself, that is the best way to enjoy yourself, drought?" "What drought you are talking now?"
you know. And not to spend much time in the You couldn't open the door, you can't open the
mirror, that is another way. If you spend too window, you could not open anything. If you
much time in the mirror there is something open anything they will all be dead. So open. As
wrong with you? I think personally that it is a
kind of passion. You should see inside: Are we
Dharma much more than what Krishna wanted to
establish. He wanted to establish the Dharma of
that we have forgotten to enjoy. So the attention
Ahlad, giving you so much of patience with
others. To me the whole thing looks like
sometimes a joke, because nothing so serious. It
is not a Rama's type that you have to be serious.
I don't have to kill anybody. I don't use any
you,
if
must
you
You should be sensitive to see how you have
you cannot know that then you live on a very
He has no sense, he has no sensitivity, he cannot
Rakshasa. I think, I don't know what to say. So
Proceed in enjoyment, which is an ocean just an
ocean. For example now I came, everybody was
sealed rooms, hermatically sealed cars. They are
very afraid of draught. I don't know whether they
will be thrown away, what will happen to them.
coming from some iceberg. So they don't believe
heart
that people are very suffocating sometimes you
know. They just suffocate. They are used to
said "Don't open, don't open the window" I said
it is about the nature also it is in their private
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Volume : IX
Issue : 9 & 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
Say in India, We see now what is happening in
India. All corrupt, horrible this, that, so I said
lives. They don't want to open. If somebody
comes to their house "Oh my God. Now we will
have to share the wines, will have to now share "alright if you don't like India why don't you go
the food." They can not share. That is most
uncollective. But in India I must say people have stay here. But this is a very corrupt government
a good sharing capacity. Because they are still here, very bad." Anywhere you go you will find
primitive. They are still primordial. They have not immediately they will see. Because you don't
gone out of the way to satisfy their ego. But I
think somehow or other in India, people like to
share. If you want to please an Indian you tell
them, "Tomorrow I will come and I'll have food
with you." His wife will jump. She will say, "now
what do you like?" "Tell me what food you like"
She will jump. But otherwise what happens? As
soon as you say "he is coming for food" the wife
will say "No! I am going to my mother."
Immediately she will have a program. I just don't
understand. They will have beautiful houses, get that very deep feeling within you if you are
very clean, very beautiful everything. But if Sahaja Dharmi. So this is a new Dharma we have
somebody comes to their house they get a shock
as if electricity has entered. So for whom is all
this? To show off they will borrow money from Krishna's vision is coming true. He describes in
the banks even Indians in America they do. They the beginning, I think he was not a good
want to have, three Mercedes, four houses, for salesman, because he describes the best first, you
what? Borrowing money, borrowing money they see the salesman first will start from 2 rupees and
do it. Sahaja Yogis have not to borrow any
money. There is no need. You can do away with
these things, why to have so many cars?
Nowadays people don't even walk at all. We used
to go to our school. My father had a car, in India.
Nothing doing. We had to walk. We used to
climb one mountain. It was about 5 miles, this
school, every morning; and in the evening, the questioner I think. So he starts asking questions
car used to come. And I would walk with my
bare feet. Because of so much vibrations and
somewhere else." "No, No, No, No that we will
know they are now chosen to change their
country. I have taken up many questions now of
India. I am going to start working on that level.
We have already started in a way for the destitute
women, then for other type, of poverty and all
that. Just by saying remove poverty, poverty
cannot be removed. You have to have feeling for
the poor. Then only. But you get that feeling
because you are an Indian. You are an Indian? So
what? your own brothers, sisters, starving. You
established now and this world a new race with
a new Dharma which is much above. Even Shri
go on to 2,000. But He first told us that you have
to become 'Sthita Pragya' means Sahaja Yoga and
when Shri Krishan was asked a question by
Arjuna "What is the 'Sthita Pragya'?" Then he
described the Sahaja Yogi. That is described
beforehand. Second chapter is that.
Then the question starts - Arjuna was a great
"What about this, what about that? What about
that?" He goes on explaining to him that you see
this is all just a Maya. This is all an illusion now.
Get out of this illusion once you get out of this
illusion because Arjuna said "they are my
him. He said, "How will I know who is your relations, they are my teachers, How can I kill
them?" So Krishna said "nobody is killed" He
her hand is the one you have to bring" so it is said, "Nobody is killed" But they are being killed
to enjoy your nobility, to enjoy your generosity. because they are not following the Satya Dharma.
It is very important. And not to side with any So it is alright. Who is your brother, who is your
one. You are not identified with them. It is much sister? They are not following the Satya Dharma.
So you have nothing to do with them. If you can
correct them and guide them it is alright.
Otherwise forget it." First deal with people who
are straight. Like we should say that we must
deal with people who are simple innocent and
then you can take to difficult people when you
are that good. Otherwise you will come here and
Russians. They immediately start seeing what is say "Mother I have got this I have got that" So
wrong with us and where do we lack in this. in Sahaja Dharma, you being the spirit, you also
Because the collectivity of being in one country, know about others, very well. And you can make
chappals I thought were cutting my vibrations. So
I used to have chappals in my hands and walk.
One day we had a new driver. My father sent
daughter?" He said "any girl with chappals in
better, now I think, because since you have taken
to Sahaja Dharma. I have seen English will tell
you what is wrong with English, Swiss will tell
you what is wrong with Swiss. Indians will tell
you what is wrong with Indians. Actually I learnt
from them. I don't know these things are there.
Russians will tell you what is wrong with
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX Issue: 9 & 10 1997
You see love is something so great. It not only
it out who is who, what chakras they are
catching. But the trouble in America I found that helps others, it also helps you. It is so joyous to
Sahaja Yogis used to just go and tell somebody give realization to others. But if you start telling
you are catching on this chakra." They have
come for the first time and you tell him "you, realizations? If you don't know how to give
you are very egoistical" He said "How do you realization, better not do it. So to criticize is not
know?" Your agnya is catching. May be his own
agnya might be catching. Is this the way to pull legs of each other sometimes, just for fun's
receive a new person? Is this the way to talk to sake. But not to harm, not to torture, not to make
rnew person? See on the contrary you should that person fall. You are all Sahaja Dharmis, you
Say "come, sit down. Very nice. You are very have accepted Sahaja Dharma and in Sahaja
great" See because they are still ignorant so they Dharma we have to have, pure love of the heart
like some sort of a buttering. Then gradually, not hypocrisy and sensible life. Now this pope is
because you are doing this just to make him a
Sahaja Yogi. Because you love him. Basically that suffering let her have abortion. The one who is
is the reason. But as soon as somebody comes in living is more important than the one who is not
if you tell him "this is wrong with you. That is living. If somebody wants to have abortion that
wrong with you." This is not a pope's business
where you go on telling people what is wrong
with them. Go and confess to all the silly people.
It is not that. What we have to show that vou beings. Like they say the muslim women are like
have fallen in love with that person. You are nice
to that person because you like that person. But
as soon as he comes you give him one shock. So
finished. How can you have good relations?
Americans have to to learn this. I don't know
"Your this Chakra is catching." why did you give
the way we can enjoy life. Ahl of course you can
f a woman is
against abortion. I am not. If
child can be born again. According to us nobody
dies permanently. Whatever it may be. So this is
one way they use it for propagation of human
a factory. They go on producing more children,
more children. So there are more voters. So the
pope knows that; that is why he said "abortion
no" Christians should not abort because then
there will be less christians to compete with the
why Americans think they are very superior muslims. But in Sahaja Yoga we don't have such
people and I tell you for wisdom I would not say funny, radical, non-sensical things. We have
they are not. They completely lack wisdom. And
they misunderstand people very fast. Start important. To understand that these are all taboos
judging others is not the way you can have which are there but not for people who have to
Sahaja Dharma. Sahaja Dharma is you are in your
own; you are in your own; you are in your own
realm, in your happiness and joy. Where is the
time to criticize others? So the best thing is to
show
divorce and we have also abortion which is
get out of the troubles, we have to act and that
is how it works. But to be very frank we don't
have to do abortions. It is achieved by Parama
Chaitanya. Parama Chaitanya does for me, I don't
have to, I don't have to do anything. It is Parama
your maximum love to everyone. In that
love you should not show your pity but love Chaitanya, it is nice. Because it knows what is to
which is again Ahladdayini. This is the message
of Shri Krishna but I don't know how many
understood it. Now what you find those who are
following Shri Krishna, like the Hare Rama things will work out very well. So to understand
people they are actually beggars on the street. He
is Kubera and his disciples are beggers on the
street. Can you imagine? Does it add to his glory you are giving to others. For that you have music
as Kubera?
be done. How to achieve. And sometimes you are
in trouble, they know that you are not leaving
things into the hands of the Parama Chaitanya. If
you leave into the hands of Parama Chaitanya
Sahaja Yoga first and foremost thing is how much
you are enjoying yourself. How much enjoyment
you have this, that. I was saying that today I
So Sahaja Yogis are not like that. Should be won't speak much but somehow with Shri
Krishna you cannot keep quiet. He played murli,
Bansuri, flute. Look at him. I talk to you but he
yourself. But think of the collectivity of yogis. just played murli. He didn't talk so much except
Collectivity is not to bring forced people to come for a Geeta you won't find him talking. And
to Sahaja Yoga. Once they come to Sahaja Yoga those who read also Geeta are horrible people I
they will know the joy of life and you don't have tell you. Those who read Geeta they don't
to tell them anything. Nothing has to be told. Just understand what is Shri Krishna's Dharma. If
(contd. on page 16)
generous. Should not bother too much about
yourself. Should not all the time think about
sit silently to work and they will feel your love.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 9 & 10 1997
Volume: IX Isue:
Divine Cool Breeze
10
Talk by H.H. Shree Mataji Nirmala Devi
To Unity International Foundation
Hotel Claridges - Delhi 6.4.1997 (Synopsis)
s far as efforts are concerned, people have
Our country has been divided into 3 more
done lots of research, lots of conferences countries, like Burma was a part of our country,
Sri Lanka, Pakistan, also Bangladesh. Now if you
and also they have tried to convince
people that without unity we cannot exist. The go to these countries you will be surprised that
reason is that, this world is one, we are all part they are in a mess. The people who fought, who
and parcel of this world. But we are not wanted their freedom and separation, most of
connected as we are in this body that even if you them wwere murdered
get a pin prick the whole body knows about it. Rehman, Bhandaranaike, Bhutto. These are the
Because, we are not awakened, our awareness is people who wanted to have the position, so they
not such that you can feel this collective started saying we must have a separate state,
awareness within yourselves. This collective separate identity. For whom it worked? But still
awareness has been talked long time back, but they don't see the point, by getting separated
not clearly. In the collective awareness what from the main line, how much they have
happens is that the Kundalini, which is your own suffered!
power, rises and as a result of that you become
part and parcel of the whole and become aware
of others and this we call as collective Ukraine people why have you separated from
consciousness. To understand properly we must Russia? So to have this idea that we should
have the experience of becoming one with the all-
pervading power of Divine love. We have heard have not seen any country achieving any better.
about it in the Bible, in the Quran. In all our
Indian scriptures, it is described that there is a
very subtle power which does all the work for us.
Now few people believe that it exists and when
1 tell them they think it is something beyond our
intellect, but you have to go beyond your mind.
This mind of ours which we consider to be fast, I am myself amazed how things are
very precious is just made by us through our ego
and our conditioning. Mind is a myth because it
is created by us and we play into the hands of
our mind like we use our computers! Computer There were 2000 people sitting outside and 2000
has been made by us but it is ruling us. In the
same way, this mind controls us and we also take people sitting inside the hall.I could not
guidance from this mind which is a myth. If I
say that, you should not be shocked, because you
are very much identified with this mind, but I
must tell you if this mind goes off the track, it doesn't matter I will come back. Then I talked to
can make anyone mad. It can get identified with
any person or stupid thing as something very
useful. So it can lead human beings to wars, all
kinds of things that will remove unity from our
hearts. For example I was talking to someone
who wanted to have a separate state. I said. sit on the stairs. You will be amazed, about 6000
"Why do you want to have a separate state?" He people came. Those who were inside, those who
said, "then we can have two Prime Ministers." I Were outside, many others, I said how have you
said, "why", because he wanted to become the
prime Minister.
Sheikh Mujeeb-ur-
1 have seen in Russia, now Bela Rousse is
trying to come back in Russia and I asked the
separate from one country to another country, I
When you get your self-realization, then what
happens that you develop within yourself a new
dimension by which you feel the collective
consciousness. You can feel on your finger tips,
what is wrong with you and what is wrong with
others. So, once that happens the unity comes so
happening in Sahaja Yoga.
I went to Russia,, I was shy of talking, but
understand, how could these Russians take to me
so easily. But they said what about us, we can't
come inside this hall because it is full. I said it
them and all of them got realization. I came out
they were still sitting there. They said what about
us, I said alright, come tomorrow I will be there
in the morning. In Russia we have lots of big
beautiful gardens so I said you better come, I will
taken to me? What have I done for you? What
makes you think that I can give you something
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Volume: IX ISUD: 9 & 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
11
special? They said its so obvious. I was surprised you know yourself, you cannot know God. You
at their sincerity and 1 found Russians, also other should know yourself, there should be self-
Eastern block people are extremely sensitive. One knowledge and this knowledge takes you beyond
of the reasons for their sensitivity is perhaps your mind and beyond science.
because they feel that they were oppressed or
whatever it is, but the thing is, they have lost first of all it is amoral. There is no morality and
their sense of conditioning. They are not
possessive. They were told by the government
that you can take your flats and live there vou don't feel anything because it is immoral.
happily. They said no, no we don't want flats.
They have no sense of possession at all. Their's
is a clean slate. Another thing, they do not have
any conditioning because they were not told artificially practice something like a moral
about any religion, they were not told about God, such people can become extremely dry and also
about all these things which are creating hot tempered. It should come from within that
problems in our country. I was so surprised that
these people took to Sahaja Yoga so easily, in the spirit. You are not this mind, you are not this
next program that I had, there were 10,000
people. It was amazing. I don't know Russian
language. They were so sweet and so nice and should become. Becoming is the point. If you
there we had a program of 250 scientists. I must become that then you will be amazed how great
say Russia has developed science in such a subtle
manner, they have very great scientists and they conscious but also you become a fountain of
all were there and I started telling them about
science. If 1 start on something else, I thought it happens, you cannot bring unity e.g. now I have
won't be so good, so let uS start on science. One
of them got up and said, Mother we have had
enough of science, can you please tell of the
science of the Divine. One thing I have noticed
about them is that they are really very all with several hippies, gradually it grew into
introspective. I asked them, are they worried such a sweet thing that we could get into Russia,
about the coup that is happening in Moscow? into Eastern block, all the European countries, we
They replied why should we worry, we are in the
Kingdom of God.
Intellectual people have their brains very much gains that from South America, he says what
with their thoughts and their ideas. Somebody about South America? When are you coming to
meets one type of a person, he becomes very South America? We need you very much there.
right-sided. Another meets another type he When I went there I found there were so many
becomes identified. You go and listen to seekers, they were not interested in power,
somebody's lecture, that lecture goes into your
head, so all the time your brain is covered, all the
time by these outside items which are not yours.
Unless and until they are your experiences, they Russia, there 25 Germans came to Moscow. I said
are not clear. To get that experience is very easy. how are you here, they were Sahaja Yogis. They
Of course our country is a country of great Yoga, said. Mother, don't you think that we Germans
I must say. Even in China when I went there they have killed so many Russians, don't you think
came and asked me, Mother is this the treasure
of our rich Chinese? Treasure of spirituality is
India. They have read about it, they know about
it, they are just waiting to get something out of
us but here I find not that much. Here we have gentle that you won't believe that they have
no time to pay attention to ourselves, to know anything of Hitler in them.
yourself which is told by every one. Christ has
said, Mohammed Sahib has said, unless and until Germans, they went to Israel. I said why did you
Science as you know has its own limitations,
so with science you cannot go any further, you
can kill people, you can destroy countries and
Now morality doesn't mean outside restriction
but it means compassion, love, pure love, you
understand what is to be done. But if you
you should know that you are nothing but a pure
ego, this emnotion but beyond that you are the
pure spirit. Even knowing is not enough, you
you are. Not only that you become collectively
love and compassion. Unless and until that
been working in Sahaja Yoga which I would not
call government level, or in any way official level.
I never tried to disturb my husband's office or
anything, but I just started on my owrn. First of
went to America and to South America. Because,
just people felt that. See because if one person
money, nothing-just seeking.
Now, I must tell you a sweet story, twice they
have shown their sweetness. First when I went to
that its our duty that we should come and give
them what we have got? Such love and such
compassion! These Germans are so soft and so
Then they went, Austrians, they are also
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 12
Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
go to Israel, there was no arrangement or example, the first chakra which we call
anything, just they went and stayed there. They Mooladhara, this chakra is made of carbon atoms.
said Mother, the thing is that we felt very Now if you take a look at carbon atoms what you
responsible for these Israelis, Jews, because so
many have been killed in our country and we from left to right it looks just like Omkara, the
cannot forgive ourselves and so we have to do same thing looks like Omkara but if you see from
something about it. Imagine Germans knowing down upwards, you will see alpha and omega.
Israelis and talking to them and caught hold of Christ has said, I am the alpha, I am the omega
some young people say about 30 or so. But I was
amazed that I asked the Israelis, I said how are be proved. Another thing is that, once you get
you here? They said why not, we want to make your self-realization you start feeling cool breeze
friends with Muslims, so we have to be here. I coming out of your hands and you can feel the
said very good idea. Automatically, they are all pervading power all around you. Now with
working out this unity. I don't tell them, they just this thing you can say that what centres you are
do it on their own understanding. What is needed catching because there are seven centres on the
is an inner understanding, inner unity not right hand, seven centres on the left hand. You
outside. This is what is that we human beings are can easily feel on your finger tips the different
capable of doing tremendous thing if we fall into
the ocean of compassion and we do it in such a
sweet manner that you can't believe that they are
human beings, that they have gone absolutely with them. If you take about 10 children, tie up
beyond the limitations of human life.
The other day I read a news about a somebody before them ask the boys, what is he
gentleman who was saying that I am going to catching, they all raise one finger, all of them the
start a Jihad. For what? To get rid of all the same, because it is absolute knowledge. Suppose
immorality they have in the West and all sorts of they raise the index finger, something wrong with
things, the drinking and all other things. So one
Sahaja Yogi telephoned to me that Mother what not spoken, how do you know? I said it is
is the need to do Jihad for all that, just do Sahaja communicated by this knowledge, through this
Yoga, you will get rid of all these things. We all
were drunkards, we all were doing all sorts of
nonsensical things, we were doing immoral of false gurus, some of them, really have come
things, you don't have to do Jihad for that, you out making big money and especially they take
just get it yourself. So much clean and so much
above all that all things, in Sanskrit we call it has big position and they approach them. These
'Upadhi', they just fall of, it happens. I assure people actually you can find them out on your
you it can happen to you also, its nothing special, fingertips. Because if anybody is like that, you
because this Kundalini when it rises, it does work just start feeling. It is written in the Quran that
out. She is your own Mother, she knows your fingers will speak, that your hands will
everything about you and the way she gives you speak at the time of 'Qayama' at the time of
your second birth is very good, you all are
capable of getting it, especially Indians. We have yourself and others. Supposing you know how to
so many 'sufis', like lotuses they have come out
and the rest is still the same. Now, we have to
understand that we Indians are born in this great
country of Yoga because of our previous life. The
problem is that we are not taking advantage of spiritual being. So you can; and that's the
the Yoga Bhumi, which is in your power and can personality where we have a complete human
give you all the blessings of the Divine. We have being, not only within himself but there will be
tried and we have noted down.
will see, you will be amazed that when you see
and he is the incarnation of Shri Ganesha. It can
centres. Even a small boy or anybody can feel
that. Anybody can tell you what's wrong with
or you can even tell them what's wrong
you
their eyes, they are realized souls and you put
the throat, he will say how do you know, I have
power that this is wrong with this man.
We are in this country, also suffering from lots
to the rich. They go in any city and find out, who
resurrection, they will speak and tell you about
control and also how to correct your centres, you
can correct the centres of others. Because all these
seven centres are responsible for your physical,
mental and emotional being and above all your
no conflict, he will be absolutely peaceful and
outside also he will be very genuine and very
many things I can tell you that you have the loving and he will win over. We had a Sahaja
souls, so many things that have not been Yogi, I think in London and then he went to Italy.
In Italy he told me, Mother, I am feeling very
The Meta science part is there. There are so
explained so far, through Sahaja Yoga, for
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 & 10
Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX Issue: 98 10 1997
13
frustrated, I am feeling very lonely, there are no many of them now, surprising,
Sahaja Yogis. I said alright, then we had a
program and so many became Sahaja Yogis and
then we are amazed that how in Rome, how there used to be like Sufis, they suffered so much
many thousands are there who are Sahaja Yogis. and then running to one unit in turkey, one in
Like this Sahaja Yoga started spreading, not by Tunisia and one everywhere. I went to Tunisia, I
me so much but by people who went from here
to see. Like one seed that is transferred from here all these petty problems have finished, of course
to there, like that many seeds are transferred, it cures you. That's nothing great, it cures you
they sprout and Sahaja Yoga tree prospers. and gives you complete mental peace, completely,
Among these Sahaja Yogis there is so much love, you are at peace with yourself and with others
its very surprising, extremely surprising.
Now in Africa also there are 400 very strong you just watch, you don't react just watch and
Sahaja Yogis, I have never been to Africa so far.
It is amazing that there are 400 Sahaja Yogis in just change completely the panorama of your
one city of Africa. Now what they are doing
just collecting more, more and more of Sahaja amazed. What has happened to this gentleman,
Yogis and that's how they are working.
This is what it is that, if you are wanting to
have peace of mind, this is what you call a
Mother's temptation, Pralobhan' as they call it. personality, the human personality as described in
The Mother says alright take your medicine, then
I will give you a chocolate. In the same way you
can say, if you really want to have peace of mind, twice. Now once you become one with the
if you really want to have unity, it will work out.
It is a very great 'Vidya' as I told you in the very the word, it is not like you put a sign board -
beginning and if you have this Vidya', Sahaja I am born again'. But if you are born again you
Yoga will work very fast because that's the only have a power and the greatest power is that you
way in which you can get natural, spontaneous, love and you enjoy your love. This power works.
inborn love between people. We have programs
every year, every month. We have a program in tell her story. She met me because she was
a very far fetched place called Ganpatipule. There working with the U.N. in New York and she got
people come from all over the world, some are
rich, some are poor. We don't have much Yoga. Then she retired and went to Mexico and
arrangements there, you see, for these people her son was stuIdying, very. very young. She
because we don't have much money. Whatever it wrote to me "Mother there is some disease which
is but they come there, they are put wherever only very few people in my family get when they
there is a place, they enjoy themselves. I said
don't you think it is uncomfortable, they said and then they get this disease but they are very
Mother we are just seeking the comfort of the old, they just die when they get this. But
spirit because spirits are so comfortable. They unfortunately my son has got it, he is a young
don't bother me, it's not good or that is not good, boy and I don't know what to do." So I started
nothing. Just they enjoy that, you should see the wondering what I should do, I was just putting
way all the nationalities enjoy themselves. Such
a peaceful understanding, such a beautiful flow this, second came, in the third one she was
of
I never knew
there could be so many Sahaja Yogis, I could
never understand because only I or 2 here and
was amazed how people got their realization and
because you develop a witness state by which
this helps you to understand yourself better. You
being and people who come close to you are
such a fighting fellow? How has he become so
tolerant, how has he become so quiet and how
has he become so much interested in others? The
our Shastras is like an egg- A bird is horn twice
and also a person who knows the Brahma is born
Divine, you are born again in the true sense of
Now we have a lady here from Mexico, I will
her realization, she went very deep in Sahaja
are sick, at a very old age. They get a sickness
my attention on it. So first letter came it was like
enjoyment. Of course, they pull each others saying should I come, bring the child to you and
legs sometimes, that's alright, but all the time all that and the fourth letter came saying that,
they are full of joy and happiness. All these petty "Mother I am amazed, my son is completely
things like rivalry, competition, all this drops off. cured." Its not a miracle, it looks like that but so
They have no liking for all this because they have many patients have been cured. So many have
already become saints and this is said by so many changed their lives through Sahaja Yoga. So
that these are men of God and they become the curing is just a Pralobhan' as you call or a
inheritors of the Divine love. They are not only temptation for you to understand more than it.
capable but it is their birth right. We have so
This is not the end of it. I met so many wrestlers
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
14
use your freedom. I have seen some people who
have got their realization, they go very deep into
it but some take, they say just alright, its like the
and everything should think that its better that I parable of the Christ that some seeds got
should get peace. So to get peace to get collective sprouted and fell on the marsh, but the depth,
consciousness and to become one with the Divine people just jump into it. I am myself surprised
Power, it is the greatest opportunity to all of you how people all over the world have worked it
out and how such love and unity of a real nation
of absolute understanding and joy giving unity
who said, Mother, give me peace because I am on
the verge of collapsing. So I can't understand
someone who has the best health, best muscles
and to all the world, enjoy the inner unity that
exists.
exists!
Now this is the point, that's very important, I
cannot force you. It is your freedom. You have to
Announcement
meditation keep popping us, so we've been
continuing our weekly morning meetings.
If you are interested in running Sahaja
meetings in this way, contact the US consulate or
Embassy in your city to find out about the
International Women's Club. If you become a
member, you'll have a better chance of being able
to have more than one meeting (in Barcelona, it's
Giving Sahaja Yoga Programs
At International Women's Associations
Worldwide
Dear Sahaja Yoginis:
We'd like to let you know about the possibilities
of giving programs and Sahaja Yoga courses
through the American and International Association
of Federated Women's Clubs, which has branches only $US 45 per year). Many ladies are interested
worldwide in many major cities (those with
foreign embassies and consulates). In Spain, we've
given programs in Madrid and in Barcelona,
where we have been running ongoing weekly Conference last year in Beijing, China. You
meetings for a year. At the Adi Shakti Puja in
May, Shri Mataji stressed the importance of ladies
being more involved in spreading Sahaja Yoga
directly, and this could be one possibility.
These women's associations are dedicated to Spain. Hope you'll find open doors in these
welcoming women who are newcomers to a city. international organizations in your cities as well.
fund raising for charity, as well as all kinds of We have found the women to be very open and
educational and social activities in general.
Members are women from all over the world of
in hearing about Shree Mataji, especially when
referring to Her panel presentation on women
and world peace at the International Women's
probably need to speak fluent English to run a
program and ongoing course.
We have really enjoyed spreading our Mother's
vibrations in the international communities in
friendly. We have heard that some of the major
women's clubs are in Tokyo, Mexico City, Milan,
all ages and backgrounds: wives of diplomats Paris, etc. Please contact Christina Rosi or Celia
(consuls and ambassadors), housewives with
young or grown children, working mothers,
business women, retired ladies, etc. In Barcelona,
we've given realization to ladies from the USA,
Mexico, Cuba, Canada, Brazil, Germany, England,
Portugal, Holland, Denmark and Spain.
Throughout the year, ladies interested in
Silvestre in Barcelona if you have any questions.
Phone and fax number : (34) 3.634.0568
Address: C/Pere Boronat 34, 1-2
08690 Sta. Coloma de Cervello
Barcelona, Spain
Good luck!
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Volume: IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
15
Russian Folk Medicine Conference
September 1997
Note: This talk was written by Shree Mataji for Mother Earth. The only thing is, they did not
presentation at the Russian Folk Medicine Conference know how to awaken this Power which sleeps in
the base of the spine known as sacrum. That
means that the Greeks knew about the sacredness
in Russia in September, 1997.
onoured and respected guests, allow me
to talk about Sahaja Yoga and the way it of this bone, but all of them knew about the
acts. Sahaja Yoga treats the roots of the primordial taboos relating to the body (in Sanskrit
problem and not just the leaves of the tree. It known as Serara), and the Spirit or the Atma
does so by raising the Primordial Force in every Tattwa. All this has been described by great seers
human being which then treats the inner energy and saints like Markandeya, Adi Shankaracharya,
centres, or chakras, automatically. It has its own
intelligence and compassion and knows what is
wrong with you better than you know yourself.
Nanaka and Jnanadeva.
Luckily, Christ also said that, "I'll send you the
Holy Ghost," and Mohammed Saheb said that the
It helps to restore primordial principles in 12th Imam shall come. Indian scriptures also have
every human being, innate principles of predicted in the Nadi Granth, written by the
primordial taboos which altogether give a person originator of astrology, Bhrigurishi, that in the
year 1970 (which has been recalculated), the
force of this energy is, in fact, made of these discovery of the Sahaja System will manifest.
Shree Mataji Nirmala Devi, who is born of the
royal dynasty of the Shalivahans, propounded all
Let's move on to the concept of folk as in folk the knowledge about Kundalini and en-masse
medicine. Anything folk is that which came awakening of the kundalini, and also the en-
through the experiences of common people masse actualization of Self Realization. By this
through the generations and was recorded by the method of spontaneous awakening, thousands
people. These experiences were recorded all over and thousands of people have been connected to
the All-Pervading Primordial Force of Life
true innate morality, health and peace inside. The
primordial and real principles which are constant
and do not change.
the world.
In the beginning, even in allopathy, people (Paramachaitanya). She not only worked out the
believed in three "doshas" in Sanskrit, just like in awakening and the union with this Primordial
Ayurvedic medicine. But Ayurvedic went beyond Force, but she gave the complete knowledge
that and they found that there is a residual force
which is primordial in nature and when it is
awakened it passes through seven energy centres
in the spinal cord and the brain and it connects
to the All-Pervading Primordial Force.
about our subtle system. In Russia itself, so many
thousand have been cured and people's lives have
been changed. They have become really
transformed and have become very loving,
compassionate and peaceful people. They are free
Those who went into the research of this in from greed and lust which is unsocial behaviour.
India were called as Nath Panthis. Nath means
"master" and Panth means "way," i.e., way or
road of mastery. Machhindernath and Goraknath
were two of these saints thousands of years ago.
These two and others travelled extensively. They get established and even in the aboriginals who
had visited the land which is now Ukraine
because in the museum you can find ancient knowledge of Reality, these primordial principles
pottery with paintings of these chakras.
In Australia, they also have the Mother culture exposes all kinds of falsehood that people are
amongst the aboriginals as well as amongst the
aboriginals of America and Canada. The Mayan
culture of Maxico believed in the Mother and
realization to others as their awareness has a new
dimension of collective consciousnes.
So, all the primordial taboos for human beings
were mutilated by modern life and had lost their
get reestablished. This knowledge is so clear and
practising such as sorcery and black mnagic.
Also, it throws light on the modern science of
medicine. But western minds are so closed that
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997
16
we don't want to see something that is so unique
and absolutely based on Reality. This power is awakening or for your spiritual ascent.
based in you. It's an actualization of an
experience that you feel. A cool breeze flows out
of your fingertips and out of the top of your head
and this is described in most of the scriptures.
You are not left in the dark, but you can feel the
centres in you, which are in jeopardy, on your
fingertips and in your body. Also you can feel
others' centres. If you know how to cure your
centres you can cure others' also, for which you
do not have to pay. It is a living process of
evolution so you do not have to pay for
This unique method is not against science.
What
civilization
western
western
or
consumerism has done is given us blind progress
but with Sahaja Yoga you can achieve progress of
the real kind because there is light. This way
Russia will become a land of real morality and
inner spirituality capable of leading the world
into the twenty-first century.
Congratulations to all Russians.
(contd. from page 9)
they don't understand Shri Krishna how they will
understand Sahaja Yoga. So for all of you is to
practice on love, on forgiveness, on appreciating
others, on giving joy to others. Some of the
Sahaja Yogis have been very kind to me.
Once I went to the shop to buy a saree for
myself. The saree was very expensive for my
purse. So I didn't buy. So let it "this colour suits
me alright but does not matter." I didn't have so
much money to buy. So that Sahaja Yogi bought
that saree and on my birthday gave me and really
I could not see it because my eyes were filled
with tears. Just a small thing like that. Normally
I do not expect you to do anything for me. No.
But small, small things make me so happy. But
even if you, do this to somebody he may not
understand, may not realize, may not feel it. But
if you are a Sahaja Yogi you will.
So thank you very much for all this that I have
said to you, try to enjoy yourself and make others
enjoy you.
May God bless you. =
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Volume: IX Isua 9&10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
17
The 1997 Latin American Seminar
contributed to our enjoyment of the food. We ate
some fruits and vegetables I had never seen
near Rio de Janeiro, Brazil hosted by the before. The day ended with the Brazil Yuva
Shakti singing bhajans. The next day, the seminar
he first ever Latin Ammerican seminar was
held on March 27 to 30 at "Sitio" Santa Anna
yogis from Rio. Over 200 yogis attended from
Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Peru, Uruguay, Italy began.
and Canada.
Programs and Collectives
Purpose of the Seminar
We started with a discussion about programs and
The purpose of the seminar was for the yogis to collectives. The purpose of the discussion was to
get to know each other and to become one
collective throughout Latin America. Another goal Suggestions.
was to initiate the expansion of Sahaja Yoga in
other countries. The seminar was conducted in a
mix of Spanish and Portuguese (Portuguese +
Español =
any problem communicating!
The trip to the seminar site north of Rio took of the basic concepts of Sahaja Yoga. Each
about one hour from the airport. On the way we
had a quick look at the famous sights around Rio. Program topics include:
We saw Sugarloaf and the famous mountain
Corcovado with the statue of Jesus on top, both
swayambhus: Sugarloaf to Shri Shiva and
Corcovado to Shri Ganesha.
share ideas, experiences, problems, and
We learned that in Colombia weekly public
programs are often held simultaneously in three
areas of Bogota. After the introductory program
there is a follow-up course of 14 weeks: The goal
is to give a practical and general understanding
Portuñol?) but ne one seemed to have
program is prepared by a small group of yogis.
• The Subtle System
• The Kundalini
• What is Meditation and How to Meditate
We left the main highway and drove a few
kilometres up a dirt road to our beautiful camp
site by a small river in a quiet lush valley.
Accommodations consisted of large rooms with
bunk beds. Everyone registered and received a
name tag showing their country and city. In total
there were 213 yogis, including 25 children.
Towns represented from Brazil were Belo
Horizonte, Brasilia, Porta Alegre, Belem, Rio de
Janeiro, Salvador, Sao Paulo, Sao Luis and
Vittoria.
•The Qualities of the Chakras
*The Elements.
• The Principle of the Guru
• The Attention
* Jesus Christ
• Deities and Mantras
The Opening of Sahasrara
• The Spirit
Collectivity
• The Paramachaitanya
Collective Shoebeat
Just before dusk everyone gathered for a
collective shoebeat. We all set in a large circle on
the grass and collectively shoebeat the problems of the 14 weeks is to give a practical, general
affecting Latin America. It was a profound understanding of the basic concepts of Sahaja
experience and a spectacular sight.
We sang bhajans while waiting for supper. long, about 20 minutes maximum
Everyone joined spontaneously sharing the
collective joy. The food was simple but delicious. of audio or videotapes of Shree Mataji's talks are
Surely the collective vibrations and clean fresh air
The courses are not a progression through the
chakras and their qualities. Instead, the basic idea
Yoga. The talks are more general and not too
Overhead transparencies and selected excerpts
used to assist the presentations. An overhead
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Volume : IX Isue: 9 & 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
18
transparency(acetato) of Shree Mataji's photograph Many smaller centres are emerging around the
is projected on a large screen. This is very larger ones in Rio, Brasilia, Salvador and Belo
impressive and powerful!
The presentations attempt to generate and
maintain curiosity about Sahaja Yoga in new Programmes in Argentina
people by presenting information as well as
opportunities to experience the vibrations in Argentina has a small but devoted collective. The
meditation and by being "worked on" by the
yogis. Without the practical nature of the those in North America. People do come when
programs, Sahaja Yoga would just sound like any
metaphysical" group.
Horizonte.
obstacles to growth in Buenos Aires are similar to
Shree Mataji comes but they don't stay. The
collective state "collective energy" -is
important for keeping new people. Dynamic
energy, love and collectivity is what generates the
collective energy. Various points were mentioned:
After the 14-week course there are seven more
sessions which provide more details about the
chakras.
It is important to remember the auspiciousness
of putting up posters of Shree Mataji. Each
poster is an act of worship. In India sometimes
they even put kumkum on the poster when
hanging it-like a Puja.
The yogis have a responsibility for the new
people. New people are lost due to stupid
things such as the yogis' lack of maturity and
desire. The details at the programs are
important. The yogis must know what to say
and how to behave in front of new people.
In Colombia they are now doing a ten-week
series on the 10 Gurus in which they emphasize
the basic message of each Guru.
Many people are getting realization. Recently
there were 230 people at programs in Barranquila,
Colombia and 100 at the follow-ups. This many
people came from -only putting 30 posters for the
first program! Now 25 are still staying. And
recently in Bogota 500 people came to a public
program and now 200 are staying on for the
follow-ups.
New people take varying amounts of time to
establish. It is different for everybody-some
may take two weeks, others two years. Some
of the first Brazilian yogis got realization and
went to India right away. They came up very
Other key points for public programs were
discussed :
. It is essential to clarify key terms and
definitions. New people have their own
concepts and ideas about what meditation is,
what a Guru is, etc.
fast.
Yogis need discrimination to know how long
new people need to establish. They need to
know who is ready and when they are ready.
. The people are seeking but there needs to be
more dedication and more attention on the
new people by the yogis. The yogis must make
time and be available to communicate with the
Always the yogis must have open hearts to the
new people. Everyone can watch and see how
to help the new people. The leader can help by
assigning different yogis to help particular
groups of new people.
It is most important to remember that Divine
new people. The yogis need to establish a
relationship with the new people and support
them.
The yogis need to develop their own qualities.
They need to manifest sincere love for
people-the capacity to give peace and joy. discretion is vibrations.
The new people need to feel their sincere love.
The need to get a feeling of security.
Mahatma Gandhi was quoted to emphasize an
important point. A journalist asked Mahatma
Gandhi, "What is your message?" Mahatma
Our devotion to Shree Mataji must show. This
is the most important thing.
Gandhi replied, "My message is my life."
Javier, now living in Bolivia, spoke of things
that happened while he was living in Italy. Many
changes have been initiated in Italy. Within two
Brazil is a very large, dispersed country. Many months of performing a havan in which 1,000
places in the country still don't know about names of the Devi were chanted, there were
Sahaja Yoga. The collectives are located far apart. complete transformations politically and with the
Porgrams in Brazil
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX issue: 9 & 10 1897
19
Mafia. Bandhans, havans and pujas were what
None of these ideas about Vishuddhi are new.
worked things out. However, none of these It is very important to read and listen to Shree
Mataji's talk. All is there. Our awareress must
grow to see the problems and then work it out
by the cleansing techniques of Sahaja Yoga,
"techniques" work without collective desire.
Havan
There was a havan on the second day in which including shoebeating and havans.
we offered the negativity affecting America. The
havan was long but intense. The attention was Chastity
very good without going to the left.
Chastity is very important-even more so in
Brazil with such extremes as the Carnival. The
base of dharma is innocence. There is great
Evening Entertainment Program
There was an evening program with music and strength in the link between brother and sister. It
dancing. The Argentinians performed some
traditional dances. Then the Colombians
is very difficult for young people in this society
to be happy without a "girl friend" or "boy
friend." The Yuva Shakti can show young people
the true joy in Sahaja Yoga.
performed a play with dances from different
regions of Colombia.
After these presentations there were many
beautiful songs. The integration of the musicians
was beautiful. The Yuva Shakti of Brazil introspection
performed some beautiful songs and the Introspection is very important for the left
musicians from Argentina, Brazil and Colombia Vishuddhi. Introspection must look at ego and
performed together.
superego. Introspection to see ourselves is always
the hardest.
The Third Day
The third day began with meditation. As always,
there was music.
Remember that Shri Vishnumaya is the force of
truth, the force to divulge the truth.
After breakfast there was some time to relax, Self-Esteem
go for footsoaking and collectively enjoy the
beautiful surroundings. Some of us went to swim The lack of self-esteem manifests in Latin America
to a very great degree. There is a feeling of
inferiority to other countries. Latin American
countries feel that they need the help of other
governments. But really Latin America is very
in nearby waterfalls.
Qualities of Left Vishuddhi
Recently in Colombia there was a national
Tich in resources. All that is required is there.
seminar. The Seminar focused on the importance
of the left Vishuddhi.
Many points from Shree Mataji's talk in the Culture of Ego
1982 Belgium Vishnumaya Puja were discussed. Another point was raised resulting from the
The Vishuddhi is very important because the previous discussions:
connection from heart (spirit) to Sahasrara goes
through the 1left Vishuddhi.
A true open-hearted person has heart equal to There are no values. The reality is that we are
spirit. For example, when we are not sincere, children of Shree Mataji.
the head says but the heart knows. One gets
left Vishuddhi problems from lack of sincerity,
lack of diplomacy, communication problems, Basic Techniques and Protocol
susceptibility, reaction, justification and It was felt that it would be good to distribute
escapism.
- The guilt from the Catholic church causes deep of the countries are isolated and do not have any
problems of the left Vishuddhi. Life is lived orn experienced yogis. It is possible they could
guilty/not guilty basis. There is always the develop different techniques that do not follow
built-in pressure of fear and guilt.
Old civilizations were connected with Mother
Earth. Now we only have a culture of the ego.
-
guidelines on how to do pujas and havans. Some
the protocol.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997
20
Divine Cool Breeze
The Final Day
Puja
Before the puja we watched a video of the 1985 We watched a video of the August 4, 1985
Birmingham, England Vishnumaya Puja. This talk Ganesha Puja in Brighton, England, "Your Power
was very relevant to the day's previous is Chastity."
discussions about Vishuddhi.
After the video the final discussions of the
seminar were held. Following this everyone
The collective Shri Vishnumaya Puja started in
the evening and lasted to after 3:00 a.m.! The Puja expressed many thanks to the Rio yogis for such
was a very deep experience of integration and
joy. Nobody wanted it to end!
There were many gifts from the Brazilian yogis experienced the event. We touched a depth we
to all the visitors. There was incredible generosity, had never felt before. The vibrations and joy were
work and dedication put into the gifts. The Yuva
Shakti and even the young children made gifts been physically present!
during the children's programs during the
hard work and dedication in hosting the event.
It is impossible to put in words how we all
so strong that it seemed as if Shree Mataji had
The seminar was very important on a subtle as
well as a practical level. It improved the
seminar.
The Argentinian collective presented a fantastic integration of the Americas by our collective
painting. It depicted a view of South America as
seen from space. The continent appeared to be in a real and practical sense through discussions
afloat in an ocean of lotuses. Standing on top of and just meeting new brothers and sisters.
the land of left Vishuddhi was Christ. Above all
this under a bandhan of angels was the image of American Seminar! =
Shree Mataji's face smiling, Her divine love over
South America.
attention on the vibrations. There was a change
We all look forward to the Second Latin
-Ian Butterworth, Calgary, Canada
After the puja and gifts the bhajans continued
until almost daylight.
Publications
Nirmalitas
contact :
The first issue of the Colombian Spanish Sahaja
Yoga Newsletter Nirmalitas was issued. Anyone
requiring copies can contact the Colombian
Collective. Nirmalitas was originally produced
by Spain and then by Argentina.
Vishwa Nirmala Dharma
Sociedade Sahaja Yoga do Brasil
Gustavo Volker Luedman
SQN 209 Bloco "J" Apt. 405
CEP 70854-100
Brasilia DF
Meta Modern Era
The Portuguese translation of Shree Mataji's
book, Meta Modern Era, was unveiled. It is
being sold for 15$ Reals (about $15 US).
Anyone interested in getting the book can
Tel: (061) 349-2103
(061)272-2093
Fax: (061) 273-3539
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 : 9 & 10 1997
Volume: IX Issue
Divine Cool Breeze
21
The 108 Names of Love
Say each name as follows:
in every movement of Your eyelashes
in the cosmic tapestry of Your Leela
"Om Sakshat Shree Mataji, You are the Love
...in the First Sound,
in the fervent prayer of all Your bhaktas
in the blessings from Mahakaruna
of caring motherhood in every living cell
in the eternal spring of compassion's deepest well
which makes the world go around
Shree Adi Shakti Adoration to Thee.".
in the First Sound
from beyond Infinity
for which the whole world dances
in the first dance
pouring through everlasting streams of ambrosia
in the ecstasy of spiritual bliss
in Your Pradakshina around the Father
that twinkles in the stars
in the smile of all the mothers
that sings in the wind
in the mane of the white horse
that glitters in the crystal of snow
that crushes the citadels of evil and hate
that germinates in the flower
in the sap of the tree
in the caress of the sun
that is taught by Shri Viratangana
which will arrest the decline of human civilization
which purifies in the Mooladhara
in the majesty of the mountain
in the foam of the water
in the music of the sea
which creates in the Swadhishthana
which evolves in the Manipura
which grants total protection and security
in the ocean of Your eyes.
which grants Oneness
in the quiet splendour of meditation
for Your bhaktas
which forgives
which resides in the house of Nirmala
in ananya bhakti
that is secret
which crowns the dome of the house of Nirmala
that is sacred
which flickers on the tips of the tongues of fire
which bubbles in elated joy
that nourishes bliss
that rests on innocence
in whose Name the Kundalini rises
that all creatures seek
for which there is no name
that melts the ice age of this Kali Yuga
before which Lord Gabriel bowed
that shines in the light of the Golden Age
between the vahana and his rider
that cools the scorching heat of aggressiveness
belween the seeker and his desire
that warms up our closed hearts
between the wave and the shore
which gives auspiciousness
which gives shape to beauty
which gives radiance to goodness
which gives balance to justice
which gives strength to righteousness
between the vibrating atoms
in the sound of silence
You are the primordial source of love
that cooks the food
that rules the planets
which opened the eyes of Parameshwara
which gazes beyond unknown horizons
which flows from the matted hair of Shiva
which walks over the water
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
which heals
that is enjoyed through adoration
which empowers
that is detached, immaculate and complete
that is the touch of divinity
which transforms
whose body is Chaitanaya
that is the taste of divinity
that is the fragrance of divinity
whose leela is the universe
whose fingers move on the rays of the dawn
that is the essence of divinity
that inspires divine diplomacy
whose dress is a pink silk saree
whose seats are Pratishthan, Cabella
and the hearts of the bhaktas
that is the call of Shri Krishna's flute
that called Lazarus back from the dead
whose hymn was sung by Kabir,
Gibran, Dante and Goethe
whose graciousness was rendered by
Botticelli, Giotto, Raphael and DaVinci
beyond any expression
beyond all imagination
which is the radiance of the Sahaja Sangha
which is the magnet of the Sahaja Sangha
whose melody echoes in the notes of
Mozart and Pannalal Ghosh
that binds the mother and the child
whose worshippers are the Trimurtis
that binds God and His Creation
whose bounty enraptures the Trilokas
which disturbed the placidity of the
Destroyer of the Tripuras
which walked in the steps of Sita,
Rukmini, Radha and Mary
that made us free
that made us Sahaja Yogis
that made us behold the glory of God
that is Nirmala
moulded in the paste that made Shri Ganesha
Schwartzsee Sahaja Seminar, Switzerland
that is approached through devotion
Winter 1995
that is met through surrender
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volurne : IX issue: 9& 10 1997
23
News from Around the World
Medical Conference in Delhi
stroke 16 years previously and had a certificate of
er Holiness Shree Mataji Nirmala Devi permanent disability, but was now living a full
and active life, thanks to Sahaja Yoga. A
Н;
was the main speaker and guest at a
medical conference on Sunday, April 6th neurosurgeon explained that immunity to disease
could only be achieved through balance, and that
in Delhi. The topic of the conference was "The
Art of Healing and Sahaja Yoga." The conference
was sponsored by the Indian Medical Association,
New Delhi branch.
the Hippocratic tradition was a holistic tradition.
Prof. Rai talked about the relationship between
high tech", stress, and psychosomatic diseases.
The program began with Sahaja bhajans, He said that patients practising Sahaja Yoga have
including Vishwa Vandita, sung by Hemlata. Ten measurably lower levels of adrenaline, a lower
heart rate arnd a decrease in blood lactic acid. He
S.C. Nigam and Prof. U.C. Rai. Each talked about described an experiment in which two groups of
mice were subjected to identical conditions-
medicine, including the history of the stress and the introduction of cancer cells. The
relationship, and cures achieved through Sahaja only difference between the two groups was one
Yoga. One speaker said he was paralyzed by a had a lever which could be pressed to stop the
speakers sat at a table on the stage, including Dr.
the relationship between spirituality and
SAHAJA YOGA ENSURES PEACE Yoga, particularly in diseases where modern
medicine has no cure. He said that a number
of psychosomatic diseases have no cure in
modern medicine and a patient has to be put
on medicines all the life.
The Hindustan times, Delhi, 7th April, 1997
"If a person wants to have peace in mind
and unity of mankind, practising Sahaja Yoga is
the only way out," said Dr. Nirmala Devi,
founder of science of Sahaja Yoga and the
personality who had spread across its message
in various countries of the world. She was
speaking at a function organized by Unity
International Foundation in the capital (Delhi) practical experience has shown
on Sunday. Former Governor G.C. Saxena and
Mr. B.Satya Narain Reddygraced the oceasion.
Dr. Nirmala Devi said that the concept of
collective consciousness in the people is very
Important for world peace and this can happen by traditional medicines. On the other hand, 80
only when self-realization oceurs. She also
informed about the medical benefits of Sahaja
Yoga and its popularity in various countries of
the world. "Sahaja Yogis all over the world are
very much aware about each others' problems
and they are capable of doing wonderful
things," she said.
Mr. R.N. Anil, Secretary General of the Unity world. For the treatment of patients, an
International Foundation, New Delhi also
announced the conferring of the Unity Award
for International Understanding to her later this
year. Dr. Umesh Rai, Director, International
Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre, New
Bombay spoke on the medical benefits of Sahaja
"Sahaja Yoga is very useful in the
management of hypertension, epilėpsy,
insomnia, diabetes, migraine, bronchial asthma
along with à host of other related diseases," he
said. Dr. Rai said that extensive research and
that
psychosomatic diseases are managed much
more effectively by the practice of Sahaja Yoga.
Commenting on the epilepsy patients, he said
that 40 per cent of the patients are not cured
per cent of the patients are cured by the
practice of Sahaja Yoga. He dwelt in length on
its benefits in patients having hypertension and
also heart disease.
Sahaja Yoga was discovered by Dr. Nirmala
Devi in 1970 and is gradually becoming
popular in a number of countries all over the
institution has been made operational in
Mumbai where treatment is done by cosmic
vibrations. Her program of self-realization is
now practised in 65 countries all over the
world.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Volume : IX issue: 9 & 10 1997
24
Divine Cool Breeze
stress; that group did not develop cancer. The presented a paper on the effects of Kundalini
stress-relieving mechanism for humans is Sahaja awakening.
Yoga.
Shree Mataji began her presentation with, "I Taiwan Public Program,
bow to all the seekers of truth." She explained
that science was amoral and did not go to the
roots, that it developed through criticism and the In the spring time, the Taiwan collective launched
challenge of knowledge, not through the a small-scale public program as if Shree Mataji
awareness of the absolute. However, she added, were physically present. The program was held
medical science is needed to help us understand
Sahaja Yoga. Shree Mataji called India the Yoga hoping that the worldwide collective vibrations
bhoomi, and said the great, traditional, spiritual from puja would be strong and support us.
knowledge of India was the foundation of
medical science. Her lecture included quotations picture in two major newspapers continuously for
from Gyanadeva, Guru Nanak and Kabir.
May 1997
on May 3rd, right before Sahasrara Day. We were
We put an advertisement with Shree Mataji's
three days right before the program date. Posters
that were very beautifully printed with Shree
chakra and the diseases caused directly or Mataji's picture and the snow-covered Himalayas
indirectly by its imbalance. For example, if heat (next to the Dharamsala school) in the
from the over-stressed liver affects the right side, background were put up all around Taipei city in
order to permeate the seekers with divine
Her talk concentrated on the Swadhishthana
there is a massive heart attack and a sudden
collapse. If the heat affects the left side, the heart vibrations.
becomes lethargic and does not supply enough
blood to the brain; the left side of the brain
becomes paralysed, which is manifested on the
65 seekers attended in a venue with a capacity
for 80. Dr. Hara first gave an introduction to
Shree Mataji and Sahaja Yoga. After that, a half
right side of the body. Shree Mataji good- hour introduction to the subtle system was given
naturedly addressed not the patients with which also focussed on answering two questions:
What are we seeking? and What is true meditation?
This was followed by Shree Mataji's video tape
from the Albert Hall, England public program,
which was presented with Chinese subtitles. We
then used an excerpt from a 1995 public program
video tape in which Shree Mataji guides the
problems with Swadhishthana, but the doctors
seated on the stage beside Her. She talked about
the speediness and futuristic outlook of doctors,
caused by using their brains too much.
At the end Dr. S.C. Nigam invited all the
doctors present to come and experiment in the
meditation centres and assured them of being seekers through self-realization.
able to cure any disease with patience and
meditation.
Only a few seekers acknowledged feeling
vibrations on top of their heads and on their
Our Divine Mother was also wished "Happy hands; Chinese are usually very conservative. The
Anniversary" as 7th April was Her Golden Jubilee seekers were in a serious yet very pleasant mood
wedding anniversary. Interestingly, the 7th was
also World Health Day.
the whole evening.
The first follow-up program on Tuesday, May
6th drew 38 seekers. We were very happy with
the success of this attempt to have a public
program without Shree Mataji's physical presence.
The seekers who attended are mostly middle-aged
or older. Hopefully they will be sensible, and stay
discoveries and research in the field of energy through the three-month beginner's course.
Award for Dr. U.C. Rai
Dr. U.C. Rai was conferred the "Vladimir
Vernidzky" award for making significant
information science. Dr. Rai, a Sahaja Yogi who is
currently director of the international Sahaja Yoga
Medical and Research Centre in Mumbai, was
Sarvesh Paulo Su, Taiwan
presented the award by Professor J. Halperin in Cyprus Public Program Report
Moscow on August 30. He also attended the third
International Congress of Folk Medicine of Russia, 27th and 28th of July went very smoothly with
which was held under the aegis of the All
Russian Scientific and Research Centre. He
The two public programs held on Cyprus on the
12 seekers on the first day and 17 on the second.
All the seekers were genuine and approached
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Volume: IX Issua: 9 & 10 1997
Divinie Cool Breeze
25
Sahaja Yoga with a cautious but open mind. They much of their spare time. We were young and
all felt the cool breeze and said that they would perhaps naive, thinking we could change the
return.
world overnight. It is taking a bit longer, but
Five yogis went to Cyprus from Athens, joined change it most certainly has and we have all
by Inna who lives on the island, two yogis from Played a role.
France, and a new yogi who is a Cypriot but
studying in Athens.
The vibrations on the island changed with the
placing of the first poster, and when the yogis the city we are so busy with so little time, but
returned to the Athens airport a week later, the
vibrations were as if they were coming from a
puja in Cabella. The seekers said that if the
programs were at another time (not in the skies and winter sunshine. Crossing Australia we
summer) there would be a much bigger response.
So there are tentative arrangements to go back in land of Shri Ganesha.
November or December.
Times have changed. Many life experiences,
some difficult, yet we still need that enthusiasm
more than ever. There is much yet to achieve. In
we need to take sometine for ourselves, for each
other to feel the collective.
Winter time in Brisbane promised clear blue
are reminded how expansive and beautiful is this
We arrived at Shree Mataji's house at Wamarun
In the meantime, Inna is alone on the island mid-morning on Saturday to be greeted by Sahaja
and would like to be contacted by any yogis Yogis from Melbourne, New Zealand and Cairns.
passing through.
Inna Angelidou
35 Kimonos Akropolis
By the commencement of the puja, there would
be around 150 yogis gathered to worship the
World Guru for this age.
For many of us it was the first time we had
seen the completed Wamarun Ashram: The house
had been constructed fromn bricks handmade from
Lefkosia
Tel. : 35 72 425128
By Shree Mataji's grace, may a collective be the clay delved from land on the property. The
established on Cyprus soon. Jai Shree Mataji!
- Johanna Klinge, Greece
building took many years to complete, made
possible by Shree Mataji and achieved through
the labour of the yogis. The strength of the
vibrations present certainly are a just reward for
the effort.
Guru Puja in Australia
It is always the same whether it is India Tour or
national Guru Puja was to be held began by Cabella. Whenever we gather together there is always
i joy that is ever-present. Everywhere there were
ashram at Burwood in Sydney. Just under 50 smiles on people's faces and time was spent
yogis from New South Wales and the Australian forming new and re-establishing old friendships.
In the afternoon a havan was held to remove
negativity and any obstacles preventing the
Sleeping on a bus is never easy, yet the hours success of the public program that night. The
rolled past because we were travelling to take local yogis had arranged this program to take
part in the work of Sahaja Yoga. When we make advantage of the boost in vibrations which comes
an effort, sometimes a "sacrifice," to play our part when yogis visit. The musicians gathered on stage
to begin the program, the songs came out fine
work out effortlessly. When we are older we will and strong, and the vibrations began to flow. The
audience warmed to the music and we could feel
their hearts open as the tired looks on their faces
Our journey to the place where the Australian
boarding the bus in the early evening at our
Capital Territory took their places for the 17 hour
journey to Brisbane.
in collective events, then everything seems to
look back on these opportunities and the days we
shared together.
were washed away by the vibrations.
This trip brought back feelings of journeys
made many years ago when we all travelled
away together to Melbourne. It brought back helping people feel the power of the Divine and
memories of a time of enthusiasms, when Sahaja begin to find meaning. It was the most successful
Yoga was just starting in our country and those public program held in Brisbane since Shree
who are now the older, established yogis were Mataji last visited.
fresh-faced enthusiastic youths for whom Sahaja
Yoga was everything and to which they devoted
We played our role as the bearers of truth,
Guru Puja commenced on Sunday at midday.
It seemed most appropriate to be holding the
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue : 9 & 10 1997
26
Divine Cool Breeze
of whom had won first prize for singing Indian
folk music in his school. We invited him to sing
at the evening program and he immediately
agreed.
puja outdoors within an almost forest setting. We
were seated on the earth before our Guru's
photograph. The sun was shining upon us,
filtered by leaves of the surrounding trees. A
warm, gentle breeze blew. We looked up to see a
wide, blue sky, the soothing sounds of nature
helping to settle the attention upon the spirit. It
is so quiet in the country. This is one of the
reasons it is so conducive in helping us touch our
own inner silence.
The program was held in a hotel with a
seating capacity of not more than 100 people as
a big response was not expected because it was
a long holiday weekend. To our amazement the
hall was full, with more than 30 new people in
attendance. The program started with the leader
of Austria welcoming the guest of honour,
Ms.Lata Reddy. He then gave a very touching
At the conclusion of the puja Uncle John
Henshaw thanked our hosts on behalf of us all.
He spoke of the national and international feeling speech as to why we as Austrians were
of brotherhood and union that this event had
established, due in no small part to the
hospitality and warmth showered upon us by the
Brisbane collective. This puja provided a boost to
the Brisbane collective as well as to everyone who
celebrating India's Independence Day. He
narrated how Her Holiness Mataji Shree Nirmala
Devi brought us close to this great land of Bharat
the Yoga Bhoomi of this world through the
process of Sahaja Yoga. He explained how Sahaja
Yoga had given us inner independence from all
those things that make us dependent. This was
participated.
He concluded by saying that he is looking also the dream of Mahatma Gandhi's Swatantrata
forward to the opportunity of the Victorian
collective welcoming the national collective to
celebrate Diwali Puja later this year at a venue
near the Victoria/New South Wales border.
movement.
After the talk, a praise to the Mother, Hé Adi
Ma was sung, followed by small excerpts from
the film Gandhi. We relived the historic moments
of the independence struggle in this film. Then
an Indian brother spoke about Shree Mataji's
contribution to India's independence struggle. A
film about Shree Mataji's life history, The Vision,
made by the American Sahaja Yogis, was then
Sahaja Yoga Austria Celebrates
the Golden Jubilee of India's
Independence Day
A program was organized by the Sahaja Yoga shown to the audience.
Society of Austria to commemorate the 50th
The hall was filled with a passionate feeling
anniversary of Mother India's Independence Day. of patriotism, devotion, humility and respect for
This great auspicious occasion incidentally the Great Mother. Then we requested the
coincides with the day Mother Mary departed for audience to participate in a self-realization
program, which was conducted through a video
cassette of Shree Mataji. The vibrations were very
heaven.
On the early morning of 15th August the yogis
went for the flag hoisting ceremony hosted at the strong and we felt that everybody in the hall had
Indian Ambassador's house. At the large public received their realization.
gathering the Ambassador read out the message
from the President of India. Surprisingly he said
that this Independence Day celebration would not
be restricted to activities sponsored by the
government of India but a joint celebration of all
those who wished to undertake it.
To add to the joyful tempo of the evening we
sang a few devotional Sahaja bhajans and
Qawwalis. Our new Indian brother whom we
met in the morning sang a beautiful Indian folk
song from Gujarat, the birth place of Gandhiji.
The function concluded with the presentation
of a small gift, Sir C.P. Srivastava's book on Shri
Lal Bahadur Shastri, to the guest of honour. She
was very touched and happy with the way we
celebrated this great occasion, and remarked that
After he had finished his statement the Sahaja
Yogis presented to him a personal invitation to
the evening program organized by them.
However, due to his ill health he excused himself
and asked his deputy Ms.Lata Reddy to represent she would always call on us for future programs
him. The general invitation was then handed out
to the others present. Here we met a enlightened audience was then invited to enjoy
interesting Indian family who have recently
moved into Vienna. They had two children, one
organized by the Indian Embassy. The
very
some Indian snacks.
Shantanu Chatterjee, Austria
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 27
Volume: IX Issue: 9 A 10 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
Self-Realization, Live on Radio
Sahaja Yoga can be heard every Sunday from 10-11 a.m.
Liallyn Fitzpatrick, another
Most broadcasters are familiar with equipment
breakdowns and guests that turn up late or don't presenter, "our crisis situations
to produce a better
program. The well-prepared
questions and format seem to fall
a bit flat compared to our
"emergency' broadcasts, another
proof that it all comes together
with a little preparation and a lot
seem
turn up at all. The producers and presenters of
Sahaja Yoga Meditation have discovered a
philosophy of radio production that deals with
these near-radio-death experiences.
of faith."
ne student, whose compares live radio with the
bewildered
Due to the non-profit, non-
parents spontaneous nature of Sahaja
wondered about Sahaja Yoga. "Live radio suits us down commercial nature of Sahaja Yoga
Yoga, tunes in each week and to the ground. You can only (hence, no sponsors), fund raising
her parents are now relaxed plan so far-it's all about the events keep us afloat. We have a
about it; families with children present moment and, really, few generous benefactors who
driving along suddenly overcome anything can happen!"and it donate more than a little on a
with a bubbly feeling of mirth does. We have had many near- regular basis without whom, as
and find each other blasting a well as the enthusiasm and
coolness out the top of their funny: equipment breakdowns; participation of the Sahaja
heads (a sure sign that the changing-the-studio nightmares; community and 2SER listeners,
awakening has occurred); elderly interview subjects who arrive we wouldn't be here.
people reporting reduced one minute to air time; the
arthritic
meditation and saying that they
haven't felt so "up" in ages.
L3
radio-death experiences, it isn't
Fifteen months down the track
after
pain
our
To tell you the truth, we didn't know when we began this
radio spot if self-realisation would work over the radio.
We are here to say it does-and beautifully so-as our
listeners will attest.
One couple who had their
first experience with
program and who now practise
Sahaja Yoga summed it up,
"Anyone can see you're sincere
and genuine. The lecture excerpts
and personal Sahaja experiences
of the people you interview are "box"-everything required for we are a bit better at this and we
pictures worth a thousand words, the program-not arriving and hope to do some subject-specific
and you don't expect people to having to wing it with and more creative programs this
take your word for it-we can whatever's in the car; eloquent, year to better illustrate the Sahaja
prove the benefit for ourselves confident guests suddenly view of a balanced world, and
and without charge. My husband frozen
and I have learned so much microphones. Since no one's collective good will be achieved
about ourselves and about what's blasted us vet, perhaps we've one person at a time.
Our
the sight of that transformation toward the
at
time.
going on around us.'
What can we say? It's real and management's just being silent
it works.
Presenter Heather Shetty
coped rather well, or may be
John B, John T, Toby P.
Peter A, Heather S. Gillian P and
to be kind.
"The curious thing," says Liallyn F for Sahaja Yoga.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
28
Volume : IX İssue : 9 & 10 1997
Weekly Sahaja Radio Programs
in Sydney
or the past two years, a spontaneous. For example, one from the station supervisors.
group of yogis in Sydney, week the topic was "spirit" and
Australia, have presented a we couldn't find any suitable
Sahaja Yoga radio program on excerpt from the talks we listened England, and have contacted
their local community station. to. So we took a talk at random Gerald Wirth in Calgary, who
This station, known as
Multicultural Station, has the the beginning, and the first ten and Canadian music by yogis
largest
transmitter in Australia. It has
been a huge success, reaching team sit on a discussion panel, interviews, vox populis,
anywhere from 2,000 to 10,000 and we invite a third person, poetry, songs, etc. either of
people each week. Audience either from the Sydney collective Shree Mataji or the yogis
numbers aside, Shree Mataji's or someone visiting from a themselves, please send them
vibrations are going out into the different area. Discussion is to Sydney for use in the
ether and, judging from how we interspersed with other elements program.
feel each week in the studio, (music, quotes, a meditation/self-
something positive is happening. realization segment, lecture
To prepare for the program, excerpts) throughout the hour. We page is from the 2SER radio
we choose a topic for the week, don't rehearse, but we choose a
do some research, collect some topic and work out a running Listening Post. .
nice quotes, music, poetry and sheet beforehand for the sound
suitable lecture excerpts of Shree operator to work from (who is
Mataji's and, "with a bandhan also a Sahaja Yogi). Some of the
and a prayer, it all comes together team have taken a nationally
in the studio, live on-air, by Shree accredited radio course through
Mataji's infinite grace." In true the station, and we get some ad-
Sahaja
F
often play IPO
recordings compiled in
We
the from our case of resources, cued is compiling some American
radio minutes was all about Spirit.
community
to use in the program. Ilf any
One or two "regulars" from the yogis have recordings of
The article about the
program on the previous
magazine,
program's
- Liallyn Fitzpatrick,
Australia
very hoc computer and sound help
fashion,
it's
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 ss
"Dedication is the only
way to grow further."
