Divine Cool Breeze 1997 114 12 Volume: IX lesue "You are the ones who will advertise Sahaja Yoga. Every one of you should understand that your life is very important ai this Juncture, And you have to become that special person who reflects reality through the Divine Love. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Shri Krinhna Puja, New Jersey, U.S.A June 8, 1997)

 In this Issue : North American Tour June 1997 What I Feel When I Meditäte 10 Message 11 i2 Christmas Puja, Ganapati Pule, 25-12-97 Be Close To Nature And Lead A Balanced Family Life 17 Edited by Yogi Mahajan Published by : V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 North American Tour June 1997 n Tuesday afternoon, June 3, Shri years, Shri Mataji would Herself attend. Our Mataji and Sir C.P. Srivastava arrived hopes were soon confirmed with a call from at Newark Airport in New Jersey. the hotel announcing that Shri Mataji, They were welcomed by Sahaja Yogis from all accompanied by Sir C.P. and several other family over the East Coast. Over the next few days, members, was coming to the camp. advice was given by Shri Mataji to prepare for the upcoming national puja and public program. It was a moment of tremendous joy and fulfillment for all of us to receive Shri Mataji Sahaja Yogis from all over North America, upon Her arrival. For mäny of us it was our as well as about 60 from South America and first sight of Shri Mataji on this tour. Shri Europe, began arriving and helping to poster Mataji and Her family took their seats in front and Ieaflet for the program. The national seminar of the stage and the evening's entertainment was once again held at Camp Vacamas in northern began. New Jersey, a rustic place in the woods not Altogether, the most impressive thing about too far from New York City. The seminar began the program was the feeling of magic in the on Friday, with organized expeditions into the city on Saturday to poster and leaflet for the air. The vibrations created by the presence of program the following Tuesday. our Mother, the closeness of the large international family of yogis, and the many On Saturday, Shri Mataji, Sir C.P. and several heartfelt performances by talented yogis desiring members of Her family visited Her house in to please Shri Mataji combined to create an Yonkers, a suburb about half an hour north of atmosphere which grew increasingly blissful as New York City. Soon after their arrival, the the evening progressed. mayor of Yonkers paid a visit to meet them. The entertainment began with a Bharat Natyam for lunch, and they enjoyed the spectacular views dance by a group of children from the Boston of the Hudson River which can be seen from area. Afterwards they sang several songs, the dining room. This was Shri Mataiji's first including one the children chose, called Carriers visit to this house since it was purchased in of tine Light. It was amazing to see their poise and grace. They were so pure and sweet in their expression that our hearts melted, and at North American National Puja, Camp the same time their performances were of very good quality. Several other children performed 1995. Vacamas, New Jersey On Saturday evening, the 6h of June, the throughout the evening, and in every case it international troop of yogis that had descended was evident that these are the children who upon New York for leafletting earlier in the have grown up as the children of the Adi Shakti: day returned to Camp Vacamas, the nowy familiar they are very advanced in their talents, radiant. home of the last four North American Pujas, and prepared for the evening's entertainment program. This program promised to be their latest hit compositions. It was enjoyable particularly memorable in one outstanding way: to hear the evolution of their talent. Many are it was reported that, for the first time in three writing songs which call out to the seekers of and beautiful. Many of our Sahaja pop musicians offered

 Volume : IX Isue : 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze the West in a very touching way, and in styles to be appreciated, it won't be an appeal, people which are very much in the mainstream of today's won't Iike such music. They 'll try some tricks popular music. otherwise. In this country we have all kinds of We were also treated to several beautiful people, all kinds of music, and sometimes renditions of western classical pieces featuring extremely stupid, but somehow they are gaining guitar, oboe, violin, flute, piano and voice. the idea that popularity now doesn't remain The beauty of these performances was beyond With all kinds of stunts and stupid things we all expectation; we truly have some great classical do. They have taken, I am sure, by their own artists living in the North American collective. urge to search the reality, a new type of style, a new type of singing in which there is a different We very much enjoyed witnessing the blending tune I feel is coming up, suggesting that there's of the world's cultures that Shri Mataji is something higher we have to achieve. The idea achieving through Sahaja Yoga. To see a group of enjoyment is changed. of yogis from Vancouver, Canada sing one song in Marathi and one in Russian, to see an American yogi perform an intricate piece of not so ancient, it has no traditions. Also people classical Indian dance, enriched our sense of are from different cultures and so they're all the global culture of Shri Mataji's vision. "Sometimes people feel that this country is mixed up, confused. But in that confusion only The other acts of the evening included a you are going to find the truth. And that's why South American bhajan sung in Spanish, several there are people who are working out some bhajans and qawwalis, choral singing, original sort of a search of their own. Maybe it's not instrumental compositions, and a very humorous correct, it's not all right. parody of a tango, performed by a yogi who is a fairly well everywhere in America if you go, you find "Like the music now, you had such serene, - known professional comedian. By the end of the evening the vibrations had deep music, also some very collective music, become very strong. Shri Mataji stayed patiently all types of music that you could think of, and through the entire program, watching and listening Indian music, Spanish music, also Russian music to Her children as they expressed their devotion by offering their talent at Her Lotus Feet. When the scheduled performances had come to an will have a sense of music. That's a different end, Shri Mataji requested that all the musicians thing than music is, because music can be take the stage and sing Jogawa, the song of the anything, but to have the sense of music that awakening of the Kundalini. The entire weekend not only ehtertains, but elevates you, takes you was strongly focused on the job at hand: the to higher realms of your existence, that is music. awakening of as many seekers as possible in New York the following Tuesday. With all our because I am sort of fond of music, but through desire we sang a rousing version of Jogawa music vibrations can be spread much faster, all these have combined on the stage here. T hat is suggestive that one day the whole world "You know how much I love music. It is not before our Mother. and they can also easily penetrate into your When we finished, Shri Mataji took the being. So a person who is absolutely dry, who microphone and spoke of Her strong desire to doesn't like music at all, or the one who doesn't reach the seekers of America. The following is like poetry, I mean all the left - sided talents, a transcription of the rest of Her talk : such a person is not in balance. And that's, "... Today I would say music, dancing, art. why it is important that one should try, even if every kind of creativity will definitely bring forth the spiritual aspect of America's life. They have to come to this; otherwise it's not going America. One side is this creativity which is you don't like, try to understand music. "It's a very funny mixture here I find in

 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze sometimes quite mad. On the other side you today, and I hope this will go on and on and find people extremely busy, have no time to on, and you'll be studying it much more." even sing something or read something... extremely busy making money. Only mnoney is Mataji departed from us to return to Her hotel. the criteria. Soon the inevitable moment came when Shri In the wake of Her presence we felt tremendous "But the money situation seems to be very vibrations, and silence had descended upon our bad here to Me for future, because of the stupid nearts and minds. Many people commented that ideas about economics here. But whatever it is, we felt so deepened already, with the puja still Sahaja Yogis are going to be absolutely very for to come. On Sunday morning, preparations began rich, prosperous, well known, because the talents for what we expected to be a Mahakali Puja. they have will show. In every field of life vou'll Complete with slain demons painted on the stage find every Sahaja Yogi will be so successful, backdrop. Much to our surprise, and in keeping that those who were full of their ego, and thought with Shri Krishna's play, Shri Mataji's talk no end of themselves, will realize that unless began with the announcement that it would be and until you have the light of your spirit you Shri Krishna Puja. We were blessed by Shri cannot go very much further. Because in the Mataji's attention on the problems of America. dimensions of human mind, you cannot conceive patiently explaining how they can be solved the heights which you can reach. through Sahaja Yoga. First New York Public Program "Through music, when today you were singing I was amazed. What a talent we have in Sahaja Shri Mataji's amazing Grace flowed through Yoga! I mean they are not paid for, they have the historic caverns of the Cathedral of St. not been trained, they have not been to John the Divine leaving nearly 2,000 New Yorkers universities and colleges of music. Just with an enlightened "attitude," and hundreds spontaneously how beautifully they can sing of yogis from around the world a sense of love and give us spiritual music, which really heartens and hope for the salvation of one of the world's Me. I was very happy to see the progress you greatest cities. have made in art and the other variety of your expressions. Everything was really wonderful generous help of our brothers and sisters from and We had long awaited this day. With the very enjoyed it thoroughly. I am sure one day all over the Northeast U.S. and Canada, the all of you who are just Sahaja Yogi singers will Tri-State collective (New York, New Jersey, and be professionals and this and that, but don't Connecticut) had fervently leafletted, postered, forget Me then. advertised and taken every opportunity to speak of the impending arrival of our Divine Mother. "So it's a nice time we had this evening. After the second month of advertising, complete Tomorrow again there is going to be puja. And with huge posters throughout the subway system, I am really, really I must say, very happy, and New York had gotten the message that this event I congratulate you to organize this program in America in such a beautiful manner. And all of you are such enthusiasts. They told me how was of great significance. In fact, at a health fair where Sahaja Yoga was featured, a vendor in the next booth ran over after seeing Shri vou have been contributing, and they wouldh't Mataji's picture and said, "Oh, are you with take any money from Me, because 1 thought Her? She's very popular!" That was the New how could they bear all the expenses, but York atmosphere. Everyone and everything somehow or other it's all working out. It's just - just as it should be! awaiting Her Advent your sweet desires, your deep surrender. Everything has worked so beautifully, and the oneness of all the world you can feel in America Gothic cathedral, a huge, cavernous place which, On June 10th, they filed into the magnificent

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 at first, was about 1/4 full. It was a classic and meditation and for all those who wanted to grand picture of New York, representing its leave the hall to leave, no one moved! It was variety, its drama, and its potential. It was a moment to be remembered. The air was filled apparent that many already had a sense of with anticipation of the next moment's blessings. reverence and awe for the transformation they Shri Mataji looked at everyone before She gave were to experience. By the end of the program, realization and said so sweetly that She felt the hall, which holds approximately 2,500 people, that She had been hard on us and She apologized, was full. When Shri Mataji asked those who but that we needed to hear these words, not to felt, the cool breeze to raise their hands, almost feel guilty, but to try to understand what She every single hand was raised. When all those was saying. The vibrations were tremendous people came and got their Self - Realization, it and everyone felt the cool breeze. was a truly wondrous example of what, by Shri Mataji's Grace and by Her Attention, can happen here in New York. The yogis knew that finally, to add to the beauty, a young Sahaja Yogini by Shri Mataji's Grace, New York would never girl named Garima danced such a devotional again be the same. The moment was so blissful, and then just piece of classical Indian dance that many in the audience were brought to tears. To see Garima gracefully bow at the Goddess's Lotus Feet only moments after the audience had received Los Angeles Just a little glimpse from the four wonderful realization was so great. days that Shri Mataji was in Los Angeles... On the last day of Her loving stay in Los When we arrived home from New York on Angeles, Shri Mataji asked all the yogis to Wednesday, we were tired. It had been a long come into Her hotel suite (which seemed by journey home. But just after walking in the the flow of vibrations to be Her throne and door a phone call came with the news that Shri abode in the Heavens). As we came and bowed Mataji was arriving in Los Angeles in less than before Her, it was a moment of the Holy Mother 24 hours. Any thoughts of being tired bringing Her children very close. disappeared! We were suddenly revived and beaming. Our preparations were done with such collectivity that no one felt any pressure and of collectivity by giving us examples from Her the ease was so obvious. Shri Mataji brought our attention to the beauty own life to show us how to be collective. It Shri Mataji arrived and met everyone. It was was such a precious and important talk. We such a joyful moment, and She had brought so were blessed to hear Her speak about Her own many flowers with Her from New York! The next four days were our blessed days. We relaxed married, Her new family had a very different and rested with Shri Mataji in Her Mothering lifestyle. Her family was Christian and Sir C.P's aspect. She took care of us all, we felt so loved. Imnarriage. She told how when She was getting expect and Shri Mataji also didn't know what to expect. Sir C.P's family was from the North The public program was on Monday evening. and the customs were different from Her home It was well attended by balanced people who in Maharashtra. There were over I00 family seemed to be ready for realization. Shri Mataji memberS waiting to see Her. They were all spoke very directly and strongly to the seekers wondering, would She wear a western style about how they were guru shoppers in the past dress or a sari, was She fair or dark, what would She be like? and how it must stop now. Her talk was very strong, and then when She paused and said that we would have the customs, like She was supposed Shri Mataji very sweetly respected their to touch the

 Volume: IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze feet of an old man who had eyes red from with utmost respect. Work teams got organized drinking. When She went to touch his feet with and we all had a chance to do whatever was Her veil, She was surprised by his very kind dear to our hearts and also to try our hand at and compassionate voice. Shri Mataji said She many new things. We soon learnt within our felt so much love from everyone. Loving one small group that we had experts present who could handle various jobs like media, advertising, computer work, postering, cooking, writing etc.! another is so important in collectivity. For the marriage She had to make a sweet dish and also some decorations. For the decorations, She made out of dough a statue of was arranged at The Claremont Hotel, a most Gauri and Ganesha. Her handwork was so prestigious landmark hotel that lies in the hills intricate that many people kept asking where on the Berkeley/Oakland city borders. We went the statues had come from, only to find out that, She had made them, and after everyone everything needed to make Shri Mataji's stay had tasted Her sweet dish, no one wanted to completely enjoyable. Wheeler Auditorium, right eat anything else. Even today people still in the centre of the campus of the University remember how delicious it was. A very nice accommodation for Shri Mataji on many shopping excursions to seek out of California at Berkeley, next to the famous clock tower, was rented for the public program. She told us that in the collective we must enjoy and love others and not focus on the inconveniences or work. There is tremendous place and you could hardly find a shop or a joy in collectivity. Another important part of pillar in Berkeley that did not have a poster collectivity is to have respect for elders and to with Shri Mataji's beautiful image smiling out have the wisdom to understand that they have at you. Thousands of fliers were handed out the authority of love to correct us. Hundreds of posters were put up all over the and advertising was done in about 10 local newspapers. We also made full use of our Shri Mataji told us that She has placed all creativity to design personal and formal invitations of us in Her body. If we are in disharmony or behave in an asahaja manner we cause pain to out the word that Shri Mataji was coming. The Her, but if we are collective and joyful, Sahaja response was terrific. Everyone wanted to know Yoga works through us. She gave many, many all about it and we were intoxicated with the examples of each aspect of collective living: joy of it all. husband and wife, brothers and sisters, showing us what is correct through examples. to the program and had a great time passing Finally, the following prayer was composed and read to Shri Mataji at the National Puja in It was such a profound morning with our New Jersey. It gave voice to our deepest desires, Holy Mother. We bowed to Shri Mataji, and as allowed us the protocol of formally inviting we left Shri Mataji's room She wanted us to Her to come to Berkeley and brought with it have some nuts as prasad. We left with our the final touch of Her full blessings to our hearts filled with joy. humble whirlwind preparations. May 28th 1997 Berkeley Program O Queen of the Universe O Devi Adi Shakti. We were blessed to be Seekers Many many Yugas ago. We are blessed with this life today, Having You amongst us. On the 1" of May the great, great news reached us of Shri Mataji's decision to honour the tiny city of Berkeley with Her presence in the middle of June. The preparations began and there was great excitement in our hearts arnd a little apprehension to be able to receive our Mother

 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze performed to welcome Her. Our eyes automatically looked at the ground. Who could face the glance of the Devi ? May Lord Garuda, In all His splendor Carry You swiftly, O Supreme Guru, To the Holy Land of Berkeley. The land that has trees, There were no words to describe the tremendous joy we felt as we stood by Her and watched Her taking in the view from Her room. It overlooked the entire Bay area : San Francisco city to the west across the Bay, taking in the Golden Gate Bridge and the Bay Bridge, Oakland to the South, and Berkeley to the North with a view of the clock tower on campus where She would be speaking to all the seekers that came. It seemed like the perfect place for Mother to stay where all of the Bay area would be blessed by Her attention. Shri Mataji was very pleased with Her quarters and was fascinated by the unique flowers which decorated the rooms and echoed the fragrance of the Adi Shakti's enchanting presence. That will bow at Your very glance The land that has flowers, That will bloom at Your very Smile. The Land that awaits You With the Nirmal Desire, To receive Your Divine Bliss and Grace! O Devi Mahakali, O Jewel of the Universe. O Mother, Our Saviour, Please hear our call. From the Gate that is golden To Red woods so tall, We await Your arrival With joy and love for all. All throughout Her stay She kept smiling In the early summer evening of June 17", profoundly at those who came to greet Her. Shri Mataji arrived at Oakland airport. As Sne Her eyes were full of compassion, Her words stepped off the airplane it was a fourteen year were like drops of gold and Her every move dream come true! It was Her first Visit since like waves in the ocean of love that surrounds the autumn of 1983 and it was a moment to Her. It was a fairy tale come true. behold for cach one of us, as She accepted flowers and said kind words to all. She seemed surprised to find that there were so many Yogis We were all very, very happy. Shri Mataji made to greet Her and was especially happy to see us all feel extremely special by noticing even the growing number of Sahaja Yogi children in the smallest effort that we had done and the Bay area. All of us got to do something for Shri Mataji. complementing it whether it was the room, or the public program organization, or the food During the ride from the airport Shri Mataji that was offered. asked about a beautiful lake that She had noticed Shri Mataji's one shopping trip took Her during the landing with beautiful silver clouds and commented that there were lots of seekers back to the same town of Sausalito where She in that area. It just so happens that Gary and had shopped fourteen years earlier. It was on Ursula Doring's new home and Sahaja centre this excursion that Her attention was drawn to is just minutes from this lake, known as Lake a large and beautiful porcelain statue of Abraham Merritt, and it confirmed an attraction that we Lincoln with two children sitting at his feet, had felt in the past for this area. one black child and one white child. It worked out that we were later able to offer this to Her When Shri Mataji emerged from the car and at Guru Puja in Cabella on behalf of America, set foot in the lobby of the hotel She was the which was so wonderfully Sahaja as during Her most radiantly beautiful being we had ever seen talk She spoke of the need to commit ourselves and as She entered Her room She granted to eradicating racialism and that this stay of "Infinite Blessings" to us all as aarti was being Hers in Berkeley coincided also with the

 Volume : IX Issue : 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 7. celebration of Juneteenth, the day on which had desired to come to this city renowned for the slaves were actually set free. its seeking and interest in change and transformation. Her tremendous concern for all A luncheon at an excellent local restaurant present and Her love of the whole area was felt had been planned, but when asked if She would by all and essentially everyone got their self enjoy some wonderful seafood, She quickly realization. The atmosphere of the program was remarked how disappointed the Yoginis would very light Berkeley is an easy - going city, be who were cooking for Her and She preferred full of youth and vitality. to go back to taste what they had prepared for Her. It was so sweet the way She said it. After the program it was wonderful to see friends, acquaintances and people who for years The public program was the next day on the had heard many of us speak of Shri Mataji and 18th of June. She started to leave the hotel at now finally had the chance to see and meet about 8:15 p.m. and She wore a white sari that seemed to suggest that a big white full moon was starting out to enlighten the dark night. A rare sight to see! And that's what happened. had no clue of the grandeur of the evening they 475 seekers sat waiting for Her to come. Before had just experienced, but for all of us it was She left, someone handed Her a gardenia. She the culmination of many small and great moments took it, smelled it and smiled. "Gardenias that pushed, pulled and stretched us into areas represent eternity," She said the next day. This and projects that we never imagined ourselves and so many other images of Her stay have left capable of. And it was just the beginning! us feeling so happy and overjoyed today when we look back upon these precious moments. Her for themselves. Many faces were glowing and some clearly Shri Mataji was very pleased with the quality of seekers, and was in a very good and happy It was a splendid evening. The program started mood after the program. with songs dedicated to Shri Mataji performed by Matt Malley of the Counting Crows and Stephen Day. After a short description of the drawn to the teenage population on several events, Yogi Mahajan gave an introductory talk 0ccasions and when asked how we could save about Sahaja Yoga together with a clear. the children of America, She said that we should compelling description of miracle photos in a slide presentation. Then the moment everyone Sahaja schools most of her life and was preparing During Her stay, Shri Mataji's attention was start a school; perhaps on Her land in New York. She called for a teenager who had attended The Chief of Protocol of the City of Berkeley, to enter high school in Berkeley to come and on behalf of the Mayor of Berkeley, came up see Her. "Hello! Do you remember me" She to welcome Shri Mataji and read a proclamation exclaimed to dispel the fear of the child as she declaring June 10th, 1997 as Shri Mataji Nirmala entered shyly with one foot in defiance and the Devi Day in Berkeley. This was followed by an other tugging at her mother's heart! That hour inspiring talk given by Marcus Nobel, the oI attention was the sweetest of parables as the honorary chair of the evening, to introduce Shri mother and child sat at Her feet and were woven Mataji and Her vision of Sahaja Yoga to the into the exquisite brilliance and poetry of Her every word: how She spun out truths and medicine laced with infinite love and gentleness. Shri Mataji's talk was very deep and powerful, The worlds of rebellion and despair were scothed being to a significant degree absorbed by the down and given hope, guidance and renewed audience. Shri Mataji mentioned that the first awareness. "You must seek out the purpose of yogi of America had been attending the University your life... and take full notice of every detail of California at Berkeley and that She always and beauty that surrounds you." But when all audience.

 Volume : IX issue: 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze was said and done it became clearer than ever on the evening of Friday, June 20, and Shri before that ultimately the child and the world Mataji's purchase of a large 7- bedroom house will look to the mother for accountability as to to be used as an ashram. their children's behavior and well-being. So it is important to find a way to their heart so that they are able to listen to you, for they need to twice on the number of Chinese people in the learn the value and importance of respect and airport. She then sat with the Sahaja Yogis, obedience. Upon Her arival, Shri Mataji commented receiving their flowers and gifts and talking with them for about half an hour. In the car She left Berkeley the next day, waving at us ride from the airport, Shri Mataji spoke about till the last minute as She departed. Before the need for an ashram in Vancouver. "The leaving, She had given each one of us Her full attention, warmth, love and care and most of " She exclaimed, noting the all an everlasting hope about ourselves. She i6 vears ago, a rented house in Vancouver became gave us the power of a Sahaja Yogi and the the city's first Sahaja Yoga ashram. Today, after power to believe in ourselves as we lived each 10 visits and four pujas, there are well over yogis are ready, growth of Sahaja Yoga in Vancouver. Nearly moment as Her children. 200 Canadians established in Sahaja Yoga. The The love that we saw in Her eyes for those growth has been slow, but it has been steady. three days surges up every morning in our hearts, to be able to spread it on to others around us, within the family and the collective and outside. Her suite at the Four Seasons Hotel in downtown Thank you, Shri Mataji, for your Beloved Vancouver. In the meantime, yogis scoured the attention and presence in the San Francisco newspapers and the Internet for houses in two Bay area. We pray to be worthy of your time rapidly - growing Vancouver suburbs. Richmond and efforts and long to see this part of the and Surrey. Richmond lies south of Vancouver world love and recognize you en masse. We and is characterized by its large Asian community. also want to thank everyone who came to help Surrey is southeast of the city and is known as us, in particular all those who came from Seattle the home of most of Vancouver's large Sikh and Los Angeles without whose help and population. The yogis narrowed the choice down guidance we could never have managed. Shri Mataji then spent Thursday evening at to a few houses. Shri Mataji, however, simply In the next six days we had daily follow- Wwent on vibrations, pointing to a real estate ups, and a full day seminar (Sunday, June 22) listing that no one had seen. together with Yogi Mahajan who guided us all gently and steadily towards a greater Shri Mataji and various yogis went straight to understanding of how to take care of all our a large house on the corner of a quiet cul de new brothers and sisters and their thirst for the beauty of the Spirit. We are delighted to report Shri Mataji said that this was the one, dozen or so wonderful Yogis are settling commenting on the size of the house, and its in Sahaja Yoga, are attending all the programs proximity to Bear Creek Park and the local and pujas and are a great inspiration to the rest train into the city. She said yogis would be After a short shopping trip in Chinatown sac in Surrey. Without entering the house, that of us! able to live there in peace without being bothered The San Francisco/Berkeley Collective is by neighbours and that the purchase of the house eternally grateful for this very special time. would establish the Ganesha principle in Canada. After Shri Mataji's historic decision to buy the ashram, She rested and prepared for the Shri Mataji's visit to Vancouver was graced public program that evening. The program was with two historical events: the public program held in a large church in downtown Vancouver Vancouver

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 and was characterized by a variety of entertaining collective was in New York, helping prepare presentations before Shri Mataji's arrival. Gerald for the North American Puja happening the Wirth led the way with beautiful classical piano first week in June. Upon their return, the frenzy pieces that helped set the tone for the evening. began of postering, pamphleteering, and the Gerald was followed by a performance from cleaning of vases and silver in preparation for young Hardeep Jassal on classical Indian flute. Shri Mataji's stay in Toronto. Some yogis spent Hardeep was followed by Stephen Day, who 8-10 hours a day postering and somehow, as sang two original folk/pop songs about seeking always, everything got done in time for Her and about Shri Mataji. The music portion of visit. the evening closed with two bhajans by the Vancouver and Seattle collectives. The music Shri Mataji arrived in Toronto on Saturday, was followed by a presentation of miracle slides. June 21*, at 10:30 p.m., where She met the and then an introductory talk by Allan Morrissey, yogis at the airport individually and they the Sahaja leader in the Vancouver area, The presented flowers. stage was set and when She arrived, Shri Mataji was greeted by a room of about 600 - 700 Dr. Ashish Pradhan presented an overview of seekers, standing respectfully, eager to hear Her Sahaja Yoga, talked about Shri Mataji's talk. Most of them stayed through the talk and background and ascendancy, and showed received their realization. The night closed with projections of miracle pictures on a large screen. a rousing version of Jogawa in which the entire Then a few yogis performed bhajans to introduce audience joined, clapping and enjoying. On Sunday, the public program was held. the audience to Sahaja music. The rest of Shri Mataji's visit was spent resting in the hotel. During this time She offered about Canada's suggestions about the ashram, how we could America. She encouraged more yogis to stay in enjoy the house, how the children in the collective the ashram and, if they couldn't do that, then should all be there. Saturday, before Her flight, they should at least live collectively. Overall, She continued to shower blessings on Vancouver She was pleased with the program, and was and the collective in the Pacific Northwest by able to have a restful stay. talking with various yogis and giving them suggestions and opportunities. She left Vancouver in the afternoon for Toronto. As She stepped evening of Monday, June 23. She talked to onto the plane less than 48 hours after arrival the yogis both collectively and individually. and waved good - bye we realized that She had not only touched the heart and changed the the four centres in and around Toronto have fate and destiny of many yogis but also of a whole city, a whole region, a whole nation. together more often, and there has been real Canada would never be the same. Thank you, growth in the collective overall. While Shri Mataji was in Toronto, She talked responsibility as a part of North Shri Mataji departed from Toronto on the Since Shri Mataji's visit, the meetings in seen an increase in attendance. The yogis get Shri Mataji, for the gift of an ashram to our country and its people, which will be our cultural Second New York Program centre, our spiritual refuge, our collective home. Surprisingly, Our Divine Mother gave permission for a second program, and with only two weeks of advertising, almost 1,000 seekers In the last week of May, 1997, the Toronto found their way to Town Hall. A New York collective was informed that Shri Mataji would landmark of independent thought and freedom, be having a program at the University of Toronto Town Hall's facade carries the inscription, "and on June 22nd At the time, most of the Toronto men shall know the truth and the truth shall set Public Program in Toronto

 10 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze Shri Mataji stayed in America for nearly six them free." It set the mood for the love of truth that brought the seekers back and kept weeks. Throughout, She worked relentlessly to them in their seatES - despite Shri Mataji's absence correct the dire spiritual straits America finds rapt, attentive, satisfied, and at the same time, itself in. In Her great compassion and generosity, ready for møre. The video showed Shri Mataji's She purchased a new ashram in Ridgefield Park, face on a full-sized movie theatre screen which New Jersey, near New York city, marking a enhanced the feeling of closeness to each person fresh start for collectivity and Sahaja Dharma who had come for their realization. on the East Coast. What I feel When I Meditate From The Sahaja Patrika The Quarterly Newsletter of the International Sahaja Public School Vol. 1, Issue 2, September 1997 "When I sit down for meditation and gradually and medîtate to achieve a higher level of go into thoughtless awareness state, I feel a awareness, and to grow spiritually, which is cool breeze passing through my hands, and it the first priority in life. Just recently, in the is not just a feeling of an ordinary breeze but last few years, I have been able to reach a real with it comes a feeling of joy, happiness and state of thoughtless awareness and it is so peace. To come into the state of thoughtless overwhelming that sometimes I feel that I could awareness, I keep away thoughts, but if thoughts just meditate for the whole day.' begin to come into my mind, I push them out of my head. At times when I look around at other people, at once the vibrations which I get in thoughtless awareness stop coming. When I am completely thoughtless, I feel I am let them pass, I let them pass and try to get rid connected with the Divine, and vibrations keep of that situation by saying, "I forgive everyone flowing, which Shri Mataji is bestowing upon including my own self." That is how I go into me. Jai Shri Mataji!" Anna Purcell, Class IX "Whenever I sit for meditation, as soon as I close my eyes, thoughts flow in my mind. I thoughtless awareness. I get a lot of cool breeze which passes through my hands and Sahasrara. I start feeling my whole body light. I enjoy this situation with my whole attention in Shri Nira Nicely, Class VII "I came into Sahaja Yoga when I was two years old and before I came to this school, I Mataji's lotus feet." took it for granted that I was in Sahaja Yoga and I would be safe as long as I called myself a Sahaja Yogi. But now I feel that I have a deeper understanding about what Sahaja Yoga great because of tremendous cool vibrations. I really is and why it is so important to meditate feel that I should stay all day to get these cool and that it is not enough to just call myself a vibrations. I feel my spirit cleaning all my Sahaja Yogi. I actually have to work, introspect chakras. Then I feel something going towards Pragya Mahajan, Class X "When I sit down to do meditation. I feel

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue : 11 & 12 1997 11 my Sahasrara. I enjoy these cool vibrations as of the finger (where it was cut), and there was long as I can. When it is over, I say in my a burning sensation on the fingertip. Shri Mataji mind, "I can't wait till we have our next put Her attention on it, and the finger was meditation." instantly healed! I felt truly blessed. Here I Nanak Chugh, Class V was, having never seen Shri Mataji in person beföre, and I had the opportunity to be very close to Her for most of the night! The Divine: One Yogi's Experience After the first New York program was over, what is Juneteenth? things were getting wrapped up, another yogi came up to me and asked me to help him with something. We ran out to his car and grabbed Proclamation was signed by the President about 20 copies of Meta Modern Era that Shri Abrahäm Lincoln, freeing slaves in the states Mataji had requested be brought to the rear of that tried to secede from the Union. However, the cathedral where She was receiving guests. the slave owners chose to keep the news and On January 1st, 1863 the Emancipation information from the slaves. Not until Union This allowed me to be close to Shri Mataji troops arrived in Galveston, Texas on June 19th. in a fairly small room. At one point, a woman 1865, two and a half years later, did the slaves came up to see Her. I couldn't hear what was learn of their freedom. Today Juneteenth is a being said, but the yogi who had brought the celebration that symbolizes freedom and books with me, a doctor, was called to Her independence of the African American people side. After he was done, I asked him what had and is their Emancipation Day. It is a day, a happened. It turns out that this woman had cut week and in some areas a month marked with her finger. She had no sensation in the middle all kinds of celebrations. Message I wish you all a "Very Happy Christmas" and "very very prosperous New Year." I am myself amazed at these people who have come to the academy and have picked up this difficult Indian music so easily. Some of them have been only for two mnonths. Imagine, people spend all their lives learning classical music and how these people have picked it up so fast. I mean, they say, it is due to Sahaja Yoga but that means really a miracle, really miracie. Even the Indian music sung by Indian musicians, they are today amazed. The way they have been singing like great Ustads. I just don't know how they have done this and how they have achieved it! Because, I know in my family there is too much of music and those who were interested got up early in the morning and practised three hours in morning and three hours in the evening. While I find these people coming from countries where they do not know a word about Indian music, picking it up so fast. May be, I cannot just explain, may be in their previous lives they were in India or may be that they are so talented. I cannot explain. Really if it is due to Sahaja Yoga, then I must say, Sahaja Yoga is something that creates miracles within and without. I have seen only the miracles without, but now this is the miracle within, that people who have never sung Indian music, have never heard about Indian music, are singing so well. May God bless you.

 Volume: IX Issue : 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 12 Christmas Puja Talk By Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Ganpatipule, 25-12-97 Si orry I had to talk in Hindi language telephones to me, immediately I will know, because most of the people here are what's wrong with the person. I don't say that Indians, some of them are Marathi and you can become like me, but atleast you have others are from North India. I was telling them vibrations to see. Also see your own vibrations. about Christ. What was his power? His power How are you moving? Put a paper on your was of love and not of anger, because He is the hand and you will see it will start shaking one who has crossed the most difficult centre before my photograph. of 'Agnya'. Those people who have ego never realised that they have ego. With their ego they do all kinds of nonsensical things without did you come to Sahaja Yoga? You came here, asking me, they have done something in Delhi, not to become some sort of a leader, or some without asking me they have done something sort of a king, but you came here to become 'a in Russia. And it is so destructive to Sahaja Yoga that they don't realise what they have great Guru', as you asked me, (15 Ta ) done is a crime which is punishable by alu 'Guru Pada Deejiye'. For that you have to have Divine laws. If you want to do anything, you must tell me beforehand. You must consult me. humility, natural balance. This is what Christ you must talk to me, because I kow what is happening. You don't know. If somebody wants to cheat you, then how will you know? If you you. People get ego out of anything e.g. I met were so sensitive, you would find out. You would have asked me, Mother, what should we With this ego, you can not go further. Why in Sahaja Yoga a complete humility, natural has taught us. At that time, I don't think people had that much ego. Ego is a modern present to one lady once. I found her ego very bad. I asked my daughter, "What is the matter with do? At least ask me. This is the main thing her? What does she do?" She said, "mummy. she knows how to make dolls." For that she missing among the Sahaja Yogis now that we have a kind of a very subtle ego. If you make has ego. What is so great than to be a good somebody a leader, it is very dangerous Sanaja Yogi? You may be the king, you may be sometimes that leader develops ego because of anything. Now you see the Prime Ministers and all of them going to the jail. What are his wife. It is a very difficult thing. They can destroy Sahaja Yoga, completely. Anything is they compared to you? They have no balance, possible. So before you do anything like that. they have no sense. What makes you a separate you have to consult. I am still living, and you individual, higher people, because you have no can ask me. You can write to me, you can "Ego'. Now people try to remove their ego. telephone to me. At least I am there to tell There are two types, so they will go on beating themselves with shoes. All kind of ritualistic you. things they do to remove their ego. But all this But then you have to develop your balance you do with your mind. Whatever you do with and love. That is only through this Parama your mind will give you ego only. They become Chaitanya. It is all pervading power of divine ascetics. They are the greatest egoists. I must love, you can develop that discretion, you can say Hitler was the greatest ascetic. With develop that special power. Even if somebody asceticism he became Hitler. If you want to

 13 Volume : IX Issue : 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze become Hitler, you become ascetic. In Sahaja is important is, if you are curing, you know Yoga, you are not allowed at all, this asceticism. that you are not curing, it is the Divine Power that is curing. You are not doing anything. It's You have to be loving, affectionate, kind best to be like that, I feel the same way. I am and disciplined. I must say this because when doing nothing and I am 'Nishkriya' (al) you are loving, you go out of bounds sometimes, doing nothing. But I am not lazy. You should because you have no discipline of Sahaja Yoga. be active but all your activity should come Loving does not mean that you become like a from the Divine Power of love. First of all you Romeo and Juliet. You must have your balance through your discipline. If you have no diseipline, heart, extend your money, house, everything you can never be a good Sahaja Yogi. From the life of Christ we have to learn these things, to come into the house, throw her out of the that unless and until we have these things, we cannot become good Sahaja Yogis. Firstly, ritualistic nature, secondly anger, thirdly important. You have to be generous, you have miserliness, like if you go to England, it's written to be kind, you have to be loving and sweet to there "Save pounds by taking a taxi". This is others. Christ only once went into a temple what it is. Miserliness, where can we save money? which He had the right to do that, when He Mother, can you give concession? It is not some saw people selling things in the temple. Same sort of a business I am doing here. If you thing we have here and if you don't go and make it half price so many will come. I am not buy anything from them, they'll be lost. But using your money. I am using it for your you only go and buy things from them because buildings. All this I have got it, of course my you have a habit of shopping. Anywhere people money also and your money. So many things 1 will go, they must shop. It's a habit. Shopping have done. The whole of Vashi, the whole of they must do. They will not see the greenery, Ashram in Delhi, two ashrams and the whole the beauty of nature, nothing. When I went to of school, and also land in Poona and other so many countries, which I had to, with my places. Now in Poona, they want me to pay for husband. I had to go and see beautiful places land, to pay for everything and the Poona people like museums, I never used to shop. But when are known Maharashtrians to be great miserly I have so many children, then I have to shop. must extend your hands for love, extend your for love. Now if your wife, doesn't allow others house. Teach her how to be kind and generous, other way round for the husband. Its very ) kanjoos people. Even for their own ashram So I would go for shopping. But not the way they would like me to pay, for everything, and that every place is for shopping. What is there they'll nicely go and sing bhajans. See they are to shop here when you have come here for good musicians, that's what they are. A very very miserly people. Miserly people can never any shops? It is the holier than holy. Why love. They love money. Egoistical people can should you go to these shops, I can't understand. never love because they love power to control I've told them not to have shops but you people others. They think they are doing it for Sahaja are the one who encourage them to make money Yoga but not. Unless and until you do something out of us? Nothing essential to buy there. Now for yourself and your ego, no use working for you have come to the holy occasion. Here you Sahaja Yoga. Look at Christ. He took birth in have come for your worship. In our Mahalaxmi a very humble abode, but He was the King. temple, there are people who are selling garlands And he lived with the poor and tried to save and things for the ladies' hair. But they say it them. He saved the lepers, He saved so many is for the Goddess. And they buy there, all the people. There were twenty one people cured people who are coming there stupidly and give by Him. Now in Sahaja Yoga I don't know it to the Brahmins in the temple and the Brahmin how many thousands have been cured. But what sells it back at a lower price. And these garlands your spiritual growth. In Mecca, do they have

 14 Volume: IX Issuue : 11:& 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze are, I don't know, how many times sold and is a big transformation taking place. In the bought and sold and bought. Because of the transformation also your rising is taking place. stupidity of the people who go there. If they There is a big evolution going on and those have to take something, they should buy from who will not be evolved properly, will be left outside. Not at the place where you have come. behind. As it is you went to Delhi, you could have bought there or you came to Bombay, you could and you will be judged, you will be left behind. have bought there, but not in this place. We You cannot adhere to people who are rising can not make this place Bombay or Delhi. higher, with your weight you will fall down. Otherwise why should we come here? That's So for you, to understand Christ, is all these why Christ took a hunter and beat them, those qualities you must have. If you are hot tempered, who were selling things near the church. Now all right, go and beat yourself with shoes. But they don't have. I have seen near the church if you are not, then you need not. You must they don't have. They have outside, but they know what you are, first of all introspect. sell other things like Catholic church sells a Accordingly, you should work it out. Ritualism wine called Benedictive. Imagine! That is another is not allowed in Sahaja Yoga, all the time. I story. Christ went for a wedding and they had would love all my children to be extremely no wine. Now in the Hebrew language, wine loving and collective, not to denounce anybody means the juice of the grapes. It doesn't mean for no rhyme and reason. If you have to fermented. So He converted water into that wine. denounce, you tell me. I know what is what. You can not convert water instantaneously into Without asking me you should not measure up wine. Wine has to rot, has to smell. The more somebody and say I have measured somebody it smells the best is taste. But they think that with what? What is your yardstick? As it is said that, this is the 'Last Judgement', Christ said you must drink. He never said that. He just converted it into wine meaning, the taste of the juice of grapes. Once I went to some television and there was a very nice man in Italy. He said, "Mother, you first give me ask. I know about everyone. May be I have not realisation." I said get some water. I put my met that person, but I can feel the vibrations. hands into it. Now drink it. He said, "It's You can write to me. Many people just telephone. tasting like wine." I said, this is what Christ That's not the way, You must write to me, did. He got his realisation. Instantaneously you because I read each and every letter. But all cannot make wine. But if somebody dies they nonsensical letters you should not write also, will drink, if somebody is born they will drink. to waste my time, like my father's mother's At any cost without drinking they are not normal. mother's thing is sick or is dead and her 'bhoot' You yourself are caught up in the web of ego. You can not condemn anyone without telling me, you have to tell me. Don't worry that this will disturb me or anything, but you should is moving about. All type of funny letters come to me. What can I do for such people. That's not the end. Or I need money. I have no money, But the people who got realisation have suddenly changed. They đon't want to drink. They have stopped drinking. Their attention has I am depending upon you for money. So please become nice. The whole thing has changed. send me money. You can ask from my This is the transformation that has worked. Of photograph. If you are a good Sahaja Yogi, which Christ has talked, Mohammed Sahib has you don't have to worry about money also. Or talked, everybody has talked about this particular I have no child, Mother what to do, I want to type when people will get transformed. But have a child. Those who have a child, ask even after transformation you do not want to them what do they have to say? So many have become what you have to be, for which you got children after coming to Sahaja Yoga. But have come here. You will be left behind. There you must deserve it.

 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 15 Divine Cool Breeze So many miracles have taken place. So many for Indian music, had to really starve for mnonths people have been cured, no doubt. But that together. They had to practice for years together. doesn't mean, you have done it. Don't get into They had to bow to their guru. That's all over the trap of 'Ego' that's most dangerous. If you now because of this "Parama Chaitanya', and destroy Sahaja Yoga, you are destroying yourself. your power to be one with the divine. The So today, you all have to promise in your heart. divine power can transform you completely, to Put your hand on your heart and say, "Mother, such an extent that anything that you want to we'll love, we will spread your divine love, do, you can do in two - three months. In Pune encompass the whole world, give realisation to when they were singing once, foreigners, as we all the people. We 'll not shout, we will not be call them with respect, in India foreigners mean angry, we will not do the all kind of rituals, but just surrender. Surrender our ego to you. Surrender it. " Surrender your ego. AlI your come. They told me, Mother, we put down our problems can be solved. Because as long as there is ego, this divine power doesn't take who don't know a word about Indian music, over. You may do anything. You are not have learnt it so well, and pronunciation of connected. Your connection is missing. Christ this Marathi language is so difficult, but they is missing. He is no more there. To establish are so good at it, it is very surprising! Now all Him, first of all you must show how you love. this has happened in your presence. It's nice But that doesn't mean, you love your wife, you have balloons here to celebrate Christ's love your children, or love your house. You birthday and all these balloons of ego should have to love everyone. Try to make everyone be burst, should be finished. happy. That's why I like music, because through music you can spread vibrations. Very good media of spreading vibrations, of loving language. Well I know English, may not be so vibrations. But those who are musicians, have good, but best thing is to learn Hindi, if possible. to be loving people. Not hot tempered, not Because there are already fourteen languages showing off, not thinking too much of themselves. in India and so many languages in other countries. All this will work very well if you understand Every country has a different kind of English that this divine power is so powerful. No doubt language. If you go to America, I don't it is love, no doubt it is truth, no doubt if you understand their English for at least two - three get out of it, you could be caught up by anything days because they go on taking their tongue and you could be finished. It is a very very and lips on one side and then on another side. powerful, effective and absolutely conclusive English of the French is another point. So best power you have within yourself. respect, not like other countries. So when they were singing there, some great musicians had heads to them, because how could these people, I will be happy if you could learn Hindi is to learn Hindi and that too a good Hindi, not Sanskritised because I feel better, if you And thanks to Christ that He crucified himself. sacrificed His body for our sake, that our 'Agnya' all understand what I am saying. It's not difficult is opened. Otherwise I could not have this Sahaja because you are all Sahaja Yogis, you can all Yoga. But in this area, we have Buddha, Christ learn Hindi in no time. I am not saying learn ' Sanskrit. Hindi is very easy. It's not my mother and Mahavira, and they had to do 'tapasya (penance), 'tapah', and they did it. You don't tongue. I never studied Hindi language, never. have to do now. They have already done that But see it's a very easy language to learn. But as my father told me, never teach Hindi language to an English man. I asked why this advice? Now see, I saw the musicians yesterday. Within He said, "there was an Englishman who was after me, that I should teach him Hindi." So Otherwise normally all the musicians I knew, he said, I have to tell my servant to open the for you. two three months they have learnt so much.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX Issue 11 & 12 1997 16 means modesty and respect style of saying door or to close the door. So for 'open the door', he said, you say 'there was a cold day' things, there is respect and a way to address he would say "cold day', and for closing the others. All this will give you a kind of more have to say 'there was a banker day'. flexible vehicle to express your love. Because But now it is different. They will pick up Hindi in Hindi language we cannot translate "I hate very quickly. I can see that. If they can learn you". We never say that. TT this horrible Indian classical music, which is I t a They cannot say. To hate so difficult, so easily, what will happen? They will learn Hindi in no time. And make me somebody is sinful. So they can never say 'I happier with that. It's not that Hindi is my but a little hard. All this is just to request you language, it is Marathi. Marathi is very difficult. that if you can learn this music, which is very It's very precise. I think it is one of the best difficult, you can always learn this simple Hindi languages to put down your ego. Tnat's why language which is very very casy and very easy Maharashtrians are normally not egoistical, because in their language there is built in process. For example some person is boasting that I have done this, I have done that. So in Marathi, tell you about Christ. But this is short time in they will say, "don't climb on a bush, or tree which I can't tell you. The way He had his of Channa." It's not so big as that. Then the own priorities! Though in the Bible He has not person is finished. Like wise there are many been described fully and whatever it might have words by which you can put down the ego of been, they have reduced it. May be, and the the man, on his face. Marathi language has so way they practise Christianity, also is shocking. many advantages. But I will not ask you to So, one has to learn Christianity through the learn Marathi language. Because Marathi language heart. No other way out. They should learn is not so easy, but Hindi you should. It's very through the heart, heart of your Mother. easy. But you must know one thing, that in Hindi language, there is 'Adab" (). 'Adab" hate you'. Just it is more in Marathi language, to talk. There are so many things, I would like to May God bless You.

 17 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze Be Close to Nature and Lead a Balanced Family Life Advice by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Evening Before Navratri Puja): Cabella 4-10-1997 t has been such a great treat for us, not understand how can you go and buy this rubbish only entertainment but the way for our of plastic, of this useless things? These future as to how to move and what to handicrafts, when I bought, I was surprised. I do. It's very surprising that the Swiss Bank must tell you about Czechoslovakia that there Business has been attracting my attention all were small smalI, very small shops and they the time. I don't know much how they can all came one by one "Mother buy something digest everything so well! n these modern times from us also, Mother buy something from us. when people are talking of democracy, talking You know I was surprised, such beautiful things, of very big ideal things and all that, at the they said, we can not sell them. But all same time how can such an illegal system exist nonsensical things people are buying. So for openly? And for that I have a plan; I have to Sahaja Yogis they must take a vow that we'll expose, I have a plan to do something about it. only take things which are hand made. You As far as the materialism is concerned, its need not have many things, you can have few. working out. All these countries who were But, something handmade. Now supposing you get a dress, there should be some hand made suffering first from recession and a terrible embroidery, or something put on that, so some recession. That recession is going to give them labour is put in into that. It is very difficult to a lesson about over production of nonsensical see how people go in for things which are very cheap and extremely troublesome. I must tell supposed to be very advanced, developed are goods. Materialism comes because, people have gone you one thing I can't wear nylon. I can't wear mad with their greed. I was searching a house anything artificial, really I can't. For a while in England, went round to see houses and I If I wear socks also, my whole body starts was surprised that all kinds of plastic things paining. So it is against. Handmade things are and mix things and all that were piled up in TeW, 1 agree, but use as far as possible handmade mountains in every house, mountains, and you things. From, the Mother Earth they make very pass through a door and you will find two legs nice terracotta. I am a socialist by temperament, of a pant falling on you. But not only in England. ! think, so I felt a great urge that I should same in Paris. I've seen people accumulating really export nothing but terracotta and terracotta so much of nonsense that they don't know where is such a beautiful thing. It's so soothing. It's to put it and what to do? This madness is on so good, it smells so well. But people think, No, we should buy something that is made in America, in some machinery thing. They go Now, I've found out a solution for Sahaja on buying like that. In America also I was Yogis what they should do? They should try to surprised that beautiful things are selling in encourage handicrafts. Every country I went shops, which they call outlets, very good, mostly to, I bought handicrafts whether it was of silk or of cotton and leather, pure leather. Czechoslovakia or England or anywhere. I cannot But people will go to big-big markets and buy and on and on.

 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 Divine Cool Breeze 1997 18 I am not saying that today, we're very changed there, means they have no wisdom, and this is and very advanced people. In a way we have what happens that the wisdom, if it is lacking gone down, because we can not walk. God has in your sense then this wisdom corrodes the given these legs to walk, but we cannot walk. society, because wisdom itself shows how We avoid walking. Now because of that there dangerous it is to go on buying all these are so many cars. I know that in some families they have five cars because five family members are there, specially in Spain. I was surprised Also, now you are seeing that people are so many cars, so many cars and every car has taking now more to Ayurveda and to Homeopathy. only one person in it. Now, problem has started They don't want to use these horrible medicines with the pollution and all these things because produced by your great country. You know what we have lost the habits of depending upon they do, Swiss? They send a very big offers to ourselves. Now see, what has happened in doctors from India to come, to work for them, Kualalampur and all these places, suffering from, supposing they have produced one 'A" sample what you call, the smoke. Now, I have not as you have shown, then the same one they done it, if you think that way, and they are change a little bit and say its better. And you praying to 'Allah' - Give us water. Why should know these medicines, most of them, are very God give them water when they are doing all dangerous and troublesome. By mistake, my kinds of nonsensical things? Now there is smoke family gave me this Antibiotics, since then my going on, why? Because they have cut the trees. legs are very weak and troublesome. I have Why do they want to cut the trees? Because they want to make money, that's all. Their wood is coming to India because in India also So, you see, why we are now taking to they have cut the trees. If you go on like mads, this? Because pollution is there, another things, you'll have pollution, meaning that destructive which is created by this machinery. Gandhiji forces will act and stop. For that you don't was saying, there is no need to use so much have to pray to the Goddess, it will work out all nonsense at a very high price and not from nonsensical things. and improved, no doubt. machinery. Now, motor car! We can walk, we and its all working out everywhere. can use trains, but people want to go anywhere by motor car even if it is about say 10 meters. So, whatever you have to have, try to have They don't want to walk. That's how our health something which is handmade. Even your clothes, has gone down. I must tell you when I was need not be many, try to have it which are studying in the school, my school was about 5 handmade. It is one of the things Sahaja Yogis miles and we had a car and we had also horses can do. They need not send money to this Swiss and what we call a Buggy in our house, but it Bank also. This Swiss Bank will be very badly was compulsory for us to walk 5 miles in the exposed now. I am angry with them for one morning. Evening time the car used to come, more thing that they had promised that they'll but morning time we all had to walk 5 miles give the money to the Jews and now they are to go to our school and in between there was going like this, they don't want to give. When a small little mountain, which we had to climb. they'll die, are they going to take it with them? That is how we learnt about nature. If you All these sins will be punished and that is why don't walk, what do you know? In the car at I am very happy, this year has brought it, because the most, you can see some lamp posts. What I had been talking about it even in the conference do you see from the car? Nothing, you can not I went to in China I talked openly about this see the nature and this walking system is very Swiss Bank. I have talked to many magistrates much out of date now for people, people don't and to many heads of the law ministry and all that. I have told them why not we have walk.

 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 19 conference and say that this banking is nonsense! and they must see the nature. What is in the Now, all types of bad people are taking advantage nature? Many of you don't know, say, I ask the name of this flower. How many of you know? nice. So many have lost their money Its a very sweet name, 'Kiss me Quick', apart there! I don't know what was the need to put from its botanical name but it is, what I am all this money there, that when they die their saying, everything you should know, you should, about small-small things. From where does this embroidery come. From where does this saree of this system and are trying to make money. Looks very children do not get anything. The problem is this greed, it is some sort of come? Our Indian men are the worst, I would an inner defect in a human being. He becomes say. They do not know anything whatsoever. greedy; greedy because he has deviated from Dharma. He thinks he can get pleasure out of But, even Western men also have the same things. He cannot and he goes on accumulating which you have not taken interest. For example. and buying. I would say your Mother also does Indians don't know how to cook. They don't that, I buy, but I buy things which are handmade. know. Once my husband told me that he knows problem. You must take interest in things in So that tomorrow if I have to give presents or if I have to sell off things even the ornaments chapatis, Rotis, and what he made was nothing how to cook. I say what? He said I'll make you've given me, I didn't know what to do! I am selling them. ornaments? I have to buy so many Ashrams, Australia, America this that. But he said I What will I do with the give up, because I was doing shipping and this, that. My family ornaments also I am sellino snipPping means shipping. But minute things you Because I spent money on my family things subtle eyesight. If you walk, look at the nature, also. Just think of it, what is all this for! What love the trees, love the animals, you'll be amazed, pleasure does it give us? I can understand if there are so many things to be known than you want to give somebody a present or somebody reading newspaper. What is there to read in you want to give some happiness, joy, you should do it. But just for yourself go on, go on. How newspaper? For hours together you go on reading much can you digest it? You cannot. newspaper. Next day you forget it. You will be amazed that, they say that for Goddess... " कटाक्ष Joy is much more in giving to others. It's e RRIT" Every glance She knows everything. not a thing that gives you any understanding of Any glance she puts on any man, woman or the fundamentals and the fundamentals is that anything, She knows where it is. And if you you are Dharma, within you is that, that is are my children you should also try that, because your valency and this materialism is abssolutely I always used to run out in the jungles, in the against it, because it creates all kinds of people forests. I used to go to all such places and Mafias, the Swiss Banks, cheats. We have really enjoy the beautiful Mother, this Mother communities after communities who are known Earth who has created such a beautiful things. to be cheats, who are very materialistic, who Have you noticed just now, that the colours of have no spiritual sense. So, for Sahaja Yogis I the background which were made by the Russians would say, of course you have said all the mantras, and the colours of this faeing thing are just the so I am supposed to do all that. But what you same, they have used the same colours. It's have to do is not to buy anymore, anything true collectivity. Now you notice in the nature, which is not handmade, try it. At least there its so matching, you know, nothing gross, nothing should be some embroidery, at least there should loud, it's so beautiful you know! This is red be some work done on it. I am surprised that but it has green to match it. these things are not very good for us, they are injurious to our health. So Sahaja Yogis must learn that they have to walk, they must walk understands everything, she does everything. This Mother Earth knows everything, she

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 20 But what do we do for Mother Earth? Is to run next day from that shop, kept it with him and after artificial thing, machinery, this thing and on my birthday he gave. These small small now new thing has come is Computer. It's all things can give you great joy, in giving people, right if you want to write letters to someone, other people, not yourself. I don't know if I but otherwise it's quite maddening and this have bought anything much for myself in my computer will make our brain absolutely zero. lifetime, never. Even if I go out shopping and We will be paralysed, we won't be able to I am thirsty I won't buy even a coca cola for think, 2+2. So, anything you want to use, also me. People know I don't buy anything for myself. should have its Maryadas. Don't go beyond it. Practically nothing, but you all give me so If you take to swimming, you'll go on swimming much, what to do! Now I have decided that till you get sick. If you are horse riding you'll after this 75 years of age, I shouldn't take go on horse riding till you fall down. See this anything from you, whatsoever. But to please is also kind of a life which has no Maryadas, you may be, they are asking that only take a like greed has no Maryadas. That's how also national or international, alright. But no more. this kind of nonsense. I am only fond of this! Every country should not bring. After all what I am only fond of this. You are a human being, is national or international. You are all you should never say like this. On the contrary international people. What is the need to bring you should say I must learn this, I must know any presents for me? I don't even have time to this, what is this all about? It is very important, see them. I am so very busy with other things, otherwise your personality will be a dwarf because there are so many problems in this personality. Ultimately people end up in money. world. So, I would suggest that try to get over I don't understand, I can't even count 200 notes. all these things and we should see ourselves I cannot, I don't know about money, I should what we are doing about. I am sure none of say, I am good at mathematics but I don'tL know you have money in Swiss Banks. Thank God. whatever money you are giving goes direct to But, never earn more than what you have them and they do it what they like and if There is no need. Whatever comes your way is somebody says how much you got for this? I alright. Of course, if you are doing some work don't know, how much for that? I don't know. of creativity, of creating some designs, creating Because I am not interested, I am not interested. some things is alright. But don't buy things, What is there to be so much interested in money go on buying things for yourself or putting ? But I get money alright, no problem, never money there, hiding here, hiding there. There's a problem. I sold one of my ornaments and I got at least 100 times more than what I have happy, being honest, being absolutely beyond spent. May be you might say its vibrations. any problem. Whatever you may say. So, to get after money is you get very much in the clutches of money. no need. You see you'll feel so satisfied and so Now, this Mafia busines is there, I agree with you. This Mafia can be controlled only So what is the solution to get rid of this by the government because they give such a greed? It's to try and give to others and see big tax. Now for example an artisan in this the joy. Give something to others, share and poor country, I would say poor, because most see the joy you feel by giving something. I of the people are suffering from taxes. One has must tell you Gregoir is not here, but I am to pay 265 types of taxes. Italians are known missing him because once I went to a saree for their art. They make beautiful things. But shop and wanted to buy one saree, but I thought they cannot, because they have to pay so much its rather expensive, why should I buy such an in taxes. Only the designers make the money expensive saree? Came away. You'll be amazed, befooling everybody. They befool people so much. he gave me the same saree on my birthday and Once my husband went to Cairo and bought I was so filled with joy, because he bought it one scarf for me. So he said, this is designers.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 21 I said this looks Indian to me. This is an Indian know, no, no I think some body gave me, I thing and surprisingly in the corner it was written don't know, I don't know. No no you better "Made in India'. He paid 25 pounds, in India find out, because its very nice. Next day they'll you could get it for 2 pounds. So another thing go around the whole place to find out if they is to run a race of eliteness. You see this one can get the same dinner set. Sahaja Yoga is (spectacles) was bought by my son - in - law. just opposite. I think you depend on Sahaja I said what is so special. He said very great Yoga. Once my husband liked one tea set. You you know. I didn't know what was so special know, London has huge big stores. Some of about the spectacles. So I went to one shop in them are really horrible. I went there. 'Baap America, and they all started saying 'Madam, Re Baap'. We walked and walked and walked Madam'. I said what is so Madam about me? Why are they calling me madam. Oh! you don't 6 months, another said after 7 months, another know, This is Cartier, I said who is this Kartiye? said 8 months. You give us the order. I gave up So I am going to put Kartikeya against them. the idea. Then Sir C.P said what has happened All such stupid ideas. You see, they bought me to their factories? I said they don't have anything, a watch 'Pathek Philips' that watch they brought they are exporting. Then I went to Australia, for me, and it would not run in time! I said you'll he amazed, and there for a special price, what is this? Never keeps the time, is always just for propagating they had put these tea sets out of time. My vibration must be trying some there. Imagine in Australia, and I got it for the tricks. So I gave it to one of them. I said Baba half price. show this to Pathek Philips. This will hit their ego Mother, very much. I said why? Because they think they are the best. I said whatever it you want just there. Just there you get it. But is, tell them, you change. It doesn't keep to if you have greed then God makes you dance. time. Then I asked my daughter to have it. I Alright! That is what is so simple as that. said Baba I can't wear it, I don't know why. Whatever you want you can get it if you don't May be I'll have something simple. That too have greed about it. That's such an enslaving again turn out to be a designers'. They are thing within us that we have greed. I mean I now, almost all of these designers are in jail can give you thousand and one examples of and some of them met me when I was coming that, thousand and one that if you don't ask from Russia. They are absolutely useless people. for anything, don't desire for anything, you get They take out some idea and sell it at high what you need. Whatever you need you get. price and if you are a fool, you go and buy But if you go on desiring then, go mad after that. Did you notice that this is Kartiye? Sahaja it go there, get this and get lost and then the Yogis are simple people. Now this is the thing thing also gets lost. That's why it is said better that there are also Mafias. I tell you and these try to develop detachment. It's alright, if it is Mafia are exploiting you. I have written this in there well and good, if it is not there doesn my book also, if you read it, that how these matter. Then you'1l be surprised your attention entrepreneurs are trying to befooling you. You will be so subtle. Now, none of you, I think, wear simple dress. Simple, a handmade will be has seen these beautiful flowers. What are there, much better than to wear something that makes the beautiful embroidery that is there, the way you look like something out of the biue and they have done this. Now, can you tell me how there is no need because it is just satisfying many there are hands in this work? Fourteen, your ego. So people have habit. Supposing I twenty eight, this side 14, this side 28. I mean have a dinner set, may not be good. They'll inclusive of all these other things. So, you don't come and see the back of the dinner table. Ahl notice anything and your attention becomes from where did you get it. I don't know, don't Mahamaya, they say it, then the Mahamaya. to so many. They said alright we promise after So if you don't have greed, you get what

 22 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 This is no explanation. Your attention, if it is an old, quite an old drama, which I had read clear, is simple, you can see the thing clearly long time back. But this is the real pilgrims and with that attention only, that attention itself, they have shown, how a seeker goes into wrong takes you to the right place where you have to ways, methods and throughout they have very go, you get the right thing what you want to nicely brought in how even a Sahaja Yogi while buy. Can you tell me, these carpets are from rising falls into different pits. So it is a very where? They are mostly from Russia. I went to good thing for you to know that if you are a Russia and I saw this carpet factory. They have Sahaja Yogi, you should be very careful and no sense of export also. So, I told them that you should see that you don't fall into these how much will a carpet cost? Doctor knows. pits and ultimately the ego and superego. In They said only 20 dollars. I said 20 dollars for the west the problem is more of ego, not of a carpet? So, I told doctor now what to do? superego and for ego, to accept that you have We have to buy many. I said how much for ego is the only way and then it will drop out. export? 200 dollars. I said in India the other If you know there is ego, ego will dropout. way round. If they have to export something Simple thing is to know that you have ego. Ego then the price is less. I said alright, so I guess, of something. People have ego of any nonsense we must think of a solution because I need it. you know. There was one lady very proud and So I asked about 20 Sahaja Yogis to go and egoistical, so I asked about her, what is the buy each one. To Russians they give for 20 matter with her? Because she knows how to make dolls, that should give you ego or what, I didn't understand that part, but this is what So you should go in for solutions and not it is. Even for small things people have ego for problems. Greed is a problem, Greed is a and all this designing and all that is based on problem. How to get rid of the greed is the your stupid ego which makes you buy all these point and to get rid of the greed is that if I buy things to show off your ego. So, try to be something, for whom should 1 buy this one? humble, and try to understand that all these dollars. I said alright you bring this. For whom should I buy? Han (yes), this will worldly things, we are not going to take them be alright for another friend of mine. Liké that. with us. They are all going to lie down. I am If you train your mind on these lines not for not saying you renounce, I am not saying you yourself but for others, then, you'll be amazed, take sanyasa, but you should know that the this greed will run away and you'll have joy. value of these things is nothing compared to As you want to give me things, I understand you. When ego comes, this idiocity comes in, that I also want to give you, in the same way you think by wearing something great you have think of all others. They are all brothers and influenced others very much. You may, but those sisters. Some other countries, make friends with who are influenced are another set of fools, I other countries. If giving is there then this greed goes away, and you get what you want, the very simple mantra. Its surprising so far, with all the miracles you don't understand that what ever we need will also be provided for must say. Once I was wearing a ring and I went to shopping in one of the places and they were so respectful to me. I said, suddenly the shopkeepers who never respect me because I am an Indian, what has happened to them? I but you must need it, not for stupid collection had gone to a shop where the lady was known of things. This was a very - very good thing, to me. She said may 1 ask you, is this real? I acted very well. I enjoyed it thoroughly, this said what do you mean real? Is this real emerald? Swiss bank laundry. I know my country suffers Yes, yes very old from my family. Han! So from it. family is very rich. No, no, It was from my Now the another drama which was done by forefathers, I am just wearing that. My God, if the English shows that 'Pilgrim's Progress' is it is real, what will be the price? I said how

 e Volume: IX issue: 11 & 12 1997 23 Divine Cool Breeze will I know? It was bought long time back, I in my head. It's alright, doesn't matter. He didn't know what I was? So he said, don't wear any flowers at all. Then he said you must wear bangles, because he comes from a very thing makes them so, that you are so great, it's traditional family. All my life I have worn bangles. not. What is the greatest thing in us is our It pleases him, what's the matter! Little little Spirit. It's the spirit that we have and we should things you do just to please him. Then he'll know that w should be proud of it that we also start thinking what should I do for my have got the spirit within us and if you become wife? But first it must start from woman, not proud then you will not do nonsensical things. from man, because women are responsible for You are people who are all realised souls and the society, In the western culture they have already you have crossed over this pilgrims stage. not told what their job is? Man's job is economics, politics, money earning. They have Now the greatest thing is to know that we made a mess out of it, I agree, quite a big are spiritual people and as spiritual people you mess. But your job is to make the society. And even dominate me in a way. If you all desire to make the society you must know how to for something, I can't get over it. I have to keep children pleased, how to keep husband accept, I have to keep you pleased. Many things pleased, how to help it out. On the contrary if I am doing just because you wanted. Doesn't you try all the time to dominate, that's not matter, it doesn't matter to me because nothing your job to dominate at all. Your job is to comes over my head. So its alright what ever make neutralize his domination by simple, simple children want let them do. But the one point is things. I'll give you an example. My husband this Ego, has to be really under control. There's is not here. He knows, I am very clever in one little more point I want to tell you, because certain things. In his office he had a gentleman. tomorrow I may not be able to say in Navaratri, I never used to interfere with his office. But there was one gentleman, good one, who gave don't know the price. No, can you get me one. I said why do you want to have it? You can have this one if you like. Like that, a small you are much above that. you see, I am bound by other things. I wanted to talk to people who are married in Sahaja up his organisation and joined another one, Yoga, specially to the ladies. I think some of because it was a private one, and he was getting them are extremely dominating and stupid. What more money so he joined it. But there he found is marriage? Marriage is honeymoon, I think. it was horrible. So he wanted to come back to Honey is the Essence and Moon is the peace. Shipping Corporation. But my husband is very Now if the women are quarrelsome, fighting, particular about rules - regulations. No, no, sarcastic, it is absolutely a hell for man. Instead no, no, now I won't have you, I don't want to of them if woman knows the essence, the honey, see your face, get out, this thing, that thing. she should know how to please the husband, to So, he came to me. Normally I never interfere. bring peace in the family. Now some of the He came to me and he said if you tell him, he husbands, are drunkards or anything, not in might listen. I said no, if I tell him he will never listen, but I know how to do it? So I told him that this gentleman came to see me. Han! Sahaja Yoga. What pleases the husband? You see in a way, it's a trick. It's a trick of a realised soul, how to please others? What do So he has come to the right person, now are we do to our husbands? Do we try to please you going to trouble me about him. No, no, them? First of all find out what he likes? My no, not me. But just think why he came to me? husband I would say, (he has gone away Thank He said why? Because he thinks I am more God) he used to say you should not wear any generous than you are. Immediately this flowers in your head. But in Maharashtra all competition started. And that fellow got the the married women are supposed to wear flowers. job. He was a great friend of his. Even in Since, that day I have never worn any flowers London he was helping him a lot. So when we

 24 Volume: IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze think that we have to control our husbands, it's see men are right - sided, they are hot tempered. better to do in a very simple way. Only on But I have told you just now, how to capture fundamentals you can put down your foot. their anger. I have seen also in the films, you Otherwise for small small things, if you go on see, all romantic scenes going on. It never dominating your husband, I tell you, you will happens. No body is like that, its all absurd miss the point. You are married for stupidity thing. So you expect them to be film heroes. or for honeymoon? And in the West, specially It's not so. You have to love, you have to take in Italy we have had very bad experience of your husband in your heart first. This is your women. English also, English girls have given duty, otherwise what else are you doing? I was me lot of trouble. I mean they are banned now. shocked, that a girl from Shillong! And this Because I can't help it. One girl from Shillong boy said "Mother you can kill me, but I will was married to somebody in USA. Imagine not have that girl here!" But she's not joy giving, from that horrible Shillong, where there is It's a fact. everyday at least 30 murders! She got such a good chance to go to US. Of course USA is also not a very great place. But she started am telling men, the trick of the trade is, if behaving as if she is a childish person and your wife is like that, try to understand why talking to him in such a manner. He told me she does it? What is her problem? Why is she Mother, she's a sadist. Whenever I telephone dominating? Or you think she is dominating to her, she talks to me in such a sarcastic you. Most of the times, most of the men who manner, this and that, that I am surprised. I talk that wives are like this, wives are very said a lady from Shillong, I can't believe it. dominating. Why she is dominating you? What's Then he told me what she talked to him and wrong with you that she is dominating you. If how she talked to him. I was amazed. I mean you introspect you'll find that you give very no man would be happy to hear all these things. little time to her. There was one lady, she wanted But she thought she was very friendly and she to have a divorce. I said why? Because he goes was joking and something like that. This does to work all the time and he is not there and not work out in marriage. Man doesn't want a this and that. But I said if you divorce, then wife to be on the horse and beating with a you'lI never be with him. Why do you want to whip. Why has he married? For the happiness, divorce. At least he gives you some time. But for the joy, for the sweetness. Its a very important if you divorce, then he'll never be with you. thing I wanted to talk because so many of women So why do you ask for divorce? I can't understand think that they are something great. Some of the logic. I mean women should not be brainless, them have some money, some of them have to say such a thing. If you want 10 divorce some jobs. But the first job is to keep the your husband for this, its absurd. Now for men society very happy and to keep your husband it is important that they should give some time, happy. It is the first job. If a woman cannot pay some attention and get some things that keep the husband happy, she is no good for us. they like. Now I'll give you again my own She is no good Sahaja Yogini. A man who is example. My husband never brought any flowers working in the office, has to keep his boss for me. You all bring flowers for me. But he. pleased. If he doesn't please his boss, he is never brought any flowers for me, whether it useless, he is thrown out of job. In the same was birthday or anything. Then I realised that way, a woman has to think about the husband this man has no sense of flowers. He doesn' in a very kind manner, because this is her job, know what is a rose or what is any other flower this is why she is married. Otherwise she should and he might bring something which is horrible! not marry, she can do what she likes. It is a May be cactus he might bring. It's better if he difficult thing to convince anyone because you doesn't bring anything because that would be If your wife is like that supposing, now I

 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 25 Divine Cool Breeze insulting, isn't it? One day he admitted I don't much of weight on my body and then I brought know about flowers, now will you tell me? it and put it properly in a box. He said when Except for roses, I don't know anything. And you'll be amazed even roses, he mixes out things. kept it nicely for one wedding, I will wear it So with such an ignorance of things if your sometime. I promised him and kept it because husband doesn't do, it is for consideration. But he does not understand about sarees. I know he men should try to know what a woman likes? doesn't understand about sarees. So if he doesn't What she wants? Moreover, men have their own understand, whatever he buys I say alright and style of thinking. Now, to give my own example he spends so much money on those things, again, better is, he buys always very expensive 45,000 Rupees! He doesn't understand what is things. So I have told him, don't buy anything real what is unreal. Nothing. Doesn't matter. for me. You don't like. No, no, I like it. But You have to see his heart, how he is giving, too much of these expensive things, why you with what love he is giving! He doesn't should buy. So he is very fond of buying this understand what can you do. Poor man! I always kind of sweater from that Scotch house. Very buy suit lengths for him. Once he said I am expensive they are two hundred and fifty pounds going to buy this time. I said better buy. He each, you know! I don't know how many I bought such aä horrible one. He went to the have. How many in black, How many? I told office and everybody said, Sir, this is not your him I'll get it from Switzerland. They are much taste. He threw it and said I will never buy cheaper there and all that. Then another is he now, you go and buy for me. See, the trouble wants to buy Kashmir coats for me, always. I is if woman takes interest and knows what sort must be having at least ten of them hanging. of colour he will like because public opinion is But he likes to give that only, alright. So I am very important for men, what the public says. passing on them to my daughters, grand daughters Like once I painted my drawing room with and all that. But what to do now? He doesn't very nice colour, pink and black mixed very mean anything bad, but because he doesn't know, nice, because it is the sign of warmth. He said doesn't know. First thing he did was to when what is this colour you have put? You should in India, before going to the Puja he went to have given this and that. I said all right, tomorrow buy a saree for me, one of my nephews went we have a party, after that I will change. Next with him. He says give me the most expensive day people came and said, "What a colour, saree that you have. So these people thought have you made this colour? He started looking somebody has come now, the shop keepers could at me. I said should I remove it? No, no, no. understand, this gentleman doesn't know anything. So they brought out a saree and said you should see that you create a good public this is the most expensive saree, the price is opinion in his presence - so that he appreciates 45,000 rupees, in those days. Alright, Alright, you. All these are tricks. I tell you we are very you give me. I have a card, will you take the simple but you have to understand. Sometimes card? Yes, yes, we'll take. He bought a saree. they get angry, doesn't matter. Actually if they It is so heavy. It is so heavy, it was something are angry with somebody else, they will come like armour. He said you must wear for the and put it on you. It is better because if they Puja. I was walking like a giant. There is a do anything to others they will beat them. You description Atisaumya...(3fa ) Atiraudra... (aa she few things about men, it can work out. Of is extremely soft and extremely terrible and I don't know, with that saree, how I sat? I sat in know, and some miserable wives. For them we one place glued down into that and now to get have divorce allowed in Sahaja Yoga. So that is up, I didn't know how to get up with that the thing I wanted to tell you that you should are you wearing it next? I said please I have Men care for public opinion very much and Mother are not going to beat them. If you understand is of your course some are very miserable husbands, I

 Volume : IX Issue 11 & 12 1997 26 Divine Cool Breeze make very good house wives very good have? But immediately they say things which Grahalaxmi. Why I am telling this is that I am will hurt. This is not the way a woman should suffering from Grahalaxmi Chakra. All the do. On the contrary, always praise, what's the doctors have told me, it is because the collective harm? By praising something you are not losing Grahalaxmis are not all right, because they are your business, by saying what a nice thing! not good housewives. Like, I tell you, we have What a nice saree! What nice clothes! What's Swiss women. They are very good I agree but the harm? very fond of cleanliness. Swiss women are mad after cleanliness. You cannot talk to them even You will really enjoy your sweetness. It is for 5 minutes. If you are sitting with them they n0t telling lies, not to be that honest, it is not are picking up this, picking up that cleaning, necessary. Because you do not like something, cleaning, cleaning! Very difficult, Swiss women. Now I was in Ilithriya, someone told me that women of Ilithriya are known to be Swiss women. So, it does not matter if the house is a little bit remain in Sahaja Yoga? So it is very important untidy. In India no woman would do that. The guests are sitting and she is with the hover! If are you to like or not like? anything breaks! In India, if thermometer breaks, they will say, it is good, now there will be no So again the same thing comes to that the women temperature. But I have seen, in the West it is have to have a heart very large heart, beautiful very surprising. Supposing some coffee spills, heart. Your Guru is a Mother. So you have to immediately they will bring the hover or something to clean it, in the presence of the and should have very very large heart so that guests! It is not important, it is a very subtle all this selfishness, even this bank will collapse type of materialism, I think, that a person is - if you do that. It is existing because you have sitting, who is a guest and why are you trying a small heart, if you have a large heart then to do all these things in her presence? But the will collapse. I have said it, specially because western women never understand. Another thing I have had many complaints about women who is, now you go to an Indian house, their colour are married here, some Indian women aiso. scheme is different and if you go to South That's why I am telling you. Best reports are Indian, their colour scheme is different. All about Russian women, I must say Vvery good have their own taste. As soon as they will enter, reports about them. They are very satisfied souls, Western women, what a colour scheme! What they want very little, they are not greedy. thing you have bought! Oh my God! Surprising! Communism has done so much good Immediately they will criticise, on the face! you must say, "I don't like it". This word has to go from Sahaja Yoga - I like this and I don't like that. If I say that then how many will to drop this - I like it and I don't like it. Who What about your spirit, what about your heart? be wonderful mothers and wonderful wives to them. It is not communism but the extremities So another point is that you must always of communism has thrown them into the area consider the feelings of others. Women is there where they don't have any sense of possession. to give proper understanding of the feelings of They don't have. Their government said, alright, others. What they think! Or they may go to an you can have your flats and look after them. Indian house which will be smelling of their We do not want to have, we are alright. food; they will eat the same food, they will Government servants were told that you can enjoy the food but try to show that it is something have your cars, but they said, we do not want lower. It is very western, I must say. If somebody to have. Because just to own the car is such is wearing a dress, immediately they will pass headache. Let the government have the headache. a remark. Very western idea, you will not find They are not the sort of people who are even good Indians doing that. I do not know about conscious of possessions. Of course, now they modern Indians as to what sort of taste they have some funny people, I am forgetting his

 Volume : IX Issue : 11 & 12 Divine Cool Breeze 1997 27 name, who was Finance Minister. He was in you use words which nobody can understand. Geneva where he learnt the trick of the trade Words should be clear cut and the melody must and he brought forth lots of reforms - so called. be there. In Indian Ragas there is melody but So now Leningrad and Moscow have become words are not important. So you enjoy the tune very expensive. Thanks to Swiss influence. This and all that, whether you know the language or has happened there, yet the people are very not, does not matter. So when you can combine good. The ladies who come from there and melody with Western music, how different it even the Romanian girls are very much respected. will be! This book will teach you. This is a Now everybody wants Romanian or Russian or very good book which you should have and from Keiv. But this time they did not come. you should understand that how the music can We are sorry they are not here. We are missing cure you, music can give you joy. Know what is the basics, the essence of music and then you can flower it out. I am sure if Indian musicians take to Western music, it will be good book, Arun Apte has written. You all much better than what it is. I cannot understand, should buy. This is a very good book. You will these people are so famous, people think they understand about Indian music. It is said that are well earning and all that. In America anybody them all. Lastly I have to tell you that there is a very this music has come from Onkara and it is very sensible music. I think all those musicians, music you must have the basis of Indian music. who sang before me, who were singing western Then you can expand it as you like. Please try songs was alright. But what was missing in it to buy this book to understand Indian music. was melody. It is not melodious. They think You must read it and you will know the essence that they are singing through their heart. of Indian music. Artificially they want to produce the effects. There is no need. To sing in parts one word and then one word. There is no melody, there and they have given me some names which are is no flow in it, while the Russian folk songs really horrid. But they must be people who were melodious. But, do not worry, Americans have suffered too much and they ask the Mother are invading that part also. They are having all to kill those Rakshasas. Now, in a way, it all this horrible music there. Now the music means will get killed in its natural course, I know that it should please you, it should give you that, if you people take to sense - because you more entertainment; not to make you unhappy, are the ones who can do it. If you do not try not to make you sad. If you have all these to acquire things which you do not want, feelings within you then you should try to say unnecessary things, if you try to reduce all like this, then you should say, yes: I have this hese things and take to something natural and problem, but I will get over it. Because you love the Mother Earth, I am sure, it will work are Sahaja Yogis, you have to show the victory. out. The Mother Earth, herself, will work it victorious nature of yours in music. I am not out. You know these earthquakes. Now nobody talking of others. They go on crying, weeping IS going in the church. I did not do anything. and singing but there is no melody, first of all. It is the Mother Earth - nobody goes in the It is just part, part, part. Even the Orchestra has never surprised. It goes like Kain kain the art pieces gone. See now, how the nature kain. But Indian Orchestra is melodious: It IS Working out! Now Islamic people, from flows like a breeze. So this difference is very from the smoke. I did not do that. When you can earn like that. But to make it a proper Lastly, today is the fourth day of Navaratri church. I did not do anything. I was sorry for Indonesia onwards, all these people are suffering bad. try to do something wrong, it comes back to So I will request all the musicians, who you. Action has a reaction. So your faces should are singing, that singing does not mean that be Sahaja, you should be Sahaja. You should

 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997 Divine Cool Breeze 28 not look like strained people. I can not understand. You are Sahaja and be in that Sahaja the harm? But that doesn't mean that she mood. I am sorry, I have taken so much time, dominates you. Stupid things you must not tomorrow I won't be able to speak about these permit. But woman must understand that her things to you. You should try to think about family is more important than father, mother that our Mother loves us. She wants us to have and even Mataji. Because I will be happy only a good family, She wants us to look after our to see the happy family. children. So I have advised all the men as well as women. It is better to be henpecked. There is no harm. But henpecked does not mean they are henpecked. Just to please your wife, what's So thank you very much. Dear Sahaji Sister/Brother Jai Shri Mataji This last issue of Divine Cool Breeze, 197 is in your hands and with it your subscription for the year 1997 ends. Kindly renew it for the year 1998 by sending Rs. 300/- by D.D. (Payable at Delhi/New Delhi/M.O. in favour of: The Divine Cool Breeze, C-17, Qutub Institutional Area, (Behind Qutub Hotel), N.Delhi-110016. Enclosed herewith is the renewal form. 1st and 2nd issue of the Divine Cool Breeze 1998 are already in the press and we hope to send it to you very soon. Please remit an additional amount of Rs. 70/- (Seventy only) in case you desire copies to be posted by Regd. Post. Thanking you, we look forward to your early susbcription. Jai Shri Mataji To Divine Cool Breeze, C-17, Qutub Institutional Area, (Behind Qutub Hotel), N.Delhi-110016. Attached is my D.D. No. drawn on Branch dated for Rs. 300/- towards my subscription of Divine Cool Breeze 1998. Please acknowledge receipt of the above D.D. Name Address Postal Code (PIN) Tel. : N.B. Please write your name and address in capital letters.

 One of the manifestations of a Guru is that he is a satisfied soul. He is just self contained.



----------------------

1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
1997
114 12
Volume: IX lesue
"You are the ones who will advertise Sahaja Yoga. Every one of you should understand that
your life is very important ai this Juncture, And you have to become that special person
who reflects reality through the Divine Love.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(Shri Krinhna Puja, New Jersey, U.S.A June 8, 1997)
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue :
North American Tour June 1997
What I Feel When I Meditäte 10
Message 11
i2
Christmas Puja, Ganapati Pule, 25-12-97
Be Close To Nature And Lead A
Balanced Family Life 17
Edited by
Yogi Mahajan
Published by : V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
North American Tour
June 1997
n Tuesday afternoon, June 3, Shri years, Shri Mataji would Herself attend. Our
Mataji and Sir C.P. Srivastava arrived hopes were soon confirmed with a call from
at Newark Airport in New Jersey. the hotel announcing that Shri Mataji,
They were welcomed by Sahaja Yogis from all accompanied by Sir C.P. and several other family
over the East Coast. Over the next few days, members, was coming to the camp.
advice was given by Shri Mataji to prepare for
the upcoming national puja and public program.
It was a moment of tremendous joy and
fulfillment for all of us to receive Shri Mataji
Sahaja Yogis from all over North America, upon Her arrival. For mäny of us it was our
as well as about 60 from South America and first sight of Shri Mataji on this tour. Shri
Europe, began arriving and helping to poster Mataji and Her family took their seats in front
and Ieaflet for the program. The national seminar of the stage and the evening's entertainment
was once again held at Camp Vacamas in northern began.
New Jersey, a rustic place in the woods
not
Altogether, the most impressive thing about
too far from New York City. The seminar began the program was the feeling of magic in the
on Friday, with organized expeditions into the
city on Saturday to poster and leaflet for the air. The vibrations created by the presence of
program the following Tuesday.
our Mother, the closeness of the large
international family of yogis, and the many
On Saturday, Shri Mataji, Sir C.P. and several heartfelt performances by talented yogis desiring
members of Her family visited Her house in to please Shri Mataji combined to create an
Yonkers, a suburb about half an hour north of atmosphere which grew increasingly blissful as
New York City. Soon after their arrival, the the evening progressed.
mayor of Yonkers paid a visit to meet them.
The entertainment began with a Bharat Natyam
for lunch, and they enjoyed the spectacular views dance by a group of children from the Boston
of the Hudson River which can be seen from
area. Afterwards they sang several songs,
the dining room. This was Shri Mataiji's first including one the children chose, called Carriers
visit to this house since it was purchased in of tine Light. It was amazing to see their poise
and grace. They were so pure and sweet in
their expression that our hearts melted, and at
North American National Puja, Camp the same time their performances were of very
good quality. Several other children performed
1995.
Vacamas, New Jersey
On Saturday evening, the 6h of June, the throughout the evening, and in every case it
international troop of yogis that had descended was evident that these are the children who
upon New York for leafletting earlier in the have grown up as the children of the Adi Shakti:
day returned to Camp Vacamas, the nowy familiar they are very advanced in their talents, radiant.
home of the last four North American Pujas,
and prepared for the evening's entertainment
program. This program promised to be their latest hit compositions. It was enjoyable
particularly memorable in one outstanding way: to hear the evolution of their talent. Many are
it was reported that, for the first time in three writing songs which call out to the seekers of
and beautiful.
Many of our Sahaja pop musicians offered
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Volume : IX Isue : 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
the West in a very touching way, and in styles to be appreciated, it won't be an appeal, people
which are very much in the mainstream of today's won't Iike such music. They 'll try some tricks
popular music.
otherwise. In this country we have all kinds of
We were also treated to several beautiful people, all kinds of music, and sometimes
renditions of western classical pieces featuring extremely stupid, but somehow they are gaining
guitar, oboe, violin, flute, piano and voice. the idea that popularity now doesn't remain
The beauty of these performances was beyond With all kinds of stunts and stupid things we
all expectation; we truly have some great classical do. They have taken, I am sure, by their own
artists living in the North American collective. urge to search the reality, a new type of style,
a new type of singing in which there is a different
We very much enjoyed witnessing the blending tune I feel is coming up, suggesting that there's
of the world's cultures that Shri Mataji is something higher we have to achieve. The idea
achieving through Sahaja Yoga. To see a group of enjoyment is changed.
of yogis from Vancouver, Canada sing one song
in Marathi and one in Russian, to see an
American yogi perform an intricate piece of not so ancient, it has no traditions. Also people
classical Indian dance, enriched our sense of are from different cultures and so they're all
the global culture of Shri Mataji's vision.
"Sometimes people feel that this country is
mixed up, confused. But in that confusion only
The other acts of the evening included a you are going to find the truth. And that's why
South American bhajan sung in Spanish, several there are people who are working out some
bhajans and qawwalis, choral singing, original sort of a search of their own. Maybe it's not
instrumental compositions, and a very humorous correct, it's not all right.
parody of a tango, performed by a yogi who is
a fairly well
everywhere in America if you go, you find
"Like the music now, you had such serene,
- known professional comedian.
By the end of the evening the vibrations had deep music, also some very collective music,
become very strong. Shri Mataji stayed patiently all types of music that you could think of, and
through the entire program, watching and listening Indian music, Spanish music, also Russian music
to Her children as they expressed their devotion
by offering their talent at Her Lotus Feet. When
the scheduled performances had come to an will have a sense of music. That's a different
end, Shri Mataji requested that all the musicians thing than music is, because music can be
take the stage and sing Jogawa, the song of the anything, but to have the sense of music that
awakening of the Kundalini. The entire weekend not only ehtertains, but elevates you, takes you
was strongly focused on the job at hand: the to higher realms of your existence, that is music.
awakening of as many seekers as possible in
New York the following Tuesday. With all our because I am sort of fond of music, but through
desire we sang a rousing version of Jogawa music vibrations can be spread much faster,
all these have combined on the stage here.
T hat is suggestive that one day the whole world
"You know how much I love music. It is not
before our Mother.
and they can also easily penetrate into your
When we finished, Shri Mataji took the being. So a person who is absolutely dry, who
microphone and spoke of Her strong desire to doesn't like music at all, or the one who doesn't
reach the seekers of America. The following is like poetry, I mean all the left - sided talents,
a transcription of the rest of Her talk :
such a person is not in balance. And that's,
"... Today I would say music, dancing, art. why it is important that one should try, even if
every kind of creativity will definitely bring
forth the spiritual aspect of America's life. They
have to come to this; otherwise it's not going America. One side is this creativity which is
you don't like, try to understand music.
"It's a very funny mixture here I find in
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
sometimes quite mad. On the other side you today, and I hope this will go on and on and
find people extremely busy, have no time to on, and you'll be studying it much more."
even sing something or read something...
extremely busy making money. Only mnoney is Mataji departed from us to return to Her hotel.
the criteria.
Soon the inevitable moment came when Shri
In the wake of Her presence we felt tremendous
"But the money situation seems to be very vibrations, and silence had descended upon our
bad here to Me for future, because of the stupid nearts and minds. Many people commented that
ideas about economics here. But whatever it is, we felt so deepened already, with the puja still
Sahaja Yogis are going to be absolutely very for
to come. On Sunday morning, preparations began
rich, prosperous, well known, because the talents for what we expected to be a Mahakali Puja.
they have will show. In every field of life vou'll Complete with slain demons painted on the stage
find every Sahaja Yogi will be so successful, backdrop. Much to our surprise, and in keeping
that those who were full of their ego, and thought with Shri Krishna's play, Shri Mataji's talk
no end of themselves, will realize that unless began with the announcement that it would be
and until you have the light of your spirit you Shri Krishna Puja. We were blessed by Shri
cannot go very much further. Because in the Mataji's attention on the problems of America.
dimensions of human mind, you cannot conceive patiently explaining how they can be solved
the heights which you can reach.
through Sahaja Yoga.
First New York Public Program
"Through music, when today you were singing
I was amazed. What a talent we have in Sahaja
Shri Mataji's amazing Grace flowed through
Yoga! I mean they are not paid for, they have the historic caverns of the Cathedral of St.
not been trained, they have not been to John the Divine leaving nearly 2,000 New Yorkers
universities and colleges of music. Just with an enlightened "attitude," and hundreds
spontaneously how beautifully they can sing of yogis from around the world a sense of love
and give us spiritual music, which really heartens and hope for the salvation of one of the world's
Me. I was very happy to see the progress you greatest cities.
have made in art and the other variety of your
expressions. Everything was really wonderful generous help of our brothers and sisters from
and
We had long awaited this day. With the very
enjoyed it thoroughly. I am sure one day all over the Northeast U.S. and Canada, the
all of you who are just Sahaja Yogi singers will Tri-State collective (New York, New Jersey, and
be professionals and this and that, but don't Connecticut) had fervently leafletted, postered,
forget Me then.
advertised and taken every opportunity to speak
of the impending arrival of our Divine Mother.
"So it's a nice time we had this evening. After the second month of advertising, complete
Tomorrow again there is going to be puja. And with huge posters throughout the subway system,
I am really, really I must say, very happy, and New York had gotten the message that this event
I congratulate you to organize this program in
America in such a beautiful manner. And all
of you are such enthusiasts. They told me how
was of great significance. In fact, at a health
fair where Sahaja Yoga was featured, a vendor
in the next booth ran over after seeing Shri
vou have been contributing, and they wouldh't Mataji's picture and said, "Oh, are you with
take any money from Me, because 1 thought Her? She's very popular!" That was the New
how could they bear all the expenses, but York atmosphere. Everyone and everything
somehow or other it's all working out. It's just - just as it should be!
awaiting Her Advent
your sweet desires, your deep surrender.
Everything has worked so beautifully, and the
oneness of all the world you can feel in America Gothic cathedral, a huge, cavernous place which,
On June 10th, they filed into the magnificent
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume IX Issue:
11 & 12 1997
at first, was about 1/4 full. It was a classic and meditation and for all those who wanted to
grand picture of New York, representing its leave the hall to leave, no one moved! It was
variety, its drama, and its potential. It was a moment to be remembered. The air was filled
apparent that many already had a sense of with anticipation of the next moment's blessings.
reverence and awe for the transformation they Shri Mataji looked at everyone before She gave
were to experience. By the end of the program, realization and said so sweetly that She felt
the hall, which holds approximately 2,500 people, that She had been hard on us and She apologized,
was full. When Shri Mataji asked those who but that we needed to hear these words, not to
felt, the cool breeze to raise their hands, almost feel guilty, but to try to understand what She
every single hand was raised. When all those was saying. The vibrations were tremendous
people came and got their Self - Realization, it and everyone felt the cool breeze.
was a truly wondrous example of what, by Shri
Mataji's Grace and by Her Attention, can happen
here in New York. The yogis knew that finally, to add to the beauty, a young Sahaja Yogini
by Shri Mataji's Grace, New York would never girl named Garima danced such a devotional
again be the same.
The moment was so blissful, and then just
piece of classical Indian dance that many in
the audience were brought to tears. To see Garima
gracefully bow at the Goddess's Lotus Feet only
moments after the audience had received
Los Angeles
Just a little glimpse from the four wonderful realization was so great.
days that Shri Mataji was in Los Angeles...
On the last day of Her loving stay in Los
When we arrived home from New York on Angeles, Shri Mataji asked all the yogis to
Wednesday, we were tired. It had been a long come into Her hotel suite (which seemed by
journey home. But just after walking in the the flow of vibrations to be Her throne and
door a phone call came with the news that Shri abode in the Heavens). As we came and bowed
Mataji was arriving in Los Angeles in less than before Her, it was a moment of the Holy Mother
24 hours. Any thoughts of being tired bringing Her children very close.
disappeared! We were suddenly revived and
beaming. Our preparations were done with such
collectivity that no one felt any pressure and of collectivity by giving us examples from Her
the ease was so obvious.
Shri Mataji brought our attention to the beauty
own life to show us how to be collective. It
Shri Mataji arrived and met everyone. It was was such a precious and important talk. We
such a joyful moment, and She had brought so were blessed to hear Her speak about Her own
many flowers with Her from New York! The
next four days were our blessed days. We relaxed married, Her new family had a very different
and rested with Shri Mataji in Her Mothering lifestyle. Her family was Christian and Sir C.P's
aspect. She took care of us all, we felt so
loved.
Imnarriage. She told how when She was getting
expect and Shri Mataji also didn't know what
to expect. Sir C.P's family was from the North
The public program was on Monday evening. and the customs were different from Her home
It was well attended by balanced people who in Maharashtra. There were over I00 family
seemed to be ready for realization. Shri Mataji memberS waiting to see Her. They were all
spoke very directly and strongly to the seekers wondering, would She wear a western style
about how they were guru shoppers in the past dress or a sari, was She fair or dark, what
would She be like?
and how it must stop now.
Her talk was very strong, and then when
She paused and said that we would have the customs, like She was supposed
Shri Mataji very sweetly respected their
to touch the
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Volume: IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
feet of an old man who had eyes red from with utmost respect. Work teams got organized
drinking. When She went to touch his feet with and we all had a chance to do whatever was
Her veil, She was surprised by his very kind dear to our hearts and also to try our hand at
and compassionate voice. Shri Mataji said She many new things. We soon learnt within our
felt so much love from everyone. Loving one small group that we had experts present who
could handle various jobs like media, advertising,
computer work, postering, cooking, writing etc.!
another is so important in collectivity.
For the marriage She had to make a sweet
dish and also some decorations. For the
decorations, She made out of dough a statue of was arranged at The Claremont Hotel, a most
Gauri and Ganesha. Her handwork was so prestigious landmark hotel that lies in the hills
intricate that many people kept asking where on the Berkeley/Oakland city borders. We went
the statues had come from, only to find out
that, She had made them, and after everyone everything needed to make Shri Mataji's stay
had tasted Her sweet dish, no one wanted to completely enjoyable. Wheeler Auditorium, right
eat anything else. Even today people still in the centre of the campus of the University
remember how delicious it was.
A very nice accommodation for Shri Mataji
on many shopping excursions to seek out
of California at Berkeley, next to the famous
clock tower, was rented for the public program.
She told us that in the collective we must
enjoy and love others and not focus on the
inconveniences or work. There is tremendous place and you could hardly find a shop or a
joy in collectivity. Another important part of pillar in Berkeley that did not have a poster
collectivity is to have respect for elders and to with Shri Mataji's beautiful image smiling out
have the wisdom to understand that they have at you. Thousands of fliers were handed out
the authority of love to correct us.
Hundreds of posters were put up all over the
and advertising was done in about 10 local
newspapers. We also made full use of our
Shri Mataji told us that She has placed all creativity to design personal and formal invitations
of us in Her body. If we are in disharmony or
behave in an asahaja manner we cause pain to out the word that Shri Mataji was coming. The
Her, but if we are collective and joyful, Sahaja response was terrific. Everyone wanted to know
Yoga works through us. She gave many, many all about it and we were intoxicated with the
examples of each aspect of collective living: joy of it all.
husband and wife, brothers and sisters, showing
us what is correct through examples.
to the program and had a great time passing
Finally, the following prayer was composed
and read to Shri Mataji at the National Puja in
It was such a profound morning with our New Jersey. It gave voice to our deepest desires,
Holy Mother. We bowed to Shri Mataji, and as allowed us the protocol of formally inviting
we left Shri Mataji's room She wanted us to Her to come to Berkeley and brought with it
have some nuts as prasad. We left with our the final touch of Her full blessings to our
hearts filled with joy.
humble whirlwind preparations.
May 28th 1997
Berkeley Program
O Queen of the Universe
O Devi Adi Shakti.
We were blessed to be Seekers
Many many Yugas ago.
We are blessed with this life today,
Having You amongst us.
On the 1" of May the great, great news reached
us of Shri Mataji's decision to honour the tiny
city of Berkeley with Her presence in the middle
of June. The preparations began and there was
great excitement in our hearts arnd a little
apprehension to be able to receive our Mother
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
performed to welcome Her. Our eyes
automatically looked at the ground. Who could
face the glance of the Devi ?
May Lord Garuda,
In all His splendor
Carry You swiftly, O Supreme Guru,
To the Holy Land of Berkeley.
The land that has trees,
There were no words to describe the
tremendous joy we felt as we stood by Her and
watched Her taking in the view from Her room.
It overlooked the entire Bay area : San Francisco
city to the west across the Bay, taking in the
Golden Gate Bridge and the Bay Bridge, Oakland
to the South, and Berkeley to the North with
a view of the clock tower on campus where
She would be speaking to all the seekers that
came. It seemed like the perfect place for Mother
to stay where all of the Bay area would be
blessed by Her attention. Shri Mataji was very
pleased with Her quarters and was fascinated
by the unique flowers which decorated the rooms
and echoed the fragrance of the Adi Shakti's
enchanting presence.
That will bow at Your very glance
The land that has flowers,
That will bloom at Your very Smile.
The Land that awaits You
With the Nirmal Desire,
To receive Your Divine Bliss and Grace!
O Devi Mahakali,
O Jewel of the Universe.
O Mother, Our Saviour,
Please hear our call.
From the Gate that is golden
To Red woods so tall,
We await Your arrival
With joy
and love for all.
All throughout Her stay She kept smiling
In the early summer evening of June 17", profoundly at those who came to greet Her.
Shri Mataji arrived at Oakland airport. As Sne Her eyes were full of compassion, Her words
stepped off the airplane it was a fourteen year were like drops of gold and Her every move
dream come true! It was Her first Visit since like waves in the ocean of love that surrounds
the autumn of 1983 and it was a moment to
Her. It was a fairy tale come true.
behold for cach one of us, as She accepted
flowers and said kind words to all. She seemed
surprised to find that there were so many Yogis We were all very, very happy. Shri Mataji made
to greet Her and was especially happy to see us all feel extremely special by noticing even
the growing number of Sahaja Yogi children in the smallest effort that we had done and
the Bay area.
All of us got to do something for Shri Mataji.
complementing it whether it was the room,
or the public program organization, or the food
During the ride from the airport Shri Mataji that was offered.
asked about a beautiful lake that She had noticed
Shri Mataji's one shopping trip took Her
during the landing with beautiful silver clouds
and commented that there were lots of seekers back to the same town of Sausalito where She
in that area. It just so happens that Gary and had shopped fourteen years earlier. It was on
Ursula Doring's new home and Sahaja centre this excursion that Her attention was drawn to
is just minutes from this lake, known as Lake a large and beautiful porcelain statue of Abraham
Merritt, and it confirmed an attraction that we Lincoln with two children sitting at his feet,
had felt in the past for this area.
one black child and one white child. It worked
out that we were later able to offer this to Her
When Shri Mataji emerged from the car and at Guru Puja in Cabella on behalf of America,
set foot in the lobby of the hotel She was the which was so wonderfully Sahaja as during Her
most radiantly beautiful being we had ever seen talk She spoke of the need to commit ourselves
and as She entered Her room She granted to eradicating racialism and that this stay of
"Infinite Blessings" to us all as aarti was being Hers in Berkeley coincided also with the
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue : 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
7.
celebration of Juneteenth, the day on which had desired to come to this city renowned for
the slaves were actually set free.
its seeking and interest in change and
transformation. Her tremendous concern for all
A luncheon at an excellent local restaurant present and Her love of the whole area was felt
had been planned, but when asked if She would by all and essentially everyone got their self
enjoy some wonderful seafood, She quickly realization. The atmosphere of the program was
remarked how disappointed the Yoginis would very light Berkeley is an easy - going city,
be who were cooking for Her and She preferred full of youth and vitality.
to go back to taste what they had prepared for
Her. It was so sweet the way She said it.
After the program it was wonderful to see
friends, acquaintances and people who for years
The public program was the next day on the had heard many of us speak of Shri Mataji and
18th of June. She started to leave the hotel at now finally had the chance to see and meet
about 8:15 p.m. and She wore a white sari that
seemed to suggest that a big white full moon
was starting out to enlighten the dark night. A
rare sight to see! And that's what happened. had no clue of the grandeur of the evening they
475 seekers sat waiting for Her to come. Before had just experienced, but for all of us it was
She left, someone handed Her a gardenia. She the culmination of many small and great moments
took it, smelled it and smiled. "Gardenias that pushed, pulled and stretched us into areas
represent eternity," She said the next day. This and projects that we never imagined ourselves
and so many other images of Her stay have left capable of. And it was just the beginning!
us feeling so happy and overjoyed today when
we look back upon these precious moments.
Her for themselves.
Many faces were glowing and some clearly
Shri Mataji was very pleased with the quality
of seekers, and was in a very good and happy
It was a splendid evening. The program started mood after the program.
with songs dedicated to Shri Mataji performed
by Matt Malley of the Counting Crows and
Stephen Day. After a short description of the drawn to the teenage population on several
events, Yogi Mahajan gave an introductory talk 0ccasions and when asked how we could save
about Sahaja Yoga together with a clear. the children of America, She said that we should
compelling description of miracle photos in a
slide presentation. Then the moment everyone Sahaja schools most of her life and was preparing
During Her stay, Shri Mataji's attention was
start a school; perhaps on Her land in New
York. She called for a teenager who had attended
The Chief of Protocol of the City of Berkeley, to enter high school in Berkeley to come and
on behalf of the Mayor of Berkeley, came up see Her. "Hello! Do you remember me" She
to welcome Shri Mataji and read a proclamation exclaimed to dispel the fear of the child as she
declaring June 10th, 1997 as Shri Mataji Nirmala entered shyly with one foot in defiance and the
Devi Day in Berkeley. This was followed by an other tugging at her mother's heart! That hour
inspiring talk given by Marcus Nobel, the oI attention was the sweetest of parables as the
honorary chair of the evening, to introduce Shri mother and child sat at Her feet and were woven
Mataji and Her vision of Sahaja Yoga to the into the exquisite brilliance and poetry of Her
every word: how She spun out truths and
medicine laced with infinite love and gentleness.
Shri Mataji's talk was very deep and powerful, The worlds of rebellion and despair were scothed
being to a significant degree absorbed by the down and given hope, guidance and renewed
audience. Shri Mataji mentioned that the first awareness. "You must seek out the purpose of
yogi of America had been attending the University your life... and take full notice of every detail
of California at Berkeley and that She always and beauty that surrounds you." But when all
audience.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Volume : IX issue: 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
was said and done it became clearer than ever on the evening of Friday, June 20, and Shri
before that ultimately the child and the world Mataji's purchase of a large 7- bedroom house
will look to the mother for accountability as to to be used as an ashram.
their children's behavior and well-being. So it
is important to find a way to their heart so that
they are able to listen to you, for they need to twice on the number of Chinese people in the
learn the value and importance of respect and airport. She then sat with the Sahaja Yogis,
obedience.
Upon Her arival, Shri Mataji commented
receiving their flowers and gifts and talking
with them for about half an hour. In the car
She left Berkeley the next day, waving at us ride from the airport, Shri Mataji spoke about
till the last minute as She departed. Before the need for an ashram in Vancouver. "The
leaving, She had given each one of us Her full
attention, warmth, love and care and most of " She exclaimed, noting the
all an everlasting hope about ourselves. She i6 vears ago, a rented house in Vancouver became
gave us the power of a Sahaja Yogi and the the city's first Sahaja Yoga ashram. Today, after
power to believe in ourselves as we lived each 10 visits and four pujas, there are well over
yogis are ready,
growth of Sahaja Yoga in Vancouver. Nearly
moment as Her children.
200 Canadians established in Sahaja Yoga. The
The love that we saw in Her eyes for those growth has been slow, but it has been steady.
three days surges up every morning in our hearts,
to be able to spread it on to others around us,
within the family and the collective and outside. Her suite at the Four Seasons Hotel in downtown
Thank you, Shri Mataji, for your Beloved Vancouver. In the meantime, yogis scoured the
attention and presence in the San Francisco newspapers and the Internet for houses in two
Bay area. We pray to be worthy of your time rapidly - growing Vancouver suburbs. Richmond
and efforts and long to see this part of the and Surrey. Richmond lies south of Vancouver
world love and recognize you en masse. We and is characterized by its large Asian community.
also want to thank everyone who came to help Surrey is southeast of the city and is known as
us, in particular all those who came from Seattle the home of most of Vancouver's large Sikh
and Los Angeles without whose help and population. The yogis narrowed the choice down
guidance we could never have managed.
Shri Mataji then spent Thursday evening at
to a few houses. Shri Mataji, however, simply
In the next six days we had daily follow- Wwent on vibrations, pointing to a real estate
ups, and a full day seminar (Sunday, June 22) listing that no one had seen.
together with Yogi Mahajan who guided us all
gently and steadily towards a greater Shri Mataji and various yogis went straight to
understanding of how to take care of all our a large house on the corner of a quiet cul de
new brothers and sisters and their thirst for the
beauty of the Spirit. We are delighted to report Shri Mataji said that this was the one,
dozen or so wonderful Yogis are settling commenting on the size of the house, and its
in Sahaja Yoga, are attending all the programs proximity to Bear Creek Park and the local
and pujas and are a great inspiration to the rest train into the city. She said yogis would be
After a short shopping trip in Chinatown
sac in Surrey. Without entering the house,
that
of us!
able to live there in peace without being bothered
The San Francisco/Berkeley Collective is by neighbours and that the purchase of the house
eternally grateful for this very special time.
would establish the Ganesha principle in Canada.
After Shri Mataji's historic decision to buy
the ashram, She rested and prepared for the
Shri Mataji's visit to Vancouver was graced public program that evening. The program was
with two historical events: the public program held in a large church in downtown Vancouver
Vancouver
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
and was characterized by a variety of entertaining collective was in New York, helping prepare
presentations before Shri Mataji's arrival. Gerald for the North American Puja happening the
Wirth led the way with beautiful classical piano first week in June. Upon their return, the frenzy
pieces that helped set the tone for the evening. began of postering, pamphleteering, and the
Gerald was followed by a performance from cleaning of vases and silver in preparation for
young Hardeep Jassal on classical Indian flute. Shri Mataji's stay in Toronto. Some yogis spent
Hardeep was followed by Stephen Day, who 8-10 hours a day postering and somehow, as
sang two original folk/pop songs about seeking always, everything got done in time for Her
and about Shri Mataji. The music portion of visit.
the evening closed with two bhajans by the
Vancouver and Seattle collectives. The music
Shri Mataji arrived in Toronto on Saturday,
was followed by a presentation of miracle slides. June 21*, at 10:30 p.m., where She met the
and then an introductory talk by Allan Morrissey, yogis at the airport individually and they
the Sahaja leader in the Vancouver area, The presented flowers.
stage was set and when She arrived, Shri Mataji
was greeted by a room of about 600 - 700 Dr. Ashish Pradhan presented an overview of
seekers, standing respectfully, eager to hear Her Sahaja Yoga, talked about Shri Mataji's
talk. Most of them stayed through the talk and background and ascendancy, and showed
received their realization. The night closed with projections of miracle pictures on a large screen.
a rousing version of Jogawa in which the entire Then a few yogis performed bhajans to introduce
audience joined, clapping and enjoying.
On Sunday, the public program was held.
the audience to Sahaja music.
The rest of Shri Mataji's visit was spent
resting in the hotel. During this time She offered about Canada's
suggestions about the ashram, how we could America. She encouraged more yogis to stay in
enjoy the house, how the children in the collective the ashram and, if they couldn't do that, then
should all be there. Saturday, before Her flight, they should at least live collectively. Overall,
She continued to shower blessings on Vancouver She was pleased with the program, and was
and the collective in the Pacific Northwest by able to have a restful stay.
talking with various yogis and giving them
suggestions and opportunities. She left Vancouver
in the afternoon for Toronto. As She stepped evening of Monday, June 23. She talked to
onto the plane less than 48 hours after arrival the yogis both collectively and individually.
and waved good - bye we realized that She had
not only touched the heart and changed the the four centres in and around Toronto have
fate and destiny of many yogis but also of a
whole city, a whole region, a whole nation. together more often, and there has been real
Canada would never be the same. Thank you, growth in the collective overall.
While Shri Mataji was in Toronto, She talked
responsibility as a part
of North
Shri Mataji departed from Toronto on the
Since Shri Mataji's visit, the meetings in
seen an increase in attendance. The yogis get
Shri Mataji, for the gift of an ashram to our
country and its people, which will be our cultural Second New York Program
centre, our spiritual refuge, our collective home.
Surprisingly, Our Divine Mother gave
permission for a second program, and with only
two weeks of advertising, almost 1,000 seekers
In the last week of May, 1997, the Toronto found their way to Town Hall. A New York
collective was informed that Shri Mataji would landmark of independent thought and freedom,
be having a program at the University of Toronto Town Hall's facade carries the inscription, "and
on June 22nd At the time, most of the Toronto men shall know the truth and the truth shall set
Public Program in Toronto
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
Shri Mataji stayed in America for nearly six
them free." It set the mood for the love of
truth that brought the seekers back and kept weeks. Throughout, She worked relentlessly to
them in their seatES - despite Shri Mataji's absence correct the dire spiritual straits America finds
rapt, attentive, satisfied, and at the same time, itself in. In Her great compassion and generosity,
ready for møre. The video showed Shri Mataji's She purchased a new ashram in Ridgefield Park,
face on a full-sized movie theatre screen which New Jersey, near New York city, marking a
enhanced the feeling of closeness to each person fresh start for collectivity and Sahaja Dharma
who had come for their realization.
on the East Coast.
What I feel When I Meditate
From The Sahaja Patrika
The Quarterly Newsletter of the International
Sahaja Public School
Vol. 1, Issue 2, September 1997
"When I sit down for meditation and gradually and medîtate to achieve a higher level of
go into thoughtless awareness state, I feel a awareness, and to grow spiritually, which is
cool breeze passing through my hands, and it the first priority in life. Just recently, in the
is not just a feeling of an ordinary breeze but last few years, I have been able to reach a real
with it comes a feeling of joy, happiness and state of thoughtless awareness and it is so
peace. To come into the state of thoughtless overwhelming that sometimes I feel that I could
awareness, I keep away thoughts, but if thoughts just meditate for the whole day.'
begin to come into my mind, I push them out
of my head. At times when I look around at
other people, at once the vibrations which I
get in thoughtless awareness stop coming. When
I am completely thoughtless, I feel I am let them pass, I let them pass and try to get rid
connected with the Divine, and vibrations keep of that situation by saying, "I forgive everyone
flowing, which Shri Mataji is bestowing upon including my own self." That is how I go into
me. Jai Shri Mataji!"
Anna Purcell, Class IX
"Whenever I sit for meditation, as soon as
I close my eyes, thoughts flow in my mind. I
thoughtless awareness. I get a lot of cool breeze
which passes through my hands and Sahasrara.
I start feeling my whole body light. I enjoy
this situation with my whole attention in Shri
Nira Nicely, Class VII
"I came into Sahaja Yoga when I was two
years old and before I came to this school, I Mataji's lotus feet."
took it for granted that I was in Sahaja Yoga
and I would be safe as long as I called myself
a Sahaja Yogi. But now I feel that I have a
deeper understanding about what Sahaja Yoga great because of tremendous cool vibrations. I
really is and why it is so important to meditate feel that I should stay all day to get these cool
and that it is not enough to just call myself a vibrations. I feel my spirit cleaning all my
Sahaja Yogi. I actually have to work, introspect chakras. Then I feel something going towards
Pragya Mahajan, Class X
"When I sit down to do meditation. I feel
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue : 11 & 12 1997
11
my Sahasrara. I enjoy these cool vibrations as of the finger (where it was cut), and there was
long as I can. When it is over, I say in my a burning sensation on the fingertip. Shri Mataji
mind, "I can't wait till we have our next put Her attention on it, and the finger was
meditation."
instantly healed! I felt truly blessed. Here I
Nanak Chugh, Class V was, having never seen Shri Mataji in person
beföre, and I had the opportunity to be very
close to Her for most of the night!
The Divine: One Yogi's Experience
After the first New York program was over, what is Juneteenth?
things were getting wrapped up, another yogi
came up to me and asked me to help him with
something. We ran out to his car and grabbed Proclamation was signed by the President
about 20 copies of Meta Modern Era that Shri Abrahäm Lincoln, freeing slaves in the states
Mataji had requested be brought to the rear of that tried to secede from the Union. However,
the cathedral where She was receiving guests. the slave owners chose to keep the news and
On January 1st, 1863 the Emancipation
information from the slaves. Not until Union
This allowed me to be close to Shri Mataji troops arrived in Galveston, Texas on June 19th.
in a fairly small room. At one point, a woman 1865, two and a half years later, did the slaves
came up to see Her. I couldn't hear what was learn of their freedom. Today Juneteenth is a
being said, but the yogi who had brought the celebration that symbolizes freedom and
books with me, a doctor, was called to Her independence of the African American people
side. After he was done, I asked him what had and is their Emancipation Day. It is a day, a
happened. It turns out that this woman had cut week and in some areas a month marked with
her finger. She had no sensation in the middle all kinds of celebrations.
Message
I wish you all a "Very Happy Christmas" and "very very prosperous New Year." I am myself
amazed at these people who have come to the academy and have picked up this difficult Indian
music so easily. Some of them have been only for two mnonths. Imagine, people spend all their
lives learning classical music and how these people have picked it up so fast. I mean, they say,
it is due to Sahaja Yoga but that means really a miracle, really miracie. Even the Indian music
sung by Indian musicians, they are today amazed. The way they have been singing like great
Ustads. I just don't know how they have done this and how they have achieved it! Because,
I know in my family there is too much of music and those who were interested got up early
in the morning and practised three hours in morning and three hours in the evening. While I
find these people coming from countries where they do not know a word about Indian music,
picking it up so fast. May be, I cannot just explain, may be in their previous lives they were
in India or may be that they are so talented. I cannot explain. Really if it is due to Sahaja Yoga,
then I must say, Sahaja Yoga is something that creates miracles within and without. I have seen
only the miracles without, but now this is the miracle within, that people who have never sung
Indian music, have never heard about Indian music, are singing so well.
May God bless you.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Volume: IX Issue : 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
12
Christmas Puja
Talk By Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Ganpatipule, 25-12-97
Si
orry I had to talk in Hindi language telephones to me, immediately I will know,
because most of the people here are what's wrong with the person. I don't say that
Indians, some of them are Marathi and you can become like me, but atleast you have
others are from North India. I was telling them vibrations to see. Also see your own vibrations.
about Christ. What was his power? His power How are you moving? Put a paper on your
was of love and not of anger, because He is the hand and you will see it will start shaking
one who has crossed the most difficult centre before my photograph.
of 'Agnya'. Those people who have ego never
realised that they have ego. With their ego they
do all kinds of nonsensical things without did you come to Sahaja Yoga? You came here,
asking me, they have done something in Delhi, not to become some sort of a leader, or some
without asking me they have done something sort of a king, but you came here to become 'a
in Russia. And it is so destructive to Sahaja
Yoga that they don't realise what they have great Guru', as you asked me, (15 Ta )
done is a crime which is punishable by alu 'Guru Pada Deejiye'. For that you have to have
Divine laws. If you want to do anything, you
must tell me beforehand. You must consult me. humility, natural balance. This is what Christ
you must talk to me, because I kow what is
happening. You don't know. If somebody wants
to cheat you, then how will you know? If you you. People get ego out of anything e.g. I met
were so sensitive, you would find out. You
would have asked me, Mother, what should we
With this ego, you can not go further. Why
in Sahaja Yoga a complete humility, natural
has taught us. At that time, I don't think people
had that much ego. Ego is a modern present to
one lady once. I found her ego very bad. I
asked my daughter, "What is the matter with
do? At least ask me. This is the main thing her? What does she do?" She said, "mummy.
she knows how to make dolls." For that she
missing among the Sahaja Yogis now that we
have a kind of a very subtle ego. If you make
has ego. What is so great than to be a good
somebody a leader, it is very dangerous Sanaja Yogi? You may be the king, you may be
sometimes that leader develops ego because of anything. Now you see the Prime Ministers
and all of them going to the jail. What are
his wife. It is a very difficult thing. They can
destroy Sahaja Yoga, completely. Anything is they compared to you? They have no balance,
possible. So before you do anything like that. they have no sense. What makes you a separate
you have to consult. I am still living, and you individual, higher people, because you have no
can ask me. You can write to me, you can "Ego'. Now people try to remove their ego.
telephone to me. At least I am there to tell There are two types, so they will go on beating
themselves with shoes. All kind of ritualistic
you.
things they do to remove their ego. But all this
But then you have to develop your balance you do with your mind. Whatever you do with
and love. That is only through this Parama your mind will give you ego only. They become
Chaitanya. It is all pervading power of divine ascetics. They are the greatest egoists. I must
love, you can develop that discretion, you can say Hitler was the greatest ascetic. With
develop that special power. Even if somebody asceticism he became Hitler. If you want to
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 13
Volume : IX Issue : 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
become Hitler, you become ascetic. In Sahaja is important is, if you are curing, you know
Yoga, you are not allowed at all, this asceticism. that you are not curing, it is the Divine Power
that is curing. You are not doing anything. It's
You have to be loving, affectionate, kind best to be like that, I feel the same way. I am
and disciplined. I must say this because when doing nothing and I am 'Nishkriya' (al)
you are loving, you go out of bounds sometimes, doing nothing. But I am not lazy. You should
because you have no discipline of Sahaja Yoga. be active but all your activity should come
Loving does not mean that you become like a from the Divine Power of love. First of all you
Romeo and Juliet. You must have your balance
through your discipline. If you have no diseipline, heart, extend your money, house, everything
you can never be a good Sahaja Yogi. From the
life of Christ we have to learn these things, to come into the house, throw her out of the
that unless and until we have these things, we
cannot become good Sahaja Yogis. Firstly,
ritualistic nature, secondly anger, thirdly important. You have to be generous, you have
miserliness, like if you go to England, it's written to be kind, you have to be loving and sweet to
there "Save pounds by taking a taxi". This is others. Christ only once went into a temple
what it is. Miserliness, where can we save money? which He had the right to do that, when He
Mother, can you give concession? It is not some saw people selling things in the temple. Same
sort of a business I am doing here. If you thing we have here and if you don't go and
make it half price so many will come. I am not buy anything from them, they'll be lost. But
using your money. I am using it for your you only go and buy things from them because
buildings. All this I have got it, of course my you have a habit of shopping. Anywhere people
money also and your money. So many things 1 will go, they must shop. It's a habit. Shopping
have done. The whole of Vashi, the whole of they must do. They will not see the greenery,
Ashram in Delhi, two ashrams and the whole the beauty of nature, nothing. When I went to
of school, and also land in Poona and other so many countries, which I had to, with my
places. Now in Poona, they want me to pay for husband. I had to go and see beautiful places
land, to pay for everything and the Poona people like museums, I never used to shop. But when
are known Maharashtrians to be great miserly I have so many children, then I have to shop.
must extend your hands for love, extend your
for love. Now if your wife, doesn't allow others
house. Teach her how to be kind and generous,
other way round for the husband. Its very
) kanjoos people. Even for their own ashram So I would go for shopping. But not the way
they would like me to pay, for everything, and that every place is for shopping. What is there
they'll nicely go and sing bhajans. See they are to shop here when you have come here for
good musicians, that's what they are. A very
very miserly people. Miserly people can never any shops? It is the holier than holy. Why
love. They love money. Egoistical people can should you go to these shops, I can't understand.
never love because they love power to control I've told them not to have shops but you people
others. They think they are doing it for Sahaja are the one who encourage them to make money
Yoga but not. Unless and until you do something out of us? Nothing essential to buy there. Now
for yourself and your ego, no use working for you have come to the holy occasion. Here you
Sahaja Yoga. Look at Christ. He took birth in have come for your worship. In our Mahalaxmi
a very humble abode, but He was the King. temple, there are people who are selling garlands
And he lived with the poor and tried to save and things for the ladies' hair. But they say it
them. He saved the lepers, He saved so many is for the Goddess. And they buy there, all the
people. There were twenty one people cured people who are coming there stupidly and give
by Him. Now in Sahaja Yoga I don't know it to the Brahmins in the temple and the Brahmin
how many thousands have been cured. But what sells it back at a lower price. And these garlands
your spiritual growth. In Mecca, do they have
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
Volume: IX Issuue : 11:& 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
are, I don't know, how many times sold and is a big transformation taking place. In the
bought and sold and bought. Because of the transformation also your rising is taking place.
stupidity of the people who go there. If they There is a big evolution going on and those
have to take something, they should buy from who will not be evolved properly, will be left
outside. Not at the place where you have come. behind.
As it is you went to Delhi, you could have
bought there or you came to Bombay, you could and you will be judged, you will be left behind.
have bought there, but not in this place. We You cannot adhere to people who are rising
can not make this place Bombay or Delhi. higher, with your weight you will fall down.
Otherwise why should we come here? That's So for you, to understand Christ, is all these
why Christ took a hunter and beat them, those qualities you must have. If you are hot tempered,
who were selling things near the church. Now all right, go and beat yourself with shoes. But
they don't have. I have seen near the church if you are not, then you need not. You must
they don't have. They have outside, but they know what you are, first of all introspect.
sell other things like Catholic church sells a Accordingly, you should work it out. Ritualism
wine called Benedictive. Imagine! That is another is not allowed in Sahaja Yoga, all the time. I
story. Christ went for a wedding and they had would love all my children to be extremely
no wine. Now in the Hebrew language, wine loving and collective, not to denounce anybody
means the juice of the grapes. It doesn't mean for no rhyme and reason. If you have to
fermented. So He converted water into that wine. denounce, you tell me. I know what is what.
You can not convert water instantaneously into Without asking me you should not measure up
wine. Wine has to rot, has to smell. The more somebody and say I have measured somebody
it smells the best is taste. But they think that with what? What is your yardstick?
As it is said that, this is the 'Last Judgement',
Christ said you must drink. He never said that.
He just converted it into wine meaning, the
taste of the juice of grapes. Once I went to
some television and there was a very nice man
in Italy. He said, "Mother, you first give me ask. I know about everyone. May be I have not
realisation." I said get some water. I put my met that person, but I can feel the vibrations.
hands into it. Now drink it. He said, "It's You can write to me. Many people just telephone.
tasting like wine." I said, this is what Christ That's not the way, You must write to me,
did. He got his realisation. Instantaneously you because I read each and every letter. But all
cannot make wine. But if somebody dies they nonsensical letters you should not write also,
will drink, if somebody is born they will drink. to waste my time, like my father's mother's
At any cost without drinking they are not normal. mother's thing is sick or is dead and her 'bhoot'
You yourself are caught up in the web of
ego. You can not condemn anyone without telling
me, you have to tell me. Don't worry that this
will disturb me or anything, but you should
is moving about. All type of funny letters come
to me. What can I do for such people. That's
not the end. Or I need money. I have no money,
But the people who got realisation have
suddenly changed. They đon't want to drink.
They have stopped drinking. Their attention has I am depending upon you for money. So please
become nice. The whole thing has changed. send me money. You can ask from my
This is the transformation that has worked. Of photograph. If you are a good Sahaja Yogi,
which Christ has talked, Mohammed Sahib has you don't have to worry about money also. Or
talked, everybody has talked about this particular I have no child, Mother what to do, I want to
type when people will get transformed. But have a child. Those who have a child, ask
even after transformation you do not want to them what do they have to say? So many have
become what you have to be, for which you got children after coming to Sahaja Yoga. But
have come here. You will be left behind. There you must deserve it.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
15
Divine Cool Breeze
So many miracles have taken place. So many for Indian music, had to really starve for mnonths
people have been cured, no doubt. But that together. They had to practice for years together.
doesn't mean, you have done it. Don't get into They had to bow to their guru. That's all over
the trap of 'Ego' that's most dangerous. If you now because of this "Parama Chaitanya', and
destroy Sahaja Yoga, you are destroying yourself. your power to be one with the divine. The
So today, you all have to promise in your heart. divine power can transform you completely, to
Put your hand on your heart and say, "Mother, such an extent that anything that you want to
we'll love, we will spread your divine love, do, you can do in two - three months. In Pune
encompass the whole world, give realisation to when they were singing once, foreigners, as we
all the people. We 'll not shout, we will not be call them with respect, in India foreigners mean
angry, we will not do the all kind of rituals,
but just surrender. Surrender our ego to you.
Surrender it. " Surrender your ego. AlI your come. They told me, Mother, we put down our
problems can be solved. Because as long as
there is ego, this divine power doesn't take who don't know a word about Indian music,
over. You may do anything. You are not have learnt it so well, and pronunciation of
connected. Your connection is missing. Christ this Marathi language is so difficult, but they
is missing. He is no more there. To establish are so good at it, it is very surprising! Now all
Him, first of all you must show how you love. this has happened in your presence. It's nice
But that doesn't mean, you love your wife, you have balloons here to celebrate Christ's
love your children, or love your house. You birthday and all these balloons of ego should
have to love everyone. Try to make everyone be burst, should be finished.
happy. That's why I like music, because through
music you can spread vibrations. Very good
media of spreading vibrations, of loving language. Well I know English, may not be so
vibrations. But those who are musicians, have good, but best thing is to learn Hindi, if possible.
to be loving people. Not hot tempered, not Because there are already fourteen languages
showing off, not thinking too much of themselves. in India and so many languages in other countries.
All this will work very well if you understand Every country has a different kind of English
that this divine power is so powerful. No doubt language. If you go to America, I don't
it is love, no doubt it is truth, no doubt if you understand their English for at least two - three
get out of it, you could be caught up by anything days because they go on taking their tongue
and you could be finished. It is a very very and lips on one side and then on another side.
powerful, effective and absolutely conclusive English of the French is another point. So best
power you have within yourself.
respect, not like other countries. So when they
were singing there, some great musicians had
heads to them, because how could these people,
I will be happy if you could learn Hindi
is to learn Hindi and that too a good Hindi,
not Sanskritised because I feel better, if you
And thanks to Christ that He crucified himself.
sacrificed His body for our sake, that our 'Agnya' all understand what I am saying. It's not difficult
is opened. Otherwise I could not have this Sahaja because you are all Sahaja Yogis, you can all
Yoga. But in this area, we have Buddha, Christ learn Hindi in no time. I am not saying learn
' Sanskrit. Hindi is very easy. It's not my mother
and Mahavira, and they had to do 'tapasya
(penance), 'tapah', and they did it. You don't tongue. I never studied Hindi language, never.
have to do now. They have already done that But see it's a very easy language to learn. But
as my father told me, never teach Hindi language
to an English man. I asked why this advice?
Now see, I saw the musicians yesterday. Within He said, "there was an Englishman who was
after me, that I should teach him Hindi." So
Otherwise normally all the musicians I knew, he said, I have to tell my servant to open the
for you.
two three months they have learnt so much.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX Issue
11 & 12 1997
16
means modesty and respect style of saying
door or to close the door. So for 'open the
door', he said, you say 'there was a cold day' things, there is respect and a way to address
he would say "cold day', and for closing the others. All this will give you a kind of more
have to say 'there was a banker day'. flexible vehicle to express your love. Because
But now it is different. They will pick up Hindi in Hindi language we cannot translate "I hate
very quickly. I can see that. If they can learn you". We never say that. TT
this horrible Indian classical music, which is I t a They cannot say. To hate
so difficult, so easily, what will happen? They
will learn Hindi in no time. And make me somebody is sinful. So they can never say 'I
happier with that. It's not that Hindi is my but a little hard. All this is just to request you
language, it is Marathi. Marathi is very difficult. that if you can learn this music, which is very
It's very precise. I think it is one of the best difficult, you can always learn this simple Hindi
languages to put down your ego. Tnat's why language which is very very casy and very easy
Maharashtrians are normally not egoistical,
because in their language there is built in process.
For example some person is boasting that I
have done this, I have done that. So in Marathi, tell you about Christ. But this is short time in
they will say, "don't climb on a bush, or tree which I can't tell you. The way He had his
of Channa." It's not so big as that. Then the own priorities! Though in the Bible He has not
person is finished. Like wise there are many been described fully and whatever it might have
words by which you can put down the ego of been, they have reduced it. May be, and the
the man, on his face. Marathi language has so way they practise Christianity, also is shocking.
many advantages. But I will not ask you to So, one has to learn Christianity through the
learn Marathi language. Because Marathi language heart. No other way out. They should learn
is not so easy, but Hindi you should. It's very through the heart, heart of your Mother.
easy. But you must know one thing, that in
Hindi language, there is 'Adab" (). 'Adab"
hate you'. Just it is more in Marathi language,
to talk.
There are so many things, I would like to
May God bless You.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
Be Close to Nature and Lead a
Balanced Family Life
Advice by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(Evening Before Navratri Puja): Cabella 4-10-1997
t has been such a great treat for us, not understand how can you go and buy this rubbish
only entertainment but the way for our of plastic, of this useless things? These
future as to how to move and what to handicrafts, when I bought, I was surprised. I
do. It's very surprising that the Swiss Bank must tell you about Czechoslovakia that there
Business has been attracting my attention all were small smalI, very small shops and they
the time. I don't know much how they can all came one by one "Mother buy something
digest everything so well! n these modern times from us also, Mother buy something from us.
when people are talking of democracy, talking You know I was surprised, such beautiful things,
of very big ideal things and all that, at the they said, we can not sell them. But all
same time how can such an illegal system exist nonsensical things people are buying. So for
openly? And for that I have a plan; I have to Sahaja Yogis they must take a vow that we'll
expose, I have a plan to do something about it. only take things which are hand made. You
As far as the materialism is concerned, its need not have many things, you can have few.
working out. All these countries who were But, something handmade. Now supposing you
get a dress, there should be some hand made
suffering first from recession and a terrible embroidery, or something put on that, so some
recession. That recession is going to give them labour is put in into that. It is very difficult to
a lesson about over production of nonsensical see how people go in for things which are very
cheap and extremely troublesome. I must tell
supposed to be very advanced, developed are
goods.
Materialism comes because, people have gone you one thing I can't wear nylon. I can't wear
mad with their greed. I was searching a house anything artificial, really I can't. For a while
in England, went round to see houses and I If I wear socks also, my whole body starts
was surprised that all kinds of plastic things paining. So it is against. Handmade things are
and mix things and all that were piled up in TeW, 1 agree, but use as far as possible handmade
mountains in every house, mountains, and you things. From, the Mother Earth they make very
pass through a door and you will find two legs nice terracotta. I am a socialist by temperament,
of a pant falling on you. But not only in England. ! think, so I felt a great urge that I should
same in Paris. I've seen people accumulating really export nothing but terracotta and terracotta
so much of nonsense that they don't know where is such a beautiful thing. It's so soothing. It's
to put it and what to do? This madness is on so good, it smells so well. But people think,
No, we should buy something that is made in
America, in some machinery thing. They go
Now, I've found out a solution for Sahaja on buying like that. In America also I was
Yogis what they should do? They should try to surprised that beautiful things are selling in
encourage handicrafts. Every country I went shops, which they call outlets, very good, mostly
to, I bought handicrafts whether it was of silk or of cotton and leather, pure leather.
Czechoslovakia or England or anywhere. I cannot But people will go to big-big markets and buy
and on and on.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12
Divine Cool Breeze
1997
18
I am not saying that today, we're very changed
there, means they have no wisdom, and this is and very advanced people. In a way we have
what happens that the wisdom, if it is lacking gone down, because we can not walk. God has
in your sense then this wisdom corrodes the given these legs to walk, but we cannot walk.
society, because wisdom itself shows how We avoid walking. Now because of that there
dangerous it is to go on buying all these are so many cars. I know that in some families
they have five cars because five family members
are there, specially in Spain. I was surprised
Also, now you are seeing that people are so many cars, so many cars and every car has
taking now more to Ayurveda and to Homeopathy. only one person in it. Now, problem has started
They don't want to use these horrible medicines with the pollution and all these things because
produced by your great country. You know what we have lost the habits of depending upon
they do, Swiss? They send a very big offers to ourselves. Now see, what has happened in
doctors from India to come, to work for them, Kualalampur and all these places, suffering from,
supposing they have produced one 'A" sample what you call, the smoke. Now, I have not
as you have shown, then the same one they done it, if you think that way, and they are
change a little bit and say its better. And you praying to 'Allah' - Give us water. Why should
know these medicines, most of them, are very God give them water when they are doing all
dangerous and troublesome. By mistake, my kinds of nonsensical things? Now there is smoke
family gave me this Antibiotics, since then my going on, why? Because they have cut the trees.
legs are very weak and troublesome. I have Why do they want to cut the trees? Because
they want to make money, that's all. Their
wood is coming to India because in India also
So, you see, why we are now taking to they have cut the trees. If you go on like mads,
this? Because pollution is there, another things, you'll have pollution, meaning that destructive
which is created by this machinery. Gandhiji forces will act and stop. For that you don't
was saying, there is no need to use so much have to pray to the Goddess, it will work out
all nonsense at a very high price and not from
nonsensical things.
and
improved, no doubt.
machinery. Now, motor car! We can walk, we and its all working out everywhere.
can use trains, but people want to go anywhere
by motor car even if it is about say 10 meters.
So, whatever you have to have, try to have
They don't want to walk. That's how our health something which is handmade. Even your clothes,
has gone down. I must tell you when I was need not be many, try to have it which are
studying in the school, my school was about 5 handmade. It is one of the things Sahaja Yogis
miles and we had a car and we had also horses can do. They need not send money to this Swiss
and what we call a Buggy in our house, but it Bank also. This Swiss Bank will be very badly
was compulsory for us to walk 5 miles in the exposed now. I am angry with them for one
morning. Evening time the car used to come, more thing that they had promised that they'll
but morning time we all had to walk 5 miles give the money to the Jews and now they are
to go to our school and in between there was going like this, they don't want to give. When
a small little mountain, which we had to climb. they'll die, are they going to take it with them?
That is how we learnt about nature. If you All these sins will be punished and that is why
don't walk, what do you know? In the car at I am very happy, this year has brought it, because
the most, you can see some lamp posts. What I had been talking about it even in the conference
do you see from the car? Nothing, you can not I went to in China I talked openly about this
see the nature and this walking system is very Swiss Bank. I have talked to many magistrates
much out of date now for people, people don't and to many heads of the law ministry and all
that. I have told them why not we have
walk.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
19
conference and say that this banking is nonsense! and they must see the nature. What is in the
Now, all types of bad people are taking advantage nature? Many of you don't know, say, I ask the
name of this flower. How many of you know?
nice. So many have lost their money Its a very sweet name, 'Kiss me Quick', apart
there! I don't know what was the need to put from its botanical name but it is, what I am
all this money there, that when they die their saying, everything you should know, you should,
about small-small things. From where does this
embroidery come. From where does this saree
of this system and are trying to make money.
Looks
very
children do not get anything.
The problem is this greed, it is some sort of come? Our Indian men are the worst, I would
an inner defect in a human being. He becomes say. They do not know anything whatsoever.
greedy; greedy because he has deviated from
Dharma. He thinks he can get pleasure out of But, even Western men also have the same
things. He cannot and he goes on accumulating which you have not taken interest. For example.
and buying. I would say your Mother also does Indians don't know how to cook. They don't
that, I buy, but I buy things which are handmade. know. Once my husband told me that he knows
problem. You must take interest in things in
So that tomorrow if I have to give presents or
if I have to sell off things even the ornaments chapatis, Rotis, and what he made was nothing
how to cook. I say what? He said I'll make
you've given me, I didn't know what to do! I
am selling them.
ornaments? I have to buy so many Ashrams,
Australia, America this that. But he said I
What will I do with the give up, because I was doing shipping and
this, that. My family ornaments also I am sellino snipPping means shipping. But minute things you
Because I spent money on my family things subtle eyesight. If you walk, look at the nature,
also. Just think of it, what is all this for! What love the trees, love the animals, you'll be amazed,
pleasure does it give us? I can understand if there are so many things to be known than
you want to give somebody a present or somebody reading newspaper. What is there to read in
you want to give some happiness, joy, you should
do it. But just for yourself go on, go on. How newspaper? For hours together you go on reading
much can you digest it? You cannot.
newspaper. Next day you forget it. You will be
amazed that, they say that for Goddess... "
कटाक्ष
Joy is much more in giving to others. It's e RRIT" Every glance She knows everything.
not a thing that gives you any understanding of Any glance she puts on any man, woman or
the fundamentals and the fundamentals is that anything, She knows where it is. And if you
you are Dharma, within you is that, that is are my children you should also try that, because
your valency and this materialism is abssolutely I always used to run out in the jungles, in the
against it, because it creates all kinds of people forests. I used to go to all such places and
Mafias, the Swiss Banks, cheats. We have really enjoy the beautiful Mother, this Mother
communities after communities who are known Earth who has created such a beautiful things.
to be cheats, who are very materialistic, who Have you noticed just now, that the colours of
have no spiritual sense. So, for Sahaja Yogis I the background which were made by the Russians
would say, of course you have said all the mantras, and the colours of this faeing thing are just the
so I am supposed to do all that. But what you same, they have used the same colours. It's
have to do is not to buy anymore, anything true collectivity. Now you notice in the nature,
which is not handmade, try it. At least there its so matching, you know, nothing gross, nothing
should be some embroidery, at least there should loud, it's so beautiful you know! This is red
be some work done on it. I am surprised that but it has green to match it.
these things are not very good for us, they are
injurious to our health. So Sahaja Yogis must
learn that they have to walk, they must walk understands everything, she does everything.
This Mother Earth knows everything, she
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
20
But what do we do for Mother Earth? Is to run next day from that shop, kept it with him and
after artificial thing, machinery, this thing and on my birthday he gave. These small small
now new thing has come is Computer. It's all things can give you great joy, in giving people,
right if you want to write letters to someone, other people, not yourself. I don't know if I
but otherwise it's quite maddening and this have bought anything much for myself in my
computer will make our brain absolutely zero. lifetime, never. Even if I go out shopping and
We will be paralysed, we won't be able to I am thirsty I won't buy even a coca cola for
think, 2+2. So, anything you want to use, also me. People know I don't buy anything for myself.
should have its Maryadas. Don't go beyond it. Practically nothing, but you all give me so
If you take to swimming, you'll go on swimming much, what to do! Now I have decided that
till you get sick. If you are horse riding you'll after this 75 years of age, I shouldn't take
go on horse riding till you fall down. See this anything from you, whatsoever. But to please
is also kind of a life which has no Maryadas, you may be, they are asking that only take a
like greed has no Maryadas. That's how also national or international, alright. But no more.
this kind of nonsense. I am only fond of this! Every country should not bring. After all what
I am only fond of this. You are a human being, is national or international. You are all
you should never say like this. On the contrary international people. What is the need to bring
you should say I must learn this, I must know any presents for me? I don't even have time to
this, what is this all about? It is very important, see them. I am so very busy with other things,
otherwise your personality will be a dwarf because there are so many problems in this
personality. Ultimately people end up in money. world. So, I would suggest that try to get over
I don't understand, I can't even count 200 notes. all these things and we should see ourselves
I cannot, I don't know about money, I should what we are doing about. I am sure none of
say, I am good at mathematics but I don'tL know you have money in Swiss Banks. Thank God.
whatever money you are giving goes direct to But, never earn more than what you have
them and they do it what they like and if There is no need. Whatever comes your way is
somebody says how much you got for this? I alright. Of course, if you are doing some work
don't know, how much for that? I don't know. of creativity, of creating some designs, creating
Because I am not interested, I am not interested. some things is alright. But don't buy things,
What is there to be so much interested in money go on buying things for yourself or putting
? But I get money alright, no problem, never money there, hiding here, hiding there. There's
a problem. I sold one of my ornaments and I
got at least 100 times more than what I have happy, being honest, being absolutely beyond
spent. May be you might say its vibrations. any problem.
Whatever you may say. So, to get after money
is you get very much in the clutches of money.
no need. You see you'll feel so satisfied and so
Now, this Mafia busines is there, I agree
with you. This Mafia can be controlled only
So what is the solution to get rid of this by the government because they give such a
greed? It's to try and give to others and see big tax. Now for example an artisan in this
the joy. Give something to others, share and poor country, I would say poor, because most
see the joy you feel by giving something. I of the people are suffering from taxes. One has
must tell you Gregoir is not here, but I am to pay 265 types of taxes. Italians are known
missing him because once I went to a saree for their art. They make beautiful things. But
shop and wanted to buy one saree, but I thought they cannot, because they have to pay so much
its rather expensive, why should I buy such an in taxes. Only the designers make the money
expensive saree? Came away. You'll be amazed, befooling everybody. They befool people so much.
he gave me the same saree on my birthday and Once my husband went to Cairo and bought
I was so filled with joy, because he bought it one scarf for me. So he said, this is designers.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
21
I said this looks Indian to me. This is an Indian know, no, no I think some body gave me, I
thing and surprisingly in the corner it was written don't know, I don't know. No no you better
"Made in India'. He paid 25 pounds, in India find out, because its very nice. Next day they'll
you could get it for 2 pounds. So another thing go around the whole place to find out if they
is to run a race of eliteness. You see this one can get the same dinner set. Sahaja Yoga is
(spectacles) was bought by my son - in - law. just opposite. I think you depend on Sahaja
I said what is so special. He said very great Yoga. Once my husband liked one tea set. You
you know. I didn't know what was so special know, London has huge big stores. Some of
about the spectacles. So I went to one shop in them are really horrible. I went there. 'Baap
America, and they all started saying 'Madam, Re Baap'. We walked and walked and walked
Madam'. I said what is so Madam about me?
Why are they calling me madam. Oh! you don't 6 months, another said after 7 months, another
know, This is Cartier, I said who is this Kartiye? said 8 months. You give us the order. I gave up
So I am going to put Kartikeya against them. the idea. Then Sir C.P said what has happened
All such stupid ideas. You see, they bought me to their factories? I said they don't have anything,
a watch 'Pathek Philips' that watch they brought they are exporting. Then I went to Australia,
for me, and it would not run in time! I said you'll he amazed, and there for a special price,
what is this? Never keeps the time, is always just for propagating they had put these tea sets
out of time. My vibration must be trying some there. Imagine in Australia, and I got it for the
tricks. So I gave it to one of them. I said Baba half price.
show this to Pathek Philips. This will hit their
ego Mother, very much. I said why? Because
they think they are the best. I said whatever it you want just there. Just there you get it. But
is, tell them, you change. It doesn't keep to if you have greed then God makes you dance.
time. Then I asked my daughter to have it. I Alright! That is what is so simple as that.
said Baba I can't wear it, I don't know why. Whatever you want you can get it if you don't
May be I'll have something simple. That too have greed about it. That's such an enslaving
again turn out to be a designers'. They are thing within us that we have greed. I mean I
now, almost all of these designers are in jail can give you thousand and one examples of
and some of them met me when I was coming that, thousand and one that if you don't ask
from Russia. They are absolutely useless people. for anything, don't desire for anything, you get
They take out some idea and sell it at high what you need. Whatever you need you get.
price and if you are a fool, you go and buy But if you go on desiring then, go mad after
that. Did you notice that this is Kartiye? Sahaja it go there, get this and get lost and then the
Yogis are simple people. Now this is the thing thing also gets lost. That's why it is said better
that there are also Mafias. I tell you and these try to develop detachment. It's alright, if it is
Mafia are exploiting you. I have written this in there well and good, if it is not there doesn
my book also, if you read it, that how these matter. Then you'1l be surprised your attention
entrepreneurs are trying to befooling you. You will be so subtle. Now, none of you, I think,
wear simple dress. Simple, a handmade will be has seen these beautiful flowers. What are there,
much better than to wear something that makes the beautiful embroidery that is there, the way
you look like something out of the biue and they have done this. Now, can you tell me how
there is no need because it is just satisfying many there are hands in this work? Fourteen,
your ego. So people have habit. Supposing I twenty eight, this side 14, this side 28. I mean
have a dinner set, may not be good. They'll inclusive of all these other things. So, you don't
come and see the back of the dinner table. Ahl notice anything and your attention becomes
from where did you get it. I don't know, don't Mahamaya, they say it, then the Mahamaya.
to so many. They said alright we promise after
So if you don't have greed, you get what
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
Divine Cool Breeze Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
This is no explanation. Your attention, if it is an old, quite an old drama, which I had read
clear, is simple, you can see the thing clearly long time back. But this is the real pilgrims
and with that attention only, that attention itself, they have shown, how a seeker goes into wrong
takes you to the right place where you have to ways, methods and throughout they have very
go, you get the right thing what you want to nicely brought in how even a Sahaja Yogi while
buy. Can you tell me, these carpets are from rising falls into different pits. So it is a very
where? They are mostly from Russia. I went to good thing for you to know that if you are a
Russia and I saw this carpet factory. They have Sahaja Yogi, you should be very careful and
no sense of export also. So, I told them that you should see that you don't fall into these
how much will a carpet cost? Doctor knows. pits and ultimately the ego and superego. In
They said only 20 dollars. I said 20 dollars for the west the problem is more of ego, not of
a carpet? So, I told doctor now what to do? superego and for ego, to accept that you have
We have to buy many. I said how much for ego is the only way and then it will drop out.
export? 200 dollars. I said in India the other If you know there is ego, ego will dropout.
way round. If they have to export something Simple thing is to know that you have ego. Ego
then the price is less. I said alright, so I guess, of something. People have ego of any nonsense
we must think of a solution because I need it. you know. There was one lady very proud and
So I asked about 20 Sahaja Yogis to go and egoistical, so I asked about her, what is the
buy each one. To Russians they give for 20 matter with her? Because she knows how to
make dolls, that should give you ego or what,
I didn't understand that part, but this is what
So you should go in for solutions and not it is. Even for small things people have ego
for problems. Greed is a problem, Greed is a and all this designing and all that is based on
problem. How to get rid of the greed is the your stupid ego which makes you buy all these
point and to get rid of the greed is that if I buy things to show off your ego. So, try to be
something, for whom should 1 buy this one? humble, and try to understand that all these
dollars. I said alright you bring this.
For whom should I buy? Han (yes), this will
worldly things, we are not going to take them
be alright for another friend of mine. Liké that. with us. They are all going to lie down. I am
If you train your mind on these lines not for not saying you renounce, I am not saying you
yourself but for others, then, you'll be amazed, take sanyasa, but you should know that the
this greed will run away and you'll have joy. value of these things is nothing compared to
As you want to give me things, I understand you. When ego comes, this idiocity comes in,
that I also want to give you, in the same way you think by wearing something great you have
think of all others. They are all brothers and influenced others very much. You may, but those
sisters. Some other countries, make friends with who are influenced are another set of fools, I
other countries. If giving is there then this
greed goes away, and you get what you want,
the very simple mantra. Its surprising so far,
with all the miracles you don't understand that
what ever we need will also be provided for
must say. Once I was wearing a ring and I
went to shopping in one of the places and they
were so respectful to me. I said, suddenly the
shopkeepers who never respect me because I
am an Indian, what has happened to them? I
but you must need it, not for stupid collection had gone to a shop where the lady was known
of things. This was a very - very good thing, to me. She said may 1 ask you, is this real? I
acted very well. I enjoyed it thoroughly, this said what do you mean real? Is this real emerald?
Swiss bank laundry. I know my country suffers Yes, yes very old from my family. Han! So
from it.
family is very rich. No, no, It was from my
Now the another drama which was done by forefathers, I am just wearing that. My God, if
the English shows that 'Pilgrim's Progress' is it is real, what will be the price? I said how
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 e Volume: IX issue: 11 & 12 1997
23
Divine Cool Breeze
will I know? It was bought long time back, I in my head. It's alright, doesn't matter. He
didn't know what I was? So he said, don't
wear any flowers at all. Then he said you must
wear bangles, because he comes from a very
thing makes them so, that you are so great, it's traditional family. All my life I have worn bangles.
not. What is the greatest thing in us is our It pleases him, what's the matter! Little little
Spirit. It's the spirit that we have and we should things you do just to please him. Then he'll
know that w should be proud of it that we also start thinking what should I do for my
have got the spirit within us and if you become wife? But first it must start from woman, not
proud then you will not do nonsensical things. from man, because women are responsible for
You are people who are all realised souls and the society, In the western culture they have
already you have crossed over this pilgrims stage. not told what their job is? Man's job is
economics, politics, money earning. They have
Now the greatest thing is to know that we made a mess out of it, I agree, quite a big
are spiritual people and as spiritual people you mess. But your job is to make the society. And
even dominate me in a way. If you all desire to make the society you must know how to
for something, I can't get over it. I have to keep children pleased, how to keep husband
accept, I have to keep you pleased. Many things pleased, how to help it out. On the contrary if
I am doing just because you wanted. Doesn't you try all the time to dominate, that's not
matter, it doesn't matter to me because nothing your job to dominate at all. Your job is to
comes over my head. So its alright what ever make neutralize his domination by simple, simple
children want let them do. But the one point is things. I'll give you an example. My husband
this Ego, has to be really under control. There's is not here. He knows, I am very clever in
one little more point I want to tell you, because certain things. In his office he had a gentleman.
tomorrow I may not be able to say in Navaratri, I never used to interfere with his office. But
there was one gentleman, good one, who gave
don't know the price. No, can you get me one.
I said why do you want to have it? You can
have this one if you like. Like that, a small
you are much above that.
you see, I am bound by other things. I wanted
to talk to people who are married in Sahaja up his organisation and joined another one,
Yoga, specially to the ladies. I think some of because it was a private one, and he was getting
them are extremely dominating and stupid. What more money so he joined it. But there he found
is marriage? Marriage is honeymoon, I think. it was horrible. So he wanted to come back to
Honey is the Essence and Moon is the peace. Shipping Corporation. But my husband is very
Now if the women are quarrelsome, fighting, particular about rules - regulations. No, no,
sarcastic, it is absolutely a hell for man. Instead no, no, now I won't have you, I don't want to
of them if woman knows the essence, the honey, see your face, get out, this thing, that thing.
she should know how to please the husband, to So, he came to me. Normally I never interfere.
bring peace in the family. Now some of the He came to me and he said if you tell him, he
husbands, are drunkards or anything, not in might listen. I said no, if I tell him he will
never listen, but I know how to do it? So I told
him that this gentleman came to see me. Han!
Sahaja Yoga. What pleases the husband? You
see in a way, it's a trick. It's a trick of a
realised soul, how to please others? What do So he has come to the right person, now are
we do to our husbands? Do we try to please you going to trouble me about him. No, no,
them? First of all find out what he likes? My no, not me. But just think why he came to me?
husband I would say, (he has gone away Thank He said why? Because he thinks I am more
God) he used to say you should not wear any generous than you are. Immediately this
flowers in your head. But in Maharashtra all competition started. And that fellow got the
the married women are supposed to wear flowers. job. He was a great friend of his. Even in
Since, that day I have never worn any flowers London he was helping him a lot. So when we
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
Volume: IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
think that we have to control our husbands, it's see men are right - sided, they are hot tempered.
better to do in a very simple way. Only on But I have told you just now, how to capture
fundamentals you can put down your foot. their anger. I have seen also in the films, you
Otherwise for small small things, if you go on see, all romantic scenes going on. It never
dominating your husband, I tell you, you will happens. No body is like that, its all absurd
miss the point. You are married for stupidity thing. So you expect them to be film heroes.
or for honeymoon? And in the West, specially It's not so. You have to love, you have to take
in Italy we have had very bad experience of your husband in your heart first. This is your
women. English also, English girls have given duty, otherwise what else are you doing? I was
me lot of trouble. I mean they are banned now. shocked, that a girl from Shillong! And this
Because I can't help it. One girl from Shillong boy said "Mother you can kill me, but I will
was married to somebody in USA. Imagine not have that girl here!" But she's not joy giving,
from that horrible Shillong, where there is It's a fact.
everyday at least 30 murders! She got such a
good chance to go to US. Of course USA is
also not a very great place. But she started am telling men, the trick of the trade is, if
behaving as if she is a childish person and your wife is like that, try to understand why
talking to him in such a manner. He told me she does it? What is her problem? Why is she
Mother, she's a sadist. Whenever I telephone dominating? Or you think she is dominating
to her, she talks to me in such a sarcastic you. Most of the times, most of the men who
manner, this and that, that I am surprised. I talk that wives are like this, wives are very
said a lady from Shillong, I can't believe it. dominating. Why she is dominating you? What's
Then he told me what she talked to him and wrong with you that she is dominating you. If
how she talked to him. I was amazed. I mean you introspect you'll find that you give very
no man would be happy to hear all these things. little time to her. There was one lady, she wanted
But she thought she was very friendly and she to have a divorce. I said why? Because he goes
was joking and something like that. This does to work all the time and he is not there and
not work out in marriage. Man doesn't want a this and that. But I said if you divorce, then
wife to be on the horse and beating with a you'lI never be with him. Why do you want to
whip. Why has he married? For the happiness, divorce. At least he gives you some time. But
for the joy, for the sweetness. Its a very important if you divorce, then he'll never be with you.
thing I wanted to talk because so many of women So why do you ask for divorce? I can't understand
think that they are something great. Some of the logic. I mean women should not be brainless,
them have some money, some of them have to say such a thing. If you want 10 divorce
some jobs. But the first job is to keep the your husband for this, its absurd. Now for men
society very happy and to keep your husband it is important that they should give some time,
happy. It is the first job. If a woman cannot pay some attention and get some things that
keep the husband happy, she is no good for us. they like. Now I'll give you again my own
She is no good Sahaja Yogini. A man who is example. My husband never brought any flowers
working in the office, has to keep his boss for me. You all bring flowers for me. But he.
pleased. If he doesn't please his boss, he is never brought any flowers for me, whether it
useless, he is thrown out of job. In the same was birthday or anything. Then I realised that
way, a woman has to think about the husband this man has no sense of flowers. He doesn'
in a very kind manner, because this is her job, know what is a rose or what is any other flower
this is why she is married. Otherwise she should and he might bring something which is horrible!
not marry, she can do what she likes. It is a May be cactus he might bring. It's better if he
difficult thing to convince anyone because you doesn't bring anything because that would be
If your wife is like that supposing, now I
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
25
Divine Cool Breeze
insulting, isn't it? One day he admitted I don't much of weight on my body and then I brought
know about flowers, now will you tell me? it and put it properly in a box. He said when
Except for roses, I don't know anything. And
you'll be amazed even roses, he mixes out things. kept it nicely for one wedding, I will wear it
So with such an ignorance of things if your sometime. I promised him and kept it because
husband doesn't do, it is for consideration. But he does not understand about sarees. I know he
men should try to know what a woman likes? doesn't understand about sarees. So if he doesn't
What she wants? Moreover, men have their own understand, whatever he buys I say alright and
style of thinking. Now, to give my own example he spends so much money on those things,
again, better is, he buys always very expensive 45,000 Rupees! He doesn't understand what is
things. So I have told him, don't buy anything real what is unreal. Nothing. Doesn't matter.
for me. You don't like. No, no, I like it. But You have to see his heart, how he is giving,
too much of these expensive things, why you with what love he is giving! He doesn't
should buy. So he is very fond of buying this understand what can you do. Poor man! I always
kind of sweater from that Scotch house. Very buy suit lengths for him. Once he said I am
expensive they are two hundred and fifty pounds going to buy this time. I said better buy. He
each, you know! I don't know how many I bought such aä horrible one. He went to the
have. How many in black, How many? I told office and everybody said, Sir, this is not your
him I'll get it from Switzerland. They are much taste. He threw it and said I will never buy
cheaper there and all that. Then another is he now, you go and buy for me. See, the trouble
wants to buy Kashmir coats for me, always. I is if woman takes interest and knows what sort
must be having at least ten of them hanging. of colour he will like because public opinion is
But he likes to give that only, alright. So I am very important for men, what the public says.
passing on them to my daughters, grand daughters Like once I painted my drawing room with
and all that. But what to do now? He doesn't very nice colour, pink and black mixed very
mean anything bad, but because he doesn't know, nice, because it is the sign of warmth. He said
doesn't know. First thing he did was to when what is this colour you have put? You should
in India, before going to the Puja he went to have given this and that. I said all right, tomorrow
buy a saree for me, one of my nephews went we have a party, after that I will change. Next
with him. He says give me the most expensive day people came and said, "What a colour,
saree that you have. So these people thought have you made this colour? He started looking
somebody has come now, the shop keepers could at me. I said should I remove it? No, no, no.
understand, this gentleman doesn't know
anything. So they brought out a saree and said you should see that you create a good public
this is the most expensive saree, the price is opinion in his presence - so that he appreciates
45,000 rupees, in those days. Alright, Alright, you. All these are tricks. I tell you we are very
you give me. I have a card, will you take the simple but you have to understand. Sometimes
card? Yes, yes, we'll take. He bought a saree. they get angry, doesn't matter. Actually if they
It is so heavy. It is so heavy, it was something are angry with somebody else, they will come
like armour. He said you must wear for the and put it on you. It is better because if they
Puja. I was walking like a giant. There is a do anything to others they will beat them. You
description
Atisaumya...(3fa ) Atiraudra... (aa she few things about men, it can work out. Of
is extremely soft and extremely terrible and I
don't know, with that saree, how I sat? I sat in know, and some miserable wives. For them we
one place glued down into that and now to get have divorce allowed in Sahaja Yoga. So that is
up, I didn't know how to get up with that the thing I wanted to tell you that you should
are you wearing it next? I said please I have
Men care for public opinion very much and
Mother
are not going to beat them. If you understand
is
of
your
course some are very miserable husbands, I
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue 11 & 12 1997
26
Divine Cool Breeze
make very good house wives very good have? But immediately they say things which
Grahalaxmi. Why I am telling this is that I am will hurt. This is not the way a woman should
suffering from Grahalaxmi Chakra. All the do. On the contrary, always praise, what's the
doctors have told me, it is because the collective harm? By praising something you are not losing
Grahalaxmis are not all right, because they are your business, by saying what a nice thing!
not good housewives. Like, I tell you, we have What a nice saree! What nice clothes! What's
Swiss women. They are very good I agree but the harm?
very fond of cleanliness. Swiss women are mad
after cleanliness. You cannot talk to them even
You will really enjoy your sweetness. It is
for 5 minutes. If you are sitting with them they n0t telling lies, not to be that honest, it is not
are picking up this, picking up that cleaning, necessary. Because you do not like something,
cleaning, cleaning! Very difficult, Swiss women.
Now I was in Ilithriya, someone told me that
women of Ilithriya are known to be Swiss women.
So, it does not matter if the house is a little bit remain in Sahaja Yoga? So it is very important
untidy. In India no woman would do that. The
guests are sitting and she is with the hover! If are you to like or not like?
anything breaks! In India, if thermometer breaks,
they will say, it is good, now there will be no So again the same thing comes to that the women
temperature. But I have seen, in the West it is have to have a heart very large heart, beautiful
very surprising. Supposing some coffee spills, heart. Your Guru is a Mother. So you have to
immediately they will bring the hover or
something to clean it, in the presence of the and should have very very large heart so that
guests! It is not important, it is a very subtle all this selfishness, even this bank will collapse
type of materialism, I think, that a person is - if you do that. It is existing because you have
sitting, who is a guest and why are you trying a small heart, if you have a large heart then
to do all these things in her presence? But the will collapse. I have said it, specially because
western women never understand. Another thing I have had many complaints about women who
is, now you go to an Indian house, their colour are married here, some Indian women aiso.
scheme is different and if you go to South That's why I am telling you. Best reports are
Indian, their colour scheme is different. All about Russian women, I must say Vvery good
have their own taste. As soon as they will enter, reports about them. They are very satisfied souls,
Western women, what a colour scheme! What they want very little, they are not greedy.
thing you have bought! Oh my God! Surprising! Communism has done so much good
Immediately they will criticise, on the face!
you must say, "I don't like it". This word has
to go from Sahaja Yoga - I like this and I don't
like that. If I say that then how many will
to drop this - I like it and I don't like it. Who
What about your spirit, what about your heart?
be wonderful mothers and wonderful wives
to them. It is not communism but the extremities
So another point is that you must always of communism has thrown them into the area
consider the feelings of others. Women is there where they don't have any sense of possession.
to give proper understanding of the feelings of They don't have. Their government said, alright,
others. What they think! Or they may go to an you can have your flats and look after them.
Indian house which will be smelling of their We do not want to have, we are alright.
food; they will eat the same food, they will Government servants were told that you can
enjoy the food but try to show that it is something have your cars, but they said, we do not want
lower. It is very western, I must say. If somebody to have. Because just to own the car is such
is wearing a dress, immediately they will pass headache. Let the government have the headache.
a remark. Very western idea, you will not find They are not the sort of people who are even
good Indians doing that. I do not know about conscious of possessions. Of course, now they
modern Indians as to what sort of taste they have some funny people, I am forgetting his
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Volume : IX
Issue : 11 & 12
Divine Cool Breeze
1997
27
name, who was Finance Minister. He was in you use words which nobody can understand.
Geneva where he learnt the trick of the trade Words should be clear cut and the melody must
and he brought forth lots of reforms - so called. be there. In Indian Ragas there is melody but
So now Leningrad and Moscow have become words are not important. So you enjoy the tune
very expensive. Thanks to Swiss influence. This and all that, whether you know the language or
has happened there, yet the people are very not, does not matter. So when you can combine
good. The ladies who come from there and melody with Western music, how different it
even the Romanian girls are very much respected. will be! This book will teach you. This is a
Now everybody wants Romanian or Russian or very good book which you should have and
from Keiv. But this time they did not come. you should understand that how the music can
We are sorry they are not here. We are missing cure you, music can give you joy. Know what
is the basics, the essence of music and then
you can flower it out. I am sure if Indian
musicians take to Western music, it will be
good book, Arun Apte has written. You all much better than what it is. I cannot understand,
should buy. This is a very good book. You will these people are so famous, people think they
understand about Indian music. It is said that are well earning and all that. In America anybody
them all.
Lastly I have to tell you that there is a very
this music has come from Onkara and it is
very sensible music. I think all those musicians, music you must have the basis of Indian music.
who sang before me, who were singing western Then you can expand it as you like. Please try
songs was alright. But what was missing in it to buy this book to understand Indian music.
was melody. It is not melodious. They think You must read it and you will know the essence
that they are singing through their heart. of Indian music.
Artificially they want to produce the effects.
There is no need. To sing in parts one word
and then one word. There is no melody, there and they have given me some names which are
is no flow in it, while the Russian folk songs really horrid. But they must be people who
were melodious. But, do not worry, Americans have suffered too much and they ask the Mother
are invading that part also. They are having all to kill those Rakshasas. Now, in a way, it all
this horrible music there. Now the music means will get killed in its natural course, I know
that it should please you, it should give you that, if you people take to sense - because you
more entertainment; not to make you unhappy, are the ones who can do it. If you do not try
not to make you sad. If you have all these to acquire things which you do not want,
feelings within you then you should try to say unnecessary things, if you try to reduce all
like this, then you should say, yes: I have this hese things and take to something natural and
problem, but I will get over it. Because you love the Mother Earth, I am sure, it will work
are Sahaja Yogis, you have to show the victory. out. The Mother Earth, herself, will work it
victorious nature of yours in music. I am not out. You know these earthquakes. Now nobody
talking of others. They go on crying, weeping IS going in the church. I did not do anything.
and singing but there is no melody, first of all. It is the Mother Earth - nobody goes in the
It is just part, part, part. Even the Orchestra
has never surprised. It goes like Kain kain the art pieces gone. See now, how the nature
kain. But Indian Orchestra is melodious: It IS Working out! Now Islamic people, from
flows like a breeze. So this difference is very from the smoke. I did not do that. When you
can earn like that. But to make it a proper
Lastly, today is the fourth day of Navaratri
church. I did not do anything. I was sorry for
Indonesia onwards, all these people are suffering
bad.
try to do something wrong, it comes back to
So I will request all the musicians, who you. Action has a reaction. So your faces should
are singing, that singing does not mean that be Sahaja, you should be Sahaja. You should
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Volume : IX Issue: 11 & 12 1997
Divine Cool Breeze
28
not look like strained people. I can not
understand. You are Sahaja and be in that Sahaja the harm? But that doesn't mean that she
mood. I am sorry, I have taken so much time, dominates you. Stupid things you must not
tomorrow I won't be able to speak about these permit. But woman must understand that her
things to you. You should try to think about family is more important than father, mother
that our Mother loves us. She wants us to have and even Mataji. Because I will be happy only
a good family, She wants us to look after our to see the happy family.
children. So I have advised all the men as well
as women. It is better to be henpecked. There
is no harm. But henpecked does not mean they
are henpecked. Just to please your wife, what's
So thank you very much.
Dear Sahaji Sister/Brother
Jai Shri Mataji
This last issue of Divine Cool Breeze, 197 is in your hands and with it your subscription for
the year 1997 ends. Kindly renew it for the year 1998 by sending Rs. 300/- by D.D. (Payable
at Delhi/New Delhi/M.O. in favour of:
The Divine Cool Breeze,
C-17, Qutub Institutional Area,
(Behind Qutub Hotel),
N.Delhi-110016.
Enclosed herewith is the renewal form.
1st and 2nd issue of the Divine Cool Breeze 1998 are already in the press and we hope to
send it to you very soon. Please remit an additional amount of Rs. 70/- (Seventy only) in case
you desire copies to be posted by Regd. Post.
Thanking you, we look forward to your early susbcription.
Jai Shri Mataji
To
Divine Cool Breeze, C-17, Qutub Institutional Area, (Behind Qutub Hotel), N.Delhi-110016.
Attached is my D.D. No.
drawn on
Branch
dated
for Rs. 300/- towards my subscription of Divine Cool Breeze 1998. Please acknowledge receipt
of the above D.D.
Name
Address
Postal Code (PIN)
Tel. :
N.B. Please write your name and address in capital letters.
 1997_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 One of the manifestations of a
Guru is that he is a satisfied
soul. He is just self contained.
