Divine Cool Breeze 11 1 Volume: X Issue 5, & 6 1998 75th Birthday Celebtrations 3380 Be Joyful! The entire universe has to receive the bubbling streams of your love. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 In this Issue: Editorial 1 Felicitation Programme Public Fellicitation talk by Shri Mataji 75th Birthday - Puja Talk 15 Four Nights of Divine Music 23 24 The Grand Finale 26 The Last Word Yogi Mahajan Edited by Published by: V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Editorial On the occasion of the birthday celebration of Guru Nanaka, often we hear his devotees chanting "Satguru Nanaka Pragatya, Miti dhundh jag chanan hoya' When Guru Nanaka incarnated on this earth, the darkness of ignorance vanished and the world was filled with effulgent light. Guru Nanaka was a realised soul, a Guru, a saint who could give realisation to only two of his followers. But the mother Adishakti - whom Adi Sankaracharya, in his great hymn, describes as under: अविद्याना-मन्त-स्तिमिर-मिहिर द्वीप-नगरी, जड़ानां चैतन्य-स्तबक-मकरन्द-सुतिझरी। दरिद्राणां चिन्तामणि गुणनिका जन्म जलधौ, निमग्नानां दंष्ट्रा मुररिपु - वराहस्य भवति ॥ Avidyaham antas - timira - mihira - dvipa nagari, Jadanam chaitanya - stabaka-makranda - Snuti jhari Dridranam Chintamani - gunanika janma -jaladhau, Nimagnanam danstra mura-ripu - varahasya bhavti (Saundarya Lahri) The dust of Thy feet, O Devi, is the island city, where from takes place the luminous sun rise of spiritual illumination driving away the over-casting darkness of ignorance in the hearts of devotees. It forms the cluster of flower buds, from which gushes forth the nector of intelligence, enlightening the dull witted. It is a veritable necklace of wish-yielding gems for the poverty stricken. And for those immersed in the ocean of Samsara, it becomes their uplifter like the tusk of Vishnu (which raised the earth from submergence in pralaya waters, when He incarnated as the cosmic Boar, Varahavtara). Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi is the only source of spiritual enlightenment. One of Her glance (Kataksha) is enough to give self-realisation to thousands and thousands of seekers enmasse. In Public Programmes most of the seekers raise their hands confirming that their Kundalini is awakened and that they have felt the Divine Cool Breeze (Chaitanya Lehri) on their Sahasrara. She is Sahaja Yoga Dayini. A glimpse of Her washes away the sins of all previous lives. ('Tujh ditthe Sache Patshah Mal Janam Janam Di Katiye' says Guru Nanaka). 75th Birthday of this Maha-Avtara, the perfect incarnation who incarnated on this earth, in the Mahamaya form, fell on 21st March 1998. The Sandrakaruna, The Beloved Mother of all Sahaja Yogis had been kind enough to bless the capital of India to organise the 75th Birthday celebrations. All hearts went out in Joy! It is a life-time opportunity for many of us! It should be a grand function! It should be an event of the century! Ejaculated some of the Sahaja Yogis. The Divine Forces, from all over the world joined hands to do their bit to make the occasion memorable. Bharatiyam the scouts ground of Delhi - was once again chosen to be the venue. Five splendid Toran Dwars (Welcome Gates) were put, the 5th, the entry to the pandal, was a Palace Gate (Hawa Mahal) made in Jaipur style. Many beautiful chandeliers and luminous lights were put in the high-domed ceiling of the auditorium. Ten feet wide wooden platform was erected around the auditorium to increase the seating capacity. The exuberant back-drop of the stage was prepared by Mr Khobar-the Sahaja Yogi horticulturist not with colour and brush but with the lúsh green hilly plants embedded in soil, studded with stones. It looked like a small hillock from the bosom of which the water was falling and making it look heavenly. Small candle lights put on it, on the Birthday, reminded the Indian seckers of

 Volume X Issue: 4,5,6 1998 Dlvine Cool Breeze the mythical Drongiri Mountain which Hanumana had brought to cure Lakshmana of the vanom of enemy's arrow. Delhi Yuva Shakti worked round the clock to decorate the stage and the auditorium which had a capacity to seat 8000 people. Out of the various committees made, one was to receive and accommodate Sahaja Yogis pouring in from abroad and from various parts of the country. A huge hanger was put as Dining Hall where more than 3000 Sahaja Yogis could take their meals. Every Sahaji- men or women, from the country or abroad The only desire, the purest one, was to please our beloved Divine Mother. Every heart prayed: -was there to pour out his heart. prapannarti hare Prasid, Prasid Mart Jag to Khilasya Prasid Vishveshwari pahi Vishvam, Twamishavari Devi Chara Charsaya O Devi, the remover of pain and sufferings of the devotees! Pray be happy! O Mother of the universe, be happy! O Goddess of the world, pray protect this world. O Devil The whole universe depends upon Thee. Thou art the sole support of this world, since thou have established thyself in the form of Mother Earth. Pray be happy. Always true to Her promise Pushpam, Phalam, Toyam" The Divine Mother blessed the international collectivity of Sahaja Yogis, with constant flow of Chaitanya. For six days and nights all of us swam in the ocean of Divine Cool Vibrations that emanated from our Divine Mother. Salutations to Thee, O, Mother Divine! Salutations to thee again and again! तनियासं पांसुं तव चरण - पड्गेरुह - भवं, विरिचि: संचिन्वन विरचयति लोका - न विकलम्। बहुत्येन शौरिः कथमपि सहस्रेणं शिरसां, हरः संक्षुदयैतं भजति भसितोद्धूलन - विधिम् (सौन्दर्य लहरी) Taniyamsam pamsum tava, Charana - pankeruha - bhavam Virinchi Samchinvan Virchayati, Lokan - avikalam; Vahatyenam Shaurih Kathamapi, Sahasrena Shrisam Harah Sankhshudyanam blhajati, Bhasitoddhoolana - vidhim Gathering a minute particle of dust from thy lotus feet, Brahma, the creator, brings into being this universe (limitless and mysterious) without any imperfection, the sustentator Vishnu as Adisheha somehow supports this universe (made out of that dust particle) with his thousands hoods. And Mahesha the destroyer, crushing that particle of dust into powder, rubs the ashes all over His body (at the time of dissolution - Pralaya) O, beloved Mother of all Sahaja Yogis, O, Mahamaya incarnate, we the Sahajis from all over the world pray to Thee, with our heart, that please bless us to be the smallest molecule of the dust of Thy Lotus Feet and let the meditation of your Holy Feet be the only joy for us.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X lssue 4,5,6 1998 Felicitation Programme he Bismillah (20.3.98) of the Prakashotsava The Festival of Enlightenment- was made with the colourful Felicitation blessing, just like the Ganges out of the Gangotri. That its what you are! You are goodness incarnate in human form; that is Programme. Besides our beloved Divine Mother and what I call her! Mother, I want to speak for hours I Sir C.P. Srivastava, the function was graced by must speak as tall as I am, but I cannot do it because honourable distinguished guests and Sahaja Yogi I have to catch a train. You will excuse me, but I brothers and sisters from all over the globe and various parts of the country. Shri Balram Jakhad - Former Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri P. ll of us in this bodily form, benign blessing-giving Chidambaram Former Finance Minister of India, Shri Sunder Lal Patwaji- Former Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh. Shri Aizaj Rizvi- Food and Civil Supplies Minister of U.P. and Chairman, Minority Shri P. Chidambaram (Former Finance Minister Cell, BJP and Shri Rahul Bajaj – the renowned of India) eruditely said: Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala industrialist were amongst those who felicitated Shri Deviji, Sahaja Yogis, distinguished guests. This is Mataji and expressed their gratitude to the Divinity. my second meeting with Shri Mataji, my first want to say one thing from all of us here, there will be one tribute for us always, please continue with and healthy with a good smile as ever. meeting with Sahaja Yogis and to be candid I feel quite bewildered and quite humbled. I ask myself Shri Balram Jakhad (M.P. and Former Speaker of what brings so many of you from all parts of the the Lok Sabha) started in Hindi language. Wishing world, from all parts of India, from all parts of this long life to Shri Mataji, he shifted over to English great city on this occasion? What moves 5000 people and said: "All around I see faces from all over the belonging to different faiths, different communities, different backgrounds together under one tent? What world. That is brotherhood, that is what human kind is, that is Her greatness because in our own Shastras inspires so many of you to be so devoted, so we have said one thing, our forefathers said it: humbled, so united, so joyful? I ask myself if all this can happen to 5000 people on one evening, why cannot this happen to 5 billion people of this world? And in the more limited way, why cannot it happen सर्वे भवन्तु सुखिनाः सर्वे सन्तु निरामया: सर्वे भद्राणों पश्यन्तु, माँ कश्चित् दुःख भाग भवेत No body should be hurt, nobody should be in pain. everybody should be good. That is what She is, that is what She does for others and secondly She has proved to the whole world that the whole world is one brotherhood Te a han a his whole earth is one). to 95 crores people living in this great ancient land? Sister Nivedita was one of the principal disciples of Swami Vivekananda. Her biographer wrote and I quote- "Faith is not built on the syllogistic foundations of reason, hut is built on the unseen rock of intution." The people of the world don't realise it but the time has come to realise what our forefathers have said. What She epitomises today is Faith has moved all of you to this place, love has united you and I join all of you in paying homage a fara v e e F where the whole world is and seeking the blessings of Shri Mataji. I am too supposed to be a single nest. It is not much bigger, it small, too insignificant, to ask anything more except is like a small nest, in which we all have to exist That is due to Her love, Her blessings, That is what here, and all the Saliaja Yogis and all the people of I wish that we should live for each other, to stay always healthy, always benign. What can I says, It seek your guidance. Guide the people of this world. is a question, it is a flow, it is a flow of love, affection, the world. I seek your blessings. I seek your love, I Thank you very much.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 4,5,6 1998 Mr. Philips Zeiss (Germany) The nature has nourished a billion planEs But never been able to equilize you in motherly love, Humorously playing with the three minutes time AIl the birds are singing the praise of your name in limit, imposed by the organisers, displayed his balance of mind, a boon bestowed by Shri Mataji. But have never been able to name all your qualities, He expressed his gratitude as under: morning hours, The learned man have filled billions of pages with Holy Mother, most respected Sir C.P., honoured knowledge. guests and dearest Sahaja Yogi brothers and sisters from all over the world. Yesterday the organisers Wisdom. have asked us to contribute to tonight's programme But have never been able to reflect a glimpse of your wisdom. The Musicians have composed billions of harmonies But they never matched the effect of your smile. with very short addresses; infact they have asked to speak for no longer than three minutes. So I find The poets have written billions of verses myself facing one of the fundamental problems, each and every Sahaja Yogi is facing in his relationship your Divine Being to his Mother, Shri Mataji. How can I express my love and gratitude to Shri Mataji? How should I do it in only three minutes? And I thought that only with the powers, Shri Mataji has bestowed upon Her Expressing his gratitude, Sh. Gregoire de children in Sahaja Yoga, I can manage this task. Shri Kalbermatten (Senior Officer in the Environment Mataji you are the Primordial Mother, having taken eld of United Nations) said: Shri Mataji, Sir C.P. your birth in 20th century, how can I thank you only excellency, distinguished guests, (Shri Mataji I must three minutes? You are the Avatara (ra) of the confess that I reached Philips' anguish and thank you modern time, who have descended for the for the two minutes.) emancipation and salvation of the mankind. How Shri Mataji two years ago I was sitting in a plane, I then I can thank you only in three minutes? Shri was coming for your birthday and I was wondering Mataji you are the mother of thousands, thousands what kind of gift I could bring you! That turned out and thousands of Sahaja Yogis to whom you have to be a puzzling question. What handicraft for given the most precious gift, the Divine can bestow Bhagwan who created art, what candle for the sun, upon human beings, self-realization, awakening, what milk for the moon, what drop of water for the rebirth. How then Shri Mataji can I thank you only ocean, and then Shri Mataji, I found out that we have in three minutes? Talking about myself when I first something you don't have.. We can walk from met you Shri Mataji I was nothing but a youngman, darkness towards light, You can't. We can move from lost and confused and without any orientation and slavery towards freedom-you can't-you are the you have not only given me rebirth and self- realisation but even more; you have given me a and ego towards a state of bliss and of recognition. material existence, you have given me a wonderful This you can't- Shri Mataji you can't recognise family, you have given me a profession, you have the Divinity because you are what you are, you have given me a social position, you have given me a status and much more above that, you have given you can't. And this, my friends, is the secret of what me a position in Sahaja Yoga from where I can help in India they call it Leela, because God needed our and contribute to your Divine Mission, Shri Mataji. consciousness to discover, how fantastic it is to How then can I thank you only in three minutes Shri discover Divinity, without us how should you do it? Mataji? So you all can imagine I found myself in a So Shri Mataji we offer you for your birthday, this big dilemma, when I was thinking what to say tonight pilgrimage from darkness towards light, from and one hour before I left I got an inspiration and I enslavement towards freedom. We pledge that we took refuge to poetry: But have never been able to describe the magic of How then can I be able to thank you only in three minutes? essence of freedon, We can move from conditioning been, you willever be, but we can discover you but will do some justice to your message, that we will improve ourselves. Shri Mataji, we express our deep deep gratitude and love and just with your permission I end, (I think I am within that five minutes) with just a last thing I want to say, Shri Mataji because The Star shines a billion nights And still not able to express your beauty, The Sun is shining a billion days And is yet not able to reflect your light,

 Volume: X issue: 4,5,6 1998 Divine Cool Breeze 5 we are in this land of Bharata that we very deeply myself singularly fortunate to be standing here before respect and we pray that this foundation of wisdom you today to participate in these momentous will bless the world through you message. What I celebrations. Mr. Chidambram asked one question, he said, how is it that so many people are here, today, from all parts of the world; what is it that brings I want to narrate one incident to you want to say Shri Mataji is this Gurur Brahma, Gurur Vishnu, Gurur Devo them here? Maheshwara, Gurur Sakshat Parbrahma, Shri Mataji Nirmala Ma, Tasmai Shri Gurüve Namah. which will probably illustrate how this Divine Lady has built up Sahaja Yoga, step by step, on the basis of very devoted and very persistent hard work. I recall a day in 1974. I had taken up a job in London, Dr. Brian Wells (Medical Director of the largest Mental Health Organization of U.K.) called Sahaja Yoga The Perfect Science, The Pure Science, The Divine Science.' He spoke as follows we were living in a place called Oxtead and Surrey, Away from London. I used to commute and you know I am talking of 24 years ago. One evening when I returned home, I found in my home-I expected to see my wife with some domestic help, but instead I saw, sitting in the drawing room on a sofa, a young is also a humbling experience and as a man of boy, white skin, I didn't expect to see him there. So science and doctor of medicine, I stand before you I looked at him and he looked at me and we wondered like a spec of sand before mount Kailasha. I stand who we were? And what wvas even more intriguing here in awe and I stand here in amazement, in was the fact that he was wearing my clothes, my kurta humility and in love. The colleges, the universities, and pyjama. So I began to wonder whether I was the libraries, the computers contain a lot of seeing some appareation? Was I in my senses or information. Shri Mataji, its not awe, it is complete something wrong with me? So I retraced my steps rubbish compared to the wisdom you bestowed. Shri and went back to my wife and asked-who is he? Mataji we know nothing. The science you teach us She explained to me that-that day she had gone to is the pure sicence, the science you teach is the Picadilli Circus and there she saw a young man lying perfect science, the sciene you teach us is the Divine uncared for, unattended. Obviously he was sick, so science. Shri Mataji the technology and the medicine she went up to him and asked what the matter was? today does nothing compared to the simple Bandhan And the boy said, he was very ill, he had noboby to that you have taught us to perform. Shri Mataji you look after himn and he was almost dying. Now, she heal us in our physical bodies, our psychological said, come along with me and she brought him home health and in our spiritual beings. There are no drugs. and had arranged for him to have a bath and since there are no medicines, there is no science, there is he didn't have any clothes, he had to wear my clothes. nothing more powerful than your inspiration and I was greatly relieved. I was very proud, she had your love. Shri Mataji on the eve of your birthday. brought home that young man out of tremendous love thank you very much for your wisdom and may you and compassion and you know that young man stayed in our house for two-three months. He was given Shri Mataji, brothers and sisters in Sahaja Yoga. Shri Mataji on the eve of your birthday it is such an honour and such a privilege to stand before you, It have many more birthdays. Sahaja Yoga treatment and within a matter of days he began to improve. His jaundice had gone, his drugs had gone, his alcholism had gone, he became within eight wveeks' time, a rose, a flower, a beautiful person! This was the first miracle I saw. You know people sometimes say they can improve a machine but anyone other than Nirmalaji saying that Ican transform a human being, I won't believe. Human beings are the most difficult to transform. It is only through Divine Power and Divine Love that you can transform a human being and she performed that miracle that day. Since then she peformed millions Thank you Surrendering himself 'fully' to Shri Mataji our esteemed Sir C.P. Shrivastava, in his scholarly style said: Shri Nirmala Mataji, this is the first time I have addressed Her as Mataji; I think on her 75th birthday celebration, time has come for me to surrender myself fully to Her; Shri Patwaji, Shri Rizviji, Shri Rahul Bajaj ji, dear Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen: I regard

 Volume: X Issue 4,5,6 1998 Divine Cool Breeze 6. But I would go little further and beyond, I would of miracles, around the world. Shri Patwaji, I consider each Sahaja Yogi to be a miracle, I consider say we need you here until each and every person each Sahaja Yogini to be an angel and I say angel have been transformed and we need you ever because whät is the meaning of transformation? thereafter to ensure that they stay as angels ever There is a total inner transformation, there is self- thereafter. union with the almighty power of God, power of love, once a person has been the opportunity to express my abiding, profound and truely described as an angel and this gathering of deepest gratitude for the love and affection you have angels, this is a part of heaven presided by the Divinity herself. Can we all understand, what She Sahaja Yogi so far, today I want you to accept me as ask you to accept me. I have been an apprentice one of you. Her but She is much beyond that. She is limitless, She can not be limited by descriptions, She can not be comprehended by mind, because someone has said in Urdu Jo Samajh Mein Aa Gaya, Phir Woh Khuda Kyon Kar Hua" someone who you can comprehend with mind would not be God. In other words, God is incomprehensible. So many facets, so many aspects, that is impossible to describe. Now it has been said that She has a task ahead of Her, She has aä mighty task ahead, She has transformed a million of people of the world, there are five billion. So we' need Her here, in this world, until each one of those five billion of this world have been transformed. One poet in Urdu has said, Tum Salamat Raho Hazaron Baras, Din Ho Saal Ke Pachas Hazaar'- We pray that you live for thousand years and each of those years should not have just 365 days but fifty thousand days. Thank you very much. Mr. Rahul Bajaj, The renowned industrialist, poured out his heart saying: "I am here as a person who has for years been receiving tremendous amount of love and affection from Shri Mataji." be anything "As a son, because I don't want to else," he said, "I have come here today not to : thank Shri Mataji, at least in India a son does not thank his mother.. I have come here only to ask for more and тоre love and your blessings."

 Volume: X Issue 4,5.6 1998 Divine Cool Breeze Public Felicitation 20.3.1998, Delhi Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi I to begìn with. Otherwise our attention is outside, we are woried about money, worried about power, worried about this, worried about that and competition and all the things that are going on. But if your attention is turned, somehow, towards your spirit, then what happens to you is that you become the power of the spirit. And the power of the spirit is the highest power you could think of. First of all, spirit is the one that loves. Loves without asking for anything, without expecting for anything. Just loves. It's an unconditional type of personality which just emits love. Anybody in trouble, anybody having a problem, just it flows. This eapacity to flow in the heart exists, but on top of that is the closing point, is that our attention is not on our spirit. Even in political bow to all the seekers of truth. So much has been said and really my heart is full of gratitude for all of you to come here, all the way and the way people have described about Sahaja Yoga. To understand Sahaja Yoga, we should know where are we today, in this Kaliyuga. What are we facing today? It should really make you feel quite disturbed to see the way things are going in every country, everywhere. What's the problem? What is the, such a need for people, to become so restless, full of tensions. Collecti vely and countrywise anywhere you go, you find some sort of confusion. Terrible! The whole society seems to be boiling with a kind of a fear of destruction. What is the reason? There are so many religions, so many organised, disorganised, all kinds of things. There are so many Sadhus and Saints. There are so many books written about what you should have, but-the only one, who is a seeker of truth, should see one point why there is so much problem, in this world and how can you help them. Where is the problem. It is inside the human being. As described, you see, we have come out of animal stage to human stage. endeavours or in your economic endeavours, in any endeavour. What happens is that ättention is outside. So you go into competition, you go into this thing. You go on becoming very competent and then suddenly find another one coming up. There are so many struggles, when your attention is outside, because in attention outside there is no purity. It is just attention to yourself and that too is so limited, very limited it is. Because if you pay attention to yourself, there is no end to your troubles and woes. For a person, as they said, really it is fact that I don't mind sleeping anywhere. I don't mind cating anything, I am not bothered about all these things. Its a fact because its not very important, think. But without thinking I am made like that. All right, but Sahaja Yogis have become like this. This is the miracle that human beings have turned their attention to their spirit. Then you are amazed how things work out, without any competition, without any fight, without any quarrels. How your attention becomes fixed on your spirit? The first thing that happens to you, is good health. Your health improves, firstly. I mean, so many problems are solved. This world, Ithink, atleast 30% of people are always sick, because of the tensions, may be, because of bad food and this and that. The first thing that happens to you, is that your health improves. We have the human awareness no doubt. In that awareness we start seeing all kinds of things, that are not good, which are destructive, which are disturbing. If it does not disturb you, that means. you are not at all a sensitive person. But you are sensitive as a human being. So now what is the reason for this? In every field of life, whether it is political or economic or any field of life, in which human beings are living, there is a very subtle problem, which people don't understand. Now, if I say that there is spirit within tis. It shines in our heart. You need not believe me. But our attention is not on the spirit. They call it 'Atma Vimukti'. Our attention is outside. At this stage of human awareness our attention is outside, outside in various things. Now where should our attention go, to evolve for what? To achieve what? Firstly our attention has to go, now, towards our spirit. Towards spiritual understanding. This is one thing that has to happen to human beings,

 Volume: X lssue: 4,5,6 1998 Divine Cool Breeze Today, now in Sahaja Yoga, we have people who only the love. If you want to say, it is also peace and have learnt that these modern ways of economic and joy and also, it is the superior wisdom. It is rather all that, have not given peace to anyone. We think of subtle for normal man to understand. I know that, I America; I have been to America. I know Americans. have gone through that. For persons to understand How terribly disturbed they are! Their families are that one can become the spirit but this is in the ruined, their children are ruined. All kinds of stupid evolutionary process. Today is the time for people things are happening. Our Indian Gurus are going to become the spirit. This is the blessing of this and making big money there. And they just want blossom time, as I call it, and people have to become peace! They just want peace of the heart. That's only the spirit. Otherwise what is left of them is like all possible when your attention goes to your heart, other human beings who will I don't know, where hecause in the heart resides the spirit and the spirit they will end up. This is an essential step today to is the source of peace. First is the love and second, become the spirit. as I told you just now, is the peace. You become All the saints, all the prophets, all the religions have extremely peaceful. You become like a witness and talked about it. Not that they have not. Of course we you see the whole drama like a joke. Its nothing s0 have twisted them, we have made separate serious, to be worried about. It all works out and separate things but only one simple thing is that you this is what one has to become, is to become the are a spirit and unless and until you became the spirit spirit, which is your own, which is in your own heart you can not achieve any peace, any joy and no love. and that is the source as I told you of love, and again, The Sahaja Yogis here, have achieved it. They don't I say, of peace. think they are from foreign country or this country And the third thing that happens to you is that, the or that country. Now here in this camp we don't have source of spirit being joy, joy bubbles in your life. It very good arrangement for sleeping, for eating or just bubbles in your life. You don't know how to get anything, no good bathroom and nothing, They are out of that great ocean of joy. You start swimming in enjoying themselves. Nobody minds it. Of course it and enjoying it, every bit of it. You touch all the shores, going round the whole world, their hearts and everything. It is in the heart that resides the spirit like a flower, when it becomes the fruit. All its petals again I say, It is not in the brain. No mental activity and everything drops off and then it becomes the can take you to spirit. Spirit is only possible if your attention could be somehow taken to the spirit and knowledge, fruit of wisdom and of love. that's possible only through Kundalini awakening. For knowledge you don't have to read books. There This change of attitude towards life, this change of is no need. People who have read to0 many books complete peace and joy has come to you all because are difficult to get into Sahaja Yoga. But what you your attention is now on your spirit. Now you don't have to see yourself, that what is the reality. But that think of money. Money walks your way. You don't is only possible if you are a realized soul. Otherwise think of power. Power walks your way and the power you get lost in the illusions of the world. You live of the spirit is the highest, the most powerful and with the illusions, all your life struggling, fighting the most righteous thing. It is not necessary that you and I don't want to say what is the end. So a simple should become a sanyasi, Sadhu baba, do all kinds thing that has happened with Sahaja Yoga in your of things. No necessity of these rituals. The spirit is evolutionary process, your attention now has gone residing within you. Already, all this you have done to your spirit than to anything else. As soon as the in previous lives. Now, in this life only thing you power of the spirit comes, you find yourself have to do is to put attention to your spirit and that's successful in everything. You don't want, you don't possible only through awakening of Kundalini, your ask for it and if you are not, you don't mind. You primordial mother. When she starts rising, she passes don't mind because you think they don't understand, through the centres and enriches them, integrates It's all right. Forget it. So there is no use fighting for them and pierces through the fontanelle bone area it, asking for it. For this one thing is important, first and makes you connected to this all pervading power and foremost thing you have to forgive everyone. of divine love. But this power of divie love is not certain things of a particular country may linger on but then it drops. Gradually it starts dropping off, fruit so you have now become the fruit, Fruit of Human beings, I don't know sometimes they are

 Volume: X lssue : 4,5,6 1998 Divine Cool Breeze illogical. Supposing somebody tries to harm you. Allright, I forgive him. Forget it, because I have no headache of that. What he is trying to do is to give me a headache which I will not take. I just forgive. so that is the very important point that Christ has also said that you have to forgive. Now, if you want you can avoid that person, or if you want you can bring him round and put him right. But we should not try on the complicated character very much, in the beginning. I said because they will complicate you. Now those people who have matured in Sahaja Yoga, can easily manage that also and also we must know that all the elements are working for us. All the events of the world are just to show how wrong things are wrong and how right things should be done. Say, for example, when Hitler came he started destroying people. He took 9 years to build himself up and he did all kinds of things which cannot be forgiven by anyone. But he died Mohammad Sahib has said so many things. I don't know how people have twisted. Christ had said so of them has said one thing that you have to become the spirit and how people have twisted it and have formed so many religions and in that religion why should they quarrel. If there is one God, there should be no quarrel. Now in Sahaja Yoga, you find that people have come from different faiths, different enlightened. countries, different ideologies, everything. One thing Now you have heard some people, I was amazed how great about Sahaja Yogis is that they äre very pure. There is so much of purity in them. I don't have any divine! All these countries, I have seen, are doing so problem of immorality in Sahaja Yoga. We don't find well, unexpectedly. Imagine in England, who came anybody being immoral. If somebody has been to India and ruled us for 300 years, there are so many immoral he just gets corrected. If somebody has Sahaja Yogis and also as you see today, when I speak being cheating, he gets corrected. If somebody has there (in England) the whole hall is filled up with been a corrupt person, he gets corrected because people, in England! I have seen also in the countries spirit gives the light for you to see for yourself, what like Russia where these people were on the verge of is good for you. Supposing you are going on a road collapsing after they started democracy. Whether it and you are blind, you can walk into a ditch. But is democracy or communism or anything these are supposing you have the light and the eyes are open, all isms'. You have to come out of it and see for you know how you have to go and that's exactly what yourself that so called democracy, has become is happening in Sahaja Yoga that the people have demoncracy, so called communism has failed. Why? realized, how to move, how to go about, how to walk Basically what is wrong with them. It is all based, and not to fall in the ditch. I have seen people who not on the spiritual level. There was no spirit have fallen into ditch also but I have nothing but involved. It was all based on, I should say, on the love for them, because they were blind. You see for endeavours which are outside, which were very a blind person you can just have love, isn't it? And I limited and those limits once they break, you see, found that once I forgive them completely and I ask you have a problem. Now economics, the word them, alright, even if they haye abused me and have economics if you see is collapsing. Everywhere there said things against me, its alright. Because they don't is recession. If they are such experts, then why there know what they are doing. They are blind people so is recession. Why there are problems. Now the people once you feel that way about others that doesn't say, we must remove the poverty. I agree. But not by matter. Whatever they have done, whatever they have giving some sort of a gift. But with self realization, so far so-called harmed you also, is no harm to you you can do it. You can do it, because if you can because you are standing on the pedestal of truth. approach people who need, with Sahaja Yoga and So the second point is that the spirit is the source of enrich them, you will be amazed that they themselves truth, not of untruth. For example there is some false will do better and work it out. All kinds of things, Guru. Immediately you will know this is false, How? you see, like in abroad, people used to say, mother On your vibrations, on your finger tips you know you talk about spiritual life then why is it India is so that this man is false. Its all said by Mohammad Sahib poor. I said they are not so poor in spirituality, They that your hands will speak at the time of resurrection. may be poor in money. Those who have got lots of That exactly happens that you see this is the trouble. money, are they also very good people? Are they also and suddenly in Germany, you find, people are so . they are so enlightened about love and about the

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998 10 doing something very good. In the same way, those Those days are gone, those ordeals you have passed who are poor are not doing something good that one through. You have been to Himalayas, you have should have compassion on them. Now what to do. stood on your heads and did all kinds of things. Now If both sides are so miserable, what should we do to no more is needed. What is needed is that you have change them, Change the whole attitude towards life. Immediately I have seen people who are supposed do it, the more you absorb all other attentions and to be rich, start understanding poverty. They start put it to your spirit, which is there already existing. sharing, they start working it out. In Sahaja Yoga, There is nothing to be brought from outside or you will be amazed, how people help each other. How nothing to be learnt. It is inside everyone of you, is they work out everybody's difficulties and problems in the heart. Only thing you have to just feel it. Now into something very beautiful. You see, it is the that feeling can only come if you have awakened wisdom that you get, from this all pervading divine the Kundilini. I know that no one- Mohammad power. This power has been described in every Sahib or Christ or Abraham or Moses, who have religion you can call it Parama Chaitanya', you can call it nowhere they would have ever thought that people by any name but name is not the point. Whatever it will form an organised religion and start in a way as is, once you are connected with this power, you are blessed. Thousand times you are blessed than you To remove that, you have to give them the are as a normal human being. As a normal being, no knowledge, the pure knowledge, not the knowledge blessing it has. It has nothing but your own of the books but the pure knowledge and the endeavour that the amount you are pushing, that's knowledge that is pure is wisdom. Through this what it is. Here nobody pushes oneself. Automatically wisdom only I have worked. This wisdom I had from you are pushed into that. This force, divine force my childhood. Nobody has given me-It's there, brings you to that and you have seen that in your but this wisdom has taught me one thing that own lives, how you came to me? How you came to whatsoever may be the condition of a human being, Sahaja Yoga? It was some sort of a Divine force whatsoever may be his style, whatsoever may be his which worked it out, which is Sahaja, which you may ego or his conditioning, if he can feel the love then not realize. But when you get your realization you his spirit gets awakened. This transformation has just think about your own life how I came to Sahaja Taken place. Yoga? How I got this and then you see this peace Here we have only 1% of the people who have got raining over your hearts, the love, affection, realisation all over the world, but I know, I remember everything that is, as he said, I have many powers, them all today who are not here that they have been may be. I don't know but one thing for definite that Sahaja Yogis can get all my powers. to put your attention to your spirit. The more you ereated books or whatever history they have created, you call it "Nirakar', you call it 'Rooh', if they are against each other. But it has happened. seekers, madly sceking, seeking the truth, they went through horrible time seeking, they had very bad As a mother, mother wants to give everything to gurus, they had all kinds of expenses, everything Sahaja Yogis. The greatest joy for a mother is to see they did but oace they came to Sahaja Yoga they all her son or daughter grow up, like her. have great found what was the truth. And the truth is very vision of life and I see the picture of that clear today. simple that you are the spirit. You are not this body, I was an ordinary housewife, without mIch money. this mind but you are the spirit. This is the Iruth and You know nmy interest in money is zero, I don't they have found the spirit. That is what is the truth understand even the bank. Somebody else has to sign that they have found. Once this truth is established cheque for me and my husband has to count my within you that you are the spirit, nothing can money and I am so bad butstill I never had a problem, destroy you, nothing can harm you. It can not have never had problem, because it is the greed in man. any wants. It doesn't have. What wants can you have when you are spirit because it is such a satisfying, he learns how to be satisfied, automatically the greed thing. It does not condemn anyone. It doesn't run after anyone.. It is satisfied, absolutely satisfied. I was very anxious that I should lead a very normal you become a Sanyasi or something you give up. life. I should rot be like some Himalaya fellow or terrible greed in man, that creates problems, but il drops out and you feel absolutely comfortable. But that doesn't mean that you become a Sadhu baba or

 Volume: X issue: 4,5,6 1998 Divine Cool Breeze 11 - no promotion. Everybody used to laught at them. It is degradation. Your promotion is not through your own being but through your own spirit. Being means a very big thing, I think, but spirit is very subtle, very beautiful, which is residing in all of you, like a light. It's a light in you. Now there are so many Sahaja Yogis who can give something like that because this is common people. Today its a amass awakening. It is not for one person. This was the thing because once any discovery is made supposing, and that discovery is only for one individual, it has no meaning. It has to go to masses and this is what I knew I have to do it and I had to work, they say so, but I don't think, I ever worked. I was just witness to the whole thing. I saw it just like a witness, enjoying all kinds of things needed for a promotion enlightenment to others. There are people who are going all over the world. I was surprised that people as you sit on the shores of a ocean you see waves coming going like that but inside that is à human being who wants to evolve, who wants to become They said Mother we have to do something because the spirit. Then he starts thinking what good he can do to others. So far I have been very anxious that My heart started really thanking them. Look at this, people should become Sahaja Yogis. I didn't take to what has come into them. Then they went, you will any missionary work or any social work. I used to be amazed, to Israel and from Israel they brought do when I was not in Sahaja Yoga when I did not start Sahaja Yoga but later on I discovered that unless sahaja Yogis why are you here. They said mother its and until you transform people, unless and until you ourjob now to make friends with these Sahaja Yogis become the spirit you will become like any other from Egypt. Just see how love engulfs, all these from Germany and Austria came to help me when I first went to Russia. I said, what are yoI doing here. so many people have been killed by our forefathers. lots of Sahaja Yogis to Egyptl So I asked the Israeli social worker. angularities, all these thorns of life and dissolves it I was working in a blind school. I was the chairman completely, It is so joy giving to see your love acting of blind school, and I was surprised that the people on others. Small-small things and very big things all who were with me were very funny type, you know. that works out with love. For example in an industry now people have problems of strikes, very common sit next to governor, I say what is this. So they said, struggle, haves and haves not, this is going on. But if you can raise the people to the spiritual height, to necessary, I can sit anywhere. But they all started their spiritual need, which is the most important need quarreling on this point. So I said alright we will today, you will be amazed there will no problem of any kind. You see it is a kind of a communism. It is governor and you all sit on that like sparrows. That a kind of a socialism. It is a kind of a democracy. It humour helped a lot and they settled down. So this is all things put together which works. Democracy is the stupid thing where you see what is your means we have Sahaja Yogis who wanted to organise position, what do you get. I mean it's so stupid that this. They said mother what should we do. I said I even the ant knows how to work out the collectivity. am not going to say anything, you do what you like. I don't know how human beings are dying after You choose whatever you like, whatever you want useless, non sensical things. But the only thing is. to do and I was just busy arranging the flowers in he has not yet become the spirit. So he doesn't respect the house, because so many flowers came and I was himself, no respect. So he does all these things which worried about the flowers. I was just aranging the are not very respectable I think. Then I thought that flowers in the house and what I find, now you see how they have done. No quarrel, no fight, no end of themselves. Once you start doing something discussion, nothing. How have they done it. good, why should you think you are very great. I Otherwise you can not make ten people sit together can't understand. My brain is that way useless and talk the same thing. One will talk, another will because what I found with these people, working talk and they will go on discussing, discussing this, with me, very anxious to take the credit for this. reaching nowhere. Otherwise only one man has to Somebody wanted to become the chairman and vice- work it out, otherwise nothing can work. So it chairman. I said you become everything. So the changes the whole atmosphere of every human being, attention being on your promotion is not a real changes his attitude, changes his endeavours and The governor was to come and they said who will I being the president, I have to sit. I said not take a "palang', we will put it on the head of the this kind of work people are doing, they think no

 12 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X lssue: 4,5,6 1998 everything becomes so beautiful and joyful. You are a socialist also because you start thinking about the people who are downtrodden, people who have no money, who are poor and you try to work out something, by which they get some money. I used to go with my father for a case in a district called Chanda and there I saw people with just one cloth around. It was shocking to me. Just one cloth, whether it is winter or summer. I used to weep. So my father would say, why do you weep for them? I said what I can do. I must try to do something for them. you have done so much work. You don't know, what gratitude I have for them. Single handedly I could not have done it. I could not have gone to so many countries. Its like a place called Benin where there are only muslims. I could never have thought of going to those far-fetched places, where these people are there and imagine these people are muslims and they have all taken to Sahaja Yoga and in that they are understanding, the beauty of love. This is done by French; can you believe this French, going down all the way to Benin and getting it done. Even English have gone all the way to different countries, even the Austrians and also Germans and Italians are Now when I got so many Sahaja Yogis, I told them I want to help these people somehow and what they another quality of people, who have a very rich heart, make is pottery. So they said mother alright, you get I must say. They have a very rich heart and the way pottery, we will import here and we will sell them. they are spreading Sahaja Yoga throughout Italy is You will be amazed that now these people have really remarkable. I am amazed, how these people houses and have got a good life to live and they are living very well. So in a way it is a kind of a socialism, that you see problems and you know collectively to solve it, collectively, not single say-prohibition, we don't have to say - don't take handed but collectively. All of the Sahaja Yogis drugs, nothing. No don'ts in Sahaja Yoga. suggest mother this can be solved like that. So far I Automatically they drop. I don't have to say, Don't have not done anything directly, I must say, like do it. Just automatically they drop. I mean you will Starting an organisation of that kind. But now when there are so many Sahaja Yogis with their attention a light to be put in one of the 'Deepas' and nobody on their heart, now my attention is going to the people who need our help. So first time I have asked match box. Such a problem, with thousands of people them to make a NGO for destitute women and for there, nobody had a match box. So we had to send children, who are being deserted by their parents and somebody to get a match box. There is no need. I immediately you will be amazed, we got the land, have never said Don't do this, never, but it has we got the people. I mean, I am not doing anything worked like that. It has worked. I don't know how? and its all done. Moreover so many people have How you have dropped that, but its very simple, written Mother if you want land, come here, do this do that. Can you imagine, once I just thought of it just don't do. that we have to do something for the poor, Also other so many things can be done with your attention which example sikhs, muslims. But you see, they all drink, is pure, full of love, because the love, you see, is because they are not really muslims, they are not something, that gives you the wisdom, how to do it. really sikhs. If they were really that, they would not If you have love, it gives you complete insight into have drunk. How is it possible then? They have to the problems and how it works. You see it is be the spirit. In the light of the spirit you just don't surprising, for me, I mean, I used to do that always. do anything that is destructive to you. You don't do But even after Sahaja Yoga, I found that its the love, anything that is destructive. You don't have to tell which is the solution. It is the only way, we can enter anybody. Now you are all sitting here. I have never into the hearts of the people. But for that love, we told you, anyone, don't do this but I was amazed, in are approaching all these people, who have never known what is spirit and how they are getting them together. Now with that, you see we don't have to be amazed. Once We had a programme and there was had a match box. Can you imagine, nobody had a when the light of the spirit is there. In that light you Now, all the people have said don't drink, say for should not try to do it for some money or some achievements or for some sort of a reward but just Overnight. People employ military, this that. They the whim of the love and that is what is today paying gave up prostitution, they gave up drugs. All kinds all of you. The way you love all the people, the way of destructive things to which human beings take, London, that people overnight gave up drugs.

 Volume : X Issue: 4,5,6 1998 Đivine Cool Breeze 13 in problems. It is not for making some sort of a show or some sort of a, we can say, a cult. sometimes out of frustration and sometimes because they feel very lonely. But now in Sahaja Yoga you can never be lonely. All over the world you have It is something which is very innate, which is very is coming, they will all go to the airport to receive. subtle and that works, that gives them joy to do Its not a brotherhood of ordinary life. It is a very how they feel for the whole world. How they care deep type of a brotherhood. Very deep understanding for the whole world. How they are willing to do for is there. But they are very deep people, I must say, them. Of course, as I said, every country has its own because they have been seekers and in that seeking problems, like we can say, north Indians are always they have really got completely into a turmoil and interested in politics because Delhi is here, but its that has made them very deep people. This book "Light of Koran" is written by a lady, like to hear anything against anyone, that's a good Gilmett. You read it, I would request you to read it thing, In the south, we can say, beyond Narmada hecause she is so deep. I knew she was very deep, river, whatever we have Maharashtra and all that they but the way she has expressed, is so beautiful, so joy giving, She is not a Muslim, she married a muslim, so called, because they were all Sahaja so that a blind man can also eat food properly. You Yogis and the way she has narrated her secking is so beautiful. We have so many big writers in Sahaja tied up. They are very very ritualistic. Because of Yoga who have given very nice books and things these two things. in Sahaja Yoga, they don't grow. but this Gilmett is very shy. She does not talk, she keeps quiet but inside she is so deep because of her lingering, still are behind us. For example in north seeking. something for Sahaja Yoga, I am sometimes amazed, reduced now, very much reduced now. They don't are very ritualistic people. Even if they put the thali, you must put salt here, you must put vegetable here, must use only one hand, you must keep another hand Whatever it is, we have to understand that these are India I would say if anybody speaks anything ill So there are many people in this world who are about anybody just put your hands (over your ears) secking the truth because they cannot bear the -this principal of Gandhiji was correct. Never listen to any non-sensical gossip. Gossip is going on, sensitive, they are not insensitive, very sensitive people like to listen to gossip because of this, media people. That's how you all have got your realisation. also, they were showing nothing but gossip only Its nothing of mine, To say, I did it, is not proper. If before elections. And the whole gossip goes into our you were not like a candle I could not have mind and that's how we work out. So for this part I enlightened you. So I am very thankful to you and I request all the people from north India to never to am so much enamoured by the way, you people are listen to any criticism, never to criticise anyone. feeling about Sahaja Yoga that collectively you have What is the use? Just see logically. If you listen to to work it out, globally you have to work it out. You somebody's criticism, what is the use? What do you have to help each other and bring up the people. Most gain out of it? Now by repeating it to somebody else important thing is to create a mind universally which what do you gain? What is the gain? Simple thing is towards the spirit. Then we will solve all the always ask a question, what is the gain. And why to problems. No problem. Now If I say I am starting see something wrong with other? I know by that you some sort of a project for the poor. Immediately all can be cheated, somebody can deceive you. It is true of them will send me money, immediately they'll but doesn't matter. You don't get anything into your find out who can work it out, who can come and head, you don't get any filth and any poison in your head. I know there are people who create problem, can work it out, all over the world. I mean it spreads talk from one to another, do this and do that. That so fast. I have to just say that. I never asked for should not harm you, in any way because you have money, I never said that I need money but the spirit and the spirit can not be harmed. It cannot immediately they will plan out the whole thing, bring be destroyed. It is said that it cannot be destroyed the whole thing here and work it out. It can work in by any weapon. It lives and lives forever so the India. It can work anywhere. It is not just they are attention towards the Atma is lacking. Atma Vimukh, interested in India but globally they are interested you can say. Our eyes have gone, our attention is nonsense of modern world and they are very help Mother. What work can we give them, how we

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998 14 birthday is, but whatever it is. It is one of the things that I can meet you, all of you here, so very happy. I gone to something away from the spirit and that's why all the problems are there. Once you are one with your spirit, it works, it works am thankful to these people who are the elites of our for you because it is in connection with the God society. They are very great people, elected and Almighty. It is in connection with the all pervading sometimes given very high positions and also there power, which works out everything. I know this all pervading power. It has shown so many miraculous have to understand the value of spiritual life. This is photographs about me and actually I did not ask it very important for them. Not to avoid this point. But but it is doing. Acutally it is very active, it is very to be one with your spirit, is your own property, is active and if it sees anybody who is subtle and who in your own, I should say, the complete glory that Is deep, it acts. In your business, in your politics, in you have is to be the spirit. With all this, I don't know, your family, in every where you will find, this light will shine and you will respect the hearts of others. You respect the love of others. You will respect the spirit that is shining in others. This is the reason why into your spirituality, so that it covers all the corners you have learnt to respect each other, because your of the world and creates a beautiful world of spirit is enlightened. I can see so clearly. I am so very happy to see so many of you here for my birthday. I don't know, what the significance of a are some very well known industrialists. All of them how to thank you all and how to thank all these people who spoke so nicely. Only thing I wish you all a great growth in your spiritual life, Atmounnati, tomorrow. May God bless you.

 Volume X Issue: 4,5,6 1998 Divine Cool Breeze 15 At last the much awaited day, the 75th Birthday of The Jagat Janani (The creator of universes) arrived. As soon as the Felicitation Programme was concluded in the early hours of the morning of 21st March, 1998. The boys and girls of Yuva Shakti sprang up in action to make an effort to prepare the stage fit to seat the Divine Mother-the creator of Aesthetics. The smallest atom of the dust of Thy Holy Feet, O Devi, forms the cluster of flower beds, fram which gushes forth the necter of intelligence, enlivening the dull witted. It is a wish yielding gem. Every inch of the auditorium was tastefully decorated with flowers. rainbow coloured baloons and dashing lights. Beautiful candles were lit on both sides of the passage from the main gate of the Nizamuddin ground to the entry gate of the pandal. There was magnificient display of fire works. Beautiful little children, in their ceremonial dresses stood dancing like angels on the Hawa Mahal gate to welcome their Divine Mother. On the Nizamuddin crassing Sahaja Yogis from various countries of the Globe stood waving their National Flags and the Band playing Sahaja tunes. Gracing the occasion, Shri Mataji was brought to the venue, in celestial procession. As soon as Shri Mataji entered Scouts Ground, Shehnai was played and Bigules (Chougada) saunded in typical Indian traditional style. Shri Mataji was overjoyed to see the love of her children. 75th Birthday Puja Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Delhi -21.3.1998) I was overjoyed to see the way you had will reflect the beauty of your inner being and of organized this beautiful welcome. I must say Sahaja Yoga. that it is your love which finds all kinds of expression of enjoying Sahaja Yoga. I really cannot understand how these unique ideas come to your heads and you represent the different Countries from where you have come. I told you yesterday, what was missing in the human awareness and that the attention was not on the spirit. But when it is on the spirit what happens to you i.e. firstly you become according to Sanskrit words Gunateet-you go beyond all the three gunas. That Iwish you carry these flags back to your own country means you are no more a person who is Tamoguni r - means the one who has got all kinds of desires of our resurrection, that we have to rise, that we have self indulgence. Your attention moves from there to to rise above this human level to a higher level of the second style, where you are 'Rajoguni", the right existence. And if that happens, then how it changes sidedness. You want to compete with others. All this your life, how it makes you happy, how you lose all struggle which is discipline: "Ateet' means beyond, your absurd ideas of hatred and of harming others, then Satvaguna, that is also where you are seeking, injuring others! All this kind of ideas which have where you see that what is wrong in this kind of worked out to give some sort of a sadistic pleasure extreme behaviour. And you just hate that kind of to many people and they have enjoyed the way they life. And you want to get out of it and then you start want to destroy the joy of others, the happiness of seeking. That also is finished. All the gunas are others. To maintain the happiness, I know, you being finished. So you become Gunateet. It just happens Sahaja Yogis, you have to bear a lot, tolerate a lot of when your attention goes to your spirit because now nonsense. You have already done it, and gradually the attention is not on any one of your inherent, you your own can say or conditions, qualities or egotistical countries, as something that is so beautiful, so very qualitics. So you become a person who is beyond pure, so very important that all others in your this. This is something very remarkable, as far as, countries also will try to follow that path which you for normal life, but for you it is not. It just happens. have crossed over. Only your lives are the ones which You just enjoy being yourself. You are no more and tell themı the message that the time has come for once Sahaja Yoga is established in your

 Đivine Cool Breeze 16 Volume: X issue: 4,5,6 1999 concerned about your own conveniences, comforts and petty things. What happens is that you just go beyond, all these three gunas which have been dominating you this way or that way. So that's how become responsible for that moment. It is such a responsibility which is also collective, means all of you become responsible. It is very surprising we are so many here, there is no quarrel, no fight, nothing. We are very nicely settled you cross the limit of human awareness firstly, then second one is that you become 'Kalateet". down, beyond all kinds of stupid ideas of attacking You go beyond time -I know today I was late each other. That happens because you are not somehow it just works out that way. But you did not involved with the time. The time cannot bow you miss the time. You were still enjoying. I could see down. Perhaps you feel if it were not you people, sitting in the house that you are all in a very enjoyable some other people, they would have thrown stones mood. All of you are enjoying nicely. I am not here but still you are enjoying. This is beyond time. You boiling in the heat, they would have resented but not are not bound by time. Whatever is the time is your the people who are beyond time-they are nicely own because you are standing in the present. You are not standing here and thinking of the future, you the time passes away. didn't think about what will happen tomorrow or how will you catch your plane or how will you do this. Then you become 'Dharmateet'. You become beyond Here you were just enjoying, enjoying the present Dharma, beyond your human nature, that means and the present is the reality. If you are thinking of whatever you do is religious, whatever is your the future or of the past then you are not in reality. I endeavour is religious, if say you are in a business, have told many a times that past is finished and future you would like to do business in a religious manner does not exist. So at this moment you are here, sitting because you are beyond religion. You are not perhaps, may be waiting for me, may be just enjoying bothered as to follow a particular pattern or ritual every moment of your stay here, of your connections of any religion. But you are beyond it. Like people with me. And this enjoyment cannot be described who are, you see, not beyond religion, they must how you are enjoying this. Otherwise people get up early in the morning, They are bound by their would be seeing the watch, wondering why Mother tuals and they pass through the rituals and if one has not come, what is the problem, why She has not of the rituals is not done, they are very unhappy and arrived and all kinds of ideas can work. It helps a lot to be Kalateet'. on my car thinking it is so late She comes, we all are sitting down cnjoying themselves. Doesn't matter, shaken up: But not you. For you, you are always in "Dhyana', always in meditative mood. And anything goes wrong, you just jump into that awareness where I remember in Nasik I had to work very hard because you get the solution and you are not disturbed, not no Sahaja Yogi would come forward to do anything. disturbed at all. When things go wrong, like They were so shy and so much worried. And it so ritualistic nature makes you very constricted, very happened, luckily or unluckily, we can say, that my docile. Sometimes can be aggressive also. car failed on the way and I was delayed in going. About one hour passed. There was no car coming People with their ritualism trouble others a lot. Like that way, there was no way to go and we were stranded on the road. Now surprisingly when I house. So she said I am a vegetarian, I said, then. reached the place where we were going to have the programme, the Sahaja Yogis took over. They took food has been cooked. So we will have to get new the responsibility and they were very busy giving utensils." I went and bought over utensils for her. realizations to others and working it out. Otherwise So she said that you have to be careful that even the they would not. They could not believe that they had spoon should not be used. So I had to go and get power to give realization. I may tell them but they spoons for her. Then she said tumblers because would not raise their hands. And just because the people are taking food here, who are eating non- time was there and they thought so many people are vegetarian food. So you better get us something here, Mother is not coming or She may be coming. which is absolutely new. So I had to incur all this So it is our responsibility. In that way they took the problem. And then she was in the kitchen and she responsibility. So when you are beyond the time, you one lady was supposed to be our friend, came to my "But I cannot eat the food in which non-vegetarian would not allow our cook to cook anything for us

 Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998 Divine Cool Breeze 17 She said first I will cook and then you can cook. And she made such a nuisance out of her that instead church, Next time again she disappeared. It happened three-four times. So the police said, sorry, we are finished with her. Now if you want you can put her in the old people's house and that's all. So they sent her to an old people's house. So this Sahaja Yogini, told me, Mother, very surprising, they are otherwise very stupid people. They go on sitting, brooding, of being a guest she became a pest. And this is what happens to people who are ritualistic because they äre very demanding. They go on demanding that this is our dharma. I know of another story, was told to me by somebody in Bombay. She said this lady who came to me as a guest because she was related to someone very high schile and their senile decay is very well seen. But what happens that on a Sunday they all dress up well up. She was worse than my great great great and go to church. That is the only point where they are sane. It is very surprising how their conditioning grandmother. I said 'Really'. She said I cannot understand that in India we have such people still living. She came here and she said I cannot take water from the tap. You have to get it from some sort of a well. Now there are only two wells in Bombay. So people had to go and fetch the water. But the cook had to be completely drenched in water and then only he could cook. Because if he cooks without that then I won't eat and she went on and on with that. And the cook got sick with peomonia. Another cook works. There was one person I had, who came and stayed with us and he said, 'I am a very good driver'. So I said, alright. But he only knew driving. He did not know about London. What sort of a place is London. Now he knew that driving very well. But if I had to go to the North, he will drive me to the South. If 1 have to go to the East, he will drive me to the West. came and he got flue. You see this lady didn't mind. I said, "What is the matter?" You know driving! "Yes. She said, No. That is my style. So she asked me what I know driving. That I know. But I do not know should we do with such people Mother. I said you anything about roads. I have no road sense". One should have asked her that we have this thing, If you day police caught hold of him. I was also in the car. like it well and good, otherwise you don't eat. It's all He said where are you going? He said I am going to right, Fasting is a very good thing. That's the only Such and such place. So he said now you have been solution for such people who are so self-centred and to this place six times. Again you are coming back to the same point sixth time. So in the old age, I have known that these things form a kind of a habit. But in young age also you can find people get so conditioned by their style. So this is what you can call the human element, where you get attached or you get bothered about something. Now it is a kind of I should say, a madness that somebody demands this, somebody demands that. I do not like this. I do not like that. It goes on and on. It is so common to say I do not like, I like. It is very surprising that they go on saying like this. They go to somebody's house. No, No I do not like this carpet. It is not your carpet. so much bothering others. So this self-centredness comes to us because we think this is our Dharma, this is our right, everything belongs to us. How dare they do not do this? How much we trouble others. How much we make them inconvenient. How much we try to make their lives miserable. We never know. We go on demanding ings. This is my dharma what can I do. This is what I have to do. But it becomes such a conditioning of the mind that I have seen many cases in Sahaja Yoga who got conditioned like that. There was a lady, a French lady who came to Sahaja You have not purchased it. That person has purchased Yoga and her mother was very ritualistic to begin the carpet. What have you got to do with it. Why with. And she was so troublesome that she must go should you say, I do not like. Who are you? You have to church every Sunday, She would dress up well, go to church and come back. And one day she just Finished. Why do you want to pass your remark, I disappeared. So they told the police to find out this do not like. Are you a connoisseur. lady and when they went to find out that lady, the So to criticise others, somebody is, say, wearing, police said that we can't find her. God knows where supposing hair in a particular way. I do not like this she has disappeared. Then she said alright, go and kind of hair. Why? I do not like. That is all. Then it find out in the church. She was still sitting in the goes from there to human beings and everywhere. not paid for that, the one who has paid likes it.

 Divine Cool Breeze 18 Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998 Who are you to like or dislike? What is your or to criticize others thinking you are something position? Why should you say I like or do not like? great. And this does not pay. By the time you come But it is very common specially in the West to pass to the end of life you find you haven't got one friend such remark. I do not like. I do not like India. Alright one neighbour. Another thing is that when you are if you do not like, sit at home, why did you come very egoistical you think no end of yourself and you here. I do not like Turkey. Why, because if supposing go on talking, jabbering, and other person gets bored anybody is wearing a long skirt, they will say, No I stiff but you are still talking, talking, talking about, don't like because it is Turkish. So you should wear say, I did this, I went there. I. I, I. It goes to any short skirts. We don't like short skirts, supposing, limit and you are not ashamed as to what you are but one should not say that I don't like it, because it saying. I have seen people who have taken to all kinds of funny attitudes towards others when they are just normal human beings. If somebody says something wrong about somebody, somebody says that person is like this, I know he did this way. Immediately it goes into their mind. "Yes, yes, true'. hurts the people. It takes away the pride of the person Now when you are in Sahaja Yoga you must know that you are not normal human beings-according to the normal standards. You are above them. Your likes and dislikes are different from them and your Now that makes your mind a sick mind. We can say whole attitude has changed. Sometimes you are just like children I think. You talk like small little children, very innocently and sometimes you talk very profound things. Now this is unknown to people who are supposed to be normal. Because normal people, you know, are so bombastic. All the time they keep on saying I, I, I. Kabira has said that when a goat is alive she goes on saying 'Main' means I, I, I but when she is dead and her intenstines are drawn "Vikrut". When the mind is not normal. You become sick and you accept all this sickness and go on dccepting till you are a sick person and this sickness is extremely dangerous. Not for others so much as for ycurself. Because nobody can stand such a sick personality. Now you might say. I have seen people I Who have taken to religion like now I am a religious person. Now. You better be religious. So what. You can't do this, you can't do that, you can't sit there, into a kind of wire, for we call 'Dhunak', means with which they separate the seeds from the cotton, that you cannot eat this. This is important; All the time time she says Tuhi, Tuhi, Tuhi, means you are, you trying to discipline others instead of disciplining are, you are. You are everything. When you say that yourself because when you are a normal person, you immediately your attention goes away from others, don't see yourself. You just see others. finding fault with them, finding what's wrong with But once you are a realized soul, you just start them, using your brains all the time to eriticize watching yourself, see for yourself what's wrong. others, to make fun of others. Sometimes even to Now after becoming the spirit, in the light of the talk ill of others, people enjoy gossip, why. They spirit you see yourself. You just see yourself. What enjoy gossip because they don't know that another happens, how you behave and how you enjoy person is the same as mysclf and I have no business yourself. When you know how to correct yourself. to gossip about that person. So this understanding, 1 should say, this loving wisdom doesn't exist when you are a normal human being, At the slightest provocation you can get angry, start doing all kinds incorrigible. So also you should just see this is of things, like a bull in a China shop. You can behave incorrigible. You can not help it. Like in Sahaja Yoga anyway. Suddenly you find just growing up into that. The reason for that is you are not yet a Sahaja Yogi, help wrong type of people like they have taken a l It is very swect, little little thing you do in such a beautiful manner and you say such beautiful things. Of course there are people who cannot be corrected- we have some people who are all the time trying to power of attorney, in Sahaja Yoga. So if somebody tries to be funny we expect a telephone call from that power of attorney after two hours. He tells now please tell Mother such and such person is to be looked after, This has to be done and that has to be done. Is absolutely a habitual thing with them to inform me that "No, you must help, you must do But Sahaja Yogi is a person who enjoys all kinds of things. Say, somebody becomes very angry and hot tempered. He also sees that what is happening, how he is behaving - so actually it is not a dharma that you get angry with someone it's not. It is something very low to be angry with others, to be all the time shouting at others, to be exacting things froni others

 Volume: X Issua : 4,5,6 19s Divine Cool Breeze 19 something." But now it has become such a common happens because I think they have never seen a good practice, we know he will just now come along and hotel or may be that they have lived in very bad give a big lecture on this subject. So you see it is a conditions. nature of a human being which has been going But a person, who is a Sahaja Yogi, can live through the different types of complications in life. anywhere, can sleep anywhere. Only thing is that Also born with some genes or something that he is his spirit is there to make him happy. Nothing else. not a very normal person though we say he is normal That is the one that gives you happiness. All these because the way he reacts, the reaction that he shows other things that human beings have which have is very absurd. There is no need for anybody to created problems after problems. Now you see telephone me to tell me, you see this man is such and such, you better look after. Unnecessarily to bad. You want to know about the Christians, you interfere with other's affairs. When you have no authority, when you have nothing to do with that person, all sorts of, I can tell you, designs are there you want to know about the Muslims, go and ask that have been made by the minds of human beings the Hindus. You will be amazed how they talk about and these designs will all disappear, just disappear. other people as if all of them are bad and they are because you belong to a different religion, you are better go and ask the Jews and if you want to know about the Jews, better go and ask the Muslims, if the best. So this is the whole attitude. it changes where they get it, may be their country, may be their family, may be their genes. Whatever you may say. religion is what. From what sort of family they come All this disappears. even your genes change. That is in, what is the background they are coming in. They what is Sahaja Yoga. Where you become the spirt, all become one. What they enjoy is the company everything changes and what happens to you, that you become a person who knows what is joy, who that's all. So many Sahaja Yogis will be there and enjoys joy, who enjoys existence, who gives joy to that is the Mecca, that is the Kumbh Mela, that you completely. You forget it. Who is what. Whose of all the Sahaja Yogis. All the Sahaja Yogis are there. others, makes others happy. All the time thinks how to make others happy. Just it happens though you are brought up the same way as the others are, though can call anything you feel like. The collective joy that you enjoy has come to you because you have erossed that barrier which has stopped you from you are being educated the same way, may be, but all that disappears and you become a wise. beautiful joyous person. seeing the truth. The truth is as I said yesterday, that you are the spirit and once you become the spirit, you become It is something that you have achieved, of which you Gunateet, Kalateet and Dharmateet. Once you cross may not be aware. The way you are enjoying in this these limits, then you become like a drop in the Scout Ground, no other group could have enjoyed, ocean. If the drop is outside the ocean, it is always as you have enjoyed. I can see what you are doing frightened of the sun because it would dry. It does here. How are you enjoying the company of others, not know what to do, which way to slip. which way very remarkabl, that has become, because your heart to move. But once it is one with the ocean, it just is full of joy of the spirit that shines within you. You moves and enjoys, because it is not alone. It is not can examine yourself and see for yourself, whatever alone, its moving with the waves of that beautiful I am saying is there or not. Of course there are some ocean of joy and that is what you have achieved, of people who think no end of themselves. They are which you are aware. You know but you don't know staying in a hotel or some lodge or something. They you have achieved it because you are the spirit. Now are not enjoying. They still think they are something you should be on the watch about yourself sometimes great so they must stay somewhere like that. Very and you will be amazed to see how you are changed, surprising especially Indians I have seen, when they how you have become so simple and sensible and come to Cabella, they all want to stay in a hotel. In wise. So many problems come in the west because their lives, they might be having one bathroom in they are still stupid, I think, very stupid people, their house, but when they come to Cabella, they because even an old man of 80 years would like to want to stay in a hotel with attached bath, with this. marry a lady of say 20 years and he doesn't with that. Young people, it is very surprising, it understand why he's doing it. Because he doesn't

 Divine Cool Breeze 20 Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998 accept his age, he doesn't accept that I am an old So when you go beyond, dharmateet you become, man, I must behave like an old man. He wants to go beyond dharma then what happens, that dharma marry a girl who can be his grand daughter. This is becomes part and parcel of you. You don't do wrong more common in the west. They may be just on their things. You just don't do it. It is not that somebody way to the grave, but doesn't matter. They want to is telling you or you want to follow it or there is have a wife like that. This is the problem of the west. compulsion or discipline, but you just don't like to Now how does it come? Because they don't do wrong things, to say something which is not understand that we are old and to be old is to be respectful, which is not helpful, which is not loving. proud. Now when I was five years I cannot imagine This is the quality of a Sahaja Yogi where you so many people could have come to wish me Happy become the spirit. Becoming the spirit you don't have Birthday. Even when I was 50 years, there were not so many people. Now when I am 75 years old, see see that and the more you go deep into yourself, you how many people are there to wish me Happy find that you are endowed with such greatness within Birthday. When you are old you should be proud of you, such beautiful feelings, such nice things within your age, if you have lived wisely. But if you are you, that you overcome the ego of others. stupid, then of course, nobody can help. Everybody I must tell you a story. Once I went to see a saint. So will laugh at such a person. It is a custom in the west the Sahaja Yogis said, Mother, you never go and see to go on having wives after wives, divorcing your these gurus and this and that. So why do you worry. to tell anybody. So obvious, so evident and one can wives and this and that. You come along with me. We had to climb a lot. I said from here you see his vibrations. You see his vibrations. Lots of vibrations coming. So we went Up the hill, climbed up and this gentleman was Supposed to have powers that he could control the Tain and it started raining, and raining very heavily and I got completely drenched in that rain. When I went up, saw him sitting on a stone, just shaking his In India, it is the other way round, I should say, they don't have much respect for the women. They were supposed to have great respect for women, they were supposed to have placed their women at the pedestal of a sati, even if the women may be anything, they don't respect. Now, this is from where it has come. I don't know some of them say it was written by some poet that women should be beaten up, Who is this head with anger. So, I went into his cave and sat poet, I think he should be beaten up. He was born down. So he came back and said to me. "Mother. out of a woman and here he writes like this. So vou why didn't you allow me to stop that rain. Is it to see we like to take up something which is wrong which is absolutely absurd. This comes because you are not wise. A wise person will take in whatever is is the wisdom. He won't accept anything non-sensical, ascetic. You bought a saree for me. If you bought a You go on reading the books, one after another, one saree for me, I can't take from you because you are a after another. So many books you read and where sanyasi. so I had to get drenched so that I will have do you land with that. You find you are reading books to borrow a saree from you. And the whole thing which are no good for you. Useless but if you are melted away. He became a very different person. So fond of reading you go on reading. So the lack of with wisdom, you know how to handle different wisdom gives you indiscrimination. And you justify types of people. You say things by which you melt it and all that you justify, you say it is very good. Whatever I am doing is the best. It is not ego, I should say, but stupid human understanding Whatever I am you that wisdom, that love, that expression of, I doing is good. Whatever is my attitude is good. How Should say, youur spirit and that's how so many saints dare anybody tell me anything that this is wrong, though they were tortured and troubled by many, but that is wrong. Everybody will laugh at that person, they were definitely very much respected and loved. make fun of that person. such a person will suffer a lot but he will never accept that I have done definitely very nice and good people. But one thing something wrong. overcome my ego." I said, "No, Not that. I didn't want, I didn't sce your ego anywhere." But the problem another. You are a sanyasi, you are an their ego. Their conditionings are also brought into a kind of a new awakening within you. They see in But those saints in those days I must say, were was there, they were rather strict with their disciples.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue; 4,5,6 1998 21 The reason was that they were not realised souls, mistakes that they are in the darkness, your attitude their diseiples. And these gurus thought that unless towards them will change. You will just try to be and until discipline these people, they will never rise, extremely patient and kind and affectionate and they will never become something great. So they loving because you will know that the person is not have to be disciplined. And those who were seekers realized. He hasn't got his eyes, he can't see. He is of truth, accepted that alright, whatever you say, we blind. He can't hear. He can't feel the reality. So first will do. Even if you ask us to fast, we will do. They'll let him feel the reality. What is the use of giving stand on their heads. Alright we will stand on our him a lecture and disciplining. Still he will go on heads. What you say I will be willing to do, you don't making mistakes and troubling himself or troubling have to worry on that point. And that's how they were others. very disciplining type. But in Sahaja Yoga, there is So this is what you have achieved through your no discipline done. The reason is you are realized enlightenment that you are beyond all this. And you souls. Your spirit is there and the spirit gives you become a person, of a temperament which is so the light. In that light you see yourself so clearly, loving and so joy giving. I mean, there are so many änd you can discipline yourself. I don't have to tell examples that I can give you. In Sahaja Yoga it has you. happened that I have seen the beauty of their love You know that so many people have given up drugs and affection, not only towards me but towards overnight. But I never told them. I never even talked others also. If it is only towards me, I can explain it. about drugs or anything. How did they do it? Because but I cannot explain the kind of people as I explained they had the light. And this is what you have got yesterday that these people went to Israel. Now they today, the light of the spirit. You become absolutely went to Egypt. They went to Russia. Who told them? independent and absolutely free, complete freedom I never ask anybody to go anywhere. On their own because you have the light. You cannot do, cannot they felt they have to go, and do this job. And they do wrong things. Supposing now, there is light and there is some sort of a big explosion taking place. I today on such a day, when you are celebrating my won't run towards the explosion, No. You won't run either. Because you have got the eyes. So the spirit very remarkable, very pictureseque. They have and its light is the greatest guiding factor by which different colours expressing your love for me. In you become, as I said, Gunateet, you become everything, I see your love, whatever you have done Kalateet and you become Dharmateet, You are not slave of anything. You are not slave of watch. You children are so loving. I have done nothing for you, are not slave of time. You are not slave as to what is I do not know what makes you feel so much your gunas. You don't want to see whether you are gratitude. I still want to know what I have done. I right sided. left sided or centre. You are a Sahaja have done nothing. But the way you want to express Yogi and a Sahaja Yogi is beyond all these things. your love, it is very surprising, except for I would So you are Gunateet. You are Dharmateet because dharma beconies part and parcel of you. You don't might be you see something different in me but the have to follow any disciplining of dharma. I have way you are showing your gratitude is really beyond seen in Sahaja Yoga, in some of the ashrams, they are very strict. That should not be so. I have told As the other day, one of the speakers said that, you them, never to be strict. If somebody doesn't get up, at say 4 o'clock, doesn't matter. Let him get up at 10 o'clock. After sometime, he will himself get up at 4. me for granted. But the way you want to thank me But don't try to discipline them too much. Children just like a small little child would like to thank, just also, you should not discipline them too much. Of becomes like children, you are so enthusiastic about course, if they are realized souls, they themselves it and you do not understand that normally it is not are so good, they are so beautiful. But if they are done, like this anywhere. Nobody tries to be just like not, try to give them realization. Once you realize, children expressing their beautiful love. It is a very that those who are not realized are making all these have to help people to get out of their ignorance. So 75th Birthday, so many baloons are there. They are here, all your decorations, everything, I feel my say, you have got the light of your spirit. In that light, me. do not thank your mother, take her for granted. It is a fact there is no need to thank me, you have to take new thing that one can see. Such peace such love,

 22 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998 such joy, all around. In a far fetched place like this how could you do that, how could you manage that. It is not easy to understand. It is not for human beings stand anywhere you can create peace in that place, to see that. They just do not understand. How these you can create happinees in that place. So be people are like this and why are they living like this confident. Do not lose your confidence. Also your so happily. Now you have comforts in the house, wisdom to understand others will be very much you are living so well in your houses, everything is convincing to understand that they are something there. But here in this Scout Ground, it is not such a exceptional. They do not get angry. They do not get comfortable place for living. But you can live into temper, they are not mad people. They are not anywhere, I know, I have seen it, wherever you are, as long as there are Sahaja Yogis around, you do people. And this you do not have to practice. It is not care for anything. And this collective enjoyment of each other, without any expectation, without any You should not think that it is something that you criticism, without any gossip or any nonsense like that is so beautiful and even you pull each other's yourselves you have it. Only thing, that you have to legs, you enjoy your jokes. It is such friendship, such see it in the light of the spirit. It just is a very simple beautiful friendship, whether you are from India or thing and that works out. It is not easy for others to from England or from America or from any other understand you. But it should be very easy to place. emitting joy, you are emitting confidence through your spiritual awakening, You have those powers you after some sort of a craze, Just very very balanced there. It is within you. You should be proud of it. have to achieve or to become, you have it- withing understand them. Because you were like them before You find such oneness of understanding, onenees and now they are seeing you, and they will become of movement, like one wave rises and another wave like you. It is very simple. rises. It is continuous, eternal and this is what one You can seen this that I started Sahaja Yoga with has to achieve for others also, for that also you must remember that you have the light, others do not have. What have I done. I really don't know, what have I So you have to be very considerate, tolerant and done. I have no idea and what you think such understanding, about their problem and just listen gratitude, enjoyment and joy. So all these things to them what is their problem. First they will tell whatever I have told you, you have to be aware of you that my business is going down or they might your being, of your own self, of your spirit, that you say that my wife is no good or my son has no job, are the spirit. And as you are the spirit, you are he is not working. All kinds of things, they might beyond all these things and once that happens, you tell you. Listen to them. For them it is important. would be amazed, what a personality you are. Alright after that, you will find gradually, they will soothe down because you are emitting love, you are one lady and now today sce how many are there. May God bless you,

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 4,5,6 1998 23: Four Nights of Divine Music uring the next four nights (22nd to 25th Puraskar, Smt. Zarin has a rare command playing March) internationally renowned "Tappa" on Sarod. musicians played before the Holy Mother PT. VISHWA MOHAN BHATT Creator of the Mohan Veena and winner of Grammy Award, Pt.Vishwa Mohan Bhatt has mesmnerised the and received her blessings. The following artists were honoured to perform before the Divine Mother and the august assembly of Her children: Sahaja Yogis with his pure, delicate yet fiery music Disciple of Sitar maestro Pt. Ravishankar, Pt. Vishwa Mohan Bhatt is outstanding in his ability to play the Tantrakari Ang and the Gayaki Ang on the Indianised Western Hawaiian Guitar by giving it a revolutionary shape and adding 14 more strings. Pt. Vishwa Mohan Bhatt's performances all over the world has been highly acclaimed. His jugalbandis with many artists like Chinese Erhu player, Jei Bing Chen and Arabian Oudh player Simon Shaheen has won many accolades. SMT. VANAJI LAL KONDIPARTHY Diciple of the most illustrious Guru Sri Uma Rama Rao, Mrs. Vanaja is known for her mastery in Kuchipudi and Bharatnatyam style of Indian classical dance. PANDIT VAIBHAV PANDHARINATH NAGESHKAR Eminent Tabla player Pt. Vaibhav Nageshkar has earned a place of distinction as a brilliant performer, composer and teacher. He belongs to Farukhabad gharana of grcat maestro Ustad Amir Hussain Khan. Pt. Bhatt has won many awards in India and abroad like Surmani, Tantri Shringar, Swar Shiromani and Honorary citizenship of U.S.A. and Canada. PANDIT BHAJAN SOPORI Pandit Sopori is a renowned Santoor player. He lays emphasis on Sufiana Kalam Gayaki The traditional musie of Kashmir. Rendition of Dhrupad Ang on Santoor with accompaniment of Pakhawaj is also part of his innovations. For his contribution to the field of music he has received prestigious Sangeet Natak Academy and Shiromani awards. RONU MAJUMDAR Ronu Majumdar is an established artist of India initiated into playing the flute by his father Dr. Bhanu Majumdar. He later on came under the tutelage of pPadamshri Pt. Vijaya Raghav Rao and mastered the Gayaki style. Shri Ronu Majumndar has appeared at various concert platformns all over the world including festivals of India. Shri Majumdar shows remarkable maturity and depth in unfolding the Raga Violinist, Padamshree Dr. N. Rajam is the pioneer combined with superb Layakari' and melodious who perfected the technique of Gayaki Ang in tone. His recitals are full of aesthetic and emotional Hindustani classical music. Disciple of legendary appeal. He touched the hearts of the audience. DR. N. RAJAM late Pt. Omkarnath Thakur, Dr. Rajam, after 15 years of intense research, has brought the music of violin With the heavenly performances of these celebrities close to human voice, In fact Dr.Rajam and Gavaki and other artists like Danishq Khan - sarod, Meena Patarpekar vocal, Pandit Jaggannath Mishra- Shehnai, Kirti Shiledar - Vocal, Satish Vyas - Santoor, Ms. Shashwati Sen Kathak Dance, the ganges of Parama Chaitanya kept flowing all these days An enchanting exponent of Sarod, Smt. Zarin Sharma establishing the Sahaja Yogis in the Lotus Feet of Ang are used as synonyms in the world of music. SMT. ZARIN SHARMA NEE DARUWALA has performed all over the world including before Her Majesty The Queen of England. A recipient of Sangeet Natak Academy and Maharashtra Gaurav the Divine Mother.

 Volume: X Issue : 4,5,6 1998 24 Đivine Cool Breeze The Grand Finale (Samapan) ап And 'Lo'! The Concluding Day (The Samapan Divas) arrived most unexpectingly. Tears of love rolled down many eyes. The mere thought of departing from the Divine Campus made us shudder. But tihen it is tihe most pious duty of the Sahaja Yogis to englighten the hearts of millions and millions of seekers, all over the world. Taking rufuge in Divine Fortress of Thoughtless Awareness, we brought ourselves in the centre. Bringing the Programme to the Grand Finale Sir C.P. Shrivastava said: Sir C.P.'s Thanks Giving 26.3.1998 Dear Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis (can you hear me) we have been celebrating an event of momentous importance for entire humanity- the birth of your Holy Mother Shri Mataji -75 years much higher level of spiritual existence. Now this is Her mission and She began that mission 28 years ago with great difficulty. I think we must recognise and recall She has single handed brought about a tremendous revolution in humanity. I narrated you the other day of one event 25 years ago, when She got hold of a young man who was dying and brought him home. Did She ask him-what is your language No. Did She ask him -what is your religion No. Did She ask him- what is your race - No. He was a human being and sae brought that human being home, treated him with Sahaja Yoga and ago. In effeet we are celebrating something which needs to be appreciated and understood. Before Her there have been incarnations. They have given to this earth excellent religions and these religions aimed at bringing humanity to civilized existence, to exist according to ethical standards. So we have these different religions growing up in different races, getting different followers. But over a period of time instead of uniting all of them they began to separate them as if there are compartments and you had treated him with that powerful emotion Love, selfless love, love of a Mother and very soon this boy who was a drunkard, who was given to drugs and all that goes with it- He got transformed. So reunions in the 19th and 20th centuries and there that is how she began, Herself, individually, looking after one peIson or a group of persons. was great need for a new incarnation to come and lift the humanity to a higher level of sprituality and that is why Shri Mataji has come to this earth and She has taken birth here. Seemingly it may appear diplomat. He also had come to Oxtead house as a to be an impossible task, how do you do that and intially that was what the blind did not see-how would Shri Mataji succeed in Her mission. But if you see what you see here today and if hear what Yoga movement. That is why how She, your Holy you have heard today Is this not already a new world in existence and it is Her world which has being built up Sahaja Yoga and now we see come into being, We are now talking of Hindus, thousands sitting here and a million or more around Christians, Muslims, Sikhs-all being brothers and the world. That is Her achievement. Now what is sisters the possibility of me, a born Hindu, worshipping in a Mosque-why not! or in a Church have been celebrating, I think, this has been the most - why not! or in a Gurudwara - why not! Every memorable event which has been an elevating event place of worship is for everybody and that is what but what message will you carry from here. That's Sahaja Yoga is. Sahaja Yoga lifts humanity to a very very important and the message that you carry to You saw Mr. Gregoire. He came here as a UN brilliant young man but in search of truth. He stayed with us for two days and went back a realised soul and now he has been one of the pillars of Sahaja Mother has step by step, human being by human the message that you have to carry from here. We

 25 Völume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998 Divine Cool Breez the wider world is-Sahaja Yoga now has to engulf creating a new model for them to follow. Then we the whole world. It has to spread everywhere. It has to come to every human being. Every human being spiritual. It lifts you up and music has been a very has to be uplifted and you carry that message and I integral part of Sahaja Yoga movement. And here I have no doubt that with the blessing of Shri Mataji would like to thank and congratulate Baba. I call him that will succeed. When we meet again to celebrate Baba because he is my 'Sala' (brother-in-law) but Her 80th birthday – probably we will not be a he has made a wonderful role in getting music million strong, we will be 200 million strong and together and organising this and let's give him a big why not. And when we celebrate a 100 years of Her hand existence there will be 5 billion Sahaja Yogis in this Anart from music function of this kind a celebration world. I owe a tremendous gratitude to Her. She has of this magnitude requires a tremendous amount of have had marvellous music programmes. Music is been my wife for 51 years. She has looked after me with tremendous love and care and affection. Once have been organised for 2000 persons, 3000 persons She was in Australia and from there She rang up my and I assure you they were not even half as well done cook in London, giving instructions as to which as this one has been organised here. There are many vegetable he should prepare for me and how. That is many who had joined hands, many Sahaja Yogis a wife. She is a mother of my daughters and your Delhi and from outside and to all of them I would Mother. She has looked after not only us but all of - they you with the same love. She has never distinguished have been extremely extremely busy, very helpful. between Her children and any other children. Every They played a great role. The caterer child to Her is Her own child. How can I express produced excellent food. Everyone has combined. adequately my personal gratitude to Her. except just But there is always a master mind behind all this. organisation. I know some international conferences like to expresS my gratitude. The Yuva Shakti he has say I love you. We wish Her eternal life. She has an eternal responsibility and I know that is your prayer automatically. There is someone behind this and that and when I go back from here I will convey to Her what you want me to convey your love, your Give him a standing ovation. prayers for Her good health, for a long life full of happiness. Now coming down from the divine to mundane life - this function has been organised who have, exceedingly well and we began with a function where a number of important persons came and addressed the gathering and they expressed 'bewilderment" that was the word used by Mr. Chidambaram. the fomer Finance Minister. Yes people are bewildered. They just cannot believe their eyes, they cannot understand how human beings who quarrel outside this world are just in love with each other. When BABA MAMA : they go back, they go back amazed, stunned and they do not know how it has happened. Please don't helieve that these things happen so some is Mr. Nalgirkar. I request him to come along. That concludes my remarks. I want to thank all those Once again Shri Nirmala Mataji ki Jai. Thank you, Gad bless you, Thank you once again. Thank you Sir for all your advice and summing up. It is so beautiful. I have always been your 'Sala' and I will remain your Sala". But there is much more than "Salahood". You have been always like a father to me as Shri Mataji has been a mother to me. And most importantly the love that flows from both of you is the source of my living- That's all I can Gradually it will seep in. All these person spoke so well, so highly and we must be very very grateful to them. I think that day Shri Yogi Mahajan, who is here, played a very big role. He was the master of ceremonies. Rajesh Shah is not here. he was responsible for bringing a number of them. That was a moment when these political leaders began to see. they were deficient and where your Mother was say,

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 4,5,6 1998 26 The last word -Dr. Wolfgang Hackl ear brothers and sisters I was asked by many western Sahaja Yogis to say something. It is very embarassing if you come here and you are treated like a king fof some, for 14 days now and then those who treat you like a king say thank you that you have come. Dear hrothers and sisters we sit now in a palace and wherever this palace is built up now, in a few days, there will he only sand, some lizards running around. There will no light because there is no generator and nobody puts the diesel into generator. There will be no water coming out of the pipes because nobody fills the water tanks. There will be no assistance booth. There will be nobody who says- any volunteers to accompany western ladies for shopping. It will be everything as it was before, just a barren land with a few huts. The huts will look nicer now because it belongs to the government but in order to give better accommodation to everybody the Sahaja Yogis of Delhi, the Sahaja Yogis of India have prepared everything very nicely so it will be in a nice state when we leave. But for all this we are, we are the ones who are very very grateful to the Sahaja Yogis of India, to the Sahaja Yogis of Delhi, to Mr Nalgirkar and his group very thankful to you. Please give them a hand and give them another standing ovation. As it is a festival for our Mother, an incarnation of our Mother, the beloved family of - we are very our Mother plays an important role. And we never come to the point that we express our emotions towards these wonderful beings which are here with us and what I wanted to say is that we feel very much honoured that you stayed here with us. You must be very special that you are so close to our Mother and we are of course channels. Sir C.P. you are such an example for us in humility and at the same time dignity and with such a loving heart and we are so happy that you are always with us, you sit there, at the side of our Holy Mother and we are very very happy that you are with us and we hope that you will be with us for many many more times. And dear Baba Mama, you are really a Mama to all of us. You are always surrounded by many Sahaja Yogis, always trying to catch people for the Academy, And if one thing we can do for you is to add one name to your 999 - which should be - the lord of the young nights. there are so many members of Shri Mataji's family like Sadhna didi and Kalpana didi and all the other persons which we personally do not know so well and they also personally do not know us so names well. We are very happy that they are with us and please give them a big hand. And thus the grand festival came to an end. Jai Shri Mataji

 Innocence Is An Eternal Quality Which Can Never Be Lost Or Destroyed.



----------------------

1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
11
1
Volume: X Issue
5, & 6
1998
75th Birthday Celebtrations
3380
Be Joyful!
The entire universe has to receive the bubbling streams of your love.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Editorial
1
Felicitation Programme
Public Fellicitation talk by Shri Mataji
75th Birthday - Puja Talk
15
Four Nights of Divine Music
23
24
The Grand Finale
26
The Last Word
Yogi Mahajan
Edited by
Published by: V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Editorial
On the occasion of the birthday celebration of Guru Nanaka, often we hear his devotees chanting
"Satguru Nanaka Pragatya, Miti dhundh jag chanan hoya'
When Guru Nanaka incarnated on this earth, the darkness of ignorance vanished and the world
was filled with effulgent light. Guru Nanaka was a realised soul, a Guru, a saint who could give
realisation to only two of his followers. But the mother Adishakti - whom Adi Sankaracharya,
in his great hymn, describes as under:
अविद्याना-मन्त-स्तिमिर-मिहिर द्वीप-नगरी, जड़ानां चैतन्य-स्तबक-मकरन्द-सुतिझरी।
दरिद्राणां चिन्तामणि गुणनिका जन्म जलधौ, निमग्नानां दंष्ट्रा मुररिपु - वराहस्य भवति ॥
Avidyaham antas - timira - mihira - dvipa nagari, Jadanam chaitanya - stabaka-makranda - Snuti jhari
Dridranam Chintamani - gunanika janma -jaladhau, Nimagnanam danstra mura-ripu - varahasya bhavti
(Saundarya Lahri)
The dust of Thy feet, O Devi, is the island city, where from takes place the luminous sun rise of
spiritual illumination driving away the over-casting darkness of ignorance in the hearts of devotees.
It forms the cluster of flower buds, from which gushes forth the nector of intelligence, enlightening
the dull witted. It is a veritable necklace of wish-yielding gems for the poverty stricken. And for
those immersed in the ocean of Samsara, it becomes their uplifter like the tusk of Vishnu (which
raised the earth from submergence in pralaya waters, when He incarnated as the cosmic Boar,
Varahavtara).
Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi is the only source of spiritual enlightenment. One of Her
glance (Kataksha) is enough to give self-realisation to thousands and thousands of seekers
enmasse. In Public Programmes most of the seekers raise their hands confirming that their
Kundalini is awakened and that they have felt the Divine Cool Breeze (Chaitanya Lehri) on their
Sahasrara. She is Sahaja Yoga Dayini. A glimpse of Her washes away the sins of all previous
lives. ('Tujh ditthe Sache Patshah Mal Janam Janam Di Katiye' says Guru Nanaka).
75th Birthday of this Maha-Avtara, the perfect incarnation who incarnated on this earth, in the
Mahamaya form, fell on 21st March 1998. The Sandrakaruna, The Beloved Mother of all Sahaja
Yogis had been kind enough to bless the capital of India to organise the 75th Birthday celebrations.
All hearts went out in Joy! It is a life-time opportunity for many of us! It should be a grand
function! It should be an event of the century! Ejaculated some of the Sahaja Yogis. The Divine
Forces, from all over the world joined hands to do their bit to make the occasion memorable.
Bharatiyam the scouts ground of Delhi - was once again chosen to be the venue. Five splendid
Toran Dwars (Welcome Gates) were put, the 5th, the entry to the pandal, was a Palace Gate
(Hawa Mahal) made in Jaipur style. Many beautiful chandeliers and luminous lights were put in
the high-domed ceiling of the auditorium. Ten feet wide wooden platform was erected around
the auditorium to increase the seating capacity.
The exuberant back-drop of the stage was prepared by Mr Khobar-the Sahaja Yogi horticulturist
not with colour and brush but with the lúsh green hilly plants embedded in soil, studded with
stones. It looked like a small hillock from the bosom of which the water was falling and making
it look heavenly. Small candle lights put on it, on the Birthday, reminded the Indian seckers of
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Volume X Issue: 4,5,6 1998
Dlvine Cool Breeze
the mythical Drongiri Mountain which Hanumana had brought to cure Lakshmana of the vanom
of enemy's arrow. Delhi Yuva Shakti worked round the clock to decorate the stage and the
auditorium which had a capacity to seat 8000 people. Out of the various committees made, one
was to receive and accommodate Sahaja Yogis pouring in from abroad and from various parts of
the country. A huge hanger was put as Dining Hall where more than 3000 Sahaja Yogis could
take their meals.
Every Sahaji- men or women, from the country or abroad
The only desire, the purest one, was to please our beloved Divine Mother. Every heart prayed:
-was there to pour out his heart.
prapannarti hare Prasid, Prasid Mart Jag to Khilasya
Prasid Vishveshwari pahi Vishvam, Twamishavari Devi Chara Charsaya
O Devi, the remover of pain and sufferings of the devotees! Pray be happy! O Mother of the
universe, be happy! O Goddess of the world, pray protect this world. O Devil The whole universe
depends upon Thee. Thou art the sole support of this world, since thou have established thyself
in the form of Mother Earth. Pray be happy.
Always true to Her promise
Pushpam, Phalam, Toyam"
The Divine Mother blessed the international collectivity of Sahaja Yogis, with constant flow of
Chaitanya. For six days and nights all of us swam in the ocean of Divine Cool Vibrations that
emanated from our Divine Mother.
Salutations to Thee, O, Mother Divine! Salutations to thee again and again!
तनियासं पांसुं तव चरण - पड्गेरुह - भवं, विरिचि: संचिन्वन विरचयति लोका - न विकलम्।
बहुत्येन शौरिः कथमपि सहस्रेणं शिरसां, हरः संक्षुदयैतं भजति भसितोद्धूलन - विधिम्
(सौन्दर्य लहरी)
Taniyamsam pamsum tava, Charana - pankeruha - bhavam
Virinchi Samchinvan Virchayati, Lokan - avikalam;
Vahatyenam Shaurih Kathamapi, Sahasrena Shrisam
Harah Sankhshudyanam blhajati, Bhasitoddhoolana - vidhim
Gathering a minute particle of dust from thy lotus feet, Brahma, the creator, brings into being
this universe (limitless and mysterious) without any imperfection, the sustentator Vishnu as
Adisheha somehow supports this universe (made out of that dust particle) with his thousands
hoods. And Mahesha the destroyer, crushing that particle of dust into powder, rubs the ashes all
over His body (at the time of dissolution - Pralaya)
O, beloved Mother of all Sahaja Yogis, O, Mahamaya incarnate, we the Sahajis from all over the
world pray to Thee, with our heart, that please bless us to be the smallest molecule of the dust of
Thy Lotus Feet and let the meditation of your Holy Feet be the only joy for us.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X lssue 4,5,6 1998
Felicitation Programme
he Bismillah (20.3.98) of the Prakashotsava
The Festival of Enlightenment- was
made with the colourful Felicitation
blessing, just like the Ganges out of the Gangotri.
That its what you are!
You are goodness incarnate in human form; that is
Programme. Besides our beloved Divine Mother and what I call her! Mother, I want to speak for hours I
Sir C.P. Srivastava, the function was graced by must speak as tall as I am, but I cannot do it because
honourable distinguished guests and Sahaja Yogi I have to catch a train. You will excuse me, but I
brothers and sisters from all over the globe and
various parts of the country. Shri Balram Jakhad -
Former Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri P. ll of us in this bodily form, benign blessing-giving
Chidambaram Former Finance Minister of India,
Shri Sunder Lal Patwaji- Former Chief Minister of
Madhya Pradesh. Shri Aizaj Rizvi- Food and Civil
Supplies Minister of U.P. and Chairman, Minority Shri P. Chidambaram (Former Finance Minister
Cell, BJP and Shri Rahul Bajaj – the renowned of India) eruditely said: Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala
industrialist were amongst those who felicitated Shri Deviji, Sahaja Yogis, distinguished guests. This is
Mataji and expressed their gratitude to the Divinity. my second meeting with Shri Mataji, my first
want to say one thing from all of us here, there will
be one tribute for us always, please continue with
and healthy with a good smile as ever.
meeting with Sahaja Yogis and to be candid I feel
quite bewildered and quite humbled. I ask myself
Shri Balram Jakhad (M.P. and Former Speaker of what brings so many of you from all parts of the
the Lok Sabha) started in Hindi language. Wishing world, from all parts of India, from all parts of this
long life to Shri Mataji, he shifted over to English great city on this occasion? What moves 5000 people
and said: "All around I see faces from all over the
belonging to different faiths, different communities,
different backgrounds together under one tent? What
world. That is brotherhood, that is what human kind
is, that is Her greatness because in our own Shastras inspires so many of you to be so devoted, so
we have said one thing, our forefathers said it:
humbled, so united, so joyful? I ask myself if all
this can happen to 5000 people on one evening, why
cannot this happen to 5 billion people of this world?
And in the more limited way, why cannot it happen
सर्वे भवन्तु सुखिनाः सर्वे सन्तु निरामया:
सर्वे भद्राणों पश्यन्तु, माँ कश्चित् दुःख भाग भवेत
No body should be hurt, nobody should be in pain.
everybody should be good. That is what She is, that
is what She does for others and secondly She has
proved to the whole world that the whole world is
one brotherhood Te a han a his whole earth is
one).
to 95 crores people living in this great ancient land?
Sister Nivedita was one of the principal disciples of
Swami Vivekananda. Her biographer wrote and I
quote-
"Faith is not built on the syllogistic foundations of
reason, hut is built on the unseen rock of intution."
The people of the world don't realise it but the time
has come to realise what our forefathers have said.
What She epitomises today is
Faith has moved all of you to this place, love has
united you and I join all of you in paying homage
a fara v e e F where the whole world is and seeking the blessings of Shri Mataji. I am too
supposed to be a single nest. It is not much bigger, it small, too insignificant, to ask anything more except
is like a small nest, in which we all have to exist
That is due to Her love, Her blessings, That is what here, and all the Saliaja Yogis and all the people of
I wish that we should live for each other, to stay
always healthy, always benign. What can I says, It seek your guidance. Guide the people of this world.
is a question, it is a flow, it is a flow of love, affection,
the world. I seek your blessings. I seek your love, I
Thank you very much.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue 4,5,6 1998
Mr. Philips Zeiss (Germany)
The nature has nourished a billion planEs
But never been able to equilize you in motherly love,
Humorously playing with the three minutes time AIl the birds are singing the praise of your name in
limit, imposed by the organisers, displayed his
balance of mind, a boon bestowed by Shri Mataji. But have never been able to name all your qualities,
He expressed his gratitude as under:
morning hours,
The learned man have filled billions of pages with
Holy Mother, most respected Sir C.P., honoured knowledge.
guests and dearest Sahaja Yogi brothers and sisters
from all over the world. Yesterday the organisers Wisdom.
have asked us to contribute to tonight's programme
But have never been able to reflect a glimpse of your
wisdom.
The Musicians have composed billions of harmonies
But they never matched the effect of your smile.
with very short addresses; infact they have asked to
speak for no longer than three minutes. So I find The poets have written billions of verses
myself facing one of the fundamental problems, each
and every Sahaja Yogi is facing in his relationship your Divine Being
to his Mother, Shri Mataji. How can I express my
love and gratitude to Shri Mataji? How should I do
it in only three minutes? And I thought that only with
the powers, Shri Mataji has bestowed upon Her Expressing his gratitude, Sh. Gregoire de
children in Sahaja Yoga, I can manage this task. Shri Kalbermatten (Senior Officer in the Environment
Mataji you are the Primordial Mother, having taken eld of United Nations) said: Shri Mataji, Sir C.P.
your birth in 20th century, how can I thank you only excellency, distinguished guests, (Shri Mataji I must
three minutes? You are the Avatara (ra) of the confess that I reached Philips' anguish and thank you
modern time, who have descended for the for the two minutes.)
emancipation and salvation of the mankind. How Shri Mataji two years ago I was sitting in a plane, I
then I can thank you only in three minutes? Shri was coming for your birthday and I was wondering
Mataji you are the mother of thousands, thousands what kind of gift I could bring you! That turned out
and thousands of Sahaja Yogis to whom you have to be a puzzling question. What handicraft for
given the most precious gift, the Divine can bestow Bhagwan who created art, what candle for the sun,
upon human beings, self-realization, awakening, what milk for the moon, what drop of water for the
rebirth. How then Shri Mataji can I thank you only ocean, and then Shri Mataji, I found out that we have
in three minutes? Talking about myself when I first something you don't have.. We can walk from
met you Shri Mataji I was nothing but a youngman, darkness towards light, You can't. We can move from
lost and confused and without any orientation and slavery towards freedom-you can't-you are the
you have not only given me rebirth and self-
realisation but even more; you have given me a and ego towards a state of bliss and of recognition.
material existence, you have given me a wonderful This you can't- Shri Mataji you can't recognise
family, you have given me a profession, you have the Divinity because you are what you are, you have
given me a social position, you have given me a
status and much more above that, you have given you can't. And this, my friends, is the secret of what
me a position in Sahaja Yoga from where I can help in India they call it Leela, because God needed our
and contribute to your Divine Mission, Shri Mataji. consciousness to discover, how fantastic it is to
How then can I thank you only in three minutes Shri discover Divinity, without us how should you do it?
Mataji? So you all can imagine I found myself in a So Shri Mataji we offer you for your birthday, this
big dilemma, when I was thinking what to say tonight pilgrimage from darkness towards light, from
and one hour before I left I got an inspiration and I enslavement towards freedom. We pledge that we
took refuge to poetry:
But have never been able to describe the magic of
How then can I be able to thank you only in three
minutes?
essence of freedon, We can move from conditioning
been, you willever be, but we can discover you but
will do some justice to your message, that we will
improve ourselves. Shri Mataji, we express our deep
deep gratitude and love and just with your permission
I end, (I think I am within that five minutes) with
just a last thing I want to say, Shri Mataji because
The Star shines a billion nights
And still not able to express your beauty,
The Sun is shining a billion days
And is yet not able to reflect your light,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Volume: X issue: 4,5,6 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
5
we are in this land of Bharata that we very deeply myself singularly fortunate to be standing here before
respect and we pray that this foundation of wisdom you today to participate in these momentous
will bless the world through you message. What I celebrations. Mr. Chidambram asked one question,
he said, how is it that so many people are here, today,
from all parts of the world; what is it that brings
I want to narrate one incident to you
want to say Shri Mataji is this
Gurur Brahma, Gurur Vishnu, Gurur Devo
them here?
Maheshwara, Gurur Sakshat Parbrahma, Shri
Mataji Nirmala Ma, Tasmai Shri Gurüve Namah.
which will probably illustrate how this Divine Lady
has built up Sahaja Yoga, step by step, on the basis
of very devoted and very persistent hard work. I
recall a day in 1974. I had taken up a job in London,
Dr. Brian Wells (Medical Director of the largest
Mental Health Organization of U.K.) called Sahaja
Yoga The Perfect Science, The Pure Science, The
Divine Science.' He spoke as follows
we were living in a place called Oxtead and Surrey,
Away from London. I used to commute and you know
I am talking of 24 years ago. One evening when I
returned home, I found in my home-I expected to
see my wife with some domestic help, but instead I
saw, sitting in the drawing room on a sofa, a young
is also a humbling experience and as a man of boy, white skin, I didn't expect to see him there. So
science and doctor of medicine, I stand before you I looked at him and he looked at me and we wondered
like a spec of sand before mount Kailasha. I stand who we were? And what wvas even more intriguing
here in awe and I stand here in amazement, in was the fact that he was wearing my clothes, my kurta
humility and in love. The colleges, the universities, and pyjama. So I began to wonder whether I was
the libraries, the computers contain a lot of seeing some appareation? Was I in my senses or
information. Shri Mataji, its not awe, it is complete something wrong with me? So I retraced my steps
rubbish compared to the wisdom you bestowed. Shri and went back to my wife and asked-who is he?
Mataji we know nothing. The science you teach us She explained to me that-that day she had gone to
is the pure sicence, the science you teach is the Picadilli Circus and there she saw a young man lying
perfect science, the sciene you teach us is the Divine uncared for, unattended. Obviously he was sick, so
science. Shri Mataji the technology and the medicine she went up to him and asked what the matter was?
today does nothing compared to the simple Bandhan And the boy said, he was very ill, he had noboby to
that you have taught us to perform. Shri Mataji you look after himn and he was almost dying. Now, she
heal us in our physical bodies, our psychological said, come along with me and she brought him home
health and in our spiritual beings. There are no drugs. and had arranged for him to have a bath and since
there are no medicines, there is no science, there is he didn't have any clothes, he had to wear my clothes.
nothing more powerful than your inspiration and I was greatly relieved. I was very proud, she had
your love. Shri Mataji on the eve of your birthday. brought home that young man out of tremendous love
thank you very much for your wisdom and may you and compassion and you know that young man stayed
in our house for two-three months. He was given
Shri Mataji, brothers and sisters in Sahaja Yoga. Shri
Mataji on the eve of your birthday it is such an
honour and such a privilege to stand before you, It
have many more birthdays.
Sahaja Yoga treatment and within a matter of days
he began to improve. His jaundice had gone, his
drugs had gone, his alcholism had gone, he became
within eight wveeks' time, a rose, a flower, a beautiful
person! This was the first miracle I saw. You know
people sometimes say they can improve a machine
but anyone other than Nirmalaji saying that Ican
transform a human being, I won't believe. Human
beings are the most difficult to transform. It is only
through Divine Power and Divine Love that you can
transform a human being and she performed that
miracle that day. Since then she peformed millions
Thank you
Surrendering himself 'fully' to Shri Mataji our
esteemed Sir C.P. Shrivastava, in his scholarly style
said:
Shri Nirmala Mataji, this is the first time I have
addressed Her as Mataji; I think on her 75th birthday
celebration, time has come for me to surrender
myself fully to Her; Shri Patwaji, Shri Rizviji, Shri
Rahul Bajaj ji, dear Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen: I regard
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Volume: X Issue 4,5,6 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
6.
But I would go little further and beyond, I would
of miracles, around the world. Shri Patwaji, I
consider each Sahaja Yogi to be a miracle, I consider say we need you here until each and every person
each Sahaja Yogini to be an angel and I say angel have been transformed and we need you ever
because whät is the meaning of transformation? thereafter to ensure that they stay as angels ever
There is a total inner transformation, there is self- thereafter.
union with the almighty
power of God, power of love, once a person has been
the opportunity to express my abiding, profound and
truely described as an angel and this gathering of deepest gratitude for the love and affection you have
angels, this is a part of heaven presided by the
Divinity herself. Can we all understand, what She Sahaja Yogi so far, today I want you to accept me as
ask you to accept me. I have been an apprentice
one of you.
Her but She is much beyond that. She is limitless,
She can not be limited by descriptions, She can not
be comprehended by mind, because someone has said
in Urdu Jo Samajh Mein Aa Gaya, Phir Woh Khuda
Kyon Kar Hua" someone who you can comprehend
with mind would not be God. In other words, God is
incomprehensible. So many facets, so many aspects,
that is impossible to describe. Now it has been said
that She has a task ahead of Her, She has aä mighty
task ahead, She has transformed a million of people
of the world, there are five billion. So we' need Her
here, in this world, until each one of those five billion
of this world have been transformed. One poet in
Urdu has said, Tum Salamat Raho Hazaron Baras,
Din Ho Saal Ke Pachas Hazaar'- We pray that
you live for thousand years and each of those years
should not have just 365 days but fifty thousand days.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Rahul Bajaj, The renowned industrialist, poured
out his heart saying:
"I am here as a person who has for years been
receiving tremendous amount of love and
affection from Shri Mataji."
be anything
"As a son, because I don't want to
else," he said, "I have come here today not to
:
thank Shri Mataji, at least in India a son does
not thank his mother..
I have come here
only to ask for more and тоre love and your
blessings."
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Volume: X Issue 4,5.6 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
Public Felicitation 20.3.1998, Delhi
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
I
to begìn with. Otherwise our attention is outside, we
are woried about money, worried about power,
worried about this, worried about that and
competition and all the things that are going on. But
if your attention is turned, somehow, towards your
spirit, then what happens to you is that you become
the power of the spirit. And the power of the spirit is
the highest power you could think of. First of all,
spirit is the one that loves. Loves without asking for
anything, without expecting for anything. Just loves.
It's an unconditional type of personality which just
emits love. Anybody in trouble, anybody having a
problem, just it flows. This eapacity to flow in the
heart exists, but on top of that is the closing point, is
that our attention is not on our spirit. Even in political
bow to all the seekers of truth. So much has
been said and really my heart is full of
gratitude for all of you to come here, all the
way and the way people have described about Sahaja
Yoga. To understand Sahaja Yoga, we should know
where are we today, in this Kaliyuga. What are we
facing today? It should really make you feel quite
disturbed to see the way things are going in every
country, everywhere. What's the problem? What is
the, such a need for people, to become so restless,
full of tensions. Collecti vely and countrywise
anywhere you go, you find some sort of confusion.
Terrible! The whole society seems to be boiling with
a kind of a fear of destruction. What is the reason?
There are so many religions, so many organised,
disorganised, all kinds of things. There are so many
Sadhus and Saints. There are so many books written
about what you should have, but-the only one,
who is a seeker of truth, should see one point
why there is so much problem, in this world and how
can you help them. Where is the problem. It is inside
the human being. As described, you see, we have
come out of animal stage to human stage.
endeavours or in your economic endeavours, in any
endeavour. What happens is that ättention is outside.
So you go into competition, you go into this thing.
You go on becoming very competent and then
suddenly find another one coming up.
There are so many struggles, when your attention is
outside, because in attention outside there is no
purity. It is just attention to yourself and that too is
so limited, very limited it is. Because if you pay
attention to yourself, there is no end to your troubles
and woes. For a person, as they said, really it is fact
that I don't mind sleeping anywhere. I don't mind
cating anything, I am not bothered about all these
things. Its a fact because its not very important,
think. But without thinking I am made like that. All
right, but Sahaja Yogis have become like this. This
is the miracle that human beings have turned their
attention to their spirit. Then you are amazed how
things work out, without any competition, without
any fight, without any quarrels. How your attention
becomes fixed on your spirit? The first thing that
happens to you, is good health. Your health improves,
firstly. I mean, so many problems are solved. This
world, Ithink, atleast 30% of people are always sick,
because of the tensions, may be, because of bad food
and this and that. The first thing that happens to you,
is that your health improves.
We have the human awareness no doubt. In that
awareness we start seeing all kinds of things, that
are not good, which are destructive, which are
disturbing. If it does not disturb you, that means.
you are not at all a sensitive person. But you are
sensitive as a human being. So now what is the reason
for this? In every field of life, whether it is political
or economic or any field of life, in which human
beings are living, there is a very subtle problem,
which people don't understand. Now, if I say that
there is spirit within tis. It shines in our heart. You
need not believe me. But our attention is not on the
spirit. They call it 'Atma Vimukti'. Our attention is
outside. At this stage of human awareness our
attention is outside, outside in various things. Now
where should our attention go, to evolve for what?
To achieve what? Firstly our attention has to go, now,
towards our spirit. Towards spiritual understanding.
This is one thing that has to happen to human beings,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Volume: X lssue: 4,5,6 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
Today, now in Sahaja Yoga, we have people who only the love. If you want to say, it is also peace and
have learnt that these modern ways of economic and joy and also, it is the superior wisdom. It is rather
all that, have not given peace to anyone. We think of subtle for normal man to understand. I know that, I
America; I have been to America. I know Americans. have gone through that. For persons to understand
How terribly disturbed they are! Their families are that one can become the spirit but this is in the
ruined, their children are ruined. All kinds of stupid evolutionary process. Today is the time for people
things are happening. Our Indian Gurus are going to become the spirit. This is the blessing of this
and making big money there. And they just want blossom time, as I call it, and people have to become
peace! They just want peace of the heart. That's only the spirit. Otherwise what is left of them is like all
possible when your attention goes to your heart, other human beings who will I don't know, where
hecause in the heart resides the spirit and the spirit they will end up. This is an essential step today to
is the source of peace. First is the love and second, become the spirit.
as I told you just now, is the peace. You become All the saints, all the prophets, all the religions have
extremely peaceful. You become like a witness and talked about it. Not that they have not. Of course we
you see the whole drama like a joke. Its nothing s0 have twisted them, we have made separate
serious, to be worried about. It all works out and separate things but only one simple thing is that you
this is what one has to become, is to become the are a spirit and unless and until you became the spirit
spirit, which is your own, which is in your own heart you can not achieve any peace, any joy and no love.
and that is the source as I told you of love, and again, The Sahaja Yogis here, have achieved it. They don't
I say, of peace.
think they are from foreign country or this country
And the third thing that happens to you is that, the or that country. Now here in this camp we don't have
source of spirit being joy, joy bubbles in your life. It very good arrangement for sleeping, for eating or
just bubbles in your life. You don't know how to get anything, no good bathroom and nothing, They are
out of that great ocean of joy. You start swimming in enjoying themselves. Nobody minds it. Of course
it and enjoying it, every bit of it. You touch all the
shores, going round the whole world, their hearts
and everything. It is in the heart that resides the spirit like a flower, when it becomes the fruit. All its petals
again I say, It is not in the brain. No mental activity and everything drops off and then it becomes the
can take you to spirit. Spirit is only possible if your
attention could be somehow taken to the spirit and knowledge, fruit of wisdom and of love.
that's possible only through Kundalini awakening. For knowledge you don't have to read books. There
This change of attitude towards life, this change of is no need. People who have read to0 many books
complete peace and joy has come to you all because are difficult to get into Sahaja Yoga. But what you
your attention is now on your spirit. Now you don't have to see yourself, that what is the reality. But that
think of money. Money walks your way. You don't is only possible if you are a realized soul. Otherwise
think of power. Power walks your way and the power you get lost in the illusions of the world. You live
of the spirit is the highest, the most powerful and with the illusions, all your life struggling, fighting
the most righteous thing. It is not necessary that you and I don't want to say what is the end. So a simple
should become a sanyasi, Sadhu baba, do all kinds thing that has happened with Sahaja Yoga in your
of things. No necessity of these rituals. The spirit is evolutionary process, your attention now has gone
residing within you. Already, all this you have done to your spirit than to anything else. As soon as the
in previous lives. Now, in this life only thing you power of the spirit comes, you find yourself
have to do is to put attention to your spirit and that's successful in everything. You don't want, you don't
possible only through awakening of Kundalini, your ask for it and if you are not, you don't mind. You
primordial mother. When she starts rising, she passes don't mind because you think they don't understand,
through the centres and enriches them, integrates It's all right. Forget it. So there is no use fighting for
them and pierces through the fontanelle bone area it, asking for it. For this one thing is important, first
and makes you connected to this all pervading power and foremost thing you have to forgive everyone.
of divine love. But this power of divie love is not
certain things of a particular country may linger on
but then it drops. Gradually it starts dropping off,
fruit so you have now become the fruit, Fruit of
Human beings, I don't know sometimes they are
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Volume: X lssue : 4,5,6 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
illogical. Supposing somebody tries to harm you.
Allright, I forgive him. Forget it, because I have no
headache of that. What he is trying to do is to give
me a headache which I will not take. I just forgive.
so that is the very important point that Christ has
also said that you have to forgive.
Now, if you want you can avoid that person, or if
you want you can bring him round and put him right.
But we should not try on the complicated character
very much, in the beginning. I said because they will
complicate you. Now those people who have
matured in Sahaja Yoga, can easily manage that also
and also we must know that all the elements are
working for us. All the events of the world are just
to show how wrong things are wrong and how right
things should be done. Say, for example, when Hitler
came he started destroying people. He took 9 years
to build himself up and he did all kinds of things
which cannot be forgiven by anyone. But he died
Mohammad Sahib has said so many things. I don't
know how people have twisted. Christ had said so
of them has said one thing that you have to become
the spirit and how people have twisted it and have
formed so many religions and in that religion why
should they quarrel. If there is one God, there should
be no quarrel. Now in Sahaja Yoga, you find that
people have come from different faiths, different enlightened.
countries, different ideologies, everything. One thing Now you have heard some people, I was amazed how
great about Sahaja Yogis is that they äre very pure.
There is so much of purity in them. I don't have any divine! All these countries, I have seen, are doing so
problem of immorality in Sahaja Yoga. We don't find well, unexpectedly. Imagine in England, who came
anybody being immoral. If somebody has been to India and ruled us for 300 years, there are so many
immoral he just gets corrected. If somebody has Sahaja Yogis and also as you see today, when I speak
being cheating, he gets corrected. If somebody has there (in England) the whole hall is filled up with
been a corrupt person, he gets corrected because people, in England! I have seen also in the countries
spirit gives the light for you to see for yourself, what like Russia where these people were on the verge of
is good for you. Supposing you are going on a road collapsing after they started democracy. Whether it
and you are blind, you can walk into a ditch. But is democracy or communism or anything these are
supposing you have the light and the eyes are open, all isms'. You have to come out of it and see for
you know how you have to go and that's exactly what yourself that so called democracy, has become
is happening in Sahaja Yoga that the people have demoncracy, so called communism has failed. Why?
realized, how to move, how to go about, how to walk Basically what is wrong with them. It is all based,
and not to fall in the ditch. I have seen people who not on the spiritual level. There was no spirit
have fallen into ditch also but I have nothing but involved. It was all based on, I should say, on the
love for them, because they were blind. You see for endeavours which are outside, which were very
a blind person you can just have love, isn't it? And I limited and those limits once they break, you see,
found that once I forgive them completely and I ask you have a problem. Now economics, the word
them, alright, even if they haye abused me and have economics if you see is collapsing. Everywhere there
said things against me, its alright. Because they don't is recession. If they are such experts, then why there
know what they are doing. They are blind people so is recession. Why there are problems. Now the people
once you feel that way about others that doesn't say, we must remove the poverty. I agree. But not by
matter. Whatever they have done, whatever they have giving some sort of a gift. But with self realization,
so far so-called harmed you also, is no harm to you you can do it. You can do it, because if you can
because you are standing on the pedestal of truth. approach people who need, with Sahaja Yoga and
So the second point is that the spirit is the source of enrich them, you will be amazed that they themselves
truth, not of untruth. For example there is some false will do better and work it out. All kinds of things,
Guru. Immediately you will know this is false, How? you see, like in abroad, people used to say, mother
On your vibrations, on your finger tips you know you talk about spiritual life then why is it India is so
that this man is false. Its all said by Mohammad Sahib poor. I said they are not so poor in spirituality, They
that your hands will speak at the time of resurrection. may be poor in money. Those who have got lots of
That exactly happens that you see this is the trouble. money, are they also very good people? Are they also
and suddenly in Germany, you find, people are so
. they are so enlightened about love and about the
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998
10
doing something very good. In the same way, those Those days are gone, those ordeals you have passed
who are poor are not doing something good that one through. You have been to Himalayas, you have
should have compassion on them. Now what to do. stood on your heads and did all kinds of things. Now
If both sides are so miserable, what should we do to no more is needed. What is needed is that you have
change them, Change the whole attitude towards life.
Immediately I have seen people who are supposed do it, the more you absorb all other attentions and
to be rich, start understanding poverty. They start put it to your spirit, which is there already existing.
sharing, they start working it out. In Sahaja Yoga, There is nothing to be brought from outside or
you will be amazed, how people help each other. How nothing to be learnt. It is inside everyone of you, is
they work out everybody's difficulties and problems in the heart. Only thing you have to just feel it. Now
into something very beautiful. You see, it is the that feeling can only come if you have awakened
wisdom that you get, from this all pervading divine the Kundilini. I know that no one- Mohammad
power. This power has been described in every Sahib or Christ or Abraham or Moses, who have
religion
you can call it Parama Chaitanya', you can call it nowhere they would have ever thought that people
by any name but name is not the point. Whatever it will form an organised religion and start in a way as
is, once you are connected with this power, you are
blessed. Thousand times you are blessed than you To remove that, you have to give them the
are as a normal human being. As a normal being, no knowledge, the pure knowledge, not the knowledge
blessing it has. It has nothing but your own of the books but the pure knowledge and the
endeavour that the amount you are pushing, that's knowledge that is pure is wisdom. Through this
what it is. Here nobody pushes oneself. Automatically wisdom only I have worked. This wisdom I had from
you are pushed into that. This force, divine force my childhood. Nobody has given me-It's there,
brings you to that and you have seen that in your but this wisdom has taught me one thing that
own lives, how you came to me? How you came to whatsoever may be the condition of a human being,
Sahaja Yoga? It was some sort of a Divine force whatsoever may be his style, whatsoever may be his
which worked it out, which is Sahaja, which you may ego or his conditioning, if he can feel the love then
not realize. But when you get your realization you his spirit gets awakened. This transformation has
just think about your own life how I came to Sahaja Taken place.
Yoga? How I got this and then you see this peace Here we have only 1% of the people who have got
raining over your hearts, the love, affection, realisation all over the world, but I know, I remember
everything that is, as he said, I have many powers, them all today who are not here that they have been
may be. I don't know but one thing for definite that
Sahaja Yogis can get all my powers.
to put your attention to your spirit. The more you
ereated books or whatever history they have created,
you call it "Nirakar', you call it 'Rooh',
if they are against each other. But it has happened.
seekers, madly sceking, seeking the truth, they went
through horrible time seeking, they had very bad
As a mother, mother wants to give everything to gurus, they had all kinds of expenses, everything
Sahaja Yogis. The greatest joy for a mother is to see they did but oace they came to Sahaja Yoga they all
her son or daughter grow up, like her. have great found what was the truth. And the truth is very
vision of life and I see the picture of that clear today. simple that you are the spirit. You are not this body,
I was an ordinary housewife, without mIch money. this mind but you are the spirit. This is the Iruth and
You know nmy interest in money is zero, I don't they have found the spirit. That is what is the truth
understand even the bank. Somebody else has to sign that they have found. Once this truth is established
cheque for me and my husband has to count my within you that you are the spirit, nothing can
money and I am so bad butstill I never had a problem, destroy you, nothing can harm you. It can not have
never had problem, because it is the greed in man. any wants. It doesn't have. What wants can you have
when you are spirit because it is such a satisfying,
he learns how to be satisfied, automatically the greed thing. It does not condemn anyone. It doesn't run
after anyone.. It is satisfied, absolutely satisfied. I
was very anxious that I should lead a very normal
you become a Sanyasi or something you give up. life. I should rot be like some Himalaya fellow or
terrible greed in man, that creates problems, but il
drops out and you feel absolutely comfortable. But
that doesn't mean that you become a Sadhu baba or
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Volume: X issue: 4,5,6 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
11
- no promotion. Everybody used to
laught at them. It is degradation. Your promotion is
not through your own being but through your own
spirit. Being means a very big thing, I think, but spirit
is very subtle, very beautiful, which is residing in
all of you, like a light. It's a light in you.
Now there are so many Sahaja Yogis who can give
something like that because this is
common people. Today its a amass awakening. It is
not for one person. This was the thing because once
any discovery is made supposing, and that discovery
is only for one individual, it has no meaning. It has
to go to masses and this is what I knew I have to do
it and I had to work, they say so, but I don't think, I
ever worked. I was just witness to the whole thing. I
saw it just like a witness, enjoying all kinds of things
needed for a promotion
enlightenment to others. There are people who are
going all over the world. I was surprised that people
as you sit on the shores of a ocean you see waves
coming going like that but inside that is à human
being who wants to evolve, who wants to become They said Mother we have to do something because
the spirit. Then he starts thinking what good he can
do to others. So far I have been very anxious that My heart started really thanking them. Look at this,
people should become Sahaja Yogis. I didn't take to what has come into them. Then they went, you will
any missionary work or any social work. I used to be amazed, to Israel and from Israel they brought
do when I was not in Sahaja Yoga when I did not
start Sahaja Yoga but later on I discovered that unless sahaja Yogis why are you here. They said mother its
and until you transform people, unless and until you ourjob now to make friends with these Sahaja Yogis
become the spirit you will become like any other from Egypt. Just see how love engulfs, all these
from Germany and Austria came to help me when I
first went to Russia. I said, what are yoI doing here.
so many people have been killed by our forefathers.
lots of Sahaja Yogis to Egyptl So I asked the Israeli
social worker.
angularities, all these thorns of life and dissolves it
I was working in a blind school. I was the chairman completely, It is so joy giving to see your love acting
of blind school, and I was surprised that the people on others. Small-small things and very big things all
who were with me were very funny type, you know. that works out with love. For example in an industry
now people have problems of strikes, very common
sit next to governor, I say what is this. So they said, struggle, haves and haves not, this is going on. But
if you can raise the people to the spiritual height, to
necessary, I can sit anywhere. But they all started their spiritual need, which is the most important need
quarreling on this point. So I said alright we will today, you will be amazed there will no problem of
any kind. You see it is a kind of a communism. It is
governor and you all sit on that like sparrows. That a kind of a socialism. It is a kind of a democracy. It
humour helped a lot and they settled down. So this is all things put together which works. Democracy
is the stupid thing where you see what is your means we have Sahaja Yogis who wanted to organise
position, what do you get. I mean it's so stupid that this. They said mother what should we do. I said I
even the ant knows how to work out the collectivity. am not going to say anything, you do what you like.
I don't know how human beings are dying after You choose whatever you like, whatever you want
useless, non sensical things. But the only thing is. to do and I was just busy arranging the flowers in
he has not yet become the spirit. So he doesn't respect the house, because so many flowers came and I was
himself, no respect. So he does all these things which worried about the flowers. I was just aranging the
are not very respectable I think. Then I thought that flowers in the house and what I find, now you see
how they have done. No quarrel, no fight, no
end of themselves. Once you start doing something discussion, nothing. How have they done it.
good, why should you think you are very great. I Otherwise you can not make ten people sit together
can't understand. My brain is that way useless and talk the same thing. One will talk, another will
because what I found with these people, working talk and they will go on discussing, discussing this,
with me, very anxious to take the credit for this. reaching nowhere. Otherwise only one man has to
Somebody wanted to become the chairman and vice- work it out, otherwise nothing can work. So it
chairman. I said you become everything. So the changes the whole atmosphere of every human being,
attention being on your promotion is not a real changes his attitude, changes his endeavours and
The governor was to come and they said who will
I being the president, I have to sit. I said not
take a "palang', we will put it on the head of the
this kind of work people are doing, they think no
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-14.txt 
 12
Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X lssue: 4,5,6 1998
everything becomes so beautiful and joyful. You are
a socialist also because you start thinking about the
people who are downtrodden, people who have no
money, who are poor and you try to work out
something, by which they get some money. I used to
go with my father for a case in a district called
Chanda and there I saw people with just one cloth
around. It was shocking to me. Just one cloth,
whether it is winter or summer. I used to weep. So
my father would say, why do you weep for them? I
said what I can do. I must try to do something for
them.
you have done so much work. You don't know, what
gratitude I have for them. Single handedly I could
not have done it. I could not have gone to so many
countries. Its like a place called Benin where there
are only muslims. I could never have thought of
going to those far-fetched places, where these people
are there and imagine these people are muslims and
they have all taken to Sahaja Yoga and in that they
are understanding, the beauty of love. This is done
by French; can you believe this French, going down
all the way to Benin and getting it done. Even English
have gone all the way to different countries, even
the Austrians and also Germans and Italians are
Now when I got so many Sahaja Yogis, I told them I
want to help these people somehow and what they another quality of people, who have a very rich heart,
make is pottery. So they said mother alright, you get I must say. They have a very rich heart and the way
pottery, we will import here and we will sell them. they are spreading Sahaja Yoga throughout Italy is
You will be amazed that now these people have really remarkable. I am amazed, how these people
houses and have got a good life to live and they are
living very well. So in a way it is a kind of a
socialism, that you see problems and you know
collectively to solve it, collectively, not single say-prohibition, we don't have to say - don't take
handed but collectively. All of the Sahaja Yogis drugs, nothing. No don'ts in Sahaja Yoga.
suggest mother this can be solved like that. So far I Automatically they drop. I don't have to say, Don't
have not done anything directly, I must say, like do it. Just automatically they drop. I mean you will
Starting an organisation of that kind. But now when
there are so many Sahaja Yogis with their attention a light to be put in one of the 'Deepas' and nobody
on their heart, now my attention is going to the
people who need our help. So first time I have asked match box. Such a problem, with thousands of people
them to make a NGO for destitute women and for there, nobody had a match box. So we had to send
children, who are being deserted by their parents and somebody to get a match box. There is no need. I
immediately you will be amazed, we got the land, have never said Don't do this, never, but it has
we got the people. I mean, I am not doing anything worked like that. It has worked. I don't know how?
and its all done. Moreover so many people have How you have dropped that, but its very simple,
written Mother if you want land, come here, do this
do that. Can you imagine, once I just thought of it just don't do.
that we have to do something for the poor, Also other
so many things can be done with your attention which example sikhs, muslims. But you see, they all drink,
is pure, full of love, because the love, you see, is because they are not really muslims, they are not
something, that gives you the wisdom, how to do it. really sikhs. If they were really that, they would not
If you have love, it gives you complete insight into have drunk. How is it possible then? They have to
the problems and how it works. You see it is be the spirit. In the light of the spirit you just don't
surprising, for me, I mean, I used to do that always. do anything that is destructive to you. You don't do
But even after Sahaja Yoga, I found that its the love, anything that is destructive. You don't have to tell
which is the solution. It is the only way, we can enter anybody. Now you are all sitting here. I have never
into the hearts of the people. But for that love, we told you, anyone, don't do this but I was amazed, in
are approaching all these people, who have never
known what is spirit and how they are getting them
together. Now with that, you see we don't have to
be amazed. Once We had a programme and there was
had a match box. Can you imagine, nobody had a
when the light of the spirit is there. In that light you
Now, all the people have said don't drink, say for
should not try to do it for some money or some
achievements or for some sort of a reward but just Overnight. People employ military, this that. They
the whim of the love and that is what is today paying gave up prostitution, they gave up drugs. All kinds
all of you. The way you love all the people, the way of destructive things to which human beings take,
London, that people overnight gave up drugs.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Volume : X Issue: 4,5,6 1998
Đivine Cool Breeze
13
in problems. It is not for making some sort of a show
or some sort of a, we can say, a cult.
sometimes out of frustration and sometimes because
they feel very lonely. But now in Sahaja Yoga you
can never be lonely. All over the world you have
It is something which is very innate, which is very
is coming, they will all go to the airport to receive. subtle and that works, that gives them joy to do
Its not a brotherhood of ordinary life. It is a very how they feel for the whole world. How they care
deep type of a brotherhood. Very deep understanding for the whole world. How they are willing to do for
is there. But they are very deep people, I must say, them. Of course, as I said, every country has its own
because they have been seekers and in that seeking problems, like we can say, north Indians are always
they have really got completely into a turmoil and interested in politics because Delhi is here, but its
that has made them very deep people.
This book "Light of Koran" is written by a lady, like to hear anything against anyone, that's a good
Gilmett. You read it, I would request you to read it thing, In the south, we can say, beyond Narmada
hecause she is so deep. I knew she was very deep, river, whatever we have Maharashtra and all that they
but the way she has expressed, is so beautiful, so
joy giving, She is not a Muslim, she married a
muslim, so called, because they were all Sahaja so that a blind man can also eat food properly. You
Yogis and the way she has narrated her secking is so
beautiful. We have so many big writers in Sahaja tied up. They are very very ritualistic. Because of
Yoga who have given very nice books and things these two things. in Sahaja Yoga, they don't grow.
but this Gilmett is very shy. She does not talk, she
keeps quiet but inside she is so deep because of her lingering, still are behind us. For example in north
seeking.
something for Sahaja Yoga, I am sometimes amazed,
reduced now, very much reduced now. They don't
are very ritualistic people. Even if they put the thali,
you must put salt here, you must put vegetable here,
must use only one hand, you must keep another hand
Whatever it is, we have to understand that these are
India I would say if anybody speaks anything ill
So there are many people in this world who are about anybody just put your hands (over your ears)
secking the truth because they cannot bear the -this principal of Gandhiji was correct. Never listen
to any non-sensical gossip. Gossip is going on,
sensitive, they are not insensitive, very sensitive people like to listen to gossip because of this, media
people. That's how you all have got your realisation. also, they were showing nothing but gossip only
Its nothing of mine, To say, I did it, is not proper. If before elections. And the whole gossip goes into our
you were not like a candle I could not have mind and that's how we work out. So for this part I
enlightened you. So I am very thankful to you and I request all the people from north India to never to
am so much enamoured by the way, you people are listen to any criticism, never to criticise anyone.
feeling about Sahaja Yoga that collectively you have What is the use? Just see logically. If you listen to
to work it out, globally you have to work it out. You somebody's criticism, what is the use? What do you
have to help each other and bring up the people. Most gain out of it? Now by repeating it to somebody else
important thing is to create a mind universally which what do you gain? What is the gain? Simple thing
is towards the spirit. Then we will solve all the always ask a question, what is the gain. And why to
problems. No problem. Now If I say I am starting see something wrong with other? I know by that you
some sort of a project for the poor. Immediately all can be cheated, somebody can deceive you. It is true
of them will send me money, immediately they'll but doesn't matter. You don't get anything into your
find out who can work it out, who can come and head, you don't get any filth and any poison in your
head. I know there are people who create problem,
can work it out, all over the world. I mean it spreads talk from one to another, do this and do that. That
so fast. I have to just say that. I never asked for should not harm you, in any way because you have
money, I never said that I need money but the spirit and the spirit can not be harmed. It cannot
immediately they will plan out the whole thing, bring be destroyed. It is said that it cannot be destroyed
the whole thing here and work it out. It can work in by any weapon. It lives and lives forever so the
India. It can work anywhere. It is not just they are attention towards the Atma is lacking. Atma Vimukh,
interested in India but globally they are interested you can say. Our eyes have gone, our attention is
nonsense of modern world and they are very
help Mother. What work can we give them, how we
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998
14
birthday is, but whatever it is. It is one of the things
that I can meet you, all of you here, so very happy. I
gone to something away from the spirit and that's
why all the problems are there.
Once you are one with your spirit, it works, it works am thankful to these people who are the elites of our
for you because it is in connection with the God society. They are very great people, elected and
Almighty. It is in connection with the all pervading sometimes given very high positions and also there
power, which works out everything. I know this all
pervading power. It has shown so many miraculous have to understand the value of spiritual life. This is
photographs about me and actually I did not ask it very important for them. Not to avoid this point. But
but it is doing. Acutally it is very active, it is very to be one with your spirit, is your own property, is
active and if it sees anybody who is subtle and who in your own, I should say, the complete glory that
Is deep, it acts. In your business, in your politics, in you have is to be the spirit. With all this, I don't know,
your family, in every where you will find, this light
will shine and you will respect the hearts of others.
You respect the love of others. You will respect the
spirit that is shining in others. This is the reason why into your spirituality, so that it covers all the corners
you have learnt to respect each other, because your of the world and creates a beautiful world of
spirit is enlightened. I can see so clearly. I am so
very happy to see so many of you here for my
birthday. I don't know, what the significance of a
are some very well known industrialists. All of them
how to thank you all and how to thank all these
people who spoke so nicely. Only thing I wish you
all a great growth in your spiritual life, Atmounnati,
tomorrow.
May God bless you.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Volume X Issue: 4,5,6 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
15
At last the much awaited day, the 75th Birthday of The Jagat Janani (The creator of universes)
arrived. As soon as the Felicitation Programme was concluded in the early hours of the morning of
21st March, 1998. The boys and girls of Yuva Shakti sprang up in action to make an effort to prepare
the stage fit to seat the Divine Mother-the creator of Aesthetics. The smallest atom of the dust of
Thy Holy Feet, O Devi, forms the cluster of flower beds, fram which gushes forth the necter of
intelligence, enlivening the dull witted. It is a wish yielding gem.
Every inch of the auditorium was tastefully decorated with flowers. rainbow coloured baloons and
dashing lights. Beautiful candles were lit on both sides of the passage from the main gate of the
Nizamuddin ground to the entry gate of the pandal. There was magnificient display of fire works.
Beautiful little children, in their ceremonial dresses stood dancing like angels on the Hawa Mahal
gate to welcome their Divine Mother. On the Nizamuddin crassing Sahaja Yogis from various countries
of the Globe stood waving their National Flags and the Band playing Sahaja tunes. Gracing the
occasion, Shri Mataji was brought to the venue, in celestial procession. As soon as Shri Mataji entered
Scouts Ground, Shehnai was played and Bigules (Chougada) saunded in typical Indian traditional
style. Shri Mataji was overjoyed to see the love of her children.
75th Birthday Puja
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(Delhi -21.3.1998)
I
was overjoyed to see the way you had will reflect the beauty of your inner being and of
organized this beautiful welcome. I must say Sahaja Yoga.
that it is your love which finds all kinds
of expression of enjoying Sahaja Yoga. I really
cannot understand how these unique ideas come to
your heads and you represent the different Countries
from where you have come.
I told you yesterday, what was missing in the human
awareness and that the attention was not on the spirit.
But when it is on the spirit what happens to you i.e.
firstly you become according to Sanskrit words
Gunateet-you go beyond all the three gunas. That
Iwish you carry these flags back to your own country means you are no more a person who is Tamoguni
r - means the one who has got all kinds of desires of
our resurrection, that we have to rise, that we have self indulgence. Your attention moves from there to
to rise above this human level to a higher level of the second style, where you are 'Rajoguni", the right
existence. And if that happens, then how it changes sidedness. You want to compete with others. All this
your life, how it makes you happy, how you lose all struggle which is discipline: "Ateet' means beyond,
your absurd ideas of hatred and of harming others, then Satvaguna, that is also where you are seeking,
injuring others! All this kind of ideas which have where you see that what is wrong in this kind of
worked out to give some sort of a sadistic pleasure extreme behaviour. And you just hate that kind of
to many people and they have enjoyed the way they life. And you want to get out of it and then you start
want to destroy the joy of others, the happiness of seeking. That also is finished. All the gunas are
others. To maintain the happiness, I know, you being finished. So you become Gunateet. It just happens
Sahaja Yogis, you have to bear a lot, tolerate a lot of when your attention goes to your spirit because now
nonsense. You have already done it, and gradually the attention is not on any one of your inherent, you
your own can say or conditions, qualities or egotistical
countries, as something that is so beautiful, so very qualitics. So you become a person who is beyond
pure, so very important that all others in your this. This is something very remarkable, as far as,
countries also will try to follow that path which you for normal life, but for you it is not. It just happens.
have crossed over. Only your lives are the ones which You just enjoy being yourself. You are no more
and tell themı the message that the time has come for
once Sahaja Yoga is established in your
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Đivine Cool Breeze
16
Volume: X issue: 4,5,6 1999
concerned about your own conveniences, comforts
and petty things. What happens is that you just go
beyond, all these three gunas which have been
dominating you this way or that way. So that's how
become responsible for that moment. It is such a
responsibility which is also collective, means all of
you become responsible.
It is very surprising we are so many here, there is no
quarrel, no fight, nothing. We are very nicely settled
you cross the limit of human awareness firstly, then
second one is that you become 'Kalateet".
down, beyond all kinds of stupid ideas of attacking
You go beyond time -I know today I was late each other. That happens because you are not
somehow it just works out that way. But you did not involved with the time. The time cannot bow you
miss the time. You were still enjoying. I could see down. Perhaps you feel if it were not you people,
sitting in the house that you are all in a very enjoyable some other people, they would have thrown stones
mood. All of you are enjoying nicely. I am not here
but still you are enjoying. This is beyond time. You boiling in the heat, they would have resented but not
are not bound by time. Whatever is the time is your the people who are beyond time-they are nicely
own because you are standing in the present. You
are not standing here and thinking of the future, you the time passes away.
didn't think about what will happen tomorrow or how
will you catch your plane or how will you do this. Then you become 'Dharmateet'. You become beyond
Here you were just enjoying, enjoying the present Dharma, beyond your human nature, that means
and the present is the reality. If you are thinking of whatever you do is religious, whatever is your
the future or of the past then you are not in reality. I endeavour is religious, if say you are in a business,
have told many a times that past is finished and future you would like to do business in a religious manner
does not exist. So at this moment you are here, sitting because you are beyond religion. You are not
perhaps, may be waiting for me, may be just enjoying bothered as to follow a particular pattern or ritual
every moment of your stay here, of your connections of any religion. But you are beyond it. Like people
with me. And this enjoyment cannot be described who are, you see, not beyond religion, they must
how you are enjoying this. Otherwise people get up early in the morning, They are bound by their
would be seeing the watch, wondering why Mother tuals and they pass through the rituals and if one
has not come, what is the problem, why She has not of the rituals is not done, they are very unhappy and
arrived and all kinds of ideas can work. It helps a lot
to be Kalateet'.
on my car thinking it is so late She comes, we all are
sitting down cnjoying themselves. Doesn't matter,
shaken up: But not you. For you, you are always in
"Dhyana', always in meditative mood. And anything
goes wrong, you just jump into that awareness where
I remember in Nasik I had to work very hard because you get the solution and you are not disturbed, not
no Sahaja Yogi would come forward to do anything. disturbed at all. When things go wrong, like
They were so shy and so much worried. And it so ritualistic nature makes you very constricted, very
happened, luckily or unluckily, we can say, that my docile. Sometimes can be aggressive also.
car failed on the way and I was delayed in going.
About one hour passed. There was no car coming People with their ritualism trouble others a lot. Like
that way, there was no way to go and we were
stranded on the road. Now surprisingly when I house. So she said I am a vegetarian, I said, then.
reached the place where we were going to have the
programme, the Sahaja Yogis took over. They took food has been cooked. So we will have to get new
the responsibility and they were very busy giving utensils." I went and bought over utensils for her.
realizations to others and working it out. Otherwise So she said that you have to be careful that even the
they would not. They could not believe that they had spoon should not be used. So I had to go and get
power to give realization. I may tell them but they spoons for her. Then she said tumblers because
would not raise their hands. And just because the people are taking food here, who are eating non-
time was there and they thought so many people are vegetarian food. So you better get us something
here, Mother is not coming or She may be coming. which is absolutely new. So I had to incur all this
So it is our responsibility. In that way they took the problem. And then she was in the kitchen and she
responsibility. So when you are beyond the time, you
one lady was supposed to be our friend, came to my
"But I cannot eat the food in which non-vegetarian
would not allow our cook to cook anything for us
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
17
She said first I will cook and then you can cook.
And she made such a nuisance out of her that instead
church, Next time again she disappeared. It happened
three-four times. So the police said, sorry, we are
finished with her. Now if you want you can put her
in the old people's house and that's all. So they sent
her to an old people's house. So this Sahaja Yogini,
told me, Mother, very surprising, they are otherwise
very stupid people. They go on sitting, brooding,
of being a guest she became a pest. And this is what
happens to people who are ritualistic because they
äre very demanding. They go on demanding that this
is our dharma.
I know of another story, was told to me by somebody
in Bombay. She said this lady who came to me as a
guest because she was related to someone very high
schile and their senile decay is very well seen. But
what happens that on a Sunday they all dress up well
up. She was worse than my great great great
and go to church. That is the only point where they
are sane. It is very surprising how their conditioning
grandmother. I said 'Really'. She said I cannot
understand that in India we have such people still
living. She came here and she said I cannot take water
from the tap. You have to get it from some sort of a
well. Now there are only two wells in Bombay. So
people had to go and fetch the water. But the cook
had to be completely drenched in water and then only
he could cook. Because if he cooks without that then
I won't eat and she went on and on with that. And
the cook got sick with peomonia. Another cook
works.
There was one person I had, who came and stayed
with us and he said, 'I am a very good driver'. So I
said, alright. But he only knew driving. He did not
know about London. What sort of a place is London.
Now he knew that driving very well. But if I had to
go to the North, he will drive me to the South. If 1
have to go to the East, he will drive me to the West.
came and he got flue. You see this lady didn't mind. I said, "What is the matter?" You know driving! "Yes.
She said, No. That is my style. So she asked me what I know driving. That I know. But I do not know
should we do with such people Mother. I said you anything about roads. I have no road sense". One
should have asked her that we have this thing, If you day police caught hold of him. I was also in the car.
like it well and good, otherwise you don't eat. It's all He said where are you going? He said I am going to
right, Fasting is a very good thing. That's the only Such and such place. So he said now you have been
solution for such people who are so self-centred and to this place six times. Again you are coming back
to the same point sixth time. So in the old age, I
have known that these things form a kind of a habit.
But in young age also you can find people get so
conditioned by their style. So this is what you can
call the human element, where you get attached or
you get bothered about something. Now it is a kind
of I should say, a madness that somebody demands
this, somebody demands that. I do not like this. I do
not like that. It goes on and on. It is so common to
say I do not like, I like. It is very surprising that they
go on saying like this. They go to somebody's house.
No, No I do not like this carpet. It is not your carpet.
so much bothering others.
So this self-centredness comes to us because we think
this is our Dharma, this is our right, everything
belongs to us. How dare they do not do this? How
much we trouble others. How much we make them
inconvenient. How much we try to make their lives
miserable. We never know. We go on demanding
ings. This is my dharma what can I do. This is what
I have to do. But it becomes such a conditioning of
the mind that I have seen many cases in Sahaja Yoga
who got conditioned like that.
There was a lady, a French lady who came to Sahaja You have not purchased it. That person has purchased
Yoga and her mother was very ritualistic to begin the carpet. What have you got to do with it. Why
with. And she was so troublesome that she must go should you say, I do not like. Who are you? You have
to church every Sunday, She would dress up well,
go to church and come back. And one day she just Finished. Why do you want to pass your remark, I
disappeared. So they told the police to find out this do not like. Are you a connoisseur.
lady and when they went to find out that lady, the So to criticise others, somebody is, say, wearing,
police said that we can't find her. God knows where supposing hair in a particular way. I do not like this
she has disappeared. Then she said alright, go and kind of hair. Why? I do not like. That is all. Then it
find out in the church. She was still sitting in the goes from there to human beings and everywhere.
not paid for that, the one who has paid likes it.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
18
Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998
Who are you to like or dislike? What is your or to criticize others thinking you are something
position? Why should you say I like or do not like? great. And this does not pay. By the time you come
But it is very common specially in the West to pass to the end of life you find you haven't got one friend
such remark. I do not like. I do not like India. Alright one neighbour. Another thing is that when you are
if you do not like, sit at home, why did you come very egoistical you think no end of yourself and you
here. I do not like Turkey. Why, because if supposing go on talking, jabbering, and other person gets bored
anybody is wearing a long skirt, they will say, No I stiff but you are still talking, talking, talking about,
don't like because it is Turkish. So you should wear say, I did this, I went there. I. I, I. It goes to any
short skirts. We don't like short skirts, supposing, limit and you are not ashamed as to what you are
but one should not say that I don't like it, because it saying. I have seen people who have taken to all
kinds of funny attitudes towards others when they
are just normal human beings. If somebody says
something wrong about somebody, somebody says
that person is like this, I know he did this way.
Immediately it goes into their mind. "Yes, yes, true'.
hurts the people. It takes away the pride of the person
Now when you are in Sahaja Yoga you must know
that you are not normal human beings-according
to the normal standards. You are above them. Your
likes and dislikes are different from them and your
Now that makes your mind a sick mind. We can say
whole attitude has changed. Sometimes you are just
like children I think. You talk like small little
children, very innocently and sometimes you talk
very profound things. Now this is unknown to people
who are supposed to be normal. Because normal
people, you know, are so bombastic. All the time they
keep on saying I, I, I. Kabira has said that when a
goat is alive she goes on saying 'Main' means I, I, I
but when she is dead and her intenstines are drawn
"Vikrut". When the mind is not normal. You become
sick and you accept all this sickness and go on
dccepting till you are a sick person and this sickness
is extremely dangerous. Not for others so much as
for ycurself. Because nobody can stand such a sick
personality. Now you might say. I have seen people
I Who have taken to religion like now I am a religious
person. Now. You better be religious. So what. You
can't do this, you can't do that, you can't sit there,
into a kind of wire, for we call 'Dhunak', means with
which they separate the seeds from the cotton, that you cannot eat this. This is important; All the time
time she says Tuhi, Tuhi, Tuhi, means you are, you trying to discipline others instead of disciplining
are, you are. You are everything. When you say that yourself because when you are a normal person, you
immediately your attention goes away from others, don't see yourself. You just see others.
finding fault with them, finding what's wrong with But once you are a realized soul, you just start
them, using your brains all the time to eriticize watching yourself, see for yourself what's wrong.
others, to make fun of others. Sometimes even to Now after becoming the spirit, in the light of the
talk ill of others, people enjoy gossip, why. They spirit you see yourself. You just see yourself. What
enjoy gossip because they don't know that another happens, how you behave and how you enjoy
person is the same as mysclf and I have no business yourself. When you know how to correct yourself.
to gossip about that person. So this understanding, 1
should say, this loving wisdom doesn't exist when
you are a normal human being, At the slightest
provocation you can get angry, start doing all kinds incorrigible. So also you should just see this is
of things, like a bull in a China shop. You can behave incorrigible. You can not help it. Like in Sahaja Yoga
anyway. Suddenly you find just growing up into that.
The reason for that is you are not yet a Sahaja Yogi, help wrong type of people like they have taken a
l
It is very swect, little little thing you do in such a
beautiful manner and you say such beautiful things.
Of course there are people who cannot be corrected-
we have some people who are all the time trying to
power of attorney, in Sahaja Yoga. So if somebody
tries to be funny we expect a telephone call from
that power of attorney after two hours. He tells now
please tell Mother such and such person is to be
looked after, This has to be done and that has to be
done. Is absolutely a habitual thing with them to
inform me that "No, you must help, you must do
But Sahaja Yogi is a person who enjoys all kinds of
things. Say, somebody becomes very angry and hot
tempered. He also sees that what is happening, how
he is behaving - so actually it is not a dharma that
you get angry with someone it's not. It is something
very low to be angry with others, to be all the time
shouting at others, to be exacting things froni others
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Volume: X Issua : 4,5,6 19s
Divine Cool Breeze
19
something." But now it has become such a common happens because I think they have never seen a good
practice, we know he will just now come along and hotel or may be that they have lived in very bad
give a big lecture on this subject. So you see it is a conditions.
nature of a human being which has been going But a person, who is a Sahaja Yogi, can live
through the different types of complications in life. anywhere, can sleep anywhere. Only thing is that
Also born with some genes or something that he is his spirit is there to make him happy. Nothing else.
not a very normal person though we say he is normal That is the one that gives you happiness. All these
because the way he reacts, the reaction that he shows other things that human beings have which have
is very absurd. There is no need for anybody to created problems after problems. Now you see
telephone me to tell me, you see this man is such
and such, you better look after. Unnecessarily to bad. You want to know about the Christians, you
interfere with other's affairs. When you have no
authority, when you have nothing to do with that
person, all sorts of, I can tell you, designs are there you want to know about the Muslims, go and ask
that have been made by the minds of human beings the Hindus. You will be amazed how they talk about
and these designs will all disappear, just disappear. other people as if all of them are bad and they are
because you belong to a different religion, you are
better go and ask the Jews and if you want to know
about the Jews, better go and ask the Muslims, if
the best. So this is the whole attitude. it changes
where they get it, may be their country, may be their
family, may be their genes. Whatever you may say. religion is what. From what sort of family they come
All this disappears. even your genes change. That is in, what is the background they are coming in. They
what is Sahaja Yoga. Where you become the spirt, all become one. What they enjoy is the company
everything changes and what happens to you, that
you become a person who knows what is joy, who that's all. So many Sahaja Yogis will be there and
enjoys joy, who enjoys existence, who gives joy to that is the Mecca, that is the Kumbh Mela, that you
completely. You forget it. Who is what. Whose
of
all the Sahaja Yogis. All the Sahaja Yogis are there.
others, makes others happy. All the time thinks how
to make others happy. Just it happens though you
are brought up the same way as the others are, though
can call anything you feel like. The collective joy
that you enjoy has come to you because you have
erossed that barrier which has stopped you from
you are being educated the same way, may be, but
all that disappears and you become a wise. beautiful
joyous person.
seeing the truth.
The truth is as I said yesterday, that you are the spirit
and once you become the spirit, you become
It is something that you have achieved, of which you Gunateet, Kalateet and Dharmateet. Once you cross
may not be aware. The way you are enjoying in this these limits, then you become like a drop in the
Scout Ground, no other group could have enjoyed, ocean. If the drop is outside the ocean, it is always
as you have enjoyed. I can see what you are doing frightened of the sun because it would dry. It does
here. How are you enjoying the company of others, not know what to do, which way to slip. which way
very remarkabl, that has become, because your heart to move. But once it is one with the ocean, it just
is full of joy of the spirit that shines within you. You moves and enjoys, because it is not alone. It is not
can examine yourself and see for yourself, whatever alone, its moving with the waves of that beautiful
I am saying is there or not. Of course there are some ocean of joy and that is what you have achieved, of
people who think no end of themselves. They are which you are aware. You know but you don't know
staying in a hotel or some lodge or something. They you have achieved it because you are the spirit. Now
are not enjoying. They still think they are something you should be on the watch about yourself sometimes
great so they must stay somewhere like that. Very and you will be amazed to see how you are changed,
surprising especially Indians I have seen, when they how you have become so simple and sensible and
come to Cabella, they all want to stay in a hotel. In wise. So many problems come in the west because
their lives, they might be having one bathroom in they are still stupid, I think, very stupid people,
their house, but when they come to Cabella, they because even an old man of 80 years would like to
want to stay in a hotel with attached bath, with this. marry a lady of say 20 years and he doesn't
with that. Young people, it is very surprising, it understand why he's doing it. Because he doesn't
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
20
Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998
accept his age, he doesn't accept that I am an old So when you go beyond, dharmateet you become,
man, I must behave like an old man. He wants to go beyond dharma then what happens, that dharma
marry a girl who can be his grand daughter. This is becomes part and parcel of you. You don't do wrong
more common in the west. They may be just on their things. You just don't do it. It is not that somebody
way to the grave, but doesn't matter. They want to is telling you or you want to follow it or there is
have a wife like that. This is the problem of the west. compulsion or discipline, but you just don't like to
Now how does it come? Because they don't do wrong things, to say something which is not
understand that we are old and to be old is to be respectful, which is not helpful, which is not loving.
proud. Now when I was five years I cannot imagine This is the quality of a Sahaja Yogi where you
so many people could have come to wish me Happy become the spirit. Becoming the spirit you don't have
Birthday. Even when I was 50 years, there were not
so many people. Now when I am 75 years old, see see that and the more you go deep into yourself, you
how many people are there to wish me Happy find that you are endowed with such greatness within
Birthday. When you are old you should be proud of you, such beautiful feelings, such nice things within
your age, if you have lived wisely. But if you are you, that you overcome the ego of others.
stupid, then of course, nobody can help. Everybody I must tell you a story. Once I went to see a saint. So
will laugh at such a person. It is a custom in the west the Sahaja Yogis said, Mother, you never go and see
to go on having wives after wives, divorcing your these gurus and this and that. So why do you worry.
to tell anybody. So obvious, so evident and one can
wives and this and that.
You come along with me. We had to climb a lot. I
said from here you see his vibrations. You see his
vibrations. Lots of vibrations coming. So we went
Up the hill, climbed up and this gentleman was
Supposed to have powers that he could control the
Tain and it started raining, and raining very heavily
and I got completely drenched in that rain. When I
went up, saw him sitting on a stone, just shaking his
In India, it is the other way round, I should say, they
don't have much respect for the women. They were
supposed to have great respect for women, they were
supposed to have placed their women at the pedestal
of a sati, even if the women may be anything, they
don't respect. Now, this is from where it has come. I
don't know some of them say it was written by some
poet that women should be beaten up, Who is this head with anger. So, I went into his cave and sat
poet, I think he should be beaten up. He was born
down. So he came back and said to me. "Mother.
out of a woman and here he writes like this. So vou why didn't you allow me to stop that rain. Is it to
see we like to take up something which is wrong
which is absolutely absurd. This comes because you
are not wise. A wise person will take in whatever is is
the wisdom. He won't accept anything non-sensical, ascetic. You bought a saree for me. If you bought a
You go on reading the books, one after another, one saree for me, I can't take from you because you are a
after another. So many books you read and where sanyasi. so I had to get drenched so that I will have
do you land with that. You find you are reading books to borrow a saree from you. And the whole thing
which are no good for you. Useless but if you are melted away. He became a very different person. So
fond of reading you go on reading. So the lack of with wisdom, you know how to handle different
wisdom gives you indiscrimination. And you justify types of people. You say things by which you melt
it and all that you justify, you say it is very good.
Whatever I am doing is the best. It is not ego, I should
say, but stupid human understanding Whatever I am you that wisdom, that love, that expression of, I
doing is good. Whatever is my attitude is good. How Should say, youur spirit and that's how so many saints
dare anybody tell me anything that this is wrong, though they were tortured and troubled by many, but
that is wrong. Everybody will laugh at that person, they were definitely very much respected and loved.
make fun of that person. such a person will suffer a
lot but he will never accept that I have done definitely very nice and good people. But one thing
something wrong.
overcome my ego." I said, "No, Not that. I didn't
want, I didn't sce your ego anywhere." But the
problem
another. You are a sanyasi, you are an
their ego. Their conditionings are also brought into
a kind of a new awakening within you. They see in
But those saints in those days I must say, were
was there, they were rather strict with their disciples.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue; 4,5,6 1998
21
The reason was that they were not realised souls, mistakes that they are in the darkness, your attitude
their diseiples. And these gurus thought that unless towards them will change. You will just try to be
and until discipline these people, they will never rise, extremely patient and kind and affectionate and
they will never become something great. So they loving because you will know that the person is not
have to be disciplined. And those who were seekers realized. He hasn't got his eyes, he can't see. He is
of truth, accepted that alright, whatever you say, we blind. He can't hear. He can't feel the reality. So first
will do. Even if you ask us to fast, we will do. They'll let him feel the reality. What is the use of giving
stand on their heads. Alright we will stand on our him a lecture and disciplining. Still he will go on
heads. What you say I will be willing to do, you don't making mistakes and troubling himself or troubling
have to worry on that point. And that's how they were others.
very disciplining type. But in Sahaja Yoga, there is So this is what you have achieved through your
no discipline done. The reason is you are realized enlightenment that you are beyond all this. And you
souls. Your spirit is there and the spirit gives you become a person, of a temperament which is so
the light. In that light you see yourself so clearly, loving and so joy giving. I mean, there are so many
änd you can discipline yourself. I don't have to tell examples that I can give you. In Sahaja Yoga it has
you.
happened that I have seen the beauty of their love
You know that so many people have given up drugs and affection, not only towards me but towards
overnight. But I never told them. I never even talked others also. If it is only towards me, I can explain it.
about drugs or anything. How did they do it? Because but I cannot explain the kind of people as I explained
they had the light. And this is what you have got yesterday that these people went to Israel. Now they
today, the light of the spirit. You become absolutely went to Egypt. They went to Russia. Who told them?
independent and absolutely free, complete freedom I never ask anybody to go anywhere. On their own
because you have the light. You cannot do, cannot they felt they have to go, and do this job. And they
do wrong things. Supposing now, there is light and
there is some sort of a big explosion taking place. I today on such a day, when you are celebrating my
won't run towards the explosion, No. You won't run
either. Because you have got the eyes. So the spirit very remarkable, very pictureseque. They have
and its light is the greatest guiding factor by which different colours expressing your love for me. In
you become, as I said, Gunateet, you become everything, I see your love, whatever you have done
Kalateet and you become Dharmateet, You are not
slave of anything. You are not slave of watch. You children are so loving. I have done nothing for you,
are not slave of time. You are not slave as to what is I do not know what makes you feel so much
your gunas. You don't want to see whether you are gratitude. I still want to know what I have done. I
right sided. left sided or centre. You are a Sahaja have done nothing. But the way you want to express
Yogi and a Sahaja Yogi is beyond all these things. your love, it is very surprising, except for I would
So you are Gunateet. You are Dharmateet because
dharma beconies part and parcel of you. You don't might be you see something different in me but the
have to follow any disciplining of dharma. I have way you are showing your gratitude is really beyond
seen in Sahaja Yoga, in some of the ashrams, they
are very strict. That should not be so. I have told As the other day, one of the speakers said that, you
them, never to be strict. If somebody doesn't get up,
at say 4 o'clock, doesn't matter. Let him get up at 10
o'clock. After sometime, he will himself get up at 4. me for granted. But the way you want to thank me
But don't try to discipline them too much. Children just like a small little child would like to thank, just
also, you should not discipline them too much. Of becomes like children, you are so enthusiastic about
course, if they are realized souls, they themselves it and you do not understand that normally it is not
are so good, they are so beautiful. But if they are done, like this anywhere. Nobody tries to be just like
not, try to give them realization. Once you realize, children expressing their beautiful love. It is a very
that those who are not realized are making all these
have to help people to get out of their ignorance. So
75th Birthday, so many baloons are there. They are
here, all your decorations, everything, I feel my
say, you have got the light of your spirit. In that light,
me.
do not thank your mother, take her for granted. It is
a fact there is no need to thank me, you have to take
new thing that one can see. Such peace such love,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-24.txt 
 22
Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998
such joy, all around. In a far fetched place like this
how could you do that, how could you manage that.
It is not easy to understand. It is not for human beings stand anywhere you can create peace in that place,
to see that. They just do not understand. How these you can create happinees in that place. So be
people are like this and why are they living like this confident. Do not lose your confidence. Also your
so happily. Now you have comforts in the house, wisdom to understand others will be very much
you are living so well in your houses, everything is convincing to understand that they are something
there. But here in this Scout Ground, it is not such a exceptional. They do not get angry. They do not get
comfortable place for living. But you can live into temper, they are not mad people. They are not
anywhere, I know, I have seen it, wherever you are,
as long as there are Sahaja Yogis around, you do people. And this you do not have to practice. It is
not care for anything. And this collective enjoyment
of each other, without any expectation, without any You should not think that it is something that you
criticism, without any gossip or any nonsense like
that is so beautiful and even you pull each other's yourselves you have it. Only thing, that you have to
legs, you enjoy your jokes. It is such friendship, such see it in the light of the spirit. It just is a very simple
beautiful friendship, whether you are from India or thing and that works out. It is not easy for others to
from England or from America or from any other understand you. But it should be very easy to
place.
emitting joy, you are emitting confidence through
your spiritual awakening, You have those powers you
after some sort of a craze, Just very very balanced
there. It is within you. You should be proud of it.
have to achieve or to become, you have it- withing
understand them. Because you were like them before
You find such oneness of understanding, onenees and now they are seeing you, and they will become
of movement, like one wave rises and another wave like you. It is very simple.
rises. It is continuous, eternal and this is what one You can seen this that I started Sahaja Yoga with
has to achieve for others also, for that also you must
remember that you have the light, others do not have. What have I done. I really don't know, what have I
So you have to be very considerate, tolerant and done. I have no idea and what you think such
understanding, about their problem and just listen gratitude, enjoyment and joy. So all these things
to them what is their problem. First they will tell whatever I have told you, you have to be aware of
you that my business is going down or they might your being, of your own self, of your spirit, that you
say that my wife is no good or my son has no job, are the spirit. And as you are the spirit, you are
he is not working. All kinds of things, they might beyond all these things and once that happens, you
tell you. Listen to them. For them it is important. would be amazed, what a personality you are.
Alright after that, you will find gradually, they will
soothe down because you are emitting love, you are
one lady and now today sce how many are there.
May God bless you,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue 4,5,6 1998
23:
Four Nights of Divine Music
uring the next four nights (22nd to 25th Puraskar, Smt. Zarin has a rare command playing
March) internationally renowned "Tappa" on Sarod.
musicians played before the Holy Mother
PT. VISHWA MOHAN BHATT
Creator of the Mohan Veena and winner of Grammy
Award, Pt.Vishwa Mohan Bhatt has mesmnerised the
and received her blessings. The following artists
were honoured to perform before the Divine Mother
and the august assembly of Her children:
Sahaja Yogis with his pure, delicate yet fiery music
Disciple of Sitar maestro Pt. Ravishankar, Pt. Vishwa
Mohan Bhatt is outstanding in his ability to play the
Tantrakari Ang and the Gayaki Ang on the Indianised
Western Hawaiian Guitar by giving it a revolutionary
shape and adding 14 more strings. Pt. Vishwa Mohan
Bhatt's performances all over the world has been
highly acclaimed. His jugalbandis with many artists
like Chinese Erhu player, Jei Bing Chen and Arabian
Oudh player Simon Shaheen has won many
accolades.
SMT. VANAJI LAL KONDIPARTHY
Diciple of the most illustrious Guru Sri Uma Rama
Rao, Mrs. Vanaja is known for her mastery in
Kuchipudi and Bharatnatyam style of Indian classical
dance.
PANDIT VAIBHAV PANDHARINATH
NAGESHKAR
Eminent Tabla player Pt. Vaibhav Nageshkar has
earned a place of distinction as a brilliant performer,
composer and teacher. He belongs to Farukhabad
gharana of grcat maestro Ustad Amir Hussain Khan.
Pt. Bhatt has won many awards in India and abroad
like Surmani, Tantri Shringar, Swar Shiromani and
Honorary citizenship of U.S.A. and Canada.
PANDIT BHAJAN SOPORI
Pandit Sopori is a renowned Santoor player. He lays
emphasis on Sufiana Kalam Gayaki The
traditional musie of Kashmir. Rendition of Dhrupad
Ang on Santoor with accompaniment of Pakhawaj
is also part of his innovations. For his contribution
to the field of music he has received prestigious
Sangeet Natak Academy and Shiromani awards.
RONU MAJUMDAR
Ronu Majumdar is an established artist of India
initiated into playing the flute by his father Dr. Bhanu
Majumdar. He later on came under the tutelage of
pPadamshri Pt. Vijaya Raghav Rao and mastered the
Gayaki style. Shri Ronu Majumndar has appeared at
various concert platformns all over the world
including festivals of India. Shri Majumdar shows
remarkable maturity and depth in unfolding the Raga
Violinist, Padamshree Dr. N. Rajam is the pioneer combined with superb Layakari' and melodious
who perfected the technique of Gayaki Ang in tone. His recitals are full of aesthetic and emotional
Hindustani classical music. Disciple of legendary appeal. He touched the hearts of the audience.
DR. N. RAJAM
late Pt. Omkarnath Thakur, Dr. Rajam, after 15 years
of intense research, has brought the music of violin With the heavenly performances of these celebrities
close to human voice, In fact Dr.Rajam and Gavaki and other artists like Danishq Khan - sarod, Meena
Patarpekar vocal, Pandit Jaggannath Mishra-
Shehnai, Kirti Shiledar - Vocal, Satish Vyas - Santoor,
Ms. Shashwati Sen Kathak Dance, the ganges of
Parama Chaitanya kept flowing all these days
An enchanting exponent of Sarod, Smt. Zarin Sharma establishing the Sahaja Yogis in the Lotus Feet of
Ang are used as synonyms in the world of music.
SMT. ZARIN SHARMA NEE DARUWALA
has performed all over the world including before
Her Majesty The Queen of England. A recipient of
Sangeet Natak Academy and Maharashtra Gaurav
the Divine Mother.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Volume: X Issue : 4,5,6 1998
24
Đivine Cool Breeze
The Grand Finale (Samapan)
ап
And 'Lo'! The Concluding Day (The Samapan Divas) arrived most unexpectingly. Tears of love
rolled down many eyes. The mere thought of departing from the Divine Campus made us shudder.
But tihen it is tihe most pious duty of the Sahaja Yogis to englighten the hearts of millions and millions
of seekers, all over the world. Taking rufuge in Divine Fortress of Thoughtless Awareness, we
brought ourselves in the centre.
Bringing the Programme to the Grand Finale Sir C.P. Shrivastava said:
Sir C.P.'s Thanks Giving 26.3.1998
Dear Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis (can you hear
me) we have been celebrating an event of
momentous importance for entire humanity- the
birth of your Holy Mother Shri Mataji -75 years
much higher level of spiritual existence. Now this
is Her mission and She began that mission 28 years
ago with great difficulty. I think we must recognise
and recall She has single handed brought about a
tremendous revolution in humanity. I narrated you
the other day of one event 25 years ago, when She
got hold of a young man who was dying and brought
him home. Did She ask him-what is your language
No. Did She ask him -what is your religion
No. Did She ask him- what is your race - No.
He was a human being and sae brought that human
being home, treated him with Sahaja Yoga and
ago.
In effeet we are celebrating something which needs
to be appreciated and understood. Before Her there
have been incarnations. They have given to this earth
excellent religions and these religions aimed at
bringing humanity to civilized existence, to exist
according to ethical standards. So we have these
different religions growing up in different races,
getting different followers. But over a period of time
instead of uniting all of them they began to separate
them as if there are compartments and you had
treated him with that powerful emotion Love,
selfless love, love of a Mother and very soon this
boy who was a drunkard, who was given to drugs
and all that goes with it- He got transformed. So
reunions in the 19th and 20th centuries and there
that is how she began, Herself, individually, looking
after one peIson or a group of persons.
was great need for a new incarnation to come and
lift the humanity to a higher level of sprituality and
that is why Shri Mataji has come to this earth and
She has taken birth here. Seemingly it may appear diplomat. He also had come to Oxtead house as a
to be an impossible task, how do you do that and
intially that was what the blind did not see-how
would Shri Mataji succeed in Her mission. But if
you see what you see here today and if hear what Yoga movement. That is why how She, your Holy
you have heard today Is this not already a new
world in existence and it is Her world which has being built up Sahaja Yoga and now we see
come into being, We are now talking of Hindus, thousands sitting here and a million or more around
Christians, Muslims, Sikhs-all being brothers and the world. That is Her achievement. Now what is
sisters the possibility of me, a born Hindu,
worshipping in a Mosque-why not! or in a Church have been celebrating, I think, this has been the most
- why not! or in a Gurudwara - why not! Every memorable event which has been an elevating event
place of worship is for everybody and that is what but what message will you carry from here. That's
Sahaja Yoga is. Sahaja Yoga lifts humanity to a very very important and the message that you carry to
You saw Mr. Gregoire. He came here as a UN
brilliant young man but in search of truth. He stayed
with us for two days and went back a realised soul
and now he has been one of the pillars of Sahaja
Mother has step by step, human being by human
the message that you have to carry from here. We
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-27.txt 
 25
Völume: X Issue: 4,5,6 1998
Divine Cool Breez
the wider world is-Sahaja Yoga now has to engulf creating a new model for them to follow. Then we
the whole world. It has to spread everywhere. It has
to come to every human being. Every human being spiritual. It lifts you up and music has been a very
has to be uplifted and you carry that message and I integral part of Sahaja Yoga movement. And here I
have no doubt that with the blessing of Shri Mataji would like to thank and congratulate Baba. I call him
that will succeed. When we meet again to celebrate Baba because he is my 'Sala' (brother-in-law) but
Her 80th birthday – probably we will not be a he has made a wonderful role in getting music
million strong, we will be 200 million strong and together and organising this and let's give him a big
why not. And when we celebrate a 100 years of Her hand
existence there will be 5 billion Sahaja Yogis in this Anart from music function of this kind a celebration
world. I owe a tremendous gratitude to Her. She has of this magnitude requires a tremendous amount of
have had marvellous music programmes. Music is
been my wife for 51 years. She has looked after me
with tremendous love and care and affection. Once have been organised for 2000 persons, 3000 persons
She was in Australia and from there She rang up my and I assure you they were not even half as well done
cook in London, giving instructions as to which as this one has been organised here. There are many
vegetable he should prepare for me and how. That is many who had joined hands, many Sahaja Yogis
a wife. She is a mother of my daughters and your Delhi and from outside and to all of them I would
Mother. She has looked after not only us but all of - they
you with the same love. She has never distinguished have been extremely extremely busy, very helpful.
between Her children and any other children. Every They played a great role. The caterer
child to Her is Her own child. How can I express produced excellent food. Everyone has combined.
adequately my personal gratitude to Her. except just But there is always a master mind behind all this.
organisation. I know some international conferences
like to expresS my gratitude. The Yuva Shakti
he has
say I love you. We wish Her eternal life. She has an
eternal responsibility and I know that is your prayer automatically. There is someone behind this and that
and when I go back from here I will convey to Her
what you want me to convey your love, your Give him a standing ovation.
prayers for Her good health, for a long life full of
happiness. Now coming down from the divine to
mundane life - this function has been organised who have,
exceedingly well and we began with a function where
a number of important persons came and addressed
the gathering and they expressed 'bewilderment"
that was the word used by Mr. Chidambaram. the
fomer Finance Minister. Yes people are bewildered.
They just cannot believe their eyes, they cannot
understand how human beings who quarrel outside
this world are just in love with each other. When BABA MAMA :
they go back, they go back amazed, stunned and they
do not know how it has happened.
Please don't helieve that these things happen so
some is Mr. Nalgirkar. I request him to come along.
That concludes my remarks. I want to thank all those
Once again Shri Nirmala Mataji ki Jai.
Thank you,
Gad bless you, Thank you once again.
Thank you Sir for all your advice and summing
up. It is so beautiful. I have always been your 'Sala'
and I will remain your Sala". But there is much more
than "Salahood". You have been always like a father
to me as Shri Mataji has been a mother to me. And
most importantly the love that flows from both of
you is the source of my living- That's all I can
Gradually it will seep in. All these person spoke so
well, so highly and we must be very very grateful to
them. I think that day Shri Yogi Mahajan, who is
here, played a very big role. He was the master of
ceremonies. Rajesh Shah is not here. he was
responsible for bringing a number of them. That was
a moment when these political leaders began to see.
they were deficient and where your Mother was
say,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 4,5,6 1998
26
The last word
-Dr. Wolfgang Hackl
ear brothers and sisters I was asked by many western Sahaja Yogis to say
something. It is very embarassing if you come here and you are treated
like a king fof some, for 14 days now and then those who treat you like a
king say thank you that you have come. Dear hrothers and sisters we sit now in a
palace and wherever this palace is built up now, in a few days, there will he only
sand, some lizards running around. There will no light because there is no generator
and nobody puts the diesel into generator. There will be no water coming out of the
pipes because nobody fills the water tanks. There will be no assistance booth. There
will be nobody who says- any volunteers to accompany western ladies for shopping.
It will be everything as it was before, just a barren land with a few huts. The huts
will look nicer now because it belongs to the government but in order to give better
accommodation to everybody the Sahaja Yogis of Delhi, the Sahaja Yogis of India
have prepared everything very nicely so it will be in a nice state when we leave. But
for all this we are, we are the ones who are very very grateful to the Sahaja Yogis of
India, to the Sahaja Yogis of Delhi, to Mr Nalgirkar and his group
very thankful to you. Please give them a hand and give them another standing ovation.
As it is a festival for our Mother, an incarnation of our Mother, the beloved family of
- we are very
our Mother plays an important role. And we never come to the point that we express
our emotions towards these wonderful beings which are here with us and what I
wanted to say is that we feel very much honoured that you stayed here with us. You
must be very special that you are so close to our Mother and we are of course
channels.
Sir C.P. you are such an example for us in humility and at the same time dignity and
with such a loving heart and we are so happy that you are always with us, you sit
there, at the side of our Holy Mother and we are very very happy that you are with us
and we hope that you will be with us for many many more times. And dear Baba
Mama, you are really a Mama to all of us.
You are always surrounded by many Sahaja Yogis, always trying to catch people for
the Academy, And if one thing we can do for you is to add one name to your 999
- which should be - the lord of the young nights. there are so many members
of Shri Mataji's family like Sadhna didi and Kalpana didi and all the other persons
which we personally do not know so well and they also personally do not know us so
names
well. We are very happy that they are with us and please give them a big hand.
And thus the grand festival came to an end.
Jai Shri Mataji
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_4,5,6.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Innocence Is An Eternal Quality
Which Can Never Be
Lost Or Destroyed.
