Divine Cool Breeze Issue : 9 5,10 Volume 1998 "Meditation is the only way you can enrich yourself with the beauty of reality." (Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, Sahasrara Puja, Cabella Ligure, May 10, 1998)

 In this Issue: Editorial 1 Easter Puja -stanbul-19-4-1998 The Messenger of Peace-London-8-7-197 We hold the Future in our Hands-Landon-03-07-1997 10 Shri Ganesha Puja Seminar-Cabella–1997 13 Litany for the Doom of Materasura 15 A School Committed to Universal love 18 News from around the world: Sahaja Story from Holland 20 20 Getting on the Air in Florida Swiss Yogis Visit ivory Coast (A Report) 21 Sahaja Yogi's lives in Kazakhstan 25 1998 Esoctric Fair in Copenhagen 25 Shri Ganesha Puja 1997-Cabella-07-09-1997 27 Yogi Mahajan Edited by E VJ. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar Published by New Delhi-11D D67

 Editorial Sometimes when we sit for meditation, our meditation is disturbed by a thought that we should get up and we suddenly break our meditation. This is an autosuggestion that, "we have meditated enough, there are other things to do." It would be interesting to find out what are these other things. "I must meet my friend." "I must telephone so and so." What after that? "Oh, watch T.V." Haven't we been doing all these things already? What have we achieved by it? Where has all this led us? Now we want our uscent and evervthing else can wait. Meditation has to be the top priority. We can telephone later and also the friend can be met another time. There is nothing so important in the T.V. A frank dialogue is very helpful. The situation within is somewhat similar to the functioning of our parliament. there is the ruling party and the opposition. For instance, the ruling party wants to establish a Sahaja government but the opposition opposes it. If the ruling party is strong then it succeeds but if it is weak and waivering then the opposition defeats it. The strength of the ruling party lies in its dedication and lve for Shri Mataji. If it is completely surrendered at the Lotus Feet or our Divine Mother then she takes care of everything, no power dares to oppose Heк But if we are weak and doubting then the opposition easily defeats us. We have to know that the opposition is always waiting in the wings to take over at the slightest opportunity, We cannot afford to give in even an inch. It is easy to control others but very difficult to control ourselves. Just as it is easy to preach than to practice what we preach. How to control oneself? This was also the plight of Prince Arjuna in the Mahabharara. He asked Shri Krishna, "how to find peace from the restless, impetuous and stuhborn mind which is difficult to control like the wind." Shri Mataji has often told us to introspect. When our kundalini rises and we meditate, the kundalini gives us a very deep sense of joy and inner peace. In the light of this new experience we can clearly see the movement of that which is unreal and through that wisdom overcome all thoughts and mental movements. Then we realise for ourselves that the mind is a myth. At this point the rule of the spirit is firmly established and no opposition dares raise its voice. This is the fulfillment of the "Lord's prayer that we say at the Agnya chakra, "Thy kingdonm come, Thy will be done on earth As it is in Heaven," We truly start enjoying what Shri Mataji has described as the ""Blossom Time."

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue 9 & 10 1998 Easter Puja Istanbul 19/4/98 Today we shall see the significance of Christ's you can not go to Sahasrara. And this was done so life, not the crucifixion. Anybody can be easily in your case only because Christ could go crucified and killed but this dead body of through all that torture, and all that brutality and crossed over. How much we should be indebted to him? I Christ was resurrected from death. Death itself died don't know the words that can express, because He is the one who took lead in telling people that, "You seek, you seek and you will find'. And then He says that "you have to come and bang at the door'. This is exactly what has happened in your case, that you and He overcame it. It's a miracle for ordinary human beings, definitely, but not for Christ, because He was a divine person. He was Shri Ganesha, He was Omkara Himself So He could walk on the water, gravity would not affect him and also He got resurrected because death could not affect him. Such a great have risen up to Agnya and then you have crossed divine personality was specially created for human your Agnya. This crossing of Agnya was not at all beings, that people should recognise Him. But they difficult for you, though by your own ideas of thinking did not recognise Him. They killed Him, in a very and conditioning of the futuristic planning and all that brutal manner. And even now they think that cross is it was a big big clouds, I should say, very black a great thing because Christ died on the cross. It's clouds which were hovering on the Agnya. Thoughts a very cruel idea of human beings to respect the were overpowering and you could not have penetrated cross. What does it show? It shows that people liked through this Agnya which was all covered. But you all the cruelties done to Him, symbolising cross as the did and you never even felt that you have crossed one that represented His death and the atrocities, the the Agnya Chakra so easily way He was tortured So it was a very sad time when He was crucified, but when He got resurrected it was the most joyous, the most auspicious and the most to Christ for opening the Agnya for you. For Him all First of all, we all should really be very thankful the tortures and all the brutality were nothing because beautiful time. His purpose of life, the purpose of His advent, His The resurrection of Christ is very symbolic for incarnation was to break the Agnya Chakra. Today Sahaja Yoga If Christ could be resurrected then human you will find that even though your Agnya is opened out and you have crossed through, still you will be amazed that people get involved in the Agnya Chakra In Sahaja Yoga people do get involved in Agnya chakra. Now how do we see through introspection what happens to us? For example, once people come to Sahaja Yoga they think, they are incharge, incharge of this, incharge of that, incharge of all the Sahaja Yogis, and they start behaving in a manner which doesn't behove a Sahaja Yogi. I have seen them and I am really amused the way they just start thrusting themselves and showing off that they are very much beings also can be resurrected because He came as a human being, with all the powers, and He created the path of resurrection for us. This path of resurrection is the one that we have followed in Sahaja Yoga But the greatest thing is the piereing of the Agnya Chakra which is described in all spiritual treaties or may be called, the scriptures, that is the door which is Golden, which is like a cover and no one can pass through that So constricted is the door of Agnya Chakra. But Christ did cross that His crossing has helped us, today, to open your Agnya Without opening the Agnya

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X issue: 98 10 1998 where you have to see them all the time. I just smile I know they are just show offs. They think no end incharge. This is nothing modern, this used to be there in human beings. But if it was so, it was before Sahaja Yoga Even now, people get into the mood of of themselves and that is why they are there But they dominating others by saying that we are incharge themselves are losing, they themselves are not very happy That is why they try to do all these tricks, this Sahaja Yoga is not so simple as you think kind of domination: because there are lots of temptations. Supposing you make somebody a leader Now leader becomes some sort of incharge and he gets the drunkenness humble, who are simple, who are honest and who are of the power When he is like that he starts dominating really seeking the truth, are being oppressed by this all the rest of the people and also starts showing off gentleman. He oppresses them, tries to show off, that he is something very great and he has to dominate tries to make slaves out of others. I have seen people all the rest of the people. Then he creates an who have gone so far that there was a group of The other side of it is that the people who are atmosphere of fear. Firstly I have seen what happens people, just would not move even an inch without the with them is that they start saying falsely that Mother permission of their leader, and they would go all out has told this, Mother has said so, this is Mother's to be subservient to such an irrational personality. First idea."I have nothing to do with that gentleman, but 0f all, you know. this is the love of Mother Mother he goes on talking like that and people get very never dominates. She can not dominate because frightened. Then he can also frighten you by saying She is nothing but love. As soon as She sees the "I will tell mother. Mother will listen to me and She problem, immediately She absorbs it. She has to make deliberations, just a drama sometimes, to show that She is angry. But She can not basically will punish you". I am sometimes very surprised at Such people because I have never said that I will punish somebady or I will take him out of Sahaja be angry with anyone. It is the love which all the Yoga, nothing. So this man who thinks no end of time, is flowing and that love envelopes the himself, he may be a leader, may not be a leader, may Mother as well as envelopes you. That is how you be nothing in Sahaja Yoga, he starts talking like this, people could understand Sahaja Yoga What does a in such a funny manner that it doesn't look that the human being need is nothing but love and compassion. Love and compassion of a very very pure type. person is a Sahaja Yogi! Then he goes even further. He goes about describing himself as something very Look at Christ. He pitied the people who crucified great as if he were the one who is chosen, specially, Him. He told his Father, the God Almighty, that 'please for rising higher and higher When I hear about these forgive them because they do not know what they are things, I am really amazed how can people befool themselves, all the time and behave in such a manner! people are doing wrong things and God, the Father doing'! He could see that because of blindness these will be very annoyed, who is wrathful and may destroy First thing in Sahaja Yoga is humility. If you are them! So it was done with a very compassionate not a humble person, you can not be a Sahaja Yogi. feeling, without thinking about. Just automatically He The person who orders about, the person who talks felt that these people are doing all this to me and I in a manner as if he were Hitler, any person who tries do not know what will happen to them! So He prayed to control and be incharge of the things, all these to God, O Father, Please forgive, please forgive capacities only show that. that person has achieved them, for they do not know what they are doing They nothing in Sahaja Yoga. First thing is to enjoy the are blind, so please, do not punish them". What compassion, what love, I mean, think of it! Do we do that in our life? If somebody harms us, troubles humility I have seen people like this, they will always sit in the first row, they will always be sitting in a place

 Divine Cool Brecze Volume Xissue 9& 10 1988 US-do we ask Father to forgive those who do not know what they are doing? That should be the level happening but it is just an inner oneness with each of a Sahaja Yogi and it will work out very well if you other. Sometimes I find Sahaja Yogis, so much ask for forgiveness. God will look after them He understanding each other, so much loving each other, mean any kind of a particular gesture or a particular so beautifully enjoying the love of other people! When transforms them, He will bring them to their senses I see that I feel very very happy, absolutely overjoyed. That is what The message of Christ is full of love, compassion. pure compassion. How He tried to protect Marie I wanted. These people should enjoy Magdalini (the prostitute) is an example of that. She That. And you will be amazed that most enjoyable was leading a sinful life, and for a saint, it had nothing thing is the love that you give to others! You may not to do. He had nothing to do with it But when He receive but when you give love to others then it is saw her being stoned by people. He stood against the most enjoyable thing. But the way you express . yourself is also an art, I think, to understand how to her He took a stone in his own hand and said, "alright, those who have not committed any wrong please others, how to make them happy I have told deed or have not committed any sin can take this this story before also, about a saint who lived in Gagan Bavda, a hill or mountain He used to live there and he couldn't walk, because of vibrations he lost his legs. And then he would go all over the place stone and hit me" And, nobody came forward. Because they had to face themselves. When we are dominating others, then a kind of a cruel joy is there. Some sort of a joy that I don't understand myself. But people on a tiger because tiger loved him and he loved the show off that we have achieved this joy, we have tiger So this gentleman was all the time telling people achieved this, a great power! It has happened for from Bombay what are you doing here? Mother has come, go and touch Her feet.' I did not know why he was so much concerned. So I told Sahaja Yogis centuries with all the great emperors and also despotic rulers. I must go and meet him All these Gurus say that we But with Sahaja Yogis it should be the other don't leave our pillow. We have to be in our own - they won't way round. They have to rule the world with pillows, means wherever they live, exist go out. I am the other way round I am never stationed peace and love. They don't have to show off by any chance. This is how Sahaja Yoga will spread in one place. So they asked if I could go? I said, much much faster. What does the world need? You "why not". So I went there. And the Sahaja Yogis just think of it It needs only love and affection. Those said that, "Mother, you never go anywhere. So why people who are yet lost in the ignorance about life and do you want to go here?" I said, "Alright, see the are still busy troubling others, torturing others, going vibrations, ah Tremendous vibrations !" So when I against the collectivity. they will have to return to normality. It is very abnormal behaviour sometimes. you just don't understand, why they behave like It is very surprising that when I went up, he could mad people. It is very difficult also to tell such a went up this fellow was very angry with the rain, because, he was supposed to be controlling the rain. And not control the rain, and I got completely drenched So, he was very angry. He was sitting on a stone and person that you are mad, and also it is difficult to be doing like this (shaking his head) with anger. I didn't with such a person who is so mad with some sort say anything to him. I went inside and sat in the cave, where he had made some arrangements for me to be seated Then, he came, touched my feet and sat down And I was amazed that he was still angry and of a power It goes on like that with so many Sahaja Yogis, I have seen, who start thinking that they have lots of powers, they can do whatever they like, they can talk to anyone and they can confiIse everyone. couldn't understand why the rain did not stop? So, he But in Sahaja Yoga you don't have to confuse You have to clearly express your love. But that doesn't asked me, why did you not allow me to stop the rain?

 Divine Cool Breeze Valume : X issue 9 &10 1998 Even Christ was very young when He was crucified. He was 33 years of age. It was all planned by the Divine that He was to be crucified to make way for After all you were coming to see me all the way and the rain should have behaved, and I could not, some how or the other, control the rain. So, what was the thing, what was the reason? I just smiled. I said, our Sahaja Yoga To open the Agnya, he had to sacrifice his life. And for him to be hanged in such a horrendous, cruel way! Normally we do not find people behaving in such a manner towards the person who is about to die. So what happened that those see, you are an ascetic, you are a sayasi, and I am your mother, I cannot take a saree from you, one is not supposed to take anything from a sanyasi Even the Mother cannot take anything from him. But you have bought a nice saree for me. So I had to drenched so that I could take the saree from you people who were incharge of his crucifixion, must have been some devils, the way they behaved It is not possible to forgive them even if Christ says. It is difficult to forgive such people who were watching the get See, the sweetness of my telling him just made him melt down! He started crying He said we need. crucifixion of Christ So, if that is the case, that a a Mother for this earth. There should be the Mother person like him thought that let me do my job- to We cannot solve the problems because whatever it is, we get angry, or we want to disappear. We don't want to be with these horrible people who are so sinful, to help them. This is the problem with the world today and that's why you find very few spiritual people in the whole world. Because they are the ones who are being very much tortured, troubled. insulted - all kinds of things happen. So they are break Sahasrara And then he didn't want to live, live with these stupid people, to be tortured Lots of stories are there about his ascent and his resurrection. And He just disappeared into Kashmir where He lived after his resurrection. And, you see, all those stories if you read, you will be amazed, how miraculously, He got His second birth or second life in Kashmir! He lived in Kashmir happily, for sometime, with His mother and there He died. They say there struggling, they want to die very fast. Gyaneshwara, such a great personality, such a great writer, poet, so beautifully he has written. But at the age of 23 is a grave of our lord Jesus Christ and also His mother who was there. he took his samadhi, means he went into a cave and closed the cave and died. Must have been tired and But who has taken advantage of his life, from his life. Who are the people, really, who wanted him to die. You know very well, how Christ died and the people came up suddenly, like Paul and Peter, who tried to make a big business out of it. It is very sad to see that these two persons brought such a shame. This Paul was nothing but an organiser He was a berson who was bureaucratic, I should say. But he fed up with the surroundings of ignorant people. And that's why he did so. So, you can imagine a person like Gyaneshwara who was the incarnation of Kartikeya, had to recede into the world of the dead because he couldn't bear it anymore, the way they were torturing them They tortured him so much saying that he is the son of a sanyasi means, he is no good, He is absolutely like an illegitimate child, and he wa was not only bureaucratic, he was also a man who illtreated to such an extent. He didn't even have wanted to have a big position. He told a lie that he shoes to wear In that heat of India, he used to walk barefeet, and his sister, brother who were great went down to Damascus and on his way, he saw a big cross. According to Sahaja Yoga all such signs are signs of supraconscious: It is not of the spirit Then he came back and started his own research and scholars, great saints, great incarnations, all of them were tortured As a result he wanted just to disappear. And he made a beautiful way of doing it that he told things like that. He has written lot of things but throughout, if you read, you will find that he was not t them that I have to go, took leave from them and went inside his cave and got in samadhi

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X Issue 9 & 10 1998 or intelligence to understand, what these people are. a Sahaja Yogi. He was just an organiser. He was a bureaucratic personality who was writing how we So when they started this tirade against the should administer, how we should have different types downtrodden people, so many of them joined them. of people, how should we manage them So he was Thus they formed their own race and they started the management department for the Christians behaving like that. This is a thing we should understand, Christians also became extremely, very secretarial type. how the dominating nature of people accepted a like you see everything has a time, you must come particular religion, because that religion is nothing but like this, you must sit like this, talk like this. And also humility, and how then these people, supposed to be the nations which are supposed to be Christians are incharge of Christianity, converted people into observing all that in a very official manner It is not something absurd! See, it is human nature, it can understood why are they so much official in everything? enjoy any nonsense, any kind of cruelty, any kind of Just the opposite of what Christ did, to break the pressure. It can never give up that realm, that area, Agnya- they built up this. And the Christian nations where they have been dominating. Now, as it is, the became most arrogant, most aggressive nations in the christian nations have gone even beyond that because whole world For them it was their right to oceupy among the Christians, all the freedom is given to them. any land they saw, it was in their right to establish They are liberated, do whatever you may like, if you their own laws, their own, I should say, assemblies. become a Christian. All this is done in India I know. Even today if you They are the ones who have been dominating and those who are dominated are there everywhere. They just living like rustic people, working very hard and would go to ordinary people whom you can call as they are all the time under attack from people who aboriginals and converted them. Their main method are dominating and those who wanted, full advantage was to convert. What was the need to convert so to be taken, out of these people. It was a ridiculous many people- because in democracy it is important thing to behave like that as Christians. Then also they that the number you have should be large. So to gain started converting, it is another nonsense, converting, the number they used to convert. See the whole go to places like Punjab, You will find the people are converting them In the south India they never made breads. They don't know how to use your oven. So situation of Christ It really makes me feel very nervous. they made huge big cakes. You can call it a cake or you can call it bread and put it in the water or in much higher than others. You have all the powers and well and they would say that we have put a part then supposing you want to behave like the Christians. of the calf or a buffalo or could be a cow and they I do not know what you will do. So now you are Today you all are Sahaja Yogis, you are all so just believed, And they say now you are finished. on the verge where Sahaja Yoga is accepted in different because you are no more belonging to Hindu religion countries, and people respect those who are Sahaja or any other religion. So now, you have become Yogis. They have been given positions, then suddenly Christians. And that is how they have made thousands you might get this power business into your heads. and thousands of people, Christians. They were You may try to become like a despot, because that actually downtrodden people, I should say. Now all is human nature. That is not divine, but that is human these downtrodden people, wanted to be converted nature! For example, when in the kingdom of animals into Christianity because they brought them all they - they are aggressive on each other it is all right, wanted. Such people would just follow the missionaries it is permitted. There is a system, there is a way, there and would not question because they were not educated is a method how they dominate. They do not jump people. They were not people of any understanding on everyone. But I have seen in Sahaja Yoga

 9& 10 1998 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue Ganesha It is all written down, but Christ is many people-we make them a leader, finished Then he sits on everybody's head If you don't make described as Maha Vishnu and not as Christ. So. them a leader then they go on writing letters to me one after another, that Mother, we wat to be leader Mäha Vishnu then rose and it has all the wonderful things. It is a real message, beautifully written by the light of Christ that now as we are thoughtlessly I want to be a leader- they go on insisting on it. For what de you want to be the leader-just to aware, now we have to express that light through dominate others? This domination business is not meant our lives, and we have to show to the world that we are quite capable and that we are within ourselves, absolutely complete. We don't want I am here today, to tell you about a beautiful anything from others. What we want now is to give, for Sahaja Yoga. image of Christ, who rose above death In the same way, let there be death of all nonsensical ideas, all whatever we have achieved, to others. This is what people are looking at you and at all the Sahaja Yogis. negative thoughts. Everything has to be overcome You have to be the lord of yourself and in that you should feel so comforted, so happy In giving others you will find it very much easier than taking something awake because to keep in these modern times, it is from others. It is very surprising how Sahaja Yoga very difficult when you are thinking of Christ and has taught you all these things! In Sahaja Yoga people talking about Him. It is just something so sad, how have to say that they are very wonderful. They are people never understood such a great man, such a very beautiful people. They are very loving, they are great personality and He was divine, absolutely divine. very kind I wvant to hear that all the time about you all, that you all are individually or collectively, something through all the sufferings. It is very painful even to May God Bless You! Thinking of Christ, I find it impossible to keep Despite that He made a drama, we should say, to go outstandingly great. But this greatness is not by domination or by showing off but this is coming from within. People see you and know that it is remember all that, how He crucified himself and how he died. But the main point is this. He has done for you, for all of you, and you are so indebted. It is his something and that is how Sahaja Yoga is going to spread. The Christ within you has to arise. Christ within you has to guide. It is the Christ within you who will teach how to behave towards work which has helped the Kundalini to be awakened and could pass through this fontanelle bone area. All this could have been impossible without the sacrifice of Christ. You all should thus deserve to have some others and how to gain their confidence and sacrifices. See this is a very symbolic thing that has give them the love and peace. That you are now happened and you all should be, all the time, prepared growing within you, to make them very very to sacrifice whatever is possible for the emancipation happy and joyous. This is the message of resurrection. This is the message of breaking the Forget about the seeking, forget about everything. Sahasrara. So this egg, which was described very What is needed is that you have to remember all the clearly, in Devi Mahatamya, how this egg was formed time that you are saved, you are being blessed by the and was broken into two and from one part of the sacrifices of Christ. It is very important. of humanity It is very subtle at this moment now. egg came out Christ and from another part Shri May God Bless You!

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9& 10 1998 "Shri Mataji, You are the Messenger of Peace Address by Ayatollah Rouhani • Royal Albert Hall, London, 3rd July, 1997 (Text translated on site and read by Derek Lee) the "way in" to knowledge of the Highest Self. The f we consider the most ancient evidence left by concrete means of putting this message into practice Homo Sapiens, we can see that man has always is what is offered to us in this age by Shri Mataji been aware of the existence of a Supreme Being. Nirmala Devi. who is Lord of all things and of all living creatures: To back up this Truth, if you will allow me, I will conceivable means, human beings of quote these words of the Prophet Mohammed, who every era have always tried to show their feelings of tells us, "God is closer to man than his own veins. Using every deep respect (and reverence ) towards God and to perform what is due to their Creator And the Prophet says, "With the knowledge of the Spirit, man will begin to know himself, so as to finally achieve knowledge of God. This is why Islam has always stressed the possibility of direct communication with God Even those who "With the purification of his inner being, man becomes conscious that he is the Spirit." have fallen into idolatry have never denied the existence of the Creator, but have simply put their idols and their images in His place. And this is still happening today. This being the case, how can we recognize a true prophet and what is his or her mission? It is thus that both the experience of spontaneous Self Realization (which is revealed by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi) and Sahaja Yoga (which is the practice which She teaches) are in perfect harmony with the teachings of Islam It is because of this revelation by Shri Mataji that I have wanted to speak to you tonight. The mission of the prophets is to reveal the Will of God, that is, to provide a logical and tangible explanation of religion as it is experienced in our daily talk by In a similar vein, I should like to end my lives. referring to the condition of women in Islamic countries Genuine monotheism the belief in a Supreme today. As you know, the position of woman as mother Being-means (or implies) the unshakable oneness of is glorified in the Islamic tradition. The Prophet the whole creation, that is, the indissoluble union Mohammad went as far as to say, "We experienced between man and God. Monotheism proves, then, the pointlessness of idols and of images that come between man and God. The mission of the prophets is thus to set human beings upon the right track, and in order to do this, the prophets have used two parallel and paradise at our mother's feet." Regarding the position of the woman as a wife, Islam not only acknowledges her complete right to choose her own husband, but pays homage to her in the famous words of the Prophet, who says, "The best amongst you is the one complementary paths. who behaves best towards his wife" Or again, "Women are sent to us by God and men are responsible for keeping them safe." Women are thus considered to be The way of learning, based on theology and philosophy equal to men in both their responsibilities and in their legal and civic rights. And the way of Self-knowledge or Self Realization That is why we find in our Holy Book, the Koran, Today, unfortunately, we have seen that this great both scholastic discourses and phrases which hint at insight of the Koran is not always understood and

 Divine Cool Breeza Valume X isus 9 & 10 1998 TO 1998 in the spiritual approach of the real Islam. This will make it possible to put a stop finally to all kinds of therefore not respected in the arious Muslim countries. You. Shri Mataji, by virtue of your courage, your injustices which are still being committed against women in the name of religion. sincerity and your purity, by virtue of your untiring travels through the five continents, you are today justly considered to be the Messenger of Peace in the world. It is with this vision and with the aim of defending the rights of women in Muslim countries throughout the world and in particular in Afghanistan, in Iran and Your exemplary life makes you the perfect symbol and model for Muslim women May their quest for Turkey, that I address this brief talk to you, Mataji, and to all the people assembled here tonight Shri Justicę, their desire to be able to enjoy a true spiritual life in their own dignity, may their quest find an echo -Medhi Rouhani

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9& 10 1998 "We hold the future in our hands Is" Address by Claes Nobel Royal Albert Hall, London, 3rd July, 1997 ell, indeed, life is full of surprises After is right. Tonight Shri Mataji will empower us to become all we are meeting here, inspired by the message and work of Holy Mother Shri guided by the knowledge of Self Realization in the masters of our own destiny. And tonight we will be light of truth and we shall all know absolute truth and absolute peace Mataji Nirmala Devi and She is not here in body, but She's here in spirit. Also the wonderful letter that we recently heard from Ayatollah Rouhani, which speaks Now, 100 years ago Alfred Nobel established his very highly of the work and the mission of the Holy Mother, where he indicates the importance of women Nobel Peace prizes. These prizes represent excellence. in the world. He is not here either and, frankly speaking We have prizes in Chemistry, Physics, Medicine, only 36 hours ago I did not know that I would be Literature, and Peace. Of those prizes, I hold the here at the Royal Albert Hall, addressing this audience Peace prize to be the finest. And I want to tell you Still I say, dear Holy Mother, and I also recognize her that Alfred Nobel listened to a woman, he listened to his secretary, Bertä, in Paris, 100 years ago, when she husband, Sir C.P Srivastava in the audience, and I say most importantly, dear friends, fellow seekers of said, "Dr. Nobel, you should use your vast fortune for truth, are you out there? Because with all this light I can only see about 20 people in front of me. So, the betterment of the world" Tonight you are listening to another woman, we are listening to the message of Shri Mataji. However, I am very much inspired, first say "yes" if you are here, then I know. [Lots of clapping] Now I can see you and I can hear you, as by my uncle and later on, you will hear, by Shri Mataji. Alfred Nobel talked much about peace. He well as you can see and hear me was frightened that his awesome, explosive dynamite, which cleared up land for harbours and tunnels, could With that said, I want to say that 1 have a vision, I have a vision of the world that is better, safer and also be used for warfare. Today in the arsenal of saner than the one we are presently experiencing. It military systems, it's like a small firecracker. But at is a world where people live in harmony and that time it-dynamite-was a most awesome. peace destructive material in harmony and peace with nature. with theniselves and Now, those words are vast. It's a bold vision Do I Now, Alfred Nobel thought basically about peace have a practical way of going from vision to reality? Yes. I will share that with you and I will share it and as an absence of war, but I assure you that peace is much more than absence of war. And I see that indicate the tornie of the meeting by ten small words, and they indicate how this global world transformation shall be undertaken, and they are right thoughts, right words, right deeds, right here and right now!! [Lots of clapping] The key word is, of course, "right". This world is fighting about what is "right", What is right peace exists in four specific areas The first area is the peace that the individual has in himself. How do we treat our mind, our emotions and our feelings? How do we treat our body? Are we slaves to other master? Until we have masters or are we our own the inner peace in ourselves, we can never have an to you might be wrong to me, and vice versa It is outer peace in the world. And the safest and best way a grey area So we need a reference point, so we of finding world peace is to have mass movements- that includes all religion and philosophies, all enterprises, can distinguish between right and wrong and between truth and lie. Tonight Shri Mataji will show us what

 Divine Cool Breaze Valume X Issue 9& 10 1998 peace laureate, Dr. Albert Schweitzer said, after he had worked and worked, trying to distill a phrase that contained everything that he knew, everything that he wanted to say through his philosophy, Dr Albert coined the phrase, "reverence for life". Nature is nothing but a plethora of examples of life in this multifaceted what is the Self? Ladies and Gentlemen, the Self in vision. And I tell you, dear fellow seekers of truth, whether they are of a political or scientific nature- to realize what inner peace is And that's what we are talking about tonight Self Realization What does Self Realization mean? Well it means that we are "realizing" something, but us is the divine, cosmic power that exists in each and every individual, but which is dormant in most people and in our lust for power, we are in the process of around the world. The spiritual leaders-from ancient destroying the very thing that makes this planet unique laws-they knew about this. and they spoke about this. But this secret of secrets has been suppressed. far, we do not know of another planet in the universe delīberately, until Shri Mataji, with great courage and that harbours this miracle. Earth is like a blue jewel great wisdom. being an old soul, who decided by Herself in space and there is only one Earth and this Earth to come back to the Earth at this critical time in our is fragile and we must take care of her and respect history, in order to share her knowledge and wisdom, her. Earth is älso called Nature. We cannot break the we, humanity today, in our ignorance, in our greed and that is: Life on Earth. [Lots of clapping] And, so which is the Sahaja Yoga, which is instant Self 1aws of Nature, we must live by them, Mother Earth Realization, which is to activate the dormant principle will break us. And we are only one species of, we is the Kundalini and to help do not know how many species we have-five, ten, the Kundalini to rise up and thus become. as it says fifteen million, but this we know (and this has been in the Bible, "You are created in My image." [Lots of proven by the world's most foremost scientist in that we all have. which clapping] Harvard University, United States, Dr. Edward That was the first category, the first sphere: of OWilson) we are today bringing to extinction 250 peace, the one we have within ourselves. The next one species per day!! That is as if we are deliberately and Wilfully pulling out thread after thread of what consists is the peace that we have among each other, in the of the fabric of life. And Mother Nature will not let us continue doing that without correcting us as naughty family, in our community, in our nation, that we have peace with other ethnic groups and with other religions, children. that we really become true, what I call "active" listeners, and as "active" listeners are able to put ourselves in the place, in the shoes, of the other party Only then, should know between ourselves and God Any religion The fourth sphere of peace is the peace that we when we have the outlook from their perspecctive, shall or any group who raises their army and destroys their we understand what they are trying to say. We're enemy in the name of God is not following what God always talking, talking, talking My dear wife, who is not here tonight, said, "Claes, vou talk too much, you don't listen "I have started to practise what she calls "active listening" has asked us to do. The world should not know of violence [lots of clapping], and the world should not know of war. I call, as we already heard, these four spheres of The third sphere is the sphere that pulled me in peace, "Earth Ethics". And tonight we will hear more originally After all, I am a European, a Swedish from the Holy Mother how we shall have a reference business man. Why am I up here, speaking the language point, how we can distinguish if we have a charlatan of spirituality, and saying "That is where the hope of and a fraud in front of us or if it's a genuine, honest the future exists"? I am doing so because I have a person. And you, dear audience, you have come here deep and profound reverence for Nature: As a Nobel tonight from many different walks of life and, like 1

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue 9& 10 1938 12 you, I have also been seeking for the truth. I am Conference '92. That was the twentieth anniversary of beginning to discern truth rather clearly And let me the Stockholm conference, that for the first time put tell you this, that I look upon life on Earth as a kind of a school, a school where we are learning perfection in '72 we had only two heads of state: the Prime and purification Now, on earth, everything is interdependent, interactive and inter-related, and on twenty years later, we had 110 heads of state A Earth as well as in heaven I guess, every action has marvellous declaration was drafted, Agenda 21, just a reaction, every effect has a cause and every cause s an effect and the Holy Mother-as I said, She continued with Rio, plus five. But, as I told Sir C.P. is a highly evolved soul-She has learned from many, many lives, what it is all about. It is all about laws. conference, I said, "WellI, we are talking about the unseen laws, the spiritual laws, they are always sustainable future,' but it seems to me that in the UN there and they work as infallibly as the law of gravity there is much of a sustainable dialogue ongoing." Tonight works [drops his pen onto the floor] It always we shall take the action. the "Environment" on the world agenda In Stockholm Minister from India and King of Sweden. In Rio last week in New York, just 70 heads of state that has when he asked me about the outcome of this works-all those unseen laws, it is for us to learn and Well, I asked a Holy man from India, a robed perceive that law. I am very comfortable with the teachings ofF Shri acharya, and I said, "Is there hope for the future? Mataji and I am very comfortable with the Holy And he said, "Mr Nobel. I will answer your question Mother herself I say so because in the Bible there as follows: When the dear Lord had created the Earth. is one saying, amongst several good ones, "You shall He was very, very happy. very, very pleased. It was know the tree by its fruit," and lately I have met the His finest creation in the universe and he decided to young men and women, in different parts of the world and certainly from many different parts of the world angels and all the devils. When they were there, he and they are all shining beautiful human individuals that celebrate, to have a party. and God invited in all the foasted them, and wished them welcome as a good bost, and sad, "There's only one rule that you must radiate inner peace and balance. They are unique. You have followed, and you are in the process of following strictly obey While you're having a good time"-and and will be I think, those individuals who should call by the way, the best food and the best wine was themselves, "Ambassadors for the Earth." and after served, ambrosia nectar-and he said, "there is one tonight's session is over, I am sure that you shall see rule and that is that while you're here, celebrating my clearly how you shall distinguish between truth and lie Creation, you may never bend your elbows." The and you shall realilze that blind faith is of no value and devils cried out and said "We don't want any part of that fanaticism and to take up violence as last argument-is of no value Eventually those things will t such a party! How can we enjoy it, not bending our elbows?" So they left Then the party started, the bring you unhappiness, they will bring you conflict and angles were having a jolly good time and the dear potentially war. Ladies and gentlemen, I know that we hold the future in our hands, I know that the future is in your hands. I know it's. in know that the future of the planet exists in the hearts God was very, very happyl!* Now how could they eat and drink without bending i my hands and I alsa : their elbows? Well, I sense that you can see what the moral of the fable is. The angles were feeding of the individuals. each other, they were sharing and they were caring. And that is what we shall do in the future together. Thank you very much. Now, I will close my remarks tonight by a fable from India. I heard it when I attended the Rio

 Divine Cool Breeze VolumeX Issue 9& 10 1998 13 Shri Ganesha Puja Seminar September 1997 A Maori lady from New Zealand sang the first very puja that we have the privilege to perform in Shri Mataji's presence is a jewel Maori bhajan The Japanese yoginis performed the beyond compare. This year's Shri Ganesha first Japanese bhajans. The Chinese yogis offered a puja in Cabella was definitely one of the erown jewels, combination of music and pantomime. The yoginis a diamond radiating its sharp pure light with great from Thailand performed a btautiful fan dance, sparkling in traditional costumes. The yogis from Indonesia b power, obliterating even the shadows of negativity. performed a traditional shadow puppet play from the Shri Ganesha, in His aspect of the remover of Ramayana The Iranian yogis, assembled from all over obstacles, was blessing all the preparations And as Europe, presented a film and then followed it up with vice-chancellor of the Vishuddhi chakra, He brought a bhajan sung in traditional Persian style with a special together Australia, New Zealand, Iran, Malaysia, stringed instrument played by Hamid, and a large type Thailand, China, Taiwan, Japaän, Vietnam, Singapore of hand-held drum played by Ali. and other South-east Asian countries, as well as yogis As our journey around the world drew to a close, from all over Europe, North and South America, Africa, Shri Mataji requested qawwalis from Music of Joy. They asked for any yogis familiar with "Mataji Qawwali to join them on the stage and the yogis of nations India and elsewhere to work together in hamony, as part and parcel of the whole The diversity of races and cultures was like a assembled for a powerful qawwali that brought half bouquet of fragrant flowers from all parts of Mother the performers to their toes to dance with joy before Earth, and was fully expressed in the Saturday night Shri Mataji entertainment program, giving us all the feeling that it really is a small world. Music of Joy started the don't know what I must be feeling when I see all Afterwards, Shri Mataji addressed the yogis. "You evening with bhajans that deepened our attention and lightened our hearts, living up to their name as they expressed the joy of being a child of Our Most Holy I visited before, and I know these countries which most of you very well. The way the whole joy and happiness that you have received through your spiritual Mother awakening, in the light of the spirit, is very evident and This was followed by a comedy in verse by the very beautifully ringing like waves and waves. It is Sahaja Yoga's dreams, which I had, is more than Australians that was poking fun at the various traps fulfilled.. So this is what is love. And in this love we seekers fall into, whether vegetarianism or epicurianism, guru shopping or analytical thinking. We then proceeded just get immersed. This ecstasy that you were getting on a journey around the Orient as yogis from first one, then another country, expressed the joy of Sahaja through the best of their artistic heritage: Under backdrop consisting of beautiful painted panels of work out. Sahaja Yoga is now very well established tropical flowers, which gave a feeling of oriental art and accepted in Russia, and even in America, the without being specific to any one country, the yogis House of Representatives issued a statement praising into was just nothing, but is the bubbling of love." Shri Mataji then spoke about Iran, and how a eventually the problems caused by fundamentalism will offered their love. Shri Mataji's work.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9& 10 1998 14 Shri Mataji spoke about art as a blessing from the afterwards expressed as being far beyond any talk Divine She suggested developing our artistry in music, they had experienced before. Many came away with art, and dancing to balance the right side "For qawwali, a far stronger feeling of the depth of Shri Ganesha's power, and that innocence is not something to merely strive for in a yogi It is an absolute necessity for I must say you are masters now!* Shri Mataji also mentioned that attention should be paid to America. Americans are childish people, but America should work out with help, and through well- ascent, that our purity can in no way be compromised. Yet it was also with a feeling of joy that Our Mother has made this possible for us performed music and dance. Many yogis remained through Monday to let the vibrations settle and to enjoy an extra day with brothers and sisters seen once in a year, two years, or even six years. The magic of Cabella flowed over and For most of us, the evening ended all too soon We awakened on puja morning to a beautifully sunny day, and made our way to the river or the waterfall The puja backdrop was unveiled, consisting of four dancing Ganeshas (similar tc the one on the cover of around us. In Cabella it is so clear that the the Music of Joy cassette) with a mouse playing at Paramachaitanya guides everything: where you sleep, the foot of each, on a celestial background, with who you speak to, what work you do, and who you painted columns between each of the figures, crowned find at the river foot-soaking next to you Each moment flows into the next without a ripple, and it is such a joy to witness it all unfold. In Cabella it is easy to with pink lotuses. The front of the stage was bordered with large tissue paper hibiscus and other flowers. Again we had the pleasure of listening to Music see that the yogis and yoginis are truly a different race of Jay. Shri Mataji arrived, dressed in a sari in iridescent coral pink with coral orange borders. The puja talk was penetrating in a way that many yogis of people, with sweetness, balance, love and understanding, in a way that can only be a reflection of the love of Our Mother. s

 15 Divine Cool Breeze Volumie X Issue 9 & 10 1998 Litany for the Doom of Materasura This is a world where too mch is not enough. 1'his is a world that feeds the Swiss Bamks PLEASE SHRI SHAKAMBARI, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT MATERIALISM CREATED Octopus. This is a world where the seint says enough. This is a workd where negativify is a plus. enongh. 5. The new multinational entities are experimenting with new forms of dictatorship, setting their production U This is a world where 13 billion people live on sites in the developing world, reducing to slavery a incomes of less than $1 a day and where the planet subdued working class and exploiting children on the does not have enough natural resources to sustain, at altar of productivity gains a world wide scale. the consumption pattern of Malaysia, leave alone America. PLEASE SHRI RAKSHAKARI. DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT MATERIALISM CREATED PLEASE SHRI DURGA, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT 6 The globalization of production and services allow a few global players to befool us and impose the rules MATERIALISM CREATED 2. This is a world where ten per cent of world of their game to the mass of unsuspecting consumers trade is generated by drugs and narco-traffics, or USSI00 billion represents the amount that yearly PLEASE SHRI BHIMADEVI, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT poisons mankind, while money laundering in Switzerland and elsewhere has become a most prosperoIs activity. reaching all levels of society. MATERIALISM CREATED 7. Vast restructuring endeavours are progressively leading to the eradication of small and medium-size enterprises for the benefit of gigantic corporations operating on a world scale PLEASE RAKTABIJA VINASHINI, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT MATERIALISM CREATED PLEASE SHRI CHANDIKA, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT 3. This is a world where Wall Street sucks the wealth from the working middle class to bestow it MATERIALISM CREATED 8. The gradual concentration of liquid wealth in the hands of the super rich is marginalizing national sovereignty and its elected officials and is imposing a new titanic dimension to the ruler-ship of money upon the rich and where Walt Disney makes you forget all about it, PLEASE SHRI KATYAYANI, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT MATERIALISM CREATED PLEASE SHRI RAKSHASAGNI, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT 4. This is a world where an Egyptian eats at MacDonalds in Cairo and a Chinese at Pizza Hut in MATERIALISM CREATED 9. Greed raised to the power 108 means the pauperization of the world's middle class and outrageous Beijing because modern consumerism expresses the lowest common denominator of world culture and erases the meaning of national values and traditions. wealth for the remaining 10%.

 16 Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X Issue 9 & 10 1998 concentration of wealth and power threatens to neutralize all seeking of the Spirit and the deafening PLEASE SHRI DAITYENDRA MARDINI, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT foar of triumph of asuric materialism destroys the hope of millions of seekers. MATERIALISM CREATED The systematie elimination of alternative 10 PLEASE SHRI MAHAMAYA, economic solutions, unequal trade and financial DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT manipulations are challenging the equitable distribution of wealth among the population of the world MATERIALISM CREATED PLEASE SHRI VAJRINI, 15. The alliance of mafias, secretive bankers DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT and corrupt managers has infiltrated the world economy and is threatening the ethics of collectivity which provide MATERIALISM CREATED 11. The deregulation of the financial markets has the foundation for the value system of our entire opened wide the gates of Jurassic Park for the large civilization. financial predators to roam about and thousands of billions of dollars are created from nothing by PLEASE SHRI VIRATANGANA, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT speculators to feed their unlimited thirst for money and MATERIALISM CREATED power 16. The trend of today's mega mergers is to marginalize the State, bypass national legislation, manipulate the market, control the economy and, for PLEASE SHRI UGRACHANDESHVARI, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT MATERIALISM CREATED all practical purposes, finish off the social foundations of real democracy. 12. The Swiss financial centre works as a haven for the rich tax-dodgers from developing countries and diverts needed capital from national investment PLEASE SHRI KHADGAPALINI, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT programmes, industrial infrastructures and social expenditures to inflate the stock exchange of the developed countries. MATERIALISM CREATED 17. The etheric sophistication of financial electronic circuits has created a virtual world where the PLEASE SHRI UGRAPRABHA, immateriality of money has become the sole reality DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT PLEASE SHRI VISHNUMAYA, MATERIALISM CREATED DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT 13. The enormous increase of financial assets has MATERIALISM CREATED siphoned cash money out of the real economy and channelled it into the financial markets, building up a 18. The progressive domination of technology is sucking the blood of the farmer, the artist and the potter turning the man who works with his hands into a permanently handicapped person. planetary gambling casino where arbitrary curreney speculation can mount huge attacks against any country which tries to follow socially-minded policies. PLEASE SHRI DEVA KARYA SAMUDYATA, PLEASE SHRI MAHAKALI, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT DESTROY THE EVIL FORČES THAT MATERIALISM CREATED MATERIALISM CREATED 19. The information highway leads to the maya 14. The lure and mirage of such a radical

 17 : 9& 10 1998 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT web of a virtual world where human attention is MATERIALISM CREATED scattered, desire is confused, truth is atomized and the soul is thereby reduced to slavery Hail, salutation to the Great Devi! Aum, Amen! PLEASE SHRI RADHA, May there be Auspiciousness, Joy and Peace! DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT May Thy divine grace penetrate the waters flowing from our mountains to the four corners of Europe and MATERIALISM CREATED spread the pure vibrations of the Aquarian Age! 20. Modern communication can become a demonic tool in the hands of a few media moguls and opinion making tycoons who are spreading their hedonistic world view of power, money and sex Salutation to Thee Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Ji, the Resplendent One, O formidable Avatar! We bow to Thee, most pleasing yet most frightful, who has been approached by the Trimurtis for the sake of protecting the universe PLEASE SHRI SHUKRATMIKA, DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT Today, in this festival of Navaratri, we chant the MATERIALISM CREATED litany of Thy children in Switzerland for the defeat of the foes of the Spirit and we offer to Thy glittering 21. The Mlechas of Satan have infiltrated the Internet global village to pour pornographic dirt and filth within the nest of the family and to spread hell's shadows in the minds of helpless people. teeth the new asuric forms of materialism. Aum Twameva Sakshat Shri Rakta Dantika Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namaha Aum, Amen. PLEASE SHRI NIRMALA KUMARI,

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 9& 10 1998 18 Committed to Universal Love: A School for the World This is the introduction from The Sahaja Patrika, Through the unbounded love and blessings of Her İSsue number one, June 1997, the newsletter of the Holiness Shri Mataji, we venture to bring out the first issue of the Sahaja Patrika, the future issues of which will be brought out by the students themselves. International Sahaja Public School. The school is located in Talnoo, near Dharamsala, in Himachal Pradesh, India. The school currently offers grades one through ten, with grade eleven to be offered committed to universal love and goodwill and following Living in an ethos of international brotherhood, for the first time in 1998. a democratic way of life, our endeavour is to train the am sure the children who are brought up in students to govern themselves and even take crucial the Sahaja School, wherever they will go, they decisions through different committees. Not that they cannot change. They will change others, but would be free to do anything they like, but would they will not change because they will be so well always look to the teachers as their guiding stars. developed in their own personality that their own personality will impress others. Sahaja Yogis do not accountability. a value which is so thoroughly drilled change. They change others." The attempt embodies, therefore, developing and instilled into them at the school A feeling of being accountable to the parents, to the teachers, and the community at large is highly desirable. It is up to their Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Om Shri Ganasheya Namoh Namah accomplishments, ambitions and aspirations.

 Divine Cool Breeze: Volume Xissue 9& 10 1998 truly international kaleidoscope of the community THE SCHOOL PLANT AND ITS ENVIRONS of nations. The International Sahaja Public School is gracefully perched in the lap of the Dauladhar Range of the Himalayas on the one side and flanked on the other side by the vernal woods The environment is best Does it not look amazing as to how all of us have come to be so close and so quickly when only a few days back we were complete strangers to one another? suited for full and balanced growth of body, mind and Is it not only natural that the whole world should Soul of the young Sahaja Yogis of the world under assemble with the feeling of surrender at the Holy the kind protection of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Feet of Shri Jagat Amba, the Mother of the Universe? Nimala Devi Sarvam Samarpayami The snow-peaked mountains provide inexplicable comfort and solace and urge us all to rise high. We have three staircase-like plateaus which house the Junior and Senior wings of the school and extensive playgrounds. The landscaping of the campus and the unique in many ways. A few of the salient highlights flower beds are a sight to see and we enjoy these of these innovative approaches are that we learn how gifts of nature, to which we add our own efforts to to learn, we become our own rivals, always beautify The Genesis of our Educational Pur- suits The educational inputs offered by the school are endeavouring to excel in our performance. We try to develop a questioning mind for getting Our School, A Community of Nations over dogmas and prejudices and superstitions. We We come from different social, cultural, political learn through exploration, experimentation and and economic environments representing the following observation. We learn to be original and creative. countries Australia, Austria, U.S.A., Canada, Italy, Germany, U.K.. New Zealand, France, Switzerland, India, Finland, Israel, Belgium, Taiwan, Hong Kong of responsibility And, above all, we develop a love and the Philippines. The school, therefore, represents of humanity We imbibe leadership qualities. We acquire a sense Vasudaiva Kutubakam

 Divine Cool Breeze VolumeX Issue 9 & 10 1998 News From Around the World told him there would be a public program in Amsterdam the next month, for which I would come back to Story from Holland A Sahaja T Amsterdam. He wasn't sure if he could come. On the he train I was on stopped in Utrecht. Outside on the platform stood a boy who looked nice I thought, "I would like to give this young man his self-realization." He boarded and sat next to me, although there were still empty seats. We started talking I wasn't sure how to get to the subject of Sahaja Yoga I day of the public program, Harry was sitting in the front row with a friend. Again he didn't feel the cool breeze, but he did enjoy the evening. Later I heard from Richard that Harry had gone to the course and that his life had changed a lot. He now believes in God Thank you, Mother for this story! started to play with my necklace which had a pendant of Shri Ganesha, but it didn't help Suddenly Richard, who. was on the train and had recognized my voice, came to say hello. The Richard left the train at the next station. I Petra van Belois, Holland Getting on the Air in Florida told Harry (the young man) that I knew Richard from Sahaja Yoga. Salutations to everybody from the Florida, USA Sahaja Yogis! We want to tell everyone about an exciting opportunity to spread Shri Mataji's message! Here is what Harry turned out to be very interested in yoga. I thought, "A pity that I have to leave the train at the next station (only 5 minutes farther)."But Harry also had to happened: get out! As we were leaving the train, Harry asked how long it took to get "this Self-Realization." I said it took In late February, a message was conveyed to all US yogis to try to show the video about Shri Mataji's life, called "The Vision" in honour of Her 75th Birthday. We about 5 minutes, He asked if he could get it right away! So we sat down on the stairs of the rear exit of the Amstel station. I told him to relax and close his eyes. I raised my kundalini and gave myself'a bandhan. Then "T" raised his wanted to show the video on TV stations, but we had next to no contacts to anybody significant in that field So af the end of our weekly meeting we gave a bandhan to kundalini and worked on some chakras. I felt a little coof express our desire and waited to see what would happen! breeze above his head! He wasn't sure if he felt it, because there was a little breeze blowing outside. I told him I felt his Kundalini He was still doubting, but felt peaceful. I said I had a bicycle to get home. He too had one and he lived very close to our house. I gave him our address and The very next day Anjan, a multimedia computer student, was approached in his college by an Indian gentleman who needed his help in a computer matter. As it turned out, that gentleman was the producer related said he was welcome any time. of a show called Asian American Focus on a local TV station, WLRN, affiliated to National Public Radio (NPR). Anjan mentioned to him that we have a video about Shri A few months later, I saw Harry at the station again and he was happy to see me. He said he had lost our Mataji Nirmala Devi, ready to go on air and asked if he would be interested. To Anjan's amazement, the producer address because his diary was stolen on his holiday in Spain This was the last time that I would be at that station said. "Yes!" because we were going to move, I gave him address, and the address of the centre in Amsterdam I my new. Over the course of the next few days the idea changed

 21 Divine Cool Breeze VolumeX issue 9 & 10 1998 Introduction slightly and we were asked if we would like to come in for an interviewabout Sahaja Yoga as the show has more of a "question and answer" format. We agreed and in Anjan's college we produced a 10-minute video showing Shri Mataji introducing Sahaja Yoga, complete with titles For a few years we have been in contact with one Sahaja Yogi. Jean-Claude Laine, leader of Ivory Coast. We had invited him to Switzerland five years ago and he was able to go to Puja in Cabella and to India for the and music at the beginning and end. tour. A few months ago we felt it would be great to go there and help the collectivity of Ivory Coast to spread Sahaja Yoga. We proposed the project to them, and slowly and nicely it came to fruition. Everything worked out perfectly, we got good priced airfare, and we were able to send posters there nearly for free (actually it cost 3 boxes of chocolate). The next day at 10 am we met at the TV station and found our interviewer, a very nice lady, being extremely open and respectful towards Sahaja Yoga and Shri Mataji. We discussed the questions to be asked and then we started recording First she introduced the two of us, then we showed Shri Mataji's video and after that continued talking about almost all aspects of Sahaja Yoga So we were five Sahaja Yogis from Switzerland who manifested the desire to go there. We must say that we had brought the project to the attention of Shri Mataji and She was very happy that we could go there. Time passed like magic, fast on one hand, and very slow on the other hand-so that we could fit all we wanted to tell the viewers about Sahaja Yoga! The vibrations were very cool! At the end of the show we invited all the viewers 18th of October Saturday Night, to a public program and gave all the contact information we could think of After a pleasant trip to the Ivory Coast, we were bathed in the plane by the nice fragrances of Africa, but arrived still full of the franticness of our western life. Immediately the heat of Abidjan slowed us down. Upon After the recording was done everyone in the studio was happy and joyful and the interviewer said we must remind her before our publie program as she definitely wants to attend to get her realization! our arrival, we discovered the hearty welcome and kindness of a thief who was prowling in the airport Luckily we also discovered that he was not so proficient at his job. Finally, around midnight, we arrived at the ashram without any problems. The producer suggested that he would like to continue presenting Sahaja Yoga in weekly half hour segments, featuring a different subject in Sahaja Yoga each time! We are excited, grateful, and amazed how Shri Mataji 19th of October Sunday, works things out, especially after such a long "drought" here in Florida! After a relaxing day, we were talking with some Sahaja Yogis of Abidjan under a typical African kiosk called Pallote (pronounced payot). Suddenly, an African drum sounded and we heard a beautiful song in Diula, the local With all our love and respect, -the Florida Yogis dialect. A procession began It came under the pallote, around us, and carried us away Everyone danced to the Ivory Coast Swiss Yogis Visit magical rhythm over to the pendal in the gardern. We were seated facing the dancers, musicians and singers, enjoying their beautiful songs. At the end, two young girls came to us with a large bowl which was the water ceremony to /Note: This isa diary describing the experiences of some Swiss Sahaja Yogis who visited the /vory Coast to assist with the spread of Sahaja Yoga.]

 22 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9& 10 1998 towards him while putting her attention on the Sahasrara. Her Agnya fingers registered catches so she said, "You can't forgive, you must forgive." Then everybody there who knew him applauded, confirming that she was right Because of this, many of them wanted to come to the welcome travellers The entire ceremony was very moving Our hearts were opened by the experience If our eyes are lotuses, then the dew came very quickly in that country. Ignace, appointed as Pujari, began the Puja. The bhajans were coloured with African folklore which is very beautiful. At the end of the Puja, the Chorale (as they call it) performed their own compositions It was something one should hear at least once in one's lifetime Then the rhythm came to tickle our feet, and we found ourselves dancing to that magical tempo. After the meal, we started the nice habit of staying up late into the night, chatting with everyone. Our first story is about Anna. She was postering alone in Abidjan. A lady passed by and looked at the poster and said, "Is She the devil? Why are you doing that? It is very bad." Anna did not know what to public program. In the evening the Chorale group started to rehearse bhajans for before the Havan After three notes of Durgati harani durga ambe, an apocalyptic rain fell from the skies. It lasted so long that we were not able to have the Havan, but the storm was performing in the sky The night once again finished late with songs and dances. Tuesday, 21 st of October With naive conditioning, we were expecting all sorts of reactions at the public program. We were there to prepare the hall, with a battery of chilies, lemons and vibrated water. Slowly, the 400 seats were all occupied The Chorale group sang the African version of Gayatri Mantra At the end of the Realisation, many hands rose answer, for she was new in Sahaja. Then, coming from nowhere, a man started explaining to the furious lady everything about Kundalini. Chakras, Spirit and all, supporting Anna The lady could not argue, cooled down and went away. The man disappeared as he came without a word. Anna, astonished, could feel that she was into the air, signifying realisation. The heavy vibrations progressively became cooler The public program was a protected great success, and all our little fears vanished After two hours of intensive questioning by journalists and the public, we felt the profound and sincere seeking of the people. Monday, 20th of October Preparations for the publie program were continuing The Sahaja Yogis had the desire to contact a radio journalist who has a two-hour national radio program called Mythand Mystery. This journalist gives everyone a chance to express themselves about spirituality. Late in the evening, back at the ashram, the three lakshmis of the ashram, Ida, Victoria and Prisca, shared stories of their travels in Benin and the miracles they heard there: As you will see, it is truly amazing Unfortunately, Paul Dokoui, the journalist, was unreachable. They were quite disappointed. Suddenly. the telephone rang It was Paul Dokoui who, after having seen the poster. wanted to do an interview. During the preparation for this interview, he got his Realisation. The show will be aired to the public after the Sahaja public The wife of a Sahaja Yogi was not happy that her husband was practising Sahaja Yoga She didn't even dare to look at the photo of shri Mataji. But one day she addressed the photo, full of fright and anger saying, "Who are you? Are you stronger then my Lord Jesus Christ?" Suddenly, before her, the face of Shri Mataji transformed into a representation of Christ. Panicking, she ran to call her husband and show him the photograph. He said, "You see, I have nothing to add to this." Slowly the photo came program. We also learned that Sita, a Sahaja Yogini, could announce all the publie programs on TV. The journalist who was a sceptic tried to challenge her by saying. "You back into the original image. say you can feel the condition of others, so can you tell • A new Sahaja Yogi, still doubting about Sahaja them what my problems are?" The Yogini put her hands

 23 Divine Cool Breeze Volume :Xissue 98 10 1998 to clear out all the negativity It was very deep, and the vibrations very strong. After the last syllable of the three mantras of Shri Mataji, a torrential downpour of rain started, like an answer to our prayers. We felt that when we do things collectively, the Divine is with us. Yoga, became very sick. He tried many things to get cured, and finally his family sent for four uns to pray for him. When they saw the photo of Shri Mataji, they told him with anger that She was the cause of his sickness. and that he should burn and throweverything away. They were very aggressive. Back at their place, upon entering their living room, the four nuns found Shri Mataji sitting there on the sofa, they panicked. One of them. At the program, we observed that 99% ofthe people were men We even had a few Europeans. The hall was full, with more than 500 people. Again the presentation courageously, addressed Shri Mataji, "If you are more powerful than Christ, rise up in the sky."Shri Mataji stood was shared between the yogis of Bouaké and ourselves During the question and answer session, we felt that the type of questions reflected a true seeking, and a deep reflection about spirituality A big part of the success of up and rose slowly and silently into the air, then disappeared The four nuns went quickly back to the house of the new yogi, and bowed before the photo, the program was due to the strong desire and the asking for forgiveness. dynamism of the collectivity of Bouake We could see on their faces the joy they felt in the preparation and Wednesday 22nd Of October organisation ofthe program. Back at Jean-Claude's house, We departed by bus for Bouakė at 10 o'clock It was the yogis once again started to ask many questions about a good opportunity to discover the landscape which is the life of yogis around the world-what is happening very beautifiul. At Bouaké the young collective heartily Cabella, our relationship with young yogis in Switzerland, welcomed us. There were about 30 people, and most and how it has developed so well in Russia, as it is the were students. They started singing bhajans using a jemb. land of ego. They also had many young people who a unique instrument which produces a very foyful sound. experience problems with their families who are against Then it was time to exchange impressions and experiences Sahaja Yoga. It is a real problem for them because they with the Yogis. They were very eager to know what is don't know where to go for their daily meditation. happening in Sahaja Yoga all over the world. As they can't travel so much, it is important for them to get Yet another banquet is served! We have decided that this trip is also rich in gastronomy experiences. A cup gem (fiuit juice strongly perfumed with ginger- careful it's spicy/hot), and hop into bed. of information. Thursday, 23rd October Saturday 25th October Early in the morning, after meditation, we felt that it was going to rain The sky was heavy. black and We prepared ourselves for the public program which took grey We returned to Abidjan on Friday. The third public program in Abidjan was held on Saturday at 9:30 am mostly done by the Abidjan yogis For some of them, to place in the evening. It will rain, we thought, that is for sure, the vibrations will clear the town. We were surprised to find that after a while the situation changed, and we enjoved the sun and a cloudless blue sky. During the day. speak in public was a new experience and we could see tremendous transformations between the beginning of the talk and the end. They started with a very uneasy feeling Jean-Pierre wanted to record some images with his and finished by expressing a real joy in sharing the truth of Sahaja Yoga. In the ashram, we had the follow-up at video-the songs, and the messages of Happy Diwali that the Bouake collectivity wanted to offer to Shri Mataji But before that, we meditated together to prepare the same time, About 8 or 9 new people came In the evening we had a havan. At the same moinent, ourselves for the evening. During the meditation wve prayed a cock flew up a tree in front of us. After all the stories for the success of the programme, and asked Shri Mataji

 24 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 9 & 10 1998 we had been hearing, we wondered ifit really was a cock The havan was in three parts. First, the mantras of Shri Mahakali, then all the negativity, and then offering different was simple and great at the same time. The feeling we had at that moment was like we had been together for six months, so intense was our experience during our stay expressions of our devotion to Shri Mataji, the vibrations 28th October Tuesday, were strong. After the three mantras, suddenly big clouds appeared and the sky was full of lightning, as if the havan continued in the sky. Our last night in Abidjan was short. The three lakshmis of the ashram had taken so much care of us that we decided to give them a break and prepare the last lunch, Sunday, 26th October as a cook was amongst us. It was a big change for us to once again eat western food äfter a long week of discovering interesting meals like giant snails, hairy crabs and other delicious new tastes We wanted to slow down the time, as the moment of departure was approaching quickly. We tried to fix in ourselves the last impressions, the last images, the last smiles. Before the Puja, we recorded the speech and dances which the collectivity of Abidjan wanted to offer Shri Mataji for Diwali Puja. It was really beautiful, joyous. and moving. There is sometimes a special moment in our lives which seems similar to moments we had in our childhood, at the feet of the Christmas tree. Shri Mataji has advanced the date and put down a present from which At the airport it was less sad than expected because a group of four yogis was also leaving for Portugal at the same time. They were on their way to their first Puja in the presence of Shri Mataji. In the twilight we all got under the pendal. Amon was there, Safi, Barry, Bernard, Maurice, Ignace, Carine, Adeline, Jean-Claude, the three lakshmis and all other Yogis. We had a last collective meditation during which we thanked Shri Mataji for this comes out a myriad of cheerful surprises. During the Puja, we felt like we were in Cabella as the vibrations were so powerful. Then they started the entertainment in our honour two ballets and a play The program finished in a never-ending saraband, bubbling with joy like fireworks. It was a unique moment where all our hearts, wide open, melted together Once again we ended the evening on the terrace chatting with our brothers and sisters. marvellous adventure. Then the silence emanated and Monday, 27th October pervaded our hearts. Between the sea and the lagoon, a long and straight road bordered by palm trees and huts was our avenue as we drove to Bassam. It was a well-known place for typical handicrafts from all over Africa. There was a multitude of Everything was nicely arranged by our Mother, even for the voluminous present for Diwali, which the group leaving for Portugal was able to take without any problem. As soon as we had reached the airport one of the Yoginis who was working for Air Africa met a colleague of hers. This man took care of everything-money, passport, ticket, visa, luggage, and our heavy packages. small shops made of palm tree leaves with funny names like Boeing 747 or Eiffel Tower We found what we came for, a gift for Shri Mataji. Two splendid masks representing a man and a wvoman On Diwali Shri Mataji explained that it is a King and a Queen. In the plane, we already wanted to return to Africa as we dozed, slept, and dreamed of our innocent and wonderful Sahaja Yogi Brothers and Sisters working it For dinner we were invited by a Sahaja Yogini of Abidjan, Mrs. Safi, who had prepared a delicious meal with many African specialities. It was a real banquet and we were weleomed like VIPS We tried to hide the fact out for that great country. Since we've returmed from our 10-day experience in Africa, our feelings, impressions, and emotions are deeply intact within us. We can feel in that this would be our last night together, and we wanted to extend it to its farthest limit. It was like a family meeting-we were talking, listening to music, dancing. It our hearts this lovely link which took place between them and us We were transformed during these 10 days, our desire to spread Sahaja Yoga became stronger, as did

 25 Divine Cool Breeze Völüme X Issue : 9& 10 1998 our desire to be with other yogis We can perceive new things because we learned a lot about ourselves, about the importance of the collective and the importance of using vibrations, simple things, obvious, but things which unfortunately sadly fade away in the habits of everyday life After this program a new Sahaja Yogi collective was established which became larger and larger. The south of Kazakhstan with its beautiful nature and soft climate was very effective for spreading Sahaja Yoga and in some new towns new Sahaja Yoga collectives appeared. Now we have about 300 yogis in our country. It has been a real and beautiful gift, something hard to describe in words, something which filled us with vibrations, and we will be eternally thankful to Shri Mataji for it. These 10 days spent with our brothers and sisters of the Ivory Coast allowed us to deepen our yoga, Every summer we participate in the Russian-Ukrainian tour of Shri Mataji where we can also meet our brothers and sisters from all over the world, and our hearts are fulfilled with love and happiness. and Some of our lucky yogis have had the opportunity to especially to experience that to get closer to other yogis, and to open ourselves to others, brings us closer to Shri Mataji This love which takes birth when yogis are together, is nothing else but the manifestation of the Love go to international pujas in Cabella, Ganapatipule and other places. Each of these journeys is an incredible experience for us which brings so much joy and lots of us go deeper and deeper. During Diwali Puja in Istanbul, Her Holiness Shri Mataji told us that, thanks to their geographical positions, our countries are quite close to India and have some similarities with Indian culture. of our Mother Kazakhstan ' lives Sahaja Yogis in Dear Friends! Recently we organised a celebration of Five Years of Sahaja Collectivity in Chimkent. To the big musical program came musical collectives with congratulations, dancing groups, MIDI and regional TV. All enjoyed a lot of Indian and folk music, which Sahaja Yoga musical groups played. It was a very friendly and joyful atmosphere that Shri Mataji gave for us, We'd like to tell you about Sahaja Yogis' lives in Kazakhstan. As you know, after the Soviet Union was divided, a lot of new countries appeared, and one of them is Kazakhstan. It's quite a large country which lies on the way from Europe to Asia. It was a country of shepherds who take their cattle from the great steppes in the North to the high mountains in the south. The people who live in this place are simple and open-hearted. Perhaps they have not such deep roots in culture and spirituality as Indians and Russians because of the hardness of their life in the Step by step, Sahaja Yoga is spreading all over Kazakhstan and now also in the north of this country a new Sahaja collective is emerging. We hope that it will spread wider and wider across this land of steppes and past, but during the USSR years they received a lot of help from their nearest neighbour, Russia, which brought a new dimension in their development mountains Much love to all Sahaja Yogis from all over the world. We would be happy to see all our brothers and sisters in our country at any time. Welcome to Kazakhstan! Jai Shri Mataji! A few years ago there was a first program of Sahaja Yoga in the capital of South Kazakhstan. Chimkent City It was very amazing that after some postering about 200 Dimitri Bondarenko people came to the program The first hall that was chosen was quite small, but surprisingly on the night before the program there was water pipe accident in the area of this hall and the administration proposed another hall, much 1998 Esoteric Fair in Copenhagen Scandinavia seems to be in general one of Europe's "Last Frontiers" for Sahaja Yoga. In Copenhagen, there have been a couple of great yogis valiantly trying to get a bigger than the first one, and it was filled completely with newcomers

 26 9& 10 1998 Dlvine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue group going for over three years, but so many of the so sweetly when I asked her if she smoked! seekers are guru shoppers who cannot stop seeking Somehow, when her boyfriend came closer to her as when they find the truth, who are indeed proud of we were talking before realisation, a shadow came being seekers, that it has become a very difficult and lonely task. People do want information about Sahaja dramatically with realisation. We talked about the Yoga, a programmes each week, especially in response to leaflets left in public libraries, but they cannot easily 1 think I am") It was a very moving moment, and accept being told about anything and would like to it is at such times that you feel a deep love for the go on doing their Tai Chi, psychoanalysis, Hatha seekers and realise fully that it is with the pure power Yoga and goodness knows what else in parallel with a feeble attempt at understanding Sahaja Yoga: have the great privilege of talking directly to people's People come once or twice, look very promising, spirits. then never return, perhaps because of a certain Danish over her, and you could see that her life mnight change few even come regularly to public problems caused by drugs, which she should know about if she was a real seeker (she said, smiling. of love that we are working. In these situations, we A woman came to see us, brought along by her husband who had received his realisation the day before, and who had obviously felt it very deeply. at the first Esoteric Fair where we have had a stand. She was very distressed and admitted she really I wanted to share with our brothers and sisters some needed help. We didn't discuss this, but as I worked of the joy we have felt in giving realisation, seeing on her I quickly felt a deep and painful left heart those dilated pupils and joyful, flushed faces shining catch. Afterwards, she was, like most of the people with love, and the feeling of directly addressing the who left us, radiant, and it turned out as we talked a lady in her life who had reserve. Having just returned from the final day of three Spirit in these people with the Divine Hand of our about her catehes that Mother, as if She were really there Herself in Person! been like a mother to her had recently died of a What a relief to cross a spiritual desert and drink mysterious heart attack, and had been an adept of an again of the power of pure love. infamous false guru We cannot know how many will come to the This morning a man and his two daughters were follow-ups in two days, but we have seen Mother's receiving their realisation together! A delightful as- miracle playing out again, and it was important just pect was witnessing the different style of each yogi to give realisation. The last man I worked on before in talking about Mother and describing Sahaja Yoga leaving this afternoon was an Iranian who came to before actually giving realisation. It was for most of see us because a good friend of his had received his us the first such fair we had attended, and we found realisation the day before. There were many cases out again how nourishing and necessary it is for us like that where newly realised souls had told friends just to transmit the light of Truth, and of course, about their experience and recommended them to how "She does it all!" come and try for themselves! Of course, this chap We had brothers and sisters coming to help us from and I had a lovely conversation afterwards about Switzerland (two Swedish sisters from the collectivity our having some great yogis coming from Iran, Shri there) and Norway. but in fact there were several Mataji's enthusiasm for the Sufis, how we had met nationalities represented in our team of nine yogis. some of the Sufis in Istanbul and what great As you may imagine, there was much joy shared by experiences we had, and how we love Qawwalis in us all on Friday and Saturday evening over dinner Sahaja Yoga. But the most beautiful moment was after the day's activities! Spring is finally coming to when he told me that he felt now was the time for Denmark, the buds of collectivity are waiting to burst the whole world to come up this way! at last! Thank you again and again, Holy Mother! Then there was the young hippie girl who laughed -Kingsley Flint, Denmark

 27 Divine Cool Breeze Valume Xissue 9 & 10 1998 Shri Ganesha Puja 1997 Cabella Ligure September 7, 1997 What she does is to build in us primordial taboos or primordial dharmas. For example, steel has its own dharma. It cannot behave like wood. Wood has its own dharma. It cannot behave like silver. They all have their dharma and they are bound in that Today we are going to worship Shri Ganesha It is all said about Him that He is the first deity that was created on this earth by Adi Shakti. As about His creation you know the story and also you know how an elephant's head was attached to Him Today I am going to tell something more Everything that is in the nature has its own dharma. subtler about Him, Kundalini and the Mother Earth If you see the tiger, lion, mongoose or a snake, they He was made out of the Mother Earth, with the all have their dharma, style everything. It's very vibrations of his mother. Now the significance of Mother surprising, how they are bound by it Earth, we have never understood. Now look at the Once in Pratishthana, I went from the other side mother earth. She is the one who produces all kinds to my bedroom and I saw a very big snake coming of beautiful flowers of different fragrance, of different out of a hole. Of course I was quite away from it but it felt my vibrations. It started running away, fell nature, colour, heights. The trees are different Trees, when they grow up, they grow in such a manner that every leaf of the tree gets the sun Look at the in the swimming pool and wouldn't come out. collective sense which is given to us by this mother Somebody went down and killed it and brought its earth We have never realised that this mother earth body up. Iwas surprised to see that it was such a which is giving us everything that we want and the sun big one about 6 feet and it intertwined itself in a very helps the mother earth-cooperates, coordinates with beautiful pattern. Then they said, Mother if we leave her. To go further with it. you have seen a picture it, it will fäll in the water and come to life again. So where a Kundalini is coming out of the mother earth what should we do? I asked them what do you do. They said we burn it So they burnt the snake. But after ten days the female of that snake came out. She and half of it is seen. So what does this Kundalini do for us or what was searching for him They killed her and she also does this mother earth do for us The Kundalini leaves made the same kind of pattern. I was amazed, it was the mother earth as a reflection and what does she very beautiful pattern, exactly the same. So I was do within us, to build us up, in which way. So it is surprised, how is it that this female knows how to the primordial power which is coming out of the mother copy her partner So what I feel is that animals, earth. Mother earth itself acts like a mother. She looks creepers, every type of animal-whole of biology after you. She gives you whatever you want and studied, I was amazed that every type of animal has another miracle thing is, that the highest tree is a the same kind of behaviour. For example you put a coconut tree and the coconut will never fall on any dog in the water, it will swim but the cat may not. creature or human being. That means all thinking, all Its a thing that is built in-the dharma, what I call as understanding all consciousness, all awareness is coming the primordial taboos. We have in the same way, from the mother earth. But we never underständ it. primordial taboos built within us, which are dharma A human being has to be like that. If he tries to be As it is, we take it for granted. Now what does she something else, then something goes wrong with his do for us human beings She is the primordial power.

 28 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9 & 10 1998 was also very good. Somehow or other, childhood, I met many of them, because I also had a habit of going to the jungles, where I used to meet them. I was surprised that they would not drink. This I am telling you about 60 years back, may be more. They would not drink. Very 'lajjashi', means shame of everything. Matter of prestige was important for life. Its like say, if you have glass, you drop it on the ground-it will break. That is the dharma In the same my way when human beings start deviating from the line of dharma, they get into trouble. But its only human beings who can do that. They can only cross over these primordial taboos and can become horrible. Sometimes I see a person and wonder what is them. They would never steal anything wrong with him. He has a nice home, very good wife, everything and then he has a keep'. What is the need? For man it is primordial that he should have only one wife and one husband. Its a taboo. As soon huts. They didn't mind. They were very clean and you deviate from that something goes wrong. Now, neat people. Now it is changed. The same people are who punishes, who corrects or who destroys - is this changed so much. They were like sacred, holy people primordial power, which we call as paramachaitanya. They worshipped mother. They worshipped mother If you can understand that it is a structure - like this earth. Nothing else. I was really very impressed how these people were so dharmic, so good and happy. They lived in. hanger, and if you want to break it, you can break it, because you are human beings. But it will be broken as simple as that. We have to understand we are human beings and we cannot do things which go against our dharma Now why the dharma? Dharma I asked this lady-why do you worship mother earth. She said she gives us everything. She is just mother, we live in the jungles and she looks after us. And she is the most conscious person. She knows that we are there and she has to look after us. Even to take out has to be there for our ascent. Now man in his some leaves from the trees, they used to think about it. But then the missionaries came. They converted intelligence, in his progressiveness, thinks that anything he does-what's wrong, specially in the west, this is very common. But I must say for the aboriginal people them. They gave them skirts and blouses But Gyanabai or those people who were made aware of their did not wear it. She said what is this? Why should primordial taboos-somehow - as the animals know I wear a dress like this where the whole body is what is bad for them and that knowledge was there exposed? No I'll wear a sari. Why should I wear a with the aboriginals. Today we are here with the dress like this? But when they met with these so Australians and in Australia aboriginals are so many: called advanced people, so many of them started I was surprised that most of their words were Sanskrit. living like them. They said you have no freedom. You So may be they might have got it from India or may are just bound by something. Actually they were bound be they have gone there from India, by the sacredness, by the divine understanding. Then they started changing She (Gyanabai) was alright, Her So many words they have which are Sanskrit I husband was alright. But her son started drinking This started thinking about them. In India we have is the beginning of the end. Then gambling, and all aboriginals. We call them Goon, Gurkhu, Bheel. We other sorts of things, he started. And her grandson had a lady who was a maid with us She was an started going to prostitutes. The idea was only that we are free, what's wrong. Now these primordial taboos are built in you. They are there. These are existing, may be, in a potential state, may be you have curbed them down, may be you have turned them out. But they are there. All the time they are there. That's what excellent cook and she had her maryadas. If my father came she would immediately cover her head and go in the other room-to respect him. Nobody told her to do that. Their marriage system was also, very surprisingly, good Their relationship with their children

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X Issue 9& 10 1998 we say, you are leaving the maryadas or else we say you are insulting Shri Ganesha. So when Mother created this universe-first deity was Shri Ganesha It is very remarkable, how the nature is so much within us and how this whatever is within us guides outside and réceives the blessings. We are not that Auspiciousness was created. Now we don't understand something separate This mother earth is our home. what is auspiciousness Auspiciousness is a complete We have a home in her and she has a home within understanding of primordial restrictions and also of the ourselves. I said today that for Shri Ganesha he had protocol. For example in India we always used to do the body of clay So you can imagine how this whole that, though I was in a Christian family. that before universe has ereated us, All of it is within us. And when we try to hurt something then we are hurting ourselves. The intelligence of mother earth, I have seen from my childhood Its such a beautifiul thing to touching the mother earth on getting up from the bed, we used to say- O Mother Earth please forgive us, because we are touching you with our feet' So respect for the mother earth and for nature is built in within us. We are part and parcel of this whole universe. But when you get into this non-sensical idea of freedom, know the nature and the mother earth. That's why all the saints, in India specially, used to go and live in the forest. Only in the forest you could see clearly, how this primordial bondage was absolutely obeyed, naturally, by the nature For us it is difficult. We are rather free people. So simple things like, a woman should always cover her body because she respects her body She respects her chastity. But if you tell this to somebody, they won't listen As you see, the evergreens-they are always clad. No leaf falls off them I call them as the females. And the others they do lose their leaves. So I call then you are leaving your mother earth Your gravity itself reduces. This mother earth has to teach us, while we are plundering. Ecology, ecology now people are crying. Whatever is outside, is also inside. If you want to exploit your mother inside or if you want to trouble your mother inside you can also trouble this mother earth. Now what has replaced our understanding, is that we are paying more attention to money. If you cut a tree to get money then it is hurting the mother. trees-deciduous But if you are cutting a tree for beautifying her, then she is happy: Her discretion is so great. See the way them as men. Here it is the other way round. When I used to go to parties, they thought I was a very she produces flowers-in different countries, different type of flowers I saw in my country that flowers are extremely fragrant. She understands so much Once I went to Australia, there is this flower Hibiscus. Imagine it first becomes pink and then gradually red. Even the serene person. You meet somebody, the man will immediately button up himself and the women will open themselves. So the whole brain has turned around. Its so stupid. SLunflower goes on turning its face with the sun. Now how can you say there is no connection between a sunflower and the sun changing So these Hibiscus flowers are the flowers which we use to worship Shri Ganesha. The programme was to worship Shri Ganesha. On the way I saw so Even Mrs Thatcher had said that it is our culture that Automatically it goes on women must expose their body Are they prostitutes? So this craze of exposure of body has become so strong now that even in India, if not in the streets or in the household, but in cinema you see women many trees of Hibiscus, flowering. I said, you better exposing themselves What you see in the Indian films get these flowers for the Puja. And when I arrived never happens outside. If women start dressing up like in the hall, all the Sahaja Yogis had bought Hibiscus that, so many people will throw stones at them, Then on their own: I never talked to them. They didn't all other sorts of things happened- man having relation know that it is to be used for Shri Ganesha Mother with man, woman having relation with woman and children. We didn't know this in India Why it has happened here. I don't think, 50 years back, they Earth had herself created at that time This is the time of Shri Ganesha, when you should get Hibiscus

 301 Divine Cool Breeze Valume : X Issue 9& 10 1998 used to do that in these countries. Why we have given just become an ordinary human being who has his up our sense of shame and this kind of nonsense has taboos, who understands and is aware then they'll say come into us. I think it must be some bhoots or - badhas in them. This is absolutely unnatural and absurd. Then, a married man having eyes on unmarried women specially. Now majority is the law. If the majority is and unmarried men are having relations - all kinds stupid then all the stupidity is regarded as great. They of things people do. You won't believe this doesn't have no brains, no intelligence to understand, how can happen in India It has now spread out but in good these things help-alcohol for example. Alcohol has not families you don't have it. Somebody told me there done any good to anyone. Without this you are is Aids in India Yes, because they take bath in the considered no good They won't talk to you if you river If they stop taking bath in the river, this will don't take it. It is so rampant in the society that all what a man he was What is there. He was born like that: So such a man is praised, in the west stop, I was a medical student. I came from a very the parties I attended, except for me and my husband open family. I never knew these things. Even in the everybody was drinking. And they used to drink much lunatic asylums of India, we have never heard of such more then normal as it was free. These are all poisons, spoiling us completely. There is a taboo now for cigarette. I can't understand why do they smoke, like The other day, Guido gave me a present of a little a chimney. They have no courage to give it up girl who was feeling shy. Shyness is the ornament of Everywhere they put up No smoke. When will they women Children are all shy. I remember, my start - No alcohol. Everybody sees that its so granddaughter, was once watching a magazine. She dangerous. Its against human awareness. You see was very small at that time, 2 years or so. She saw people falling down, cursing each other, fighting If you bikni or something. She said what stop this alcoholism, all this shamelessness will go reports. one woman in a are you doing. My Grandma will come and give you away. When you take alcohol, your awareness is two slaps. Please wear your dresses. Have you affected. One alcoholie told me that when I take noticed, children don't like shamelessness. alcohol, I don't see my sister as my sister but see her Shamelessness has gone to such an extent that keeping as my beloved. How do you do that? But for social nude is considered a very great advancement status and all that you must drink. We don't even Somebody told me that he wanted to save the aboriginals but they were so much impressed by the white skin that they accepted everything. They were even having relations with own sister, daughter, mother. These subjects are rather heinous to talk about. I can't understand how ean human beings go to that level. And at this time we have Sahaja Yoga, where you have become aware of your natural taboos. It is understand how our primordial taboos are completely battered by the society. The simple thing is that to understand your own self it would be better to see the stupid people, You will be amazed what sort of things they are doing. And then to cover it up they have etiquettes. They talk in a very special manner, move themselves in a potentially there as I have told you. It is enlightened very trained personality. And anybody who doesn't and suddenly you have accepted it. I never expected do that is out of their sight. They think he lacks so much but you have accepted this and enjoying it eliteness. So another idea is that we have to be elite. and practising it. You see the lives of all the great Look at Ganesha. He is by no means elite. He eats saints. You can't have someone like Diana being called like a glutton and he looks at you as if he is going to hit you with his "Mace'. For Ganesha there is no forgiveness When he became Christ, then he developed forgiveness. I don't know how it worked a saint. She had no 'maryadas'. I have sympathies with her as her husband tortured her. But 'maryadas are very important. How can she be a saint. If you

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9 & 10 1998 out. But as Ganesha there is no forgiveness at all the innocence. Wherever they get the children, they Don't try to ask forgiveness from him. He will never misuse them. They teach them bad things. Even the forgive. Even if his mother says, you forgive, he will schools, every thing is so horrid. So we have to be not, He never forgives. Then only it comes to the very very careful about our children. We have to point that the mother only has to say 1 forgive you. guide them properly, look after them and let their Then he can't do anything because he is extremely primordial taboos be preserved. If a child does obedient of his mother. So if the mother has forgiven- something nice, appreciate it finished But otherwise he will never, never forgive. I am not worried about a child being little bit mischievous. But if he takes to anything anti-Ganesha, be careful. All kinds of diseases can develop. If these primordial taboos are destroyed in childhood, it is very difficult to revive. Still I have always said that innocence is never lost, only there are some clouds And that's why all kinds of these horrible diseases are seen, thousands of them, Also if you don't respect him then impotancy, Aids and all secret diseases can come. I had a very bad time with people who suffered from these secret diseases. Shri Ganesha accepts my forgiveness. , but whenever he has a chance, he again which try to cover it and we become rather ignorant comes back. Now see they are deities wvith their own dharma He gives you wisdom, discretion and about it, that we have done anything wrong That is understanding But if you don't obey his qualities then your duty. he is a very difficult man. So to tell somebody, don't do it, is very difficult but the nature takes respite To get you cured on the Mooladhara is very very difficult. You do get cured, no doubt, ultimately, but the most difficult disease is from mooladhara. He is an eternal child. He is innocence. Despite all that he cannot Your society is horrible. Next generation, I don't know where it is going to end up. When I think about it, I really get a fright. The solution is that you have to be careful about your children and their thinking and their attitude towards Shri Ganesha. They are forgive you if you disturb your innocence. Mother is just the opposite. She wants to save you at any cost. But not Ganesha Ganesha says alright, you better go to hell, And hell is in our own lives. Those people special, lovable things for Shri Ganesha. I can't imagine how he loves the children and he is always there to protect the children. you people really understand what I am saying If are drinking, smoking, prostitution. This is all hell. What else is hell. And he will never save you from now, if you have to cross this margin of human life and spiritual life - first thing is your Shri Ganesha. When Kundalini rises, Shri Ganesha is quite, just hell. supports the Kundalini to rise. He is the one who also suggests to you that it is wrong, the way you are doing things. He looks after you but he will not forgive Only in Marathi arti of Shri Ganesha, they say that at the time, when I am getting my realisation, you must save me. That's the only thing they ask, at the time my resurrection you must save me. It is not said you. It is not so difficult, the way people talk about that at the time of my resurrection you protect me- their physical needs and all this nonsense. Even the no, you save me. Because he is the one who is sitting animals don't talk like that. Instead of destroying this on every chakra like a vice-chancellor of the university. nature, try to build it up, try to see how you can make Even if you have Vishnu and Mahadeva on your side it a beautiful garden or a beautiful place. Every time but if Shri Ganesha is sitting and he says, No, not his I am here, I am thinking, what should I do with this ascent, it doesn't work out. Its very difficult In these land here, which is very barren. How can I change modern times, horrible things are happening to your it. All the time there is thought about how to make children. I think the whole of this negativity is against it beautiful. In that if there is innocence, no greed, no of

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9 & 10 1998 do work for Sahaja Yoga If you take to poetry, they competition but just to enjoy the beauty of your own creation, to see how things are. People have gone out of proportion, out of understanding, for example here any such position, to be a poetess. So I gave it up. or anywhere else in Europe, you are not supposed to But I was a very good sportswoman. I used to play grow any more fruits. Why? Because the price must things. I stood first in every sort of game, and I had be kept low. If you have so many fruits, why don't championship. I gave up that also. I studied medicine you send it to places where they don't have fruits. I stood first in the whole university but I gave it up. They will destroy it but they will not do that. So the Why? Because I am the primordial mother and I have love and feelings for others is not there and they to do the job of awakening the primordial nature - destroy if something is overproduced by the mother the dharma within human beings. And that's what I earth, just to keep the prices high. They are very have to do and nothing else But for that I don't do cruel. Only thinking about money, money. All this is anything I am 'Nishkriya'. Really I don't do. Its done will all call you a poetess and I don't want to have still happening But I am sure one day it will stop. The pubs are the best buildings in a village. The way they glorify drinking is the best part of it by the nature, by Shri Ganesha, Vishnu, Mahesha- everybody. They are doing it. Then what is the relationship. The relationship is I would like you to have a desire that let drinking they are all in my body and they are all bound by be finished like smoking. If you think like that, that their own dharma. And they act. This is the relationship-spontaneous, automatic relationship. For example the fan is built in and when you switch on, the fan starts moving It's like that. All of them are related to me and they have a tremendous protocol, tremendous respect, that if I say anything, they will not finish it. This is a very deep thing that I am telling you that you are a is built in within you, are your dharmas and if you go against your dharma then you will be finished. They are all built in within you. They are all there potentially. I hope you will understand, how important it is to be aware of your restrictions, within yourself. So thank you very much, all of you. personally think that it is with drinking only that you develop all this perverted attitudes Otherwise if its a normal man with a normal brain, why should he do such things-fighting, killing. quarrelling, violence - It is impossible to understand normal person do such a thing. Shri Ganesha gives you balance. He keeps you in proper track But if you don't want to listen to him you are thrown hope you understand our relationship with how can a human being ie. there away nature, with Shri Ganesha and with our Kundalini – is like absolutely identified with each other If you start loving the nature, all these ideas of spoiling your innocence will be finished. I used to write poetry, very fond of nature But then I told myself, you have to May God Bless You.



----------------------

1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Issue : 9 5,10
Volume
1998
"Meditation is the only way you can enrich yourself with the beauty of reality."
(Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, Sahasrara Puja,
Cabella Ligure, May 10, 1998)
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Editorial
1
Easter Puja -stanbul-19-4-1998
The Messenger of Peace-London-8-7-197
We hold the Future in our Hands-Landon-03-07-1997
10
Shri Ganesha Puja Seminar-Cabella–1997
13
Litany for the Doom of Materasura
15
A School Committed to Universal love
18
News from around the world:
Sahaja Story from Holland
20
20
Getting on the Air in Florida
Swiss Yogis Visit ivory Coast (A Report)
21
Sahaja Yogi's lives in Kazakhstan
25
1998 Esoctric Fair in Copenhagen
25
Shri Ganesha Puja 1997-Cabella-07-09-1997
27
Yogi Mahajan
Edited by
E VJ. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
Published by
New Delhi-11D D67
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
Sometimes when we sit for meditation, our meditation is disturbed by a thought that we
should get up and we suddenly break our meditation. This is an autosuggestion that, "we
have meditated enough, there are other things to do." It would be interesting to find out what
are these other things. "I must meet my friend." "I must telephone so and so." What after
that? "Oh, watch T.V."
Haven't we been doing all these things already? What have we achieved by it? Where
has all this led us?
Now we want our uscent and evervthing else can wait. Meditation has to be the top
priority. We can telephone later and also the friend can be met another time. There is nothing
so important in the T.V. A frank dialogue is very helpful.
The situation within is somewhat similar to the functioning of our parliament. there is
the ruling party and the opposition. For instance, the ruling party wants to establish a Sahaja
government but the opposition opposes it. If the ruling party is strong then it succeeds but
if it is weak and waivering then the opposition defeats it. The strength of the ruling party
lies in its dedication and lve for Shri Mataji. If it is completely surrendered at the Lotus
Feet or our Divine Mother then she takes care of everything, no power dares to oppose
Heк
But if we are weak and doubting then the opposition easily defeats us. We have to know that
the opposition is always waiting in the wings to take over at the slightest opportunity, We
cannot afford to give in even an inch.
It is easy to control others but very difficult to control ourselves. Just as it is easy to preach
than to practice what we preach. How to control oneself? This was also the plight of Prince
Arjuna in the Mahabharara. He asked Shri Krishna, "how to find peace from the restless,
impetuous and stuhborn mind which is difficult to control like the wind."
Shri Mataji has often told us to introspect. When our kundalini rises and we meditate,
the kundalini gives us a very deep sense of joy and inner peace. In the light of this new
experience we can clearly see the movement of that which is unreal and through that wisdom
overcome all thoughts and mental movements. Then we realise for ourselves that the mind
is a myth. At this point the rule of the spirit is firmly established and no opposition dares
raise its voice. This is the fulfillment of the "Lord's prayer that we say at the Agnya chakra,
"Thy kingdonm come, Thy will be done on earth As it is in Heaven,"
We truly start enjoying what Shri Mataji has described as the ""Blossom Time."
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue 9 & 10 1998
Easter Puja
Istanbul 19/4/98
Today we shall see the significance of Christ's you can not go to Sahasrara. And this was done so
life, not the crucifixion. Anybody can be easily in your case only because Christ could go
crucified and killed but this dead body of through all that torture, and all that brutality and crossed
over. How much we should be indebted to him? I
Christ was resurrected from death. Death itself died
don't know the words that can express, because He
is the one who took lead in telling people that, "You
seek, you seek and you will find'. And then He says
that "you have to come and bang at the door'. This
is exactly what has happened in your case, that you
and He overcame it. It's a miracle for ordinary human
beings, definitely, but not for Christ, because He was
a divine person. He was Shri Ganesha, He was Omkara
Himself So He could walk on the water, gravity
would not affect him and also He got resurrected
because death could not affect him. Such a great have risen up to Agnya and then you have crossed
divine personality was specially created for human your Agnya. This crossing of Agnya was not at all
beings, that people should recognise Him. But they difficult for you, though by your own ideas of thinking
did not recognise Him. They killed Him, in a very and conditioning of the futuristic planning and all that
brutal manner. And even now they think that cross is it was a big big clouds, I should say, very black
a great thing because Christ died on the cross. It's clouds which were hovering on the Agnya. Thoughts
a very cruel idea of human beings to respect the were overpowering and you could not have penetrated
cross. What does it show? It shows that people liked through this Agnya which was all covered. But you
all the cruelties done to Him, symbolising cross as the did and you never even felt that you have crossed
one that represented His death and the atrocities, the the Agnya Chakra so easily
way He was tortured So it was a very sad time when
He was crucified, but when He got resurrected it was
the most joyous, the most auspicious and the most to Christ for opening the Agnya for you. For Him all
First of all, we all should really be very thankful
the tortures and all the brutality were nothing because
beautiful time.
His purpose of life, the purpose of His advent, His
The resurrection of Christ is very symbolic for incarnation was to break the Agnya Chakra. Today
Sahaja Yoga If Christ could be resurrected then human you will find that even though your Agnya is opened
out and you have crossed through, still you will be
amazed that people get involved in the Agnya Chakra
In Sahaja Yoga people do get involved in Agnya
chakra. Now how do we see through introspection
what happens to us? For example, once people come
to Sahaja Yoga they think, they are incharge, incharge
of this, incharge of that, incharge of all the Sahaja
Yogis, and they start behaving in a manner which
doesn't behove a Sahaja Yogi. I have seen them and
I am really amused the way they just start thrusting
themselves and showing off that they are very much
beings also can be resurrected because He came as
a human being, with all the powers, and He created
the path of resurrection for us. This path of resurrection
is the one that we have followed in Sahaja Yoga But
the greatest thing is the piereing of the Agnya Chakra
which is described in all spiritual treaties or may be
called, the scriptures, that is the door which is Golden,
which is like a cover and no one can pass through
that So constricted is the door of Agnya Chakra. But
Christ did cross that His crossing has helped us,
today, to open your Agnya Without opening the Agnya
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X issue: 98 10 1998
where you have to see them all the time. I just smile
I know they are just show offs. They think no end
incharge. This is nothing modern, this used to be there
in human beings. But if it was so, it was before
Sahaja Yoga Even now, people get into the mood of of themselves and that is why they are there But they
dominating others by saying that we are incharge themselves are losing, they themselves are not very
happy That is why they try to do all these tricks, this
Sahaja Yoga is not so simple as you think kind of domination:
because there are lots of temptations. Supposing
you make somebody a leader Now leader becomes
some sort of incharge and he gets the drunkenness humble, who are simple, who are honest and who are
of the power When he is like that he starts dominating really seeking the truth, are being oppressed by this
all the rest of the people and also starts showing off gentleman. He oppresses them, tries to show off,
that he is something very great and he has to dominate tries to make slaves out of others. I have seen people
all the rest of the people. Then he creates an who have gone so far that there was a group of
The other side of it is that the people who are
atmosphere of fear. Firstly I have seen what happens people, just would not move even an inch without the
with them is that they start saying falsely that Mother permission of their leader, and they would go all out
has told this, Mother has said so, this is Mother's to be subservient to such an irrational personality. First
idea."I have nothing to do with that gentleman, but 0f all, you know. this is the love of Mother Mother
he goes on talking like that and people get very never dominates. She can not dominate because
frightened. Then he can also frighten you by saying She is nothing but love. As soon as She sees the
"I will tell mother. Mother will listen to me and She problem, immediately She absorbs it. She has to
make deliberations, just a drama sometimes, to
show that She is angry. But She can not basically
will punish you". I am sometimes very surprised at
Such people because I have never said that I will
punish somebady or I will take him out of Sahaja be angry with anyone. It is the love which all the
Yoga, nothing. So this man who thinks no end of time, is flowing and that love envelopes the
himself, he may be a leader, may not be a leader, may Mother as well as envelopes you. That is how you
be nothing in Sahaja Yoga, he starts talking like this, people could understand Sahaja Yoga What does a
in such a funny manner that it doesn't look that the human being need is nothing but love and compassion.
Love and compassion of a very very pure type.
person is a Sahaja Yogi! Then he goes even further.
He goes about describing himself as something very Look at Christ. He pitied the people who crucified
great as if he were the one who is chosen, specially, Him. He told his Father, the God Almighty, that 'please
for rising higher and higher When I hear about these forgive them because they do not know what they are
things, I am really amazed how can people befool
themselves, all the time and behave in such a manner! people are doing wrong things and God, the Father
doing'! He could see that because of blindness these
will be very annoyed, who is wrathful and may destroy
First thing in Sahaja Yoga is humility. If you are them! So it was done with a very compassionate
not a humble person, you can not be a Sahaja Yogi. feeling, without thinking about. Just automatically He
The person who orders about, the person who talks felt that these people are doing all this to me and I
in a manner as if he were Hitler, any person who tries do not know what will happen to them! So He prayed
to control and be incharge of the things, all these to God, O Father, Please forgive, please forgive
capacities only show that. that person has achieved them, for they do not know what they are doing They
nothing in Sahaja Yoga. First thing is to enjoy the are blind, so please, do not punish them". What
compassion, what love, I mean, think of it! Do we
do that in our life? If somebody harms us, troubles
humility I
have seen people like this, they will always
sit in the first row, they will always be sitting in a place
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Divine Cool Brecze Volume Xissue 9& 10 1988
US-do we ask Father to forgive those who do not
know what they are doing? That should be the level happening but it is just an inner oneness with each
of a Sahaja Yogi and it will work out very well if you other. Sometimes I find Sahaja Yogis, so much
ask for forgiveness. God will look after them He understanding each other, so much loving each other,
mean any kind of a particular gesture or a particular
so beautifully enjoying the love of other people! When
transforms them, He will bring them to their senses
I see that I feel very very happy, absolutely overjoyed.
That is what
The message of Christ is full of love, compassion.
pure compassion. How He tried to protect Marie I wanted. These people should enjoy
Magdalini (the prostitute) is an example of that. She That. And you will be amazed that most enjoyable
was leading a sinful life, and for a saint, it had nothing thing is the love that you give to others! You may not
to do. He had nothing to do with it But when He receive but when you give love to others then it is
saw her being stoned by people. He stood against the most enjoyable thing. But the way you express
. yourself is also an art, I think, to understand how to
her He took a stone in his own hand and said,
"alright, those who have not committed any wrong please others, how to make them happy I have told
deed or have not committed any sin can take this
this story before also, about a saint who lived in
Gagan Bavda, a hill or mountain He used to live
there and he couldn't walk, because of vibrations he
lost his legs. And then he would go all over the place
stone and hit me" And, nobody came forward. Because
they had to face themselves. When we are dominating
others, then a kind of a cruel joy is there. Some sort
of a joy that I don't understand myself. But people on a tiger because tiger loved him and he loved the
show off that we have achieved this joy, we have tiger So this gentleman was all the time telling people
achieved this, a great power! It has happened for
from Bombay what are you doing here? Mother has
come, go and touch Her feet.' I did not know why
he was so much concerned. So I told Sahaja Yogis
centuries with all the great emperors and also despotic
rulers.
I must go and meet him All these Gurus say that we
But with Sahaja Yogis it should be the other don't leave our pillow. We have to be in our own
- they won't
way round. They have to rule the world with pillows, means wherever they live, exist
go out. I am the other way round I am never stationed
peace and love. They don't have to show off by
any chance. This is how Sahaja Yoga will spread in one place. So they asked if I could go? I said,
much much faster. What does the world need? You "why not". So I went there. And the Sahaja Yogis
just think of it It needs only love and affection. Those said that, "Mother, you never go anywhere. So why
people who are yet lost in the ignorance about life and do you want to go here?" I said, "Alright, see the
are still busy troubling others, torturing others, going vibrations, ah Tremendous vibrations !" So when I
against the collectivity. they will have to return to
normality. It is very abnormal behaviour sometimes.
you just don't understand, why they behave like It is very surprising that when I went up, he could
mad people. It is very difficult also to tell such a
went up this fellow was very angry with the rain,
because, he was supposed to be controlling the rain.
And
not control the rain, and I got completely drenched
So, he was very angry. He was sitting on a stone and
person that you are mad, and also it is difficult to be
doing like this (shaking his head) with anger. I didn't
with such a person who is so mad with some sort
say anything to him. I went inside and sat in the cave,
where he had made some arrangements for me to be
seated Then, he came, touched my feet and sat down
And I was amazed that he was still angry and
of a power It goes on like that with so many Sahaja
Yogis, I have seen, who start thinking that they have
lots of powers, they can do whatever they like, they
can talk to anyone and they can confiIse everyone.
couldn't understand why the rain did not stop? So, he
But in Sahaja Yoga you don't have to confuse You
have to clearly express your love. But that doesn't
asked me, why did you not allow me to stop the rain?
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Valume : X issue
9 &10 1998
Even Christ was very young when He was crucified.
He was 33 years of age. It was all planned by the
Divine that He was to be crucified to make way for
After all you were coming to see me all the way and
the rain should have behaved, and I could not, some
how or the other, control the rain. So, what was the
thing, what was the reason? I just smiled. I said,
our Sahaja Yoga To open the Agnya, he had to
sacrifice his life. And for him to be hanged in such
a horrendous, cruel way! Normally we do not find
people behaving in such a manner towards the person
who is about to die. So what happened that those
see, you are an ascetic, you are a sayasi, and I am
your mother, I cannot take a saree from you, one
is not supposed to take anything from a sanyasi
Even the Mother cannot take anything from him. But
you have bought a nice saree for me. So I had to
drenched so that I could take the saree from you
people who were incharge of his crucifixion, must
have been some devils, the way they behaved It is
not possible to forgive them even if Christ says. It is
difficult to forgive such people who were watching the
get
See, the sweetness of my telling him just made him
melt down! He started crying He said we need.
crucifixion of Christ So, if that is the case, that a
a Mother for this earth. There should be the Mother
person like him thought that let me do my job- to
We cannot solve the problems because whatever it
is, we get angry, or we want to disappear. We don't
want to be with these horrible people who are so
sinful, to help them. This is the problem with the
world today and that's why you find very few spiritual
people in the whole world. Because they are the
ones who are being very much tortured, troubled.
insulted - all kinds of things happen. So they are
break Sahasrara And then he didn't want to live, live
with these stupid people, to be tortured Lots of
stories are there about his ascent and his resurrection.
And He just disappeared into Kashmir where He
lived after his resurrection. And, you see, all those
stories if you read, you will be amazed, how
miraculously, He got His second birth or second life
in Kashmir! He lived in Kashmir happily, for sometime,
with His mother and there He died. They say there
struggling, they want to die very fast. Gyaneshwara,
such a great personality, such a great writer, poet,
so beautifully he has written. But at the age of 23
is a grave of our lord Jesus Christ and also His
mother who was there.
he took his samadhi, means he went into a cave and
closed the cave and died. Must have been tired and
But who has taken advantage of his life, from his
life. Who are the people, really, who wanted him to
die. You know very well, how Christ died and the
people came up suddenly, like Paul and Peter, who
tried to make a big business out of it. It is very sad
to see that these two persons brought such a shame.
This Paul was nothing but an organiser He was a
berson who was bureaucratic, I should say. But he
fed up with the surroundings of ignorant people. And
that's why he did so. So, you can imagine a person
like Gyaneshwara who was the incarnation of
Kartikeya, had to recede into the world of the dead
because he couldn't bear it anymore, the way they
were torturing them They tortured him so much saying
that he is the son of a sanyasi means, he is no good,
He is absolutely like an illegitimate child, and he wa
was not only bureaucratic, he was also a man who
illtreated to such an extent. He didn't even have
wanted to have a big position. He told a lie that he
shoes to wear In that heat of India, he used to walk
barefeet, and his sister, brother who were great
went down to Damascus and on his way, he saw
a big cross. According to Sahaja Yoga all such signs
are signs of supraconscious: It is not of the spirit
Then he came back and started his own research and
scholars, great saints, great incarnations, all of them
were tortured As a result he wanted just to disappear.
And he made a beautiful way of doing it that he told
things like that. He has written lot of things but
throughout, if you read, you will find that he was not
t
them that I have to go, took leave from them and
went inside his cave and got in samadhi
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X Issue 9 & 10 1998
or intelligence to understand, what these people are.
a Sahaja Yogi. He was just an organiser. He was a
bureaucratic personality who was writing how we So when they started this tirade against the
should administer, how we should have different types downtrodden people, so many of them joined them.
of people, how should we manage them So he was Thus they formed their own race and they started
the management department for the Christians behaving like that. This is a thing we should understand,
Christians also became extremely, very secretarial type. how the dominating nature of people accepted a
like you see everything has a time, you must come particular religion, because that religion is nothing but
like this, you must sit like this, talk like this. And also humility, and how then these people, supposed to be
the nations which are supposed to be Christians are incharge of Christianity, converted people into
observing all that in a very official manner It is not something absurd! See, it is human nature, it can
understood why are they so much official in everything? enjoy any nonsense, any kind of cruelty, any kind of
Just the opposite of what Christ did, to break the pressure. It can never give up that realm, that area,
Agnya- they built up this. And the Christian nations where they have been dominating. Now, as it is, the
became most arrogant, most aggressive nations in the christian nations have gone even beyond that because
whole world For them it was their right to oceupy among the Christians, all the freedom is given to them.
any land they saw, it was in their right to establish They are liberated, do whatever you may like, if you
their own laws, their own, I should say, assemblies. become a Christian.
All this is done in India I know. Even today if you
They are the ones who have been dominating and
those who are dominated are there everywhere. They
just living like rustic people, working very hard and would go to ordinary people whom you can call as
they are all the time under attack from people who aboriginals and converted them. Their main method
are dominating and those who wanted, full advantage was to convert. What was the need to convert so
to be taken, out of these people. It was a ridiculous many people- because in democracy it is important
thing to behave like that as Christians. Then also they that the number you have should be large. So to gain
started converting, it is another nonsense, converting, the number they used to convert. See the whole
go to places like Punjab, You will find the people are
converting them In the south India they never made
breads. They don't know how to use your oven. So
situation of Christ It really makes me feel very nervous.
they made huge big cakes. You can call it a cake or
you can call it bread and put it in the water or in much higher than others. You have all the powers and
well and they would say that we have put a part then supposing you want to behave like the Christians.
of the calf or a buffalo or could be a cow and they I do not know what you will do. So now you are
Today you all are Sahaja Yogis, you are all so
just believed, And they say now you are finished. on the verge where Sahaja Yoga is accepted in different
because you are no more belonging to Hindu religion countries, and people respect those who are Sahaja
or any other religion. So now, you have become Yogis. They have been given positions, then suddenly
Christians. And that is how they have made thousands you might get this power business into your heads.
and thousands of people, Christians. They were You may try to become like a despot, because that
actually downtrodden people, I should say. Now all is human nature. That is not divine, but that is human
these downtrodden people, wanted to be converted nature! For example, when in the kingdom of animals
into Christianity because they brought them all they - they are aggressive on each other it is all right,
wanted. Such people would just follow the missionaries it is permitted. There is a system, there is a way, there
and would not question because they were not educated is a method how they dominate. They do not jump
people. They were not people of any understanding on everyone. But I have seen in Sahaja Yoga
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-8.txt 
 9& 10 1998
Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue
Ganesha It is all written down, but Christ is
many people-we make them a leader, finished
Then he sits on everybody's head If you don't make described as Maha Vishnu and not as Christ. So.
them a leader then they go on writing letters to me
one after another, that Mother, we wat to be leader
Mäha Vishnu then rose and it has all the wonderful
things. It is a real message, beautifully written by
the light of Christ that now as we are thoughtlessly
I want to be a leader- they go on insisting on it.
For what de you want to be the leader-just to aware, now we have to express that light through
dominate others? This domination business is not meant our lives, and we have to show to the world that
we are quite capable and that we are within
ourselves, absolutely complete. We don't want
I am here today, to tell you about a beautiful anything from others. What we want now is to give,
for Sahaja Yoga.
image of Christ, who rose above death In the same
way, let there be death of all nonsensical ideas, all
whatever we have achieved, to others. This is what
people are looking at you and at all the Sahaja Yogis.
negative thoughts. Everything has to be overcome
You have to be the lord of yourself and in that you
should feel so comforted, so happy In giving others
you will find it very much easier than taking something awake because to keep in these modern times, it is
from others. It is very surprising how Sahaja Yoga very difficult when you are thinking of Christ and
has taught you all these things! In Sahaja Yoga people talking about Him. It is just something so sad, how
have to say that they are very wonderful. They are people never understood such a great man, such a
very beautiful people. They are very loving, they are great personality and He was divine, absolutely divine.
very kind I wvant to hear that all the time about you
all, that you all are individually or collectively, something through all the sufferings. It is very painful even to
May God Bless You!
Thinking of Christ, I find it impossible to keep
Despite that He made a drama, we should say, to go
outstandingly great. But this greatness is not by
domination or by showing off but this is coming
from within. People see you and know that it is
remember all that, how He crucified himself and how
he died. But the main point is this. He has done for
you, for all of you, and you are so indebted. It is his
something and that is how Sahaja Yoga is going
to spread. The Christ within you has to arise.
Christ within you has to guide. It is the Christ
within you who will teach how to behave towards
work which has helped the Kundalini to be awakened
and could pass through this fontanelle bone area. All
this could have been impossible without the sacrifice
of Christ. You all should thus deserve to have some
others and how to gain their confidence and sacrifices. See this is a very symbolic thing that has
give them the love and peace. That you are now happened and you all should be, all the time, prepared
growing within you, to make them very very to sacrifice whatever is possible for the emancipation
happy and joyous. This is the message of
resurrection. This is the message of breaking the Forget about the seeking, forget about everything.
Sahasrara. So this egg, which was described very What is needed is that you have to remember all the
clearly, in Devi Mahatamya, how this egg was formed time that you are saved, you are being blessed by the
and was broken into two and from one part of the sacrifices of Christ. It is very important.
of humanity It is very subtle at this moment now.
egg came out Christ and from another part Shri
May God Bless You!
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9& 10 1998
"Shri Mataji, You are the Messenger of Peace
Address by Ayatollah Rouhani • Royal Albert Hall, London, 3rd July, 1997
(Text translated on site and read by Derek Lee)
the "way in" to knowledge of the Highest Self. The
f we consider the most ancient evidence left by concrete means of putting this message into practice
Homo Sapiens, we can see that man has always is what is offered to us in this age by Shri Mataji
been aware of the existence of a Supreme Being. Nirmala Devi.
who is Lord of all things and of all living creatures:
To back up this Truth, if you will allow me, I will
conceivable means, human beings of quote these words of the Prophet Mohammed, who
every era have always tried to show their feelings of tells us, "God is closer to man than his own veins.
Using every
deep respect (and reverence ) towards God and to
perform what is due to their Creator
And the Prophet says, "With the knowledge of the
Spirit, man will begin to know himself, so as to finally
achieve knowledge of God.
This is why Islam has always stressed the possibility
of direct communication with God Even those who
"With the purification of his inner being, man
becomes conscious that he is the Spirit."
have fallen into idolatry have never denied the existence
of the Creator, but have simply put their idols and
their images in His place. And this is still happening
today. This being the case, how can we recognize a
true prophet and what is his or her mission?
It is thus that both the experience of spontaneous
Self Realization (which is revealed by Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi) and Sahaja Yoga (which is the practice
which She teaches) are in perfect harmony with the
teachings of Islam It is because of this revelation by
Shri Mataji that I have wanted to speak to you tonight.
The mission of the prophets is to reveal the Will
of God, that is, to provide a logical and tangible
explanation of religion as it is experienced in our daily
talk by
In a similar vein, I should like to end
my
lives.
referring to the condition of women in Islamic countries
Genuine monotheism the belief in a Supreme today. As you know, the position of woman as mother
Being-means (or implies) the unshakable oneness of is glorified in the Islamic tradition. The Prophet
the whole creation, that is, the indissoluble union Mohammad went as far as to say, "We experienced
between man and God. Monotheism proves, then, the
pointlessness of idols and of images that come between
man and God. The mission of the prophets is thus to
set human beings upon the right track, and in order
to do this, the prophets have used two parallel and
paradise at our mother's feet." Regarding the position
of the woman as a wife, Islam not only acknowledges
her complete right to choose her own husband, but
pays homage to her in the famous words of the
Prophet, who says, "The best amongst you is the one
complementary paths.
who behaves best towards his wife" Or again, "Women
are sent to us by God and men are responsible for
keeping them safe." Women are thus considered to be
The way of learning, based on theology and
philosophy
equal to men in both their responsibilities and in their
legal and civic rights.
And the way of Self-knowledge or Self Realization
That is why we find in our Holy Book, the Koran,
Today, unfortunately, we have seen that this great
both scholastic discourses and phrases which hint at insight of the Koran is not always understood and
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeza Valume X isus 9 & 10 1998
TO 1998
in the spiritual approach of the real Islam. This will
make it possible to put a stop finally to all kinds of
therefore not respected in the arious Muslim countries.
You. Shri Mataji, by virtue of your courage, your
injustices which are still being committed against
women in the name of religion.
sincerity and your purity, by virtue of your untiring
travels through the five continents, you are today justly
considered to be the Messenger of Peace in the world.
It is with this vision and with the aim of defending
the rights of women in Muslim countries throughout
the world and in particular in Afghanistan, in Iran and
Your exemplary life makes you the perfect symbol
and model for Muslim women May their quest for
Turkey, that I address this brief talk to you,
Mataji, and to all the people assembled here tonight
Shri
Justicę, their desire to be able to enjoy a true spiritual
life in their own dignity, may their quest find an echo
-Medhi Rouhani
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9& 10 1998
"We hold the future in our hands
Is"
Address by Claes Nobel Royal Albert Hall, London, 3rd July, 1997
ell, indeed, life is full of surprises After is right. Tonight Shri Mataji will empower us to become
all we are meeting here, inspired by the
message and work of Holy Mother Shri guided by the knowledge of Self Realization in the
masters of our own destiny. And tonight we will be
light of truth and we shall all know absolute truth and
absolute peace
Mataji Nirmala Devi and She is not here in body, but
She's here in spirit. Also the wonderful letter that we
recently heard from Ayatollah Rouhani, which speaks
Now, 100 years ago Alfred Nobel established his
very highly of the work and the mission of the Holy
Mother, where he indicates the importance of women Nobel Peace prizes. These prizes represent excellence.
in the world. He is not here either and, frankly speaking We have prizes in Chemistry, Physics, Medicine,
only 36 hours ago I did not know that I would be Literature, and Peace. Of those prizes, I hold the
here at the Royal Albert Hall, addressing this audience Peace prize to be the finest. And I want to tell you
Still I say, dear Holy Mother, and I also recognize her
that Alfred Nobel listened to a woman, he listened to
his secretary, Bertä, in Paris, 100 years ago, when she
husband, Sir C.P Srivastava in the audience, and I
say most importantly, dear friends, fellow seekers of said, "Dr. Nobel, you should use your vast fortune for
truth, are you out there? Because with all this light
I can only see about 20 people in front of me. So,
the betterment of the world" Tonight you are listening
to another woman, we are listening to the message of
Shri Mataji. However, I am very much inspired, first
say "yes" if you are here, then I know. [Lots of
clapping] Now I can see you and I can hear you, as
by my uncle and later on, you will hear, by Shri
Mataji. Alfred Nobel talked much about peace. He
well as you can see and hear me
was frightened that his awesome, explosive dynamite,
which cleared up land for harbours and tunnels, could
With that said, I want to say that 1 have a vision,
I have a vision of the world that is better, safer and also be used for warfare. Today in the arsenal of
saner than the one we are presently experiencing. It military systems, it's like a small firecracker. But at
is a world where people live in harmony and
that time it-dynamite-was a most awesome.
peace
destructive material
in harmony and peace with nature.
with theniselves and
Now, those words are vast. It's a bold vision Do I
Now, Alfred Nobel thought basically about peace
have
a practical way of going from vision to reality?
Yes. I will share that with you and I will share it and
as an absence of war, but I assure you that peace
is much more than absence of war. And I see that
indicate the tornie of the meeting by ten small words,
and they indicate how this global world transformation
shall be undertaken, and they are right thoughts, right
words, right deeds, right here and right now!! [Lots
of clapping] The key word is, of course, "right". This
world is fighting about what is "right", What is right
peace exists in four specific areas The first area is
the peace that the individual has in himself. How do
we treat our mind, our emotions and our feelings?
How do we treat our body? Are we slaves to other
master? Until we have
masters or are we our own
the inner peace in ourselves, we can never have an
to you might be wrong to me, and vice versa It is
outer peace in the world. And the safest and best way
a grey area So we need a reference point, so we
of finding world peace is to have mass movements-
that includes all religion and philosophies, all enterprises,
can distinguish between right and wrong and between
truth and lie. Tonight Shri Mataji will show us what
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Divine Cool Breaze Valume X Issue 9& 10 1998
peace laureate, Dr. Albert Schweitzer said, after he
had worked and worked, trying to distill a phrase that
contained everything that he knew, everything that he
wanted to say through his philosophy, Dr Albert coined
the phrase, "reverence for life". Nature is nothing but
a plethora of examples of life in this multifaceted
what is the Self? Ladies and Gentlemen, the Self in vision. And I tell you, dear fellow seekers of truth,
whether they are of a political or scientific nature-
to realize what inner peace is And that's what we are
talking about tonight
Self Realization What does Self Realization mean?
Well it means that we are "realizing" something, but
us is the divine, cosmic power that exists in each and
every individual, but which is dormant in most people and in our lust for power, we are in the process of
around the world. The spiritual leaders-from ancient destroying the very thing that makes this planet unique
laws-they knew about this. and they spoke about this.
But this secret of secrets has been suppressed. far, we do not know of another planet in the universe
delīberately, until Shri Mataji, with great courage and that harbours this miracle. Earth is like a blue jewel
great wisdom. being an old soul, who decided by Herself in space and there is only one Earth and this Earth
to come back to the Earth at this critical time in our is fragile and we must take care of her and respect
history, in order to share her knowledge and wisdom, her. Earth is älso called Nature. We cannot break the
we, humanity today, in our ignorance, in our greed
and that is: Life on Earth. [Lots of clapping] And, so
which is the Sahaja Yoga, which is instant Self 1aws of Nature, we must live by them, Mother Earth
Realization, which is to activate the dormant principle will break us. And we are only one species of, we
is the Kundalini and to help do not know how many species we have-five, ten,
the Kundalini to rise up and thus become. as it says fifteen million, but this we know (and this has been
in the Bible, "You are created in My image." [Lots of proven by the world's most foremost scientist in
that we all have. which
clapping]
Harvard University, United States, Dr. Edward
That was the first category, the first sphere: of OWilson) we are today bringing to extinction 250
peace, the one we have within ourselves. The next one
species per day!! That is as if we are deliberately and
Wilfully pulling out thread after thread of what consists
is the peace that we have among each other, in the
of the fabric of life. And Mother Nature will not let
us continue doing that without correcting us as naughty
family, in our community, in our nation, that we have
peace with other ethnic groups and with other religions,
children.
that we really become true, what I call "active" listeners,
and as "active" listeners are able to put ourselves in
the place, in the shoes, of the other party Only then, should know between ourselves and God Any religion
The fourth sphere of peace is the peace that we
when we have the outlook from their perspecctive, shall
or any group who raises their army and destroys their
we understand what they are trying to say. We're enemy in the name of God is not following what God
always talking, talking, talking My dear wife, who is
not here tonight, said, "Claes, vou talk too much, you
don't listen "I have started to practise what she calls
"active listening"
has asked us to do. The world should not know of
violence [lots of clapping], and the world should not
know of war.
I call, as we already heard, these four spheres of
The third sphere is the sphere that pulled me in peace, "Earth Ethics". And tonight we will hear more
originally After all, I am a European, a Swedish from the Holy Mother how we shall have a reference
business man. Why am I up here, speaking the language point, how we can distinguish if we have a charlatan
of spirituality, and saying "That is where the hope of and a fraud in front of us or if it's a genuine, honest
the future exists"? I am doing so because I have a person. And you, dear audience, you have come here
deep and profound reverence for Nature: As a Nobel tonight from many different walks of life and, like
1
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue 9& 10 1938
12
you, I have also been seeking for the truth. I am Conference '92. That was the twentieth anniversary of
beginning to discern truth rather clearly And let me the Stockholm conference, that for the first time put
tell you this, that I look upon life on Earth as a kind
of a school, a school where we are learning perfection in '72 we had only two heads of state: the Prime
and purification Now, on earth, everything is
interdependent, interactive and inter-related, and on twenty years later, we had 110 heads of state A
Earth as well as in heaven I guess, every action has marvellous declaration was drafted, Agenda 21, just
a reaction, every effect has a cause and every cause
s an effect and the Holy Mother-as I said, She continued with Rio, plus five. But, as I told Sir C.P.
is a highly evolved soul-She has learned from many,
many lives, what it is all about. It is all about laws. conference, I said, "WellI, we are talking about
the unseen laws, the spiritual laws, they are always sustainable future,' but it seems to me that in the UN
there and they work as infallibly as the law of gravity there is much of a sustainable dialogue ongoing." Tonight
works [drops his pen onto the floor] It always we shall take the action.
the "Environment" on the world agenda In Stockholm
Minister from India and King of Sweden. In Rio
last week in New York, just 70 heads of state that
has
when he asked me about the outcome of this
works-all those unseen laws, it is for us to learn and
Well, I asked a Holy man from India, a robed
perceive that law.
I am very comfortable with the teachings ofF Shri acharya, and I said, "Is there hope for the future?
Mataji and I am very comfortable with the Holy And he said, "Mr Nobel. I will answer your question
Mother herself I say so because in the Bible there as follows: When the dear Lord had created the Earth.
is one saying, amongst several good ones, "You shall He was very, very happy. very, very pleased. It was
know the tree by its fruit," and lately I have met the His finest creation in the universe and he decided to
young men and women, in different parts of the world
and certainly from many different parts of the world angels and all the devils. When they were there, he
and they are all shining beautiful human individuals that
celebrate, to have a party. and God invited in all the
foasted them, and wished them welcome as a good
bost, and sad, "There's only one rule that you must
radiate inner peace and balance. They are unique. You
have followed, and you are in the process of following strictly obey While you're having a good time"-and
and will be I think, those individuals who should call by the way, the best food and the best wine was
themselves, "Ambassadors for the Earth." and after served, ambrosia nectar-and he said, "there is one
tonight's session is over, I am sure that you shall see rule and that is that while you're here, celebrating my
clearly how you shall distinguish between truth and lie Creation, you may never bend your elbows." The
and you shall realilze that blind faith is of no value and devils cried out and said "We don't want any part of
that fanaticism and to take up violence as last
argument-is of no value Eventually those things will
t such a party! How can we enjoy it, not bending our
elbows?" So they left Then the party started, the
bring you unhappiness, they will bring you conflict and angles were having a jolly good time and the dear
potentially war. Ladies and gentlemen, I know that we
hold the future in our hands, I know that the future
is in your hands. I know it's. in
know that the future of the planet exists in the hearts
God was very, very happyl!*
Now how could they eat and drink without bending
i my hands and I alsa
: their elbows? Well, I sense that you can see what the
moral of the fable is. The angles were feeding
of the individuals.
each other, they were sharing and they were
caring. And that is what we shall do in the future
together. Thank you very much.
Now, I will close my remarks tonight by a fable
from India. I heard it when I attended the Rio
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze VolumeX Issue 9& 10 1998
13
Shri Ganesha Puja Seminar
September 1997
A Maori lady from New Zealand sang the first
very puja that we have the privilege to
perform in Shri Mataji's presence is a jewel Maori bhajan The Japanese yoginis performed the
beyond compare. This year's Shri Ganesha first Japanese bhajans. The Chinese yogis offered a
puja in Cabella was definitely one of the erown jewels, combination of music and pantomime. The yoginis
a diamond radiating its sharp pure light with great from Thailand performed a btautiful fan dance, sparkling
in traditional costumes. The yogis from Indonesia
b
power, obliterating even the shadows of negativity.
performed a traditional shadow puppet play from the
Shri Ganesha, in His aspect of the remover of Ramayana The Iranian yogis, assembled from all over
obstacles, was blessing all the preparations And as Europe, presented a film and then followed it up with
vice-chancellor of the Vishuddhi chakra, He brought a bhajan sung in traditional Persian style with a special
together Australia, New Zealand, Iran, Malaysia, stringed instrument played by Hamid, and a large type
Thailand, China, Taiwan, Japaän, Vietnam, Singapore of hand-held drum played by Ali.
and other South-east Asian countries, as well as yogis
As our journey around the world drew to a close,
from all over Europe, North and South America, Africa,
Shri Mataji requested qawwalis from Music of Joy.
They asked for any yogis familiar with "Mataji Qawwali
to join them on the stage and the yogis of nations
India and elsewhere to work together in hamony, as
part and parcel of the whole
The diversity of races and cultures was like a assembled for a powerful qawwali that brought half
bouquet of fragrant flowers from all parts of Mother the performers to their toes to dance with joy before
Earth, and was fully expressed in the Saturday night Shri Mataji
entertainment program, giving us all the feeling that it
really is a small world. Music of Joy started the don't know what I must be feeling when I see all
Afterwards, Shri Mataji addressed the yogis. "You
evening with bhajans that deepened our attention and
lightened our hearts, living up to their name as they
expressed the joy of being a child of Our Most Holy
I visited before, and I know
these countries which
most of you very well. The way the whole joy and
happiness that you have received through your spiritual
Mother
awakening, in the light of the spirit, is very evident and
This was followed by a comedy in verse by the very beautifully ringing like waves and waves. It is
Sahaja Yoga's dreams, which I had, is more than
Australians that was poking fun at the various traps
fulfilled.. So this is what is love. And in this love we
seekers fall into, whether vegetarianism or epicurianism,
guru shopping or analytical thinking. We then proceeded just get immersed. This ecstasy that you were getting
on a journey around the Orient as yogis from first
one, then another country, expressed the joy of Sahaja
through the best of their artistic heritage: Under
backdrop consisting of beautiful painted panels of work out. Sahaja Yoga is now very well established
tropical flowers, which gave a feeling of oriental art and accepted in Russia, and even in America, the
without being specific to any one country, the yogis House of Representatives issued a statement praising
into was just nothing, but is the bubbling of love."
Shri Mataji then spoke about Iran, and how
a eventually the problems caused by fundamentalism will
offered their love.
Shri Mataji's work.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9& 10 1998
14
Shri Mataji spoke about art as a blessing from the afterwards expressed as being far beyond any talk
Divine She suggested developing our artistry in music, they had experienced before. Many came away with
art, and dancing to balance the right side "For qawwali, a far stronger feeling of the depth of Shri Ganesha's
power, and that innocence is not something to merely
strive for in a yogi It is an absolute necessity for
I must say you are masters now!*
Shri Mataji also mentioned that attention should be
paid to America. Americans are childish people, but
America should work out with help, and through well-
ascent, that our purity can in no way be compromised.
Yet it was also with a feeling of joy that Our Mother
has made this possible for us
performed music and dance.
Many yogis remained through Monday to let the
vibrations settle and to enjoy an extra day with brothers
and sisters seen once in a year, two years, or even
six years. The magic of Cabella flowed over and
For most of us, the evening ended all too soon
We awakened on puja morning to a beautifully sunny
day, and made our way to the river or the waterfall
The puja backdrop was unveiled, consisting of four
dancing Ganeshas (similar tc the one on the cover of around us. In Cabella it is so clear that the
the Music of Joy cassette) with a mouse playing at Paramachaitanya guides everything: where you sleep,
the foot of each, on a celestial background, with who you speak to, what work you do, and who you
painted columns between each of the figures, crowned find at the river foot-soaking next to you Each moment
flows into the next without a ripple, and it is such a
joy to witness it all unfold. In Cabella it is easy to
with pink lotuses. The front of the stage was bordered
with large tissue paper hibiscus and other flowers.
Again we had the pleasure of listening to Music see that the yogis and yoginis are truly a different race
of Jay. Shri Mataji arrived, dressed in a sari in
iridescent coral pink with coral orange borders. The
puja talk was penetrating in a way that many yogis
of people, with sweetness, balance, love and
understanding, in a way that can only be a reflection
of the love of Our Mother.
s
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-16.txt 
 15
Divine Cool Breeze Volumie X Issue 9 & 10 1998
Litany for the Doom of Materasura
This is a world where too mch is not enough.
1'his is a world that feeds the Swiss Bamks
PLEASE SHRI SHAKAMBARI,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
MATERIALISM CREATED
Octopus.
This is a world where the seint says enough.
This is a workd where negativify is a plus.
enongh.
5. The new multinational entities are experimenting
with new forms of dictatorship, setting their production
U This is a world where 13 billion people live on sites in the developing world, reducing to slavery a
incomes of less than $1 a day and where the planet subdued working class and exploiting children on the
does not have enough natural resources to sustain, at altar of productivity gains
a world wide scale. the consumption pattern of
Malaysia, leave alone America.
PLEASE SHRI RAKSHAKARI.
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
MATERIALISM CREATED
PLEASE SHRI DURGA,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
6 The globalization of production and services allow
a few global players to befool us and impose the rules
MATERIALISM CREATED
2. This is a world where ten per cent of world of their game to the mass of unsuspecting consumers
trade is generated by drugs and narco-traffics, or
USSI00 billion represents the amount that yearly
PLEASE SHRI BHIMADEVI,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
poisons mankind, while money laundering in Switzerland
and elsewhere has become a most prosperoIs activity.
reaching all levels of society.
MATERIALISM CREATED
7. Vast restructuring endeavours are progressively
leading to the eradication of small and medium-size
enterprises for the benefit of gigantic corporations
operating on a world scale
PLEASE RAKTABIJA VINASHINI,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
MATERIALISM CREATED
PLEASE SHRI CHANDIKA,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
3. This is a world where Wall Street sucks the
wealth from the working middle class to bestow it
MATERIALISM CREATED
8. The gradual concentration of liquid wealth in the
hands of the super rich is marginalizing national
sovereignty and its elected officials and is imposing a
new titanic dimension to the ruler-ship of money
upon the rich and where Walt Disney makes
you
forget all about it,
PLEASE SHRI KATYAYANI,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
MATERIALISM CREATED
PLEASE SHRI RAKSHASAGNI,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
4. This is a world where an Egyptian eats at
MacDonalds in Cairo and a Chinese at Pizza Hut in
MATERIALISM CREATED
9. Greed raised to the power 108 means the
pauperization of the world's middle class and outrageous
Beijing because modern consumerism expresses the
lowest common denominator of world culture and
erases the meaning of national values and traditions.
wealth for the remaining 10%.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-17.txt 
 16
Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X Issue 9 & 10 1998
concentration of wealth and power threatens to
neutralize all seeking of the Spirit and the deafening
PLEASE SHRI DAITYENDRA MARDINI,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
foar of triumph of asuric materialism destroys the
hope of millions of seekers.
MATERIALISM CREATED
The systematie elimination of alternative
10
PLEASE SHRI MAHAMAYA,
economic solutions, unequal trade and financial
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
manipulations are challenging the equitable distribution
of wealth among the population of the world
MATERIALISM CREATED
PLEASE SHRI VAJRINI,
15.
The alliance of mafias, secretive bankers
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
and corrupt managers has infiltrated the world economy
and is threatening the ethics of collectivity which provide
MATERIALISM CREATED
11. The deregulation of the financial markets has the foundation for the value system of our entire
opened wide the gates of Jurassic Park for the large civilization.
financial predators to roam about and thousands of
billions of dollars are created from nothing by
PLEASE SHRI VIRATANGANA,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
speculators to feed their unlimited thirst for money and
MATERIALISM CREATED
power
16. The trend of today's mega mergers is to
marginalize the State, bypass national legislation,
manipulate the market, control the economy and, for
PLEASE SHRI UGRACHANDESHVARI,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
MATERIALISM CREATED
all practical purposes, finish off the social foundations
of real democracy.
12. The Swiss financial centre works as a haven
for the rich tax-dodgers from developing countries and
diverts needed capital from national investment
PLEASE SHRI KHADGAPALINI,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
programmes, industrial infrastructures and social
expenditures to inflate the stock exchange of the
developed countries.
MATERIALISM CREATED
17. The etheric sophistication of financial electronic
circuits has created a virtual world where the
PLEASE SHRI UGRAPRABHA,
immateriality of money has become the sole reality
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
PLEASE SHRI VISHNUMAYA,
MATERIALISM CREATED
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
13. The enormous increase of financial assets has
MATERIALISM CREATED
siphoned cash money out of the real economy and
channelled it into the financial markets, building up a
18. The progressive domination of technology is
sucking the blood of the farmer, the artist and the
potter turning the man who works with his hands into
a permanently handicapped person.
planetary gambling casino where arbitrary curreney
speculation can mount huge attacks against any country
which tries to follow socially-minded policies.
PLEASE SHRI DEVA KARYA SAMUDYATA,
PLEASE SHRI MAHAKALI,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
DESTROY THE EVIL FORČES THAT
MATERIALISM CREATED
MATERIALISM CREATED
19. The information highway leads to the maya
14. The lure and mirage of such a radical
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
: 9& 10 1998
Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
web of a virtual world where human attention is
MATERIALISM CREATED
scattered, desire is confused, truth is atomized and the
soul is thereby reduced to slavery
Hail, salutation to the Great Devi! Aum, Amen!
PLEASE SHRI RADHA,
May there be Auspiciousness, Joy and Peace!
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
May Thy divine grace penetrate the waters flowing
from our mountains to the four corners of Europe and
MATERIALISM CREATED
spread the pure vibrations of the Aquarian Age!
20. Modern communication can become a demonic
tool in the hands of a few media moguls and opinion
making tycoons who are spreading their hedonistic
world view of power, money and sex
Salutation to Thee Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Ji, the
Resplendent One, O formidable Avatar! We bow to
Thee, most pleasing yet most frightful, who has been
approached by the Trimurtis for the sake of protecting
the universe
PLEASE SHRI SHUKRATMIKA,
DESTROY THE EVIL FORCES THAT
Today, in this festival of Navaratri, we chant the
MATERIALISM CREATED
litany of Thy children in Switzerland for the defeat of
the foes of the Spirit and we offer to Thy glittering
21. The Mlechas of Satan have infiltrated the Internet
global village to pour pornographic dirt and filth within
the nest of the family and to spread hell's shadows
in the minds of helpless people.
teeth the new asuric forms of materialism.
Aum Twameva Sakshat Shri Rakta Dantika Sakshat
Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh
Namaha Aum, Amen.
PLEASE SHRI NIRMALA KUMARI,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 9& 10 1998
18
Committed to Universal Love:
A School for the World
This is the introduction from The Sahaja Patrika,
Through the unbounded love and blessings of Her
İSsue number one, June 1997, the newsletter of the
Holiness Shri Mataji, we venture to bring out the first
issue of the Sahaja Patrika, the future issues of which
will be brought out by the students themselves.
International Sahaja Public School. The school is
located in Talnoo, near Dharamsala, in Himachal
Pradesh, India. The school currently offers grades
one through ten, with grade eleven to be offered committed to universal love and goodwill and following
Living in an ethos of international brotherhood,
for the first time in 1998.
a democratic way of life, our endeavour is to train the
am sure the children who are brought up in students to govern themselves and even take crucial
the Sahaja School, wherever they will go, they decisions through different committees. Not that they
cannot change. They will change others, but would be free to do anything they like, but would
they will not change because they will be so well always look to the teachers as their guiding stars.
developed in their own personality that their own
personality will impress others. Sahaja Yogis do not accountability. a value which is so thoroughly drilled
change. They change others."
The attempt embodies, therefore, developing
and instilled into them at the school A feeling of being
accountable to the parents, to the teachers, and the
community at large is highly desirable. It is up to their
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Om Shri Ganasheya Namoh Namah
accomplishments, ambitions and aspirations.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze: Volume Xissue 9& 10 1998
truly international kaleidoscope of the community
THE SCHOOL PLANT AND ITS ENVIRONS
of nations.
The International Sahaja Public School is gracefully
perched in the lap of the Dauladhar Range of the
Himalayas on the one side and flanked on the other
side by the vernal woods The environment is best
Does it not look amazing as to how all of us have
come to be so close and so quickly when only a few
days back we were complete strangers to one another?
suited for full and balanced growth of body, mind and Is it not only natural that the whole world should
Soul of the young Sahaja Yogis of the world under assemble with the feeling of surrender at the Holy
the kind protection of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Feet of Shri Jagat Amba, the Mother of the Universe?
Nimala Devi
Sarvam Samarpayami
The snow-peaked mountains provide inexplicable
comfort and solace and urge us all to rise high. We
have three staircase-like plateaus which house the Junior
and Senior wings of the school and extensive
playgrounds. The landscaping of the campus and the unique in many ways. A few of the salient highlights
flower beds are a sight to see and we enjoy these of these innovative approaches are that we learn how
gifts of nature, to which we add our own efforts to to learn, we become our own rivals, always
beautify
The Genesis of our Educational Pur-
suits
The educational inputs offered by the school are
endeavouring to excel in our performance.
We try to develop a questioning mind for getting
Our School, A Community of Nations
over dogmas and prejudices and superstitions. We
We come from different social, cultural, political learn through exploration, experimentation and
and economic environments representing the following
observation. We learn to be original and creative.
countries Australia, Austria, U.S.A., Canada, Italy,
Germany, U.K.. New Zealand, France, Switzerland,
India, Finland, Israel, Belgium, Taiwan, Hong Kong of responsibility And, above all, we develop a love
and the Philippines. The school, therefore, represents of humanity
We imbibe leadership qualities. We acquire a sense
Vasudaiva Kutubakam
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze VolumeX Issue 9 & 10 1998
News From Around the World
told him there would be a public program in Amsterdam
the next month, for which I would come back to
Story from
Holland
A Sahaja
T
Amsterdam. He wasn't sure if he could come. On the
he train I was on stopped in Utrecht. Outside
on the platform stood a boy who looked nice
I thought, "I would like to give this young man
his self-realization." He boarded and sat next to me,
although there were still empty seats. We started talking
I wasn't sure how to get to the subject of Sahaja Yoga I
day of the public program, Harry was sitting in the front
row with a friend. Again he didn't feel the cool breeze,
but he did enjoy the evening. Later I heard from Richard
that Harry had gone to the course and that his life had
changed a lot. He now believes in God Thank you,
Mother for this story!
started to play with my necklace which had a pendant of
Shri Ganesha, but it didn't help Suddenly Richard, who.
was on the train and had recognized my voice, came to
say hello. The Richard left the train at the next station. I
Petra van Belois, Holland
Getting on the Air in Florida
told Harry (the young man) that I knew Richard from
Sahaja Yoga.
Salutations to everybody from the Florida, USA
Sahaja Yogis! We want to tell everyone about an exciting
opportunity to spread Shri Mataji's message! Here is what
Harry turned out to be very interested in yoga. I
thought, "A pity that I have to leave the train at the next
station (only 5 minutes farther)."But Harry also had to
happened:
get out! As we were leaving the train, Harry asked how
long it took to get "this Self-Realization." I said it took
In late February, a message was conveyed to all US
yogis to try to show the video about Shri Mataji's life,
called "The Vision" in honour of Her 75th Birthday. We
about 5 minutes, He asked if he could get it right away!
So we sat down on the stairs of the rear exit of the Amstel
station. I told him to relax and close his eyes. I raised my
kundalini and gave myself'a bandhan. Then "T" raised his
wanted to show the video on TV stations, but we had
next to no contacts to anybody significant in that field So
af the end of our weekly meeting we gave a bandhan to
kundalini and worked on some chakras. I felt a little coof
express our desire and waited to see what would happen!
breeze above his head! He wasn't sure if he felt it, because
there was a little breeze blowing outside. I told him I felt
his Kundalini He was still doubting, but felt peaceful. I
said I had a bicycle to get home. He too had one and he
lived very close to our house. I gave him our address and
The very next day Anjan, a multimedia computer
student, was approached in his college by an Indian
gentleman who needed his help in a computer
matter. As it turned out, that gentleman was the producer
related
said he was welcome any time.
of a show called Asian American Focus on a local TV
station, WLRN, affiliated to National Public Radio (NPR).
Anjan mentioned to him that we have a video about Shri
A few months later, I saw Harry at the station again
and he was happy to see me. He said he had lost our
Mataji Nirmala Devi, ready to go on air and asked if he
would be interested. To Anjan's amazement, the producer
address because his diary was stolen on his holiday in
Spain This was the last time that I would be at that station
said. "Yes!"
because we were going to move, I gave him
address, and the address of the centre in Amsterdam I
my new.
Over the course of the next few days the idea changed
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-22.txt 
 21
Divine Cool Breeze VolumeX issue 9 & 10 1998
Introduction
slightly and we were asked if we would like to come in
for an interviewabout Sahaja Yoga as the show has more
of a "question and answer" format. We agreed and in
Anjan's college we produced a 10-minute video showing
Shri Mataji introducing Sahaja Yoga, complete with titles
For a few years we have been in contact with one
Sahaja Yogi. Jean-Claude Laine, leader of Ivory Coast.
We had invited him to Switzerland five years ago and he
was able to go to Puja in Cabella and to India for the
and music at the beginning and end.
tour. A few months ago we felt it would be great to go
there and help the collectivity of Ivory Coast to spread
Sahaja Yoga. We proposed the project to them, and
slowly and nicely it came to fruition. Everything worked
out perfectly, we got good priced airfare, and we were
able to send posters there nearly for free (actually it cost
3 boxes of chocolate).
The next day at 10 am we met at the TV station and
found our interviewer, a very nice lady, being extremely
open and respectful towards Sahaja Yoga and Shri Mataji.
We discussed the questions to be asked and then we
started recording First she introduced the two of us, then
we showed Shri Mataji's video and after that continued
talking about almost all aspects of Sahaja Yoga
So we were five Sahaja Yogis from Switzerland who
manifested the desire to go there. We must say that we
had brought the project to the attention of Shri Mataji
and She was very happy that we could go there.
Time passed like magic, fast on one hand, and very
slow on the other hand-so that we could fit all we wanted
to tell the viewers about Sahaja Yoga! The vibrations were
very cool! At the end of the show we invited all the viewers
18th of October
Saturday Night,
to a public program and gave all the contact information
we could think of
After a pleasant trip to the Ivory Coast, we were
bathed in the plane by the nice fragrances of Africa, but
arrived still full of the franticness of our western life.
Immediately the heat of Abidjan slowed us down. Upon
After the recording was done everyone in the studio
was happy and joyful and the interviewer said we must
remind her before our publie program as she definitely
wants to attend to get her realization!
our arrival, we discovered the hearty welcome and
kindness of a thief who was prowling in the airport Luckily
we also discovered that he was not so proficient at his
job. Finally, around midnight, we arrived at the ashram
without any problems.
The producer suggested that he would like to continue
presenting Sahaja Yoga in weekly half hour segments,
featuring a different subject in Sahaja Yoga each time!
We are excited, grateful, and amazed how Shri Mataji
19th of October
Sunday,
works things out, especially after such a long "drought"
here in Florida!
After a relaxing day, we were talking with some Sahaja
Yogis of Abidjan under a typical African kiosk called
Pallote (pronounced payot). Suddenly, an African drum
sounded and we heard a beautiful song in Diula, the local
With all our love and respect,
-the Florida Yogis
dialect. A procession began It came under the pallote,
around us, and carried us away Everyone danced to the
Ivory Coast
Swiss
Yogis
Visit
magical rhythm over to the pendal in the gardern. We were
seated facing the dancers, musicians and singers, enjoying
their beautiful songs. At the end, two young girls came to
us with a large bowl which was the water ceremony to
/Note: This isa diary describing the experiences
of some Swiss Sahaja Yogis who visited the
/vory Coast to assist with the spread of Sahaja
Yoga.]
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9& 10 1998
towards him while putting her attention on the Sahasrara.
Her Agnya fingers registered catches so she said, "You
can't forgive, you must forgive." Then everybody there
who knew him applauded, confirming that she was right
Because of this, many of them wanted to come to the
welcome travellers The entire ceremony was very moving
Our hearts were opened by the experience If our eyes
are lotuses, then the dew came very quickly in that country.
Ignace, appointed as Pujari, began the Puja. The
bhajans were coloured with African folklore which is very
beautiful. At the end of the Puja, the Chorale (as they call
it) performed their own compositions It was something
one should hear at least once in one's lifetime Then the
rhythm came to tickle our feet, and we found ourselves
dancing to that magical tempo. After the meal, we started
the nice habit of staying up late into the night, chatting
with everyone. Our first story is about Anna. She was
postering alone in Abidjan. A lady passed by and looked
at the poster and said, "Is She the devil? Why are you
doing that? It is very bad." Anna did not know what to
public program.
In the evening the Chorale group started to rehearse
bhajans for before the Havan After three notes of
Durgati harani durga ambe, an apocalyptic rain fell
from the skies. It lasted so long that we were not able to
have the Havan, but the storm was performing in the sky
The night once again finished late with songs and dances.
Tuesday, 21 st of October
With naive conditioning, we were expecting all sorts
of reactions at the public program. We were there to
prepare the hall, with a battery of chilies, lemons and
vibrated water. Slowly, the 400 seats were all occupied
The Chorale group sang the African version of Gayatri
Mantra At the end of the Realisation, many hands rose
answer, for she was new in Sahaja. Then, coming from
nowhere, a man started explaining to the furious lady
everything about Kundalini. Chakras, Spirit and all,
supporting Anna The lady could not argue, cooled down
and went away. The man disappeared as he came without
a word. Anna, astonished, could feel that she was
into the air, signifying realisation. The heavy vibrations
progressively became cooler The public program was a
protected
great success, and all our little fears vanished After two
hours of intensive questioning by journalists and the public,
we felt the profound and sincere seeking of the people.
Monday, 20th of October
Preparations for the publie program were continuing
The Sahaja Yogis had the desire to contact a radio
journalist who has a two-hour national radio program
called Mythand Mystery. This journalist gives everyone
a chance to express themselves about spirituality.
Late in the evening, back at the ashram, the three
lakshmis of the ashram, Ida, Victoria and Prisca, shared
stories of their travels in Benin and the miracles they heard
there: As you will see, it is truly amazing
Unfortunately, Paul Dokoui, the journalist, was
unreachable. They were quite disappointed. Suddenly.
the telephone rang It was Paul Dokoui who, after having
seen the poster. wanted to do an interview. During the
preparation for this interview, he got his Realisation. The
show will be aired to the public after the Sahaja public
The wife of a Sahaja Yogi was not happy that her
husband was practising Sahaja Yoga She didn't even dare
to look at the photo of shri Mataji. But one day she
addressed the photo, full of fright and anger saying, "Who
are you? Are you stronger then my Lord Jesus Christ?"
Suddenly, before her, the face of Shri Mataji transformed
into a representation of Christ. Panicking, she ran to call
her husband and show him the photograph. He said, "You
see, I have nothing to add to this." Slowly the photo came
program.
We also learned that Sita, a Sahaja Yogini, could
announce all the publie programs on TV. The journalist
who was a sceptic tried to challenge her by saying. "You
back into the original image.
say you can feel the condition of others, so can you tell
• A new Sahaja Yogi, still doubting about Sahaja
them what my problems are?" The Yogini put her hands
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-24.txt 
 23
Divine Cool Breeze Volume :Xissue 98 10 1998
to clear out all the negativity It was very deep, and the
vibrations very strong. After the last syllable of the three
mantras of Shri Mataji, a torrential downpour of rain
started, like an answer to our prayers. We felt that when
we do things collectively, the Divine is with us.
Yoga, became very sick. He tried many things to get
cured, and finally his family sent for four uns to pray for
him. When they saw the photo of Shri Mataji, they told
him with anger that She was the cause of his sickness.
and that he should burn and throweverything away. They
were very aggressive. Back at their place, upon entering
their living room, the four nuns found Shri Mataji sitting
there on the sofa, they panicked. One of them.
At the program, we observed that 99% ofthe people
were men We even had a few Europeans. The hall was
full, with more than 500 people. Again the presentation
courageously, addressed Shri Mataji, "If you are more
powerful than Christ, rise up in the sky."Shri Mataji stood
was shared between the yogis of Bouaké and ourselves
During the question and answer session, we felt that the
type of questions reflected a true seeking, and a deep
reflection about spirituality A big part of the success of
up and rose slowly and silently into the air, then
disappeared The four nuns went quickly back to the
house of the new yogi, and bowed before the photo, the program was due to the strong desire and the
asking for forgiveness.
dynamism of the collectivity of Bouake We could see on
their faces the joy they felt in the preparation and
Wednesday 22nd Of October
organisation ofthe program. Back at Jean-Claude's house,
We departed by bus for Bouakė at 10 o'clock It was the yogis once again started to ask many questions about
a good opportunity to discover the landscape which is the life of yogis around the world-what is happening
very beautifiul. At Bouaké the young collective heartily Cabella, our relationship with young yogis in Switzerland,
welcomed us. There were about 30 people, and most and how it has developed so well in Russia, as it is the
were students. They started singing bhajans using a jemb. land of ego. They also had many young people who
a unique instrument which produces a very foyful sound. experience problems with their families who are against
Then it was time to exchange impressions and experiences Sahaja Yoga. It is a real problem for them because they
with the Yogis. They were very eager to know what is don't know where to go for their daily meditation.
happening in Sahaja Yoga all over the world. As they
can't travel so much, it is important for them to get
Yet another banquet is served! We have decided that
this trip is also rich in gastronomy experiences. A cup
gem (fiuit juice strongly perfumed with ginger- careful
it's spicy/hot), and hop into bed.
of
information.
Thursday, 23rd October
Saturday 25th October
Early in the morning, after meditation, we felt that it
was going to rain The sky was heavy. black and
We prepared ourselves for the public program which took
grey
We returned to Abidjan on Friday. The third public
program in Abidjan was held on Saturday at 9:30 am
mostly done by the Abidjan yogis For some of them, to
place in the evening. It will rain, we thought, that is for
sure, the vibrations will clear the town. We were surprised
to find that after a while the situation changed, and we
enjoved the sun and a cloudless blue sky. During the day.
speak in public was a new experience and we could see
tremendous transformations between the beginning of the
talk and the end. They started with a very uneasy feeling
Jean-Pierre wanted to record some images with his
and finished by expressing a real joy in sharing the truth
of Sahaja Yoga. In the ashram, we had the follow-up at
video-the songs, and the messages of Happy Diwali
that the Bouake collectivity wanted to offer to Shri Mataji
But before that, we meditated together to prepare
the same time, About 8 or 9 new people came
In the evening we had a havan. At the same moinent,
ourselves for the evening. During the meditation wve prayed
a cock flew up a tree in front of us. After all the stories
for the success of the programme, and asked Shri Mataji
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 9 & 10 1998
we had been hearing, we wondered ifit really was a cock
The havan was in three parts. First, the mantras of Shri
Mahakali, then all the negativity, and then offering different
was simple and great at the same time. The feeling we
had at that moment was like we had been together for six
months, so intense was our experience during our stay
expressions of our devotion to Shri Mataji, the vibrations
28th October
Tuesday,
were strong. After the three mantras, suddenly big clouds
appeared and the sky was full of lightning, as if the havan
continued in the sky.
Our last night in Abidjan was short. The three lakshmis
of the ashram had taken so much care of us that we
decided to give them a break and prepare the last lunch,
Sunday, 26th October
as a cook was amongst us. It was a big change for us to
once again eat western food äfter a long week of
discovering interesting meals like giant snails, hairy crabs
and other delicious new tastes We wanted to slow down
the time, as the moment of departure was approaching
quickly. We tried to fix in ourselves the last impressions,
the last images, the last smiles.
Before the Puja, we recorded the speech and dances
which the collectivity of Abidjan wanted to offer Shri
Mataji for Diwali Puja. It was really beautiful, joyous.
and moving. There is sometimes a special moment in our
lives which seems similar to moments we had in our
childhood, at the feet of the Christmas tree. Shri Mataji
has advanced the date and put down a present from which
At the airport it was less sad than expected because a
group of four yogis was also leaving for Portugal at the
same time. They were on their way to their first Puja in
the presence of Shri Mataji. In the twilight we all got under
the pendal. Amon was there, Safi, Barry, Bernard,
Maurice, Ignace, Carine, Adeline, Jean-Claude, the three
lakshmis and all other Yogis. We had a last collective
meditation during which we thanked Shri Mataji for this
comes out a myriad of cheerful surprises. During the Puja,
we felt like we were in Cabella as the vibrations were so
powerful. Then they started the entertainment in our
honour two ballets and a play The program finished in a
never-ending saraband, bubbling with joy like fireworks.
It was a unique moment where all our hearts, wide open,
melted together Once again we ended the evening on the
terrace chatting with our brothers and sisters.
marvellous adventure. Then the silence emanated and
Monday, 27th October
pervaded our hearts.
Between the sea and the lagoon, a long and straight
road bordered by palm trees and huts was our avenue as
we drove to Bassam. It was a well-known place for typical
handicrafts from all over Africa. There was a multitude of
Everything was nicely arranged by our Mother, even
for the voluminous present for Diwali, which the group
leaving for Portugal was able to take without any problem.
As soon as we had reached the airport one of the Yoginis
who was working for Air Africa met a colleague of hers.
This man took care of everything-money, passport,
ticket, visa, luggage, and our heavy packages.
small shops made of palm tree leaves with funny names
like Boeing 747 or Eiffel Tower We found what we came
for, a gift for Shri Mataji. Two splendid masks representing
a man and a wvoman On Diwali Shri Mataji explained
that it is a King and a Queen.
In the plane, we already wanted to return to Africa as
we dozed, slept, and dreamed of our innocent and
wonderful Sahaja Yogi Brothers and Sisters working it
For dinner we were invited by a Sahaja Yogini of
Abidjan, Mrs. Safi, who had prepared a delicious meal
with many African specialities. It was a real banquet and
we were weleomed like VIPS We tried to hide the fact
out for that great country. Since we've returmed from our
10-day experience in Africa, our feelings, impressions,
and emotions are deeply intact within us. We can feel in
that this would be our last night together, and we wanted
to extend it to its farthest limit. It was like a family
meeting-we were talking, listening to music, dancing. It
our hearts this lovely link which took place between them
and us We were transformed during these 10 days, our
desire to spread Sahaja Yoga became stronger, as did
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-26.txt 
 25
Divine Cool Breeze Völüme X Issue : 9& 10 1998
our desire to be with other yogis We can perceive new
things because we learned a lot about ourselves, about
the importance of the collective and the importance of
using vibrations, simple things, obvious, but things which
unfortunately sadly fade away in the habits of everyday
life
After this program a new Sahaja Yogi collective was
established which became larger and larger. The south of
Kazakhstan with its beautiful nature and soft climate was
very effective for spreading Sahaja Yoga and in some
new towns new Sahaja Yoga collectives appeared. Now
we have about 300 yogis in our country.
It has been a real and beautiful gift, something hard to
describe in words, something which filled us with
vibrations, and we will be eternally thankful to Shri Mataji
for it. These 10 days spent with our brothers and sisters
of the Ivory Coast allowed us to deepen our yoga,
Every summer we participate in the Russian-Ukrainian
tour of Shri Mataji where we can also meet our brothers
and sisters from all over the world, and our hearts are
fulfilled with love and happiness.
and
Some of our lucky yogis have had the opportunity to
especially to experience that to get closer to other yogis,
and to open ourselves to others, brings us closer to Shri
Mataji This love which takes birth when yogis are
together, is nothing else but the manifestation of the Love
go to international pujas in Cabella, Ganapatipule and
other places. Each of these journeys is an incredible
experience for us which brings so much joy and lots of us
go deeper and deeper. During Diwali Puja in Istanbul,
Her Holiness Shri Mataji told us that, thanks to their
geographical positions, our countries are quite close to
India and have some similarities with Indian culture.
of our Mother
Kazakhstan
' lives
Sahaja Yogis
in
Dear Friends!
Recently we organised a celebration of Five Years of
Sahaja Collectivity in Chimkent. To the big musical
program came musical collectives with congratulations,
dancing groups, MIDI and regional TV. All enjoyed a lot
of Indian and folk music, which Sahaja Yoga musical
groups played. It was a very friendly and joyful atmosphere
that Shri Mataji gave for us,
We'd like to tell you about Sahaja Yogis' lives in
Kazakhstan. As you know, after the Soviet Union was
divided, a lot of new countries appeared, and one of them
is Kazakhstan. It's quite a large country which lies on the
way from Europe to Asia. It was a country of shepherds
who take their cattle from the great steppes in the North
to the high mountains in the south. The people who live in
this place are simple and open-hearted. Perhaps they have
not such deep roots in culture and spirituality as Indians
and Russians because of the hardness of their life in the
Step by step, Sahaja Yoga is spreading all over
Kazakhstan and now also in the north of this country a
new Sahaja collective is emerging. We hope that it will
spread wider and wider across this land of steppes and
past, but during the USSR years they received a lot of
help from their nearest neighbour, Russia, which brought
a new dimension in their development
mountains
Much love to all Sahaja Yogis from all over the world.
We would be happy to see all our brothers and sisters in
our country at any time. Welcome to Kazakhstan! Jai
Shri Mataji!
A few years ago there was a first program of Sahaja
Yoga in the capital of South Kazakhstan. Chimkent City
It was very amazing that after some postering about 200
Dimitri Bondarenko
people came to the program The first hall that was chosen
was quite small, but surprisingly on the night before the
program there was water pipe accident in the area of this
hall and the administration proposed another hall, much
1998 Esoteric Fair in Copenhagen
Scandinavia seems to be in general one of Europe's
"Last Frontiers" for Sahaja Yoga. In Copenhagen, there
have been a couple of great yogis valiantly trying to get a
bigger than the first one, and it was filled completely with
newcomers
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-27.txt 
 26
9& 10 1998
Dlvine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue
group going for over three years, but so many of the so sweetly when I asked her if she smoked!
seekers are guru shoppers who cannot stop seeking Somehow, when her boyfriend came closer to her as
when they find the truth, who are indeed proud of we were talking before realisation, a shadow came
being seekers, that it has become a very difficult and
lonely task. People do want information about Sahaja dramatically with realisation. We talked about the
Yoga, a
programmes each week, especially in response to
leaflets left in public libraries, but they cannot easily 1 think I am") It was a very moving moment, and
accept being told about anything and would like to it is at such times that you feel a deep love for the
go on doing their Tai Chi, psychoanalysis, Hatha seekers and realise fully that it is with the pure power
Yoga and goodness knows what else in parallel with
a feeble attempt at understanding Sahaja Yoga: have the great privilege of talking directly to people's
People come once or twice, look very promising, spirits.
then never return, perhaps because of a certain Danish
over her, and you could see that her life mnight change
few even come regularly to public problems caused by drugs, which she should know
about if she was a real seeker (she said, smiling.
of love that we are working. In these situations, we
A woman came to see us, brought along by her
husband who had received his realisation the day
before, and who had obviously felt it very deeply.
at the first Esoteric Fair where we have had a stand. She was very distressed and admitted she really
I wanted to share with our brothers and sisters some needed help. We didn't discuss this, but as I worked
of the joy we have felt in giving realisation, seeing on her I quickly felt a deep and painful left heart
those dilated pupils and joyful, flushed faces shining catch. Afterwards, she was, like most of the people
with love, and the feeling of directly addressing the who left us, radiant, and it turned out as we talked
a lady in her life who had
reserve.
Having just returned from the final day of three
Spirit in these people with the Divine Hand of our about her catehes that
Mother, as if She were really there Herself in Person! been like a mother to her had recently died of a
What a relief to cross a spiritual desert and drink mysterious heart attack, and had been an adept of an
again of the power of pure love.
infamous false guru
We cannot know how many will come to the This morning a man and his two daughters were
follow-ups in two days, but we have seen Mother's receiving their realisation together! A delightful as-
miracle playing out again, and it was important just pect was witnessing the different style of each yogi
to give realisation. The last man I worked on before in talking about Mother and describing Sahaja Yoga
leaving this afternoon was an Iranian who came to before actually giving realisation. It was for most of
see us because a good friend of his had received his us the first such fair we had attended, and we found
realisation the day before. There were many cases
out again how nourishing and necessary it is for us
like that where newly realised souls had told friends just to transmit the light of Truth, and of course,
about their experience and recommended them to how "She does it all!"
come and try for themselves! Of course, this chap We had brothers and sisters coming to help us from
and I had a lovely conversation afterwards about Switzerland (two Swedish sisters from the collectivity
our having some great yogis coming from Iran, Shri there) and Norway. but in fact there were several
Mataji's enthusiasm for the Sufis, how we had met nationalities represented in our team of nine yogis.
some of the Sufis in Istanbul and what great As you may imagine, there was much joy shared by
experiences we had, and how we love Qawwalis in us all on Friday and Saturday evening over dinner
Sahaja Yoga. But the most beautiful moment was after the day's activities! Spring is finally coming to
when he told me that he felt now was the time for Denmark, the buds of collectivity are waiting to burst
the whole world to come up this way!
at last! Thank you again and again, Holy Mother!
Then there was the young hippie girl who laughed
-Kingsley Flint, Denmark
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-28.txt 
 27
Divine Cool Breeze Valume Xissue
9 & 10 1998
Shri Ganesha Puja 1997
Cabella Ligure September 7, 1997
What she does is to build in us primordial taboos or
primordial dharmas. For example, steel has its own
dharma. It cannot behave like wood. Wood has its
own dharma. It cannot behave like silver. They all
have their dharma and they are bound in that
Today we are going to worship Shri Ganesha
It is all said about Him that He is the first
deity that was created on this earth by Adi
Shakti. As about His creation you know the story and
also you know how an elephant's head was attached
to Him Today I am going to tell something more Everything that is in the nature has its own dharma.
subtler about Him, Kundalini and the Mother Earth If you see the tiger, lion, mongoose or a snake, they
He was made out of the Mother Earth, with the all have their dharma, style everything. It's very
vibrations of his mother. Now the significance of Mother surprising, how they are bound by it
Earth, we have never understood. Now look at the
Once in Pratishthana, I went from the other side
mother earth. She is the one who produces all kinds
to my bedroom and I saw a very big snake coming
of beautiful flowers of different fragrance, of different
out of a hole. Of course I was quite away from it
but it felt my vibrations. It started running away, fell
nature, colour, heights. The trees are different Trees,
when they grow up, they grow in such a manner that
every leaf of the tree gets the sun Look at the in the swimming pool and wouldn't come out.
collective sense which is given to us by this mother Somebody went down and killed it and brought its
earth We have never realised that this mother earth body up. Iwas surprised to see that it was such a
which is giving us everything that we want and the sun big one about 6 feet and it intertwined itself in a very
helps the mother earth-cooperates, coordinates with beautiful pattern. Then they said, Mother if we leave
her. To go further with it. you have seen a picture it, it will fäll in the water and come to life again. So
where a Kundalini is coming out of the mother earth what should we do? I asked them what do you do.
They said we burn it So they burnt the snake. But
after ten days the female of that snake came out. She
and half of it is seen.
So what does this Kundalini do for us or what was searching for him They killed her and she also
does this mother earth do for us The Kundalini leaves made the same kind of pattern. I was amazed, it was
the mother earth as a reflection and what does she very beautiful pattern, exactly the same. So I was
do within us, to build us up, in which way. So it is surprised, how is it that this female knows how to
the primordial power which is coming out of the mother copy her partner So what I feel is that animals,
earth. Mother earth itself acts like a mother. She looks creepers, every type of animal-whole of biology
after you. She gives you whatever you want and studied, I was amazed that every type of animal has
another miracle thing is, that the highest tree is a the same kind of behaviour. For example you put a
coconut tree and the coconut will never fall on any dog in the water, it will swim but the cat may not.
creature or human being. That means all thinking, all Its a thing that is built in-the dharma, what I call as
understanding all consciousness, all awareness is coming the primordial taboos. We have in the same way,
from the mother earth. But we never underständ it. primordial taboos built within us, which are dharma
A human being has to be like that. If he tries to be
As it is, we take it for granted. Now what does she
something else, then something goes wrong with his
do for us human beings She is the primordial power.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-29.txt 
 28
Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9 & 10 1998
was also very good. Somehow or other,
childhood, I met many of them, because I also had
a habit of going to the jungles, where I used to meet
them. I was surprised that they would not drink. This
I am telling you about 60 years back, may be more.
They would not drink. Very 'lajjashi', means shame
of everything. Matter of prestige was important for
life. Its like say, if you have glass, you drop it on the
ground-it will break. That is the dharma In the same
my
way when human beings start deviating from the line
of dharma, they get into trouble. But its only human
beings who can do that. They can only cross over
these primordial taboos and can become horrible.
Sometimes I see a person and wonder what is them. They would never steal anything
wrong with him. He has a nice home, very good wife,
everything and then he has a keep'. What is the
need? For man it is primordial that he should have
only one wife and one husband. Its a taboo. As soon huts. They didn't mind. They were very clean and
you deviate from that something goes wrong. Now, neat people. Now it is changed. The same people are
who punishes, who corrects or who destroys - is this changed so much. They were like sacred, holy people
primordial power, which we call as paramachaitanya. They worshipped mother. They worshipped mother
If you can understand that it is a structure - like this earth. Nothing else.
I was really very impressed how these people
were so dharmic, so good and happy. They lived in.
hanger, and if you want to break it, you can break
it, because you are human beings. But it will be
broken as simple as that. We have to understand
we are human beings and we cannot do things which
go against our dharma Now why the dharma? Dharma
I asked this lady-why do you worship mother earth.
She said she gives us everything. She is just mother,
we live in the jungles and she looks after us. And she
is the most conscious person. She knows that we are
there and she has to look after us. Even to take out
has to be there for our ascent. Now man in his
some leaves from the trees, they used to think about
it. But then the missionaries came. They converted
intelligence, in his progressiveness, thinks that anything
he does-what's wrong, specially in the west, this is
very common. But I must say for the aboriginal people them. They gave them skirts and blouses But Gyanabai
or those people who were made aware of their did not wear it. She said what is this? Why should
primordial taboos-somehow - as the animals know I wear a dress like this where the whole body is
what is bad for them and that knowledge was there exposed? No I'll wear a sari. Why should I wear a
with the aboriginals. Today we are here with the dress like this? But when they met with these so
Australians and in Australia aboriginals are so many: called advanced people, so many of them started
I was surprised that most of their words were Sanskrit. living like them. They said you have no freedom. You
So may be they might have got it from India or may are just bound by something. Actually they were bound
be they have gone there from India,
by the sacredness, by the divine understanding. Then
they started changing She (Gyanabai) was alright, Her
So many words they have which are Sanskrit I husband was alright. But her son started drinking This
started thinking about them. In India we have is the beginning of the end. Then gambling, and all
aboriginals. We call them Goon, Gurkhu, Bheel. We other sorts of things, he started. And her grandson
had a lady who was a maid with us She was an started going to prostitutes. The idea was only that we
are free, what's wrong. Now these primordial taboos
are built in you. They are there. These are existing,
may be, in a potential state, may be you have curbed
them down, may be you have turned them out. But
they are there. All the time they are there. That's what
excellent cook and she had her maryadas. If my father
came she would immediately cover her head and go
in the other room-to respect him. Nobody told her
to do that. Their marriage system was also, very
surprisingly, good Their relationship with their children
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X Issue 9& 10 1998
we say, you are leaving the maryadas or else we say
you are insulting Shri Ganesha. So when Mother
created this universe-first deity was Shri Ganesha
It is very remarkable, how the nature is so much
within us and how this whatever is within us guides
outside and réceives the blessings. We are not
that
Auspiciousness was created. Now we don't understand something separate This mother earth is our home.
what is auspiciousness Auspiciousness is a complete We have a home in her and she has a home within
understanding of primordial restrictions and also of the ourselves. I said today that for Shri Ganesha he had
protocol. For example in India we always used to do the body of clay So you can imagine how this whole
that, though I was in a Christian family. that before universe has ereated us, All of it is within us. And
when we try to hurt something then we are hurting
ourselves. The intelligence of mother earth, I have
seen from my childhood Its such a beautifiul thing to
touching the mother earth on getting up from the bed,
we used to say- O Mother Earth please forgive us,
because we are touching you with our feet' So respect
for the mother earth and for nature is built in within
us. We are part and parcel of this whole universe. But
when you get into this non-sensical idea of freedom,
know the nature and the mother earth.
That's why all the saints, in India specially, used
to go and live in the forest. Only in the forest you
could see clearly, how this primordial bondage was
absolutely obeyed, naturally, by the nature For us it
is difficult. We are rather free people. So simple things
like, a woman should always cover her body because
she respects her body She respects her chastity. But
if you tell this to somebody, they won't listen As you
see, the evergreens-they are always clad. No leaf falls
off them I call them as the females. And the others
they do lose their leaves. So I call
then you are leaving your mother earth Your gravity
itself reduces. This mother earth has to teach us, while
we are plundering. Ecology, ecology now people are
crying. Whatever is outside, is also inside. If you want
to exploit your mother inside or if you want to trouble
your mother inside you can also trouble this mother
earth. Now what has replaced our understanding, is
that we are paying more attention to money. If you
cut a tree to get money then it is hurting the mother.
trees-deciduous
But if you are cutting a tree for beautifying her, then
she is happy: Her discretion is so great. See the way
them as men. Here it is the other way round. When
I used to go to parties, they thought I was a very
she produces flowers-in different countries, different
type of flowers I saw in my country that flowers are
extremely fragrant. She understands so much Once I
went to Australia, there is this flower Hibiscus. Imagine
it first becomes pink and then gradually red. Even the
serene person. You meet somebody, the man will
immediately button up himself and the women will
open themselves.
So the whole brain has turned around. Its so stupid.
SLunflower goes on turning its face with the sun. Now
how can you say there is no connection between a
sunflower and the sun
changing So these Hibiscus flowers are the flowers
which we use to worship Shri Ganesha. The programme
was to worship Shri Ganesha. On the way I saw so
Even Mrs Thatcher had said that it is our culture that
Automatically it goes on women must expose their body Are they prostitutes?
So this craze of exposure of body has become so
strong now that even in India, if not in the streets or
in the household, but in cinema you see women
many trees of Hibiscus, flowering. I said, you better exposing themselves What you see in the Indian films
get these flowers for the Puja. And when I arrived never happens outside. If women start dressing up like
in the hall, all the Sahaja Yogis had bought Hibiscus that, so many people will throw stones at them, Then
on their own: I never talked to them. They didn't all other sorts of things happened- man having relation
know that it is to be used for Shri Ganesha Mother with man, woman having relation with woman and
children. We didn't know this in India Why it has
happened here. I don't think, 50 years back, they
Earth had herself created at that time This is the time
of Shri Ganesha, when you should get Hibiscus
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-31.txt 
 301
Divine Cool Breeze Valume : X Issue 9& 10 1998
used to do that in these countries. Why we have given just become an ordinary human being who has his
up our sense of shame and this kind of nonsense has taboos, who understands and is aware then they'll say
come into us. I think it must be some bhoots or -
badhas in them. This is absolutely unnatural and absurd.
Then, a married man having eyes on unmarried women specially. Now majority is the law. If the majority is
and unmarried men are having relations - all kinds stupid then all the stupidity is regarded as great. They
of things people do. You won't believe this doesn't have no brains, no intelligence to understand, how can
happen in India It has now spread out but in good these things help-alcohol for example. Alcohol has not
families you don't have it. Somebody told me there done any good to anyone. Without this you are
is Aids in India Yes, because they take bath in the considered no good They won't talk to you if you
river If they stop taking bath in the river, this will don't take it. It is so rampant in the society that all
what a man he was What is there. He was born
like that: So such a man is praised, in the west
stop, I was a medical student. I came from a very the parties I attended, except for me and my husband
open family. I never knew these things. Even in the everybody was drinking. And they used to drink much
lunatic asylums of India, we have never heard of such more then normal as it was free. These are all poisons,
spoiling us completely. There is a taboo now for
cigarette. I can't understand why do they smoke, like
The other day, Guido gave me a present of a little a chimney. They have no courage to give it up
girl who was feeling shy. Shyness is the ornament of Everywhere they put up No smoke. When will they
women Children are all shy. I remember, my start - No alcohol. Everybody sees that its so
granddaughter, was once watching a magazine. She dangerous. Its against human awareness. You see
was very small at that time, 2 years or so. She saw people falling down, cursing each other, fighting If you
bikni or something. She said what stop this alcoholism, all this shamelessness will go
reports.
one woman in a
are you doing. My Grandma will come and give you away. When you take alcohol, your awareness is
two slaps. Please wear your dresses. Have you affected. One alcoholie told me that when I take
noticed, children don't like shamelessness.
alcohol, I don't see my sister as my sister but see her
Shamelessness has gone to such an extent that keeping
as my beloved. How do you do that? But for social
nude is considered a very great advancement
status and all that you must drink. We don't even
Somebody told me that he wanted to save the
aboriginals but they were so much impressed by the
white skin that they accepted everything. They were
even having relations with own sister, daughter, mother.
These subjects are rather heinous to talk about. I
can't understand how ean human beings go to that
level. And at this time we have Sahaja Yoga, where
you have become aware of your natural taboos. It is
understand how our primordial taboos are completely
battered by the society.
The simple thing is that to understand your own
self it would be better to see the stupid people, You
will be amazed what sort of things they are doing.
And then to cover it up they have etiquettes. They
talk in a very special manner, move themselves in a
potentially there as I have told you. It is enlightened very trained personality. And anybody who doesn't
and suddenly you have accepted it. I never expected do that is out of their sight. They think he lacks
so much but you have accepted this and enjoying it eliteness. So another idea is that we have to be elite.
and practising it. You see the lives of all the great Look at Ganesha. He is by no means elite. He eats
saints. You can't have someone like Diana being called like a glutton and he looks at you as if he is going
to hit you with his "Mace'. For Ganesha there is no
forgiveness When he became Christ, then he
developed forgiveness. I don't know how it worked
a saint. She had no 'maryadas'. I have sympathies
with her as her husband tortured her. But 'maryadas
are very important. How can she be a saint. If you
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9 & 10 1998
out. But as Ganesha there is no forgiveness at all the innocence. Wherever they get the children, they
Don't try to ask forgiveness from him. He will never misuse them. They teach them bad things. Even the
forgive. Even if his mother says, you forgive, he will schools, every thing is so horrid. So we have to be
not, He never forgives. Then only it comes to the very very careful about our children. We have to
point that the mother only has to say 1 forgive you. guide them properly, look after them and let their
Then he can't do anything because he is extremely primordial taboos be preserved. If a child does
obedient of his mother. So if the mother has forgiven- something nice, appreciate it
finished But otherwise he will never, never forgive.
I am not worried about a child being little bit
mischievous. But if he takes to anything anti-Ganesha,
be careful. All kinds of diseases can develop. If these
primordial taboos are destroyed in childhood, it is
very difficult to revive. Still I have always said that
innocence is never lost, only there are some clouds
And that's why all kinds of these horrible diseases are
seen, thousands of them, Also if you don't respect
him then impotancy, Aids and all secret diseases can
come. I had a very bad time with people who suffered
from these secret diseases. Shri Ganesha accepts my
forgiveness.
, but whenever he has a chance, he again
which try to cover it and we become rather ignorant
comes back. Now see they are deities wvith their own
dharma He gives you wisdom, discretion and about it, that we have done anything wrong That is
understanding But if you don't obey his qualities then your duty.
he is a very difficult man. So to tell somebody, don't
do it, is very difficult but the nature takes respite To
get you cured on the Mooladhara is very very difficult.
You do get cured, no doubt, ultimately, but the most
difficult disease is from mooladhara. He is an eternal
child. He is innocence. Despite all that he cannot
Your society is horrible. Next generation, I don't
know where it is going to end up. When I think about
it, I really get a fright. The solution is that you have
to be careful about your children and their thinking
and their attitude towards Shri Ganesha. They are
forgive you if you disturb your innocence. Mother is
just the opposite. She wants to save you at any cost.
But not Ganesha Ganesha says alright, you better go
to hell, And hell is in our own lives. Those people
special, lovable things for Shri Ganesha. I can't imagine
how he loves the children and he is always there to
protect the children.
you people really understand what I am saying
If
are drinking, smoking, prostitution. This is all hell.
What else is hell. And he will never save you from now, if you have to cross this margin of human life
and spiritual life - first thing is your Shri Ganesha.
When Kundalini rises, Shri Ganesha is quite, just
hell.
supports the Kundalini to rise. He is the one who also
suggests to you that it is wrong, the way you are
doing things. He looks after you but he will not forgive
Only in Marathi arti of Shri Ganesha, they say that
at the time, when I am getting my realisation, you must
save me. That's the only thing they ask, at the time
my resurrection you must save me. It is not said you. It is not so difficult, the way people talk about
that at the time of my resurrection you protect me- their physical needs and all this nonsense. Even the
no, you save me. Because he is the one who is sitting animals don't talk like that. Instead of destroying this
on every chakra like a vice-chancellor of the university. nature, try to build it up, try to see how you can make
Even if you have Vishnu and Mahadeva on your side it a beautiful garden or a beautiful place. Every time
but if Shri Ganesha is sitting and he says, No, not his I am here, I am thinking, what should I do with this
ascent, it doesn't work out. Its very difficult In these land here, which is very barren. How can I change
modern times, horrible things are happening to your it. All the time there is thought about how to make
children. I think the whole of this negativity is against it beautiful. In that if there is innocence, no greed, no
of
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_9,10.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 9 & 10 1998
do work for Sahaja Yoga If you take to poetry, they
competition but just to enjoy the beauty of your own
creation, to see how things are. People have gone out
of proportion, out of understanding, for example here any such position, to be a poetess. So I gave it up.
or anywhere else in Europe, you are not supposed to But I was a very good sportswoman. I used to play
grow any more fruits. Why? Because the price must things. I stood first in every sort of game, and I had
be kept low. If you have so many fruits, why don't championship. I gave up that also. I studied medicine
you send it to places where they don't have fruits. I stood first in the whole university but I gave it up.
They will destroy it but they will not do that. So the Why? Because I am the primordial mother and I have
love and feelings for others is not there and they to do the job of awakening the primordial nature -
destroy if something is overproduced by the mother the dharma within human beings. And that's what I
earth, just to keep the prices high. They are very have to do and nothing else But for that I don't do
cruel. Only thinking about money, money. All this is anything I am 'Nishkriya'. Really I don't do. Its done
will all call you a poetess and I don't want to have
still happening But I am sure one day it will stop. The
pubs are the best buildings in a village. The way they
glorify drinking is the best part of it
by the nature, by Shri Ganesha, Vishnu, Mahesha-
everybody. They are doing it.
Then what is the relationship. The relationship is
I would like you to have a desire that let drinking they are all in my body and they are all bound by
be finished like smoking. If you think like that, that their own dharma. And they act. This is the
relationship-spontaneous, automatic
relationship. For example the fan is built in and when
you switch on, the fan starts moving It's like that. All
of them are related to me and they have a tremendous
protocol, tremendous respect, that if I say anything,
they will not finish it. This is a very deep thing that
I am telling you that you are a
is built in within you, are your dharmas and if you go
against your dharma then you will be finished. They
are all built in within you. They are all there potentially.
I hope you will understand, how important it is to be
aware of your restrictions, within yourself. So thank
you very much, all of you.
personally think that it is
with drinking only that you develop all this perverted
attitudes Otherwise if its a normal man with a normal
brain, why should he do such things-fighting, killing.
quarrelling, violence - It is impossible to understand
normal person do such a thing. Shri Ganesha
gives you balance. He keeps you in proper track But
if you don't want to listen to him you are thrown
hope you understand our relationship with
how can a
human being ie. there
away
nature, with Shri Ganesha and with our Kundalini –
is like absolutely identified with each other If you start
loving the nature, all these ideas of spoiling your
innocence will be finished. I used to write poetry, very
fond of nature But then I told myself, you have to
May God Bless You.
