Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue: 1, 2 & 3. 1996 "Be sure that you are telling the Truth and nothing else and that you have felt the truth in full ways. Those who have not felt the vibrations, should not talk of Sahaja Yoga. They have no authority. They have to receive vibrations. They have to fully imbibe within them and then they can say, "yes, we felt'. This is a very important task Sahaja Yogis have to do in these modern times, t.e. to tell aloud that they have found the truth." Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 In This Issue: Editorial 1 Sufism & Sahaja Yoga 2. Navratri Puja 5-10-97 The Role of Women 16 Shri Adi Shakti Puja 6-6-93 (What is Adishakti) Diwali Puja, 2-11-97 23 : Yogi Mahajan Editor Publisher V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Editorial Have you met someone who gladly takes away all your woes and fills you with joy, who washes the scars of sin and clothes you with shy innocence, who sweetens anger into love, who never gives up, no matter how often you fall, whose hands only give but do not ask, who unlocks all doors to meteoric heights, whose mere presence exults the spirit into ecstasy, even repeating her name wards off evil spirits. The experience of this meeting is your marriage with goodness, virtue, innocence, compassion, auspiciousness and Divine glory. Nay, it is the meeting with your creator. It is the moment of fulfilment we have dreamt of since many births. To commemorate this blessing we celebrate the Birthday of our Divine Mother, Shri Adi Shakti, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. Our most loving mother worked tirelessly for our ascent for 75 years. Her 75th birthday on 21st March 1998 ushers the birth of the golden age about which saint Gyaneshwar had prophesied-The age "when men of god will become prophets" as described by William Blake. The 'mental fight' is over and now Blossom Time has come. Let us reap the harvest of golden fruits and celebrate. In the light of the spirit darkness and ignorance has been dispelled. All illusions and mental deceptions have fallen like the Berlin Wall. The global caucus of Sahaja Yoga is too powerful for any negativity. This caucus of collective consciousness has exposed all falsehood. Valiant Normalities have built a 'New Jerusalem' in our 'green and glorious land'. May her Lotus Feet accept the petals of our realisation of Her Divine Vision as a humble offering on her 75th Birthday. Her 75th birthday is indeed the most auspicious moment for thanksgiving Thanking her again and again for all the pangs of pain she suffered in giving us rebirth, of bearing with our shortcomings, of giving us realisation and of nurturing. us as the most precious roses in her delightful garden. But what can one offer to one's own creator, to the one who has an abundance of everything, who is verily the source of everything. A Sahaja Yogi can only offer flowers of love and devotion at Her Lotus Feet. But she has often said that She loves those who love Her children. Let us see Her in the eyes of our brothers and sisters, let us love Her in their spirit. Let us care for them as She cared for us. When we would have done this, our gift may be received in heaven. No crowds need witness and applause or deeds, but the witness is within and the witness is above. Our Divine Mother recalled what Her father told Her in Childhood, that "one hand must not know what the other gives". Yes, goodness is its own reward. On our most loving Mother's 75th birthday there are many promises we must make and keep. Yet, even they will not suffice to redeem her debt, perhaps a simple promise from the heart to be truthful to our own spirit and love the spirit in others might gladden the Holy Spirit. -Yogi Mahajan

 Divine Cool Breeze Essue 1-2 & 3 1998 Volume: X Sufism & Sahaja Yoga Dr. Amjad Ali, a Pakistani now working tehzeeb and a seat of Islamic learning, at a hospital in Melbourne, Australia, gave recently saw an intermingling of faiths the Islamic and Sufi interpretation of the Sufism and Sahaja Yoga, at an international Chakras. The first Chakra Mooldhara is seminar on the "Advent of Qayamah Qalabiya in Sufism and Alam-e-Fani in Islam. through enlightenment" organised by the Likewise Swadhishthana is Nafsiya in Sufism and Na-sout in Islam, Nabhi is Qaldiya in Sufism and La-hout in Islam; Anhata is Lucknow, famous for its Ganga-Jamuni Islamic Study Group. The Group, which is a conglomeration of Sirriya in Sufism and Sa-hout in Islam; Muslim professionals from different parts of Vishudhi is Ruhiya in Sufism and Mala- the world, is making a serious effort to khout in Islam. Aganya is Khafiya in Sufism inspire the people that the path to salvation and fab-rout in Islam and Sahasrara is lies in the subtle body of the human beings. Haqiquate in Sufism and La-hout in Islam. Dr. Amjad dwelt at length on how Islam Il has tried to draw a parallel between the "Seven Heavens" as mentioned in The had explained the importance of 373 of these Quran and the seven chakras or plexuses chakras in the resurrection of man: described in the Sahaja Yoga of which Mata Nirmala Devi is the torchbearer. Mr. Jamail, an Algeria-born aeronautical engineer now working in Paris, said that the Renowned Turkish Sufi scholar Hussain fight was between "to be a Muslim" and "being a Muslim." "God does not want his Taup, who came all the way from Istanbul, children to suffer," he said adding that explained at length the seven heavens of ayamat or the day of resurrection and Chakras (consciousness) which were the seven heavens mentioned by Prophet set the temnpo of the conference when he judgement, is the day when human beings should judge themselves. Dr. Zafar Rashid, a Pakistani now working in Oxford University Hospital said that no religion was meant to be exclusive consciousness, and according to him, the The problem started when they were most important step is when God is pleased organised and that denied to human beings with man. Then God sees and hears through an opportunity to realise their own selves. Mohammed. of each explained step He man. The final step is when man is Defining the word Sufi, he said that it comes from the word Safai (cleansing) and, enveloped by the will of God. This is the stage when man finds peace therefore, every human being should make and union with the Almighty. Mr. Taup, who a serious effort of cleansing oneself of one's all through his life has been an Imam, sins. preacher and muezzin, has been the guiding force behind this movement. 17.2.97, Times of India, New Delhi

 Divine Cool Breeze * Volumrie : IX Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Navratri Puja Cabella 5-10-97 Pravachana (Talk) by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. Today, is the 6th day of Navratri. There have Now, supposing I give some present to been many incarnations of the Goddess, for somebody and some present to another one. different purposes. But when the great saints Even in Sahaja Yoga they feel Jealous. Very introspect themselves, who were worshipping surprising ! How can you, when the goddess the mother, they found out that what she has has given you the quality to love ? Very-very done for us. The other day, I told you that the common nonsense about it is that human beings Dharma is the innate valency of human beings, are very jealous. But, as Sahaja Yogis, you and they are 10. This is already established should not, because that quality that the goddess within is, but we deviate, deviate from dharma has given you is of loving. That quality should and all the problems come in. Because to leave be shown, on the contrary you are very jealous. the Dharma is not a human quality. The Goddess That means you are not a Sahaja Yogi blessed herself has done so many things for us, already by Shri Mataji. No, if you are blessed then you'll within us, though we are not aware of it said have no jealousy whatsoever. And this jealousy that d all those whom you have sometimes goes to this extent that, now we are, created means mostly the human beings, what say from Cabella, so you are from Albela, you do ? As what do you exist inside the human finished. These are so close to each other just beings ? Now, just introspect if you have these like the two nostrils together but there will be qualities within you or not ? Because they are jealousy. There will be jealousy about why not given to you by the Goddess, by the Shakti mother come to my country, if you can go to within you, like, या देवीं सर्वभूतेषु शांतिरुपेण संस्थिता is that country very important, that you exist within human beings as peace. Do you find those human beings who are peaceful within and without. Very this is mine, this is mine, this is yours. This difficult, but she has given you that. She has jealousy starts in such a funny manner that, we given you that peace, which you have to do not realise also, that she has given us the So, this comes also from the ignorance that power to love, tremendous power to love. Inauspicious power cannot be our, but achieve. Now, it comes because you have fallen of auspicious dharmie power to love somebody your human Dharmas, so this peace which she means without any lust and greed, without any has given you, you have to achieve through your jealousy. But the human mind has developed ascent, through the Kundalini awakening. You itself, so cunning, that it is proud that it can be are excited, alright, or you want to take revenge, jealous of someone. Out of this jealousy only vou want to hurt others, you want to trouble greed comes in, as I told you. It is a fact, because others, You enjoy sometimes. Even as Sahaja you feel jealous, so you want to buy the same Yogi, people enjoy hurting others, troubling thing; then you must compete with others. If others. So, the second one she says is I a somebody has got a job better than yours then सर्व भूतेषु प्रीति रूपेण संस्थिता, प्रीति is the quality of you must compete. These things are all loving, that a human being has been given, the destructive and the powers of Goddess are quality of loving, but its not there, because first constructive. She gives you all the powers that nonsensical thing human beings have is jealousy. are absolutely constructive. Then she says,

 Volume: X Divine Cool Breeze Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 देवी सर्व भूतेषुः, the saints have said क्षमा रूपेण संस्थिता put in you is, ग्रा देवी सर्वभूतेषु भ्रान्ति रूपेण संस्थिता ET#I is what you call is the Forgiveness. She puts you into delusion. Because sometimes Forgiveness from the heart, alright somebody the children cannot understand unless & until has been cruel to you, has been nasty to you, they face the delusion. They have to face the has exploited you, have troubled you, but you delusion, she allows, allows you to go wrong have the power, great power to forgive. Do we to a point where you discover you are lost. Very use that power to forgive ? Then for realising important it is, that She plays, this is the also what does she do that she gives you the Mahamaya part, as they say, and this is sleep, या देवी सर्वभूतेपु निदारूपे संस्थिता when youl discuSsed in every religion, that we get lost with are tired and you can't sleep, she makes you this delusion. Now what are the delusions that sleep. She relaxes she does, because She acts through Para- for men as if they were very powerful, that they sympathetic nervous system. The sympathetic can do what they like, and they are not going nervous system can excite you, can depress you, to be punished for it. For women, they too but the parasympatholytic relaxes yoLI, relaxes behave in the same manner. They don't your heart, relaxes your body and you feel understand that this is a delusion the mother completely relaxed and sleepy in the lap of your has given to us, for us to find out that we are mother. But there are many people who cannot in the wrong. Because, if you tell somebody this sleep, because they are thinking about something is wrong, you don't do it. Still they are not they have to achieve. If you cannot sleep, then matured enough so they'll go on doing wrong something wrong with you. And when you things. So the mother says go on, very nice, cannot sleep, I also cannot sleep. Whatever is very good, very good thing. You jump in the happening collectively also works on me. sea, jump. When you realize that you have been Anything wrong you do, that works on me, in a delusion, then only you can return back. specially collectively. So, you cannot sleep, Without any problem you cannot return, so because you are thinking of things, which are many of you are so obstinate, so self-conscious. of no value. Now to overcome that, in Sahaja Whatever one may tell will not listen. Yoga, we know we have to go into thoughtless Whatever way, we may try to convince on a awareness. But when your ego is working. (This mental level, you won't, so the delusion is child is very disturbing I have seen him all the beyond the mind. It is beyond mind. It works time running about. Better tell him.) You see in out sometimes very well for difficult people. India you find children absolutely keeping quiet, Now, when you are in a position of a mother. why ? Because the mother takes up the you don't want your child to be ruined, responsibility to train the child. So many naturally. She feels responsible, and she thinks programmes you have had. Have you ever seen that now they have got connection with the any child running about? Yesterday also they divine and this connection should not be broken were all running about here. The reason is that That they should be all the time blessed and be the mother doesn't take responsibility as a mother happy. All this is within us, within us, built in to see that the children are properly brought from our very childhood, but we forget it. Slowly, Even you are so old but I have to tell you, slowly we start loosing it. May be this you. So the power of relaxation we have ? We have the delusions of ego: Ego you, you up. whatever is good for you, your society and new conditioning is such or may be the ego is such generation that has come. In this new generation and may be that they forget that they are if realised souls. I am talking to you, to people still are not behaving in a proper way, in you a normal way, how can you impress others ? who are realised souls, I am not talking to people So, Mother has to tell you. who are already lost or who may be on their way to Sahaja Yoga. But the way you are The most interesting thing that mother has brought up, the way you have been told very

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Sweetly, with love, with affection, with kindness, respect the body, but this seems to have gone and if you don't understand that, then you go with the influence of America, I should say, they into afa For example it is also said, 1 a are brainless people. Absolutely brainless, H oa t a I don't know how to nothing to learn from them, only 200 years old discribe ? Its not shyness. It is a kind of a shame people and we start behaving in their manner. about your body. Now, they have beauty contest, We don't see even what is happening to their India also they had beauty contest (why are country, what sort of people they are ? How you writing ?...) Rear means you they live, what is their idea ? What is their goal have to have shame of your body, that's specially in life ? Every false guru has exploited them, for women. As a child, you will see, women are because they are brainless, if they had brains, very shy, see little girls, they are very shy. they would never have accepted them. They Shyness gradually disappears. But in the have brains how to run a computer or how to beginning, they are even shy of me. They come run a television, mechanical things. But as far before me, they'll put down their head, they'll as their own body is concerned, they don't not even say amaste. Very sweet and they don't know how to manage. like people wearing funny dresses. I remember my granddaughter, once she saw one magazine which there was a lady in the swimming many sensible people opposed it, because its like dress. She said what are you doing ? Better wear selling your body and making money. What is your dress, otherwise my grandma will come the difference between prostitution and this ? If and hit you hard. To that lady she was saying you get money by selling your body then it's like that and then she opened and saw one prostitution. Yoi are not supposed to sell your man's dress with a small little knicker, I don't body. That's not what goddess has done to you, know why they do it ! And she said this one but you should dress up well, different, different seems to be absolutely shameless fellow. He is occasions are there. For those occasions you have going to have a bad time now, and she closed to wear the way it is. The other day I gave, a it and told the maid servant, burn this, burn very nice saree, which we call as to one this off, I don't want to see. Such a little girl, lady, as a present and we had a function, for a she knew that it was wrong. But the way now book was inaugrated, and this lady came there, a days we are going about with the show of so I said why didn't you wear your tai i She our body and sometimes I feel that all these said what ? There is no wedding on, how can designers will die or will get bankrupt, because I wear for this function tadii There has to be people wear such little clothes these days. There a wedding. Very sweet, in wedding I can wear. is no space for any artist to show his work or It is all occasions, places, which are to be to show his art, how he can dress you up. In celebrated. Like in India when husband-wife go Japan I asked them, how this is, long time back, to the temple or to worship the idols or now Japanese are American, but at that time, I anything, then they will wear all that is said how is it you wear these dresses this necessary, to face the goddess after all. Imagine kaemonas done so well, very expensive and it people coming for this programme lhere, takes time to wear that ? So, they said that, wearing, I don't know what they call it but like you see, if God has made a beautiful body, it is jute, jute clothes, like hippies. What would his art and we have to make our art to decorate happen to me ? I would disappear in thin air, it. So what we do is to make our art to decorate I can tell you that. So one has to have respect it. I really liked it, because in India, it is the for the body, that is what she has said first that In India they had a beauty competition and Gi uvil a aaa. Now you might say that there same thing, If there's a lady she has to wear a saree, which is being made very artfully, very are people who are taking bath in the river and beautifully, just to decorate her body, just to this and that and give justification. But you are

 Issue 1-2 &3 1998 Volume: X Divine Cool Breeze saints, you are realised souls, you don't have to weak, your teeth will be falling and you wil see those people who are not yet realised and become very soon an old hag. Same with the who are misbehaving. You must do what a saint men, now a days men are also going to the beauty parlour, I am told. Too much money, I think, and stupidity together. There is no need. There are so many qualities that the goddess If you lead a good healthy life, you have to has given you. Another is aaaaa1, She is exercise and meditate. If you meditate, you the one who has giveri us hunger, we have to become peaceful, with that peace, you'll be eat our food. Now a days there is a fashion of amazed, you'll have so much of energy. So much becoming thin or whatever you may call and energy is wasted in thinking, and what do you you know so many diseases have developed, think? If you ask somebody what are you Anorexia, this thing, that thing, because women thinking? Everything, but everything means want to eat little. You can change the things what ? Why do you think so much ? What is you are eating but it's not the aim of life to only the need to think ? It's a habit, human habit, to look after your body. Body is not the only go on thinking about everything. For example, important thing. What is important is your just now there are three carpets. Now, if I put spirit She is the one who gives you the attention on it, I'll first see how nice they are and just enjoy, enjoy what the artist have done method by which you'll ascend. But all the time ? That's all, no words, nothing. Just the worried about their body. This is something I enjoyment within yourself. But if you ask can't understand, specially the women, who are somebody else, he'll just start saying, oh this is shakti. Then another point is that they follow a not good, that's not good, this is not so bright, fashion. Fashion is madness. When I was voung this thing, that thing. The joy of that artist is used to wear my blouses like this only But in finished. You cannot get that joy, that joy about India also fashion started, they used to increase which we are seeking. What we are seeking is the size of the sleeves, then decrease the size of joy and even when you have got a way of doing the sleeves, then some went up to here. Now, it, you don't achieve it. Because thinking is a I thought what is this nonsense ? Why waste reaction. Reaction to everything and it makes money like this ? You have a particular design the life so miserable, it makes the life of the and this is traditionally accepted design, that person who thinks and of others also. I'll give should have. Why do you want to go on you an example. This whole thing, we got it increasing and decreasing the size of the sleeves done, just because, It's very heavy rains and according to the fashion ? This is the fashion. also we have problems of sometimes snowing Who makes the fashion ? Devi? Devi has nade So, I thought that's a nice thing, to have a nice the fashions ? Who has made the fashions ? It thing done and it's very well done, we got it. is the hungry, greedy people, who are befooling Now, there are thinking people in this Italy, lots of them, that's why its not progressing. Now. we applied three years back. Three years they Now, for example, I told vou, you must put kept our money locked up in the bank, imagine. oil in your hair, atleast on Saturday, put And first time they said, alright, everything is sufficient oil and then wash your head. But, fine, it's alright you can have it. It had seventy you will not do that and then you start losing signatures of these Italians, so called and then your hair. I can understand that if you have no they came around to say, the same people, no, said should do. kundalini, she is the one who gives you a you you, and you are trying to follow fashions time, you are a very busy man. But why ? Why no, no, you must change it to copper. not do something when it is needed to look after why ? Because copper will be aesthetically very yourself also. So you look after your body to good. But don't they know, the stupid people, thin down, you lose your hair, eyesight will be that copper will look the same as they are

 e Volume:X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Divine Cool Breeze looking. After one month only they will have by train, even if train stops for two minutes, the same colour. This is the idea of aesthetics men must get out. The wife will be worried now and now I have told them, we don't want your and while the train will be moving, then they'll land, you keep it to yourself and give us back jump. It's a crack brain, I think like a monkey our money, In a simple thing like that, why ? because even monkeys won't do that. It's that Because they have a committee, there is they cannot remain stationary in one place. Rejuvne, bejvne, sejuvne ? We have to go Now, in meditation you have to sit down in one through all that nonsense. Because they all sit place, not to jump from here to there, there to down in chairs, very seriously, we must discuss, here, which is very difficult. Women have other we must consult, we must ask everyone and problems. While cooking, they'll meditate. They then this. Ultimätely what comes ? No progress have no time. They have their friends, they have of anything. There is no peace. May be, I don't to go to shopping to buy things and fill the know, may be some underhand dealings are house with all kind of rubbish. They have no needed, for which they are feeling shy to tell time for anything. They are also very me. I don't know what is the thing, but still I adventurous. They want to do business. They can't understand when one office says yes, and want to do this, they want to do that. For when it comes back to it, it says no. Three meditation they have no time ! So settling down again years. So what I am trying to say, that thinking is very important. Settle down with yourself. too much is the sign of ego. But they don't find So, somebody told me, 'Mother if we settle down any solutions. No solutions of anything, They'll we'll become very fat. Alright doesn't matter, never hit the solution. Because they are but you settle down. All sorts of excuses are discussing, arguing, thinking. They have no there, not to meditate. Yes, I meditate mother, solutions. know so difficult in these modern fimes. but you There are crisis in our lives, there are problem Now it is important that Sahaja Yogis have in our lives. But actually you'll be amazed. When to do introspection, inward. Introspection is there is crisis, say in my family or in Sahaja inward looking. Inward looking, why I am Yoga, immediately, I become thoughtless. thinking ? What am I thinking. What is the need Spontaneously I become thoughtless, because the to think ? You will become Nirvichar. Don't problem will be solved by the Parama allow your mind to befool you. This mind is like Chaitanaya. a monkey, I tell you. It's really like a monkey and when it starts working, it makes you jump, from this end to that end, that end to that end. the problem, why should I think ? Forget it, let If you reach some conclusion, so called, and if the Parama Chaitanaya look. If you don't it is not achieved, then you are the most depend on your Parama Chaitanaya, It doesn't miserable person. I have seen people thinning help, doesn't give you any solution. Then you down, only thinking about some thing which is go on round and round and round with your absurd and you can see out of this thinking brain and work it out. This is what you have to what comes out, on a global level also. What is know definitely, that you are connected to the the need to go to the moon ? So many people all pervading power of Divine Love. This is not are dying out ! What is the need to go to Mars love which is stupid. It's Love that thinks, love ? What are they going to get from there ? that is truth, love that is joy. All This is built-in Because they have formed a habit, first they within you and now you have got realisation3; came to India, then went to China, then went so instead of evolving yourself, you just jump to this, then went to that. They can't sit down, into things which are of no value. And so many settle down. They can't settle down in their Sahaja Yogis get lost. I have recently been told house also, specially men. If you are travelling by someone that we have lost about 100 Sahaja The Parama Chaitanaya is going to solve

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 1-2 &3 1998 Yogis, because they started following another the saints have written, you have got the Sahaja Yogi who started seeing things. So, they of truth, you know the reality much more than also wanted to see. If youi can see something, those saints who have praised the Goddess. If that means you are not there. Simple thing. If I you could just think as to what level you are am, say, on the top of a mountain, then I am sitting, you wouldn't fall, you wouldn't go down there, but if I am away from the mountain then that much, only problem is you have to know I can see. The more you see something that that your ascent has to be spiritual and already means you are away from that. Did you follow these qualities are very well balanced and this point ? So, the subtle, the sukshama state is within you, more than dharma. May be vou that where you are yourself that. How can you have the power to give up or to fall down, hut see yourself ? This is the point Sahaja Yogis these powers are never destroyed within you. must understand. Anybody who can see, remember once, I went to America, first time Mother, oh, no he can see, he saw auras around and I met one gentleman and next day he came you, he can see this thing, so, how can you see and told me Mother, I'm changed, I'm changed, ? Because you are that, you can't see. So all I'm changed. What happened ? You know I used such people who are very popular sometimes in to hate my uncle and never wanted to talk him, the biginning of Sahaja Yoga, try to control you very angry with him, but yesterday, just imagine, and befool you and then you are thrown out. yesterday I met him. I went and hugged him Now, this is what you call is the judgement. and kissed him and I said, now I have forgiven There are sieves, and sieves and sieves through you, completely forgiven you. Now don't think which you have to pass. Where you get about feeling guilty about it. He started looking enamoured by this or that or you fall for this or at me like this. So with the kundalini awakening, that, all these things are there. Step by step, all these beautiful qualities you have will come how you are ariving ? You are ariving at that up and then your generosity, your beautiful being point where your destruction is sure, because which is enlightened by the spirit, will prove to you have to become the spirit, you have to rise the world that, Sahaja Yoga is the truth. in spiritual life and if your movement is Yesterday's beautiful dramas have shown us, downward, who can help you ? This is a very but it should not be a mental satisfaction within interesting time as I told you, is the time of you that I have got the realization, I-am this, judgement and at this time we have to be careful no, no, no mental. It's a state, and that state to that we are our own judges. Nobody is to tell achieve, you have to really meditate. Find you that you are catching this one and you are for meditation every night, every morning. The catching that one. You yourself can feel it, what more you'll meditate, the better it will be. No chakras are you catching. Whatever I may try excuses are to be given or to be convincing to on my own to suck in all your problems, do yourself. Everything is unimportant, your ascent whatever is possible to keep you rising and rising is very important, if you really want to save and rising, but what I feel that this method of this world from this kaliyuga. I think today helping you, will not make you so strong, have made it very clear to you, what qualities because you will always think that afterall are already installed within you. They are, Mother will suck my problems. If I get 100 are not dharmas but qualities, they are just letters, 99 of them are of Sahaja Yogis who are within you, only thing you have turned your suffering from this trouble or that trouble Iam attention to something opposite, otherwise all amazed, you have all these qualities already these qualities are already instilled within you. awakened in you, they are in you, you use them. They are already there, and nothing can destroy Somebody will say, that fellow is troubling me, them except for you yourself. If you have the wife is troubling me, the husband is troubling destroyed them, nobody can help me, just forgive, just forgive, your power of forgiveness is poor. Moreover, more than what power put mẹ they 15 May God bless you all.

 Volurrie: X Issue I-2 & 3 1998 Divinie Cool Breeze The Role of Women Shudy Camps, June 1998 Yesterday, we have had a nice meditation, and Also, the tree fell down And she didn't know we all felt the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost, and what to do. So she came back and she said to told you that we have to understand that this this, another Sahaja Yogini, "I'm sorry I've said is the greatest moment in the history, while you these things. That is what has happened, now you are born, and you are doing the highest work that please save me from another disaster because is of God, here. And you are specially chosen for have been rather selfish towards myself." She said, it and how you must know that you are a saint. "No, I never said anything to mother. I never told Apart from this, all the blessings that you have, Her. I just came back home, I forgot everything. you also get lost sometimes in your blessings that I never told anything to Mother. I never carried you have, you also get lost sometimes in your any malice in my mind. I was absolutely very blessings and start behaving in a manner which forgiving. How it has happened ?" doesn't behove a saintly person. Now after so many years I have agreed, or I agreed to have Puja and she was worried that all her garden will Ekadasha Rudra Puja, which was, I know, was be swept away one day. So she wrote a letter to a dangerous thing to do because I know, still so me saying. "Mother, this is what has happened. many Sahaja Yogis are half-baked, some are just I have done it because I have these bad habits taking advantage of Sahaja Yoga, and making from my past life and I tried to save one money out of it or getting some power out of it, Jackfruit.." and then she had to give it away or fame or something. This has happened after the Ekadasha Rudra to beggars, to servants. Nobody would buy those jackfruits from her. Then she lost all her money So this was let loose now. this power, and She lost everything. I know it is rather dangerous, is a very, very dangerous power in a way, and but how to destroy the negativity ? you have to be very careful. It of course, protects you from the people who attack you and try to destroy you from all negativity. It wants to work Sahaja Yoga, very much, and Sahaja Yogis. out all kinds of protection that is possible for you, through a very subtle method. As you must have but if you start misbehaving, also it can act upon heard about Australia, what has happened there. you. I'll give you a story about something happened One lady who was sent from her husband to very recently in India. One Sahaja Yogi went to Australia to get corrected. So there's another one another Sahaja Yogi's place, who had lots of who's a wife of someone. She's very conscious of jackfruits in her garden and she said, "why don't her "wifeness." She got hold of this negative woman vou give me one jackfruit because I wat to make and created a group of such riegative women. And some Vegetable out of it ?" So she said, "Not today. all the vibrations of Sahaja Yoga were finished give you. I will give you some other day; I there. On my birthday, not one person sent me do'nt want to give you today. That's all. And she even a flower from Australia. They did my Puja, had lots of jackfruits. So the Sahaja Yogi felt bad all right. That ritual they did : Puja.. but families And today I find the negativity is also hurting Ill you see, she just wanted to make some She said that we are doing in our own family that vegetables for some nice people coming to her Which is your family ? The small little family of house-costs you nothing in the market, just she ashram or your own family ? And the whole thing liked the jackfruit so she said can I have one got destroyed. All the vibrations of all the jackfruit ? Next day there was a a kind of typhoon came, only in her garden, nowhere else. And all her jackfruits fell down. very big wind, Australias was destroyed. Then I had to call the leader to Bombay, He

 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X 10 was so upset with his own vibrations because he started shaking before me. His hands started and England and America, the women have trembling before me. He said, "I am sensitive." become very dominant. And they know how to I said, "No, this is Bhoot, this is not sensitivity. control men by telling them stories about how to If Specially it is very much in Europe, I find, you get anything, pains, or anything like that, look after the family, how to look after the childrer, that means you Te Don't be diverted. Don't think like that. Don't have get lost with it. I have seen so many of like that. wrong ideas about yourself." I said, "you sit down It has created so many problems. before me now." Then I took out the spirits from him. Then he admitted "there was an assault of Scottish people on me." Scottish people. Why ? themselves and understand they are wives. And "Because she went from Scotland." I said, "Bhoots whatever blessing they have got from Sahaja Yoga do not have any nationality. They do not have will be all withdrawn if you start misbehaving. any caste. They don't have any religion. They're And all kinds of miseries will be upon them, not bhoots. So don't call them Scotish. They could be because of me, but because of Ekdasha Rudra. As Russians. They could be Italians. They could be you put everything on the bhoots, let me put it Indians. They could be anything." But such a lot on all the deities. I don't take any responsibility. them that the whole of Australia, the whole of Because if you are irresponsible, they'll hit you New York got caught up. Now I requested all the women to behave hard and you will end up with cancer or something very serious and then, don't blame me. This is the So how the negativity crawls into it, and a situation today. I have known some Sahaja Yoginis person like James who is a saint was hurt. Not who confessed to me that they have been doing hurt but he was absolutely ruined and he admitted this, they have been doing that, they have been that "Mother,I know what has happened to me." talking about families this, that. And they have But I found out his wife who was guilty. She had been hurt. This is to be understood because I think a very bad past, allergic to things, she was. All the women in the West do not have intelligence. kinds of things she had. I told her that you have They are not intelligent. That's the simple equation to get out of Australia. So the Maha Puja has been I have reached. Some have iritelligence and even postponed in a way. I'll see to it that we do it, if they are caught up they are sensible, If they but may not be any one of the Sahaja Yogis from are intelligent. But the women here are aggressive that ashram come. And then to my surprise, all but not intelligent. these horrible six women who had formed a group with this woman, wrote a letter to me that "She has uplifted us." And the vibrations were so bad point. She knows this is Adi Shakti. If her husband that I just felt the whole vibrations started flowing is doint something wrong she'll just say "I'll fast and fighting with them. I couldn't read the letter. for ten days. Will you behave yourself ?" or "Ill And they felt they have been uplifted. An intelligent woman is in India. She sees the get out of this house if you don't behave yourself." Is the women in India who have made Sahaja So in Sahaja Yoga, you can be misled very Yoga successful in India; They are very intelligent much by so many things, but now, be careful. women. Don't try to cheat yourself. Must understand your own value. As I told you yesterday that you are Yogis, you are saints, and you should not yield are so aggressive. They do not see the point, They to anything nonsensical and cheapish. Anybody do not understand who I am. They do not who tries to do all those things, you should tell understand, what is our worth. To them all them you are yogis. As I told you yesterday that nonsensical stupid things are important. Not all for a person who is a yogi, the whole world is of you but some of you. And because the his own family. Here the women lack intelligence because they intelligence is less, you yield to such women who

 Divine Cool Breeze # Völue: X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 are stupid. They tell you all kinds of things. They Yoga, you must have the same knowledge as any talk well. Here only the women talk, I have seen. Sahaja Yogi has. If you have produced children, Men do not talk. If you see a television, only the it doesn't mean that you have achieved something women are talking. Men never talk. A child has great. Anybody can produce children : dogs, cats, died, it is the mother who is talking. I don't know everyone. Also your husbands are responsible how she can talk when her child is dead. She's partly for it. So nothing you have achieved great the one who will talk. And the father will be by producing children, looking after the children, Lunhappy, like a mouse sitting there, keeping shut. dominating your husband all the time. How much So many times I have told Sahaja Yogis in England do you know about Sahaja Yoga ? I know some and elsewhere that you are like cabbages. If you of them do not know what are the chakras on behave like this, the day will come when you all the feet. They don't want to know anything about will be destroyed by these horrible women. Now Sahaja Yoga. Only they want to use Sahaja Yoga women have to understand they are women sometimes to dominate the husbands. One has to because they are compassionate, they are face it up. How much do you know deeply about forbearing, They are like this Mother Earth. Their Sahaja Yoga. ego is so developed. Be careful about it Why America is finished today ? Because of their Most of you have so many problems within yourselves. As I have seen, some of you, as soon as you put hands towards someone, you feel, oh, I can give you so many examples of Indian here, I'm catching here. That's the sign of a regular girls who are married here. They brought round bhooting. And I have seen people saying that they their husbands. They put everything right. They are sensitive. It's such a misleading thing. I am have slowly and steadily put them properly into very sensitive. I am very much higher in Sahaja Sahaja Yoga. This is a very common failing of the Yoga. That's not the way you are going to be higher. West and I don't know what has happened to You have to be absolutely perfect, in perfect health the men here. They fell so guilty that they must and perfect knowledge about Sahaja Yoga you become like slaves. Is the other way around in should have. How many of you have read Advent India quite a lot in the North India, I should say, ? Let us see. How many of you have read full that women are very much dominated. We had Advent ? Honestly. Honestly. That's good. women. one Sahaja Yogini. Her husband was a Sahaja Yogi, he was a doctor. He got paralysis. When he got Now what I'm trying to say that you have paralysis, his wife started earning money. When to find out, what is Sahaja Yoga ? Your Guru is she started earning money, he felt very humiliated. a woman. She is the source of all the knowledge. Then he dominated her much more. She came and She is the Ocean of all the knowledge. And why told me, "It was nice when I was not earning- should we lag behind ? In all things we want to he was much sweeter to me.now I'm earning..." be absolutely equal, similar to men. Even in dressing and she was giving every single pie to him. Still up and everything. And what about in knowledge he was dominating her, all the time. "Why you about Sahaja Yoga ? How many have given didn't do this ? Why you didn't do that ?" She realizations to others ? Raise your hands. Only said, "He never did that before. As soon as he's the women I am interested in. That's good. So all right, I am going to give up my earnings," she that is what one should be proud of One should said, "because my husband cannot stand my know how much you know Sahaja Yoga mentally, emotionally. How many of you dominate your husband ? Be careful. She is the only honest So I have to request you people, first and person, I think. I know all of you who dominate. foremost thing, all the Sahaja Yoginis must know And try to crush them also, sometimes. I'm Sahaja Yoga, as well as, the men know. Not just requesting you now because you are the Shakti: smiling and dressing up is important. In Sahaja You are the power behind the man. You are the earnings."

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 1-2&3 1998 12 one who are going to make them great. You are I have seen now in Australia happening. One the ones who are going to build up Sahaja Yoga woman has ruined the whole of Australia and as a potential energy. You are like this Mother Earth one woman can make the whole of Australia a who has to give everything beautiful. all these great thing. That's me. I'm very proud to be a flowers. From where do they come ? All these trees. This Mother Earth looks se simple. But what she Shri Krishna. He had to marry 16,000 women. gives us, look at that Look at those beautiful things. He had to marry them. He could not have them woman and I would hate to be a man. Look at as disciples. They were shaktis, they were His So, one has to understand that to be a good powers. They had to be women. They would have Sahaja Yogini, first of all you have to be an said, already they are saying, that He was a ladies' excellent wife. And not a dominating wife, man. But to me nobody can say that, because 1 pushing yourself forward all the time. I have anm a woman and a mother is not challenged realized this ery much but now recently, I have Father is always challenged. Not the mother. So got 3-4 cases, in which I'm really Shocked, the many things you can achieve as a woman. For way things are happening. And they can hit at that you have to know a few things, how to express me or hit at the leader, hit at anything. Because your pure love to others. How to express your it's easy for bhoots to get the women than the genuineness to others. How to help your husband men. Is true. When you go too much towards the in Sahaja Yoga. right, you immediately get caught up on the left because you move like a swving because naturally you are the left sided thing and then the bhoots a promise to me, that you'll work for Sahaja Yoga catch you much more that they catch other and you'll help your husband in doing Sahaja Yoga. people. You'll be amazed, that when I see the You'll help your husband when he's looking after women, who have led a perverted sex life, are other Sahaja Yogis. And you'll look after other much worse than men. After marriage, men get Sahaja Yogis, who come to your house. You'll make cured, women do not. They have mental your house a Sahaja Yoga center, receive the people problems, because you must know you are the in your house and will always try to enhance the emotions, you are the desires of the whole world. collectivity. Under these promises you are married. You are so important, without you nothing can You are the ones who can show that. It is easy start. If I had not come on this Earth, put all of for a woman to be Short-sighted, conceited and them together, right from Sadashiva to Ganesha, mean. It takes time for a man to be that. But with they could not have done anything. It is a fact. all these possiblities, even if you have another It's me as a woman, as a the In the marriage of Sahaja Yoga, you have given mother, as a wife, as possibility of men to dominate, then you are neither has achieved this. And that's what for here nor there. You have no sex, then. I mean, spouse you, it should be the easiest thing to do because I don't know what even to call them then. You I'm a woman and I've lived like a woman and better name it, a person who is neither woman I've managed so many children, all over the nor a man. Let us be women and be proud of world Managed the whole show, managed my it. That's how we can make a very good world family also very well. I balanced it very well. And for everyone. how it is now proved that a woman can not only be a priest but she can be the highest Guru of So now coming to the major problems of the world. We have seen that I amn talking about politics quite a lot these days, and may be one day all Gurus. I put all of you on the pedestal now, So I of you have to enter into politics, when the have to tell you that you have to come up and time has come. Also, I'm going to see this Mr. you have to look after your Sahaja. You are very Jackson in America. Let's see what works out. Also, important because a bad woman and a bad wife as you know we are working it out in England. is very much more detrimental than a bad man. I am going to within 2 years time, to see all these proper

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 13 leaders. And we are going to work it out in a must learn. way that is sensible, dignified but it is for you people to show that you are very balanced, good families. Now, so we come to the deeper problems of this world. Is that the mental projection has now shown clearly... (Be with me, all of you try to Hello, will you please keep quiet ? Who is understand.) It's a very deep problem, that if you that? Your son is very mischievous. Would you go to the left or to the right you jump into the please take him away ? You must teach them how extremes, into the problems and you create to behave before Mother. You must teach them. problems: So we have to keep everybody in the One child can spoil all the other children. Be careful. centre. And to keep in the centre, we have to You must smack them sometimes, I think it's ascend. Now the problem is that, we have many necessary. Otherwise the children can never behave people who have come to Sahaja Yoga. This was themselves. They need two smackings on the left never achieved before, never achieved before. For Swadisthana and they're all right. We have to build that the main reason was that it was impossible up societies and families, with proper training, with to penetrate into the minds of the people and tel| proper understanding. As I told you, till the age them what is to be done. Everybody tried their of five years, you can smack them. Till the age level best. of ten years, you should teach them and after the age of sixteen years, they are to be treated just Today only I was discussing Buddha. 1 said like your friends. But first if you have missed these Buddha tried his level best to tell people that they two points, you can never treat them. They'll just should get out of nonsensical ritualism, and get sit on your head. This is the problem also of to their salvation. He tried everything. So when he died, they said, "All right, he has said not to make any statues; we'll make stupas." so they made But today the problems are much deeper than stupas that they started worshiping. Just the what we think of, a kind of a negative force like opposite of what he said, that just now you get Hitler's force is rising up through women of all your salvation, your cleansing, introspection and the countries. Through women this horrible Hitler the middle path. He even went up to the idea and all these Germans who died are taking birth. that don't have families. With the families means They are becoming like now...just like Nazis. So this nonsense. You just take to renunciation, within but to negative forces, that are working within us. They as usual, as they were again consolidated into their have to be humble, they have to be sweet and nonsensical things, they made big stupas and things sacrificing because they have power to do it. It's and worshiped. You see that in the life of Christ. only the women who can do it. Not the men. Men You see that in the life of Mahavira. You see that can't do it. They have other sweetness about them. in the lives of all the great incarnations and Men have some other sweetness about them. But prophets, Islam and everything. Same thing has the women have that intelligence which can build happened, that they have perverted it. But who has perverted ? Who has spoiled the whole essence every great Incarnation ? It was spoiled by the disciples themselves because they were not realized. children in this country. women have to be very careful not to give way yourself, so that you see all these things the whole world into a beautiful world. of Now what are you doing ? Sit quietly. Will you please sit quietly ? Hello ! If you can't sit quietly better go away Sit quietly. Yesterday you were not here and they were all very quiet. Now behave properly. All of you must learn to behave, all right ? You must teach your children when you bring them here or bring anywhere that how to behave. You must teach them. You must tell them. Children Now, the deep problem I find is the women who are supposed to be my disciples will be spoiling Sahaja Yoga-very clearly. I can see it now. I can see it so clearly, absolutely clearly. They are going to spoil because they have become very dominating Because they think they know Sahaja Yoga. Because

 Divine Cool Breeze $ Volume : X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 14 they think they have become very great. A leader's if they are coming, immediately I can feel they wife thinks she's the leader herself. If you call are coming. The whole atmosphere waits for them. somebody that "All right, come and do this job for The whole cosmos, just in complete respectful me," the wife thinks she has a right on her husband attendance, is waiting for their arrival There are more than mother has. Is the women who are the women of that quality. We have to take them as culprit today and that's why I want to warn you. ideals and not the stupid, useless, vain women. Now I have seen it. I can point it out, at least ten We have to take them as something great. This women like that who have done it. And now the is what I have to tell you that the potential within you is very great. Sahaja Yoga should not be limited to you or to your children. So the depth that you eleventh. It's just here this is what it is. And I have to request you to understand that have you touch. the responsibility will be on you. When it will be written down in history, as Ramayana was written, it was the maid servant of Kaikai, the mother, the lost their values, they have lost their depth. This stepmother of Rama is the one who is responsible is the basic problem of today. They have become for the whole of thing that happened in the competitive, money oriented, success oriented, all Ramayara. But that was to happen. But where nonsensical things. They are not ascent oriented. is that Manthara today, and where is that Kaikai ? So you have to be very, very careful. Basically this Indians do not take their names. They spit if is the problem you should see and I request all anybody takes that name. To the dogs they have the Sahaja Yogis to be on the watch. The same gone. They thought that time they have achieved woman today can be ladder to the heaven or could a lot. This is what I have to tell you. If you want be a slide downward. Somehow they have achieved like that, down in the history, because this that kind of a position now that they can dictate, The problem of today, that the women have to go is a very precarious time we are facing and we just like Hitler : took only eleven years. I think have to be very, very careful about ourselves. What these women have taken, I don't know how many are we up to ? What are we doing ? I deal with years, but now I see them on the scene. A woman the present moment and the present times. And without righteousness, a woman without chastity, I don't want to say what will happen to you in a woman without humility is not a woman future. If you have to go to hell, you can go. I'm Compassion is her decoration. I wish I could write not going to say who's going to go to hell and like William Blake. I wish he had written about who's going to go to heaven, but it is for you to the women of the West and the beauty that they decide through your introspection, to understand were. And that they have to achieve. Once the what's going to happen. women really know their strength, they will make this world a beautiful world, I know that. But not And I have to specially make a very important their weaknesses where they fall at the pattern request to the women that in these modern times, of men. That's their weakness. they are the ones who are going to save the world. Not the men. They have done their job before. Now it is for you to save, with your understanding. achieve two things. Yesterday I told you about with your compassion, with your sacrifices, with introspection and today I have told you where your wisdom and the innate love, not only your is the problem. Even if you make a big boat, the children, your husband, your family, but the whole biggest boat, which is seaworthy, and make a big world. It is a very good opportunity for all of you hole in it, that boat will be sunk. Even if to do your bit. It has been a tremendous experience the brightest eyes, but a little hole goes into your with some of the very great Sahaja Yoginis we eyes, you can't see the skies. And in their subtle have. Some of them have achieved, really, as you method, these women have the knack to put that can say,the constant state of bliss. Really. Some in your eyes. And they have also the knack to. of them have. In the constant state of bliss. Even open the complete vision of beauty. So, in this program we have been able to have you

 issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: IX 15 We are going to be a very ideal race, an ideal I'm so very happy in India for one reason. Most of the men come and tell me: "It's my wife family, an ideal everything, no doubt. We are who brought me to Sahaja Yoga. It is she who going to show to the world, whatever people may exposed me to sahaja Yoga. It is she who's done try tricks on us, we are not bothered. We have so much for me and for Sahaja Yoga. And such to go further and further. Like Ganesha, you can tremendous respect for the women. Even those say, a huge big elephant tied with all kinds of who have come here, I've seen some of them have ropes and all kinds of chains can go and push slowly and steadily brought their husbands to forward. In this manner, we all Sahaja Yogis are Sahaja Yoga. Cf course Indians also have some going to work it out. But the ladies of Sahaja horrid women and when they come abroad, if Yoga have to work it out. They have to see that they are westernized and are exposed to western they give that power to their men. If I find any life also, they can be very horrid too. But innately, husband weak, I know It's the wife who is a a woman's attitude in India is different, that she nagger or or who is a dominating person, has to establish the dharma in her family. She has who thinks no end of herself. And if I see a man to establish the beauty of God in her family. She so powerful, I know there's a woman behind has to give all that is good to her children, all him. It's just like electricity and light and a lamp. righteousness. She has to be humble. She has not If the electricity is flowing all right, the lamp to raise her voice. If she raises her voice, then she is burning. Absolutely fhat. But if you are spoils her children : she teaches them how to raise identified with these stupid vain womerı, then the voice. She has to, in a way, obey her husband you are lost. You'll be finished. because children should obey her. It works ; the society is much better there than it is here. So this new, movement of women's lib and all that, is I am saying, and if you try to follow what you of that secret work that is going on. Because have to do, then you will immediately see that or If you know what I am, if you know what a sign women are left-sided, they are sly. They work it mother is trying to strengthen our roots. Because out very cleverly and cunningly. you are the roots of the trees. You have to give all the nourishment. You have to be notherly, all could be like me. You all could sisterly towards alI the other Sahaja Yogis, not But you achieve all my powers much more than men to quarrel, to fight, to say hard things. That's achieve if you want to. But you have to get out not the job of a woman, not to argue but be of your small visions and small ideas about quiet and watch out. Even if they are catching glorifying yourself. I'm sure it will work out if you on certain chakras, you can cleanse them very take it upon yourself that we all could do what well as wives. You can work it out secretly. You Mother is doing today. First thing you must learn can do it. Because the problem, though it looks to cook well. Don't allow men to do anywork in so dangerous, and so destructive and shocking, the household. Never, never allow your husband the keys are in the hands of the wonmen of today. to do anywork in the household. They will just They can just solve the problem like that if they entirely depend on you. Make the best food. Be decide and understand their glory and their an expert cook. The husband will be back home. value and do not make themselves cheap, I'm giving you the tricks of the trade. Try to hankering after cheap popularity. If I have been understand your husband like a witness. able to nail down this great problem to a very Sometimes he gets angry for nothing at all and precise source of it and if you can manage the all that. Be a witness to that. He is another child source, I'm sure we can manage Sahaja Yoga. you have. It's a grown up child and you have We can manage the whole world and the to look after a grown up child. Be kind and humanity at large is going to be absolutely saved attentive. It is very surprising that you all have as that is your desire. not yet learned those tricks. Perhaps your mothers never told you. May God bless you.

 Divine Cool Breeze $ Volume : X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 16 Shri Adishakti Puja Cabella 6-6-93 "What is Adishakti Today you are all going to worship me first time. It has always been a puja of an pure love. So think of a father who has put aspect of me or part of me. Now one has to all his love into one personality, then what is know very clearly, what is Adishakti ? As you left in him ? Nothing. He is just watching. say it is the Pure desire of God Almighty, the What does he think ? He is just watching the Sadashiva. But what is the pure desire of God play of his desire, of his love. He is watching Almighty ? If you see, your own desires come it, how it is working out. And when he is out of what ? Not out of divine love, not out watching that he is very careful because he of common love, out of material love or out of knows that this personality that I have created power of love. Behind all these desires there is nothing but love and compassion; and is love: If you donot love something you will compassion itself is such a noble variety that not desire it. So these mundane type of love it cannot bear anybody challenging that that you have for which you spend so much compassion, troubling that compassion or also of your time uselessly, actually they donot give in any way demeaning it, lowering it you satisfaction because that is not true love insulating it. He is so alert on that point and that you have just, infatuation for the time he is very watchful. So a rift has taken place, being and then you just get fed up with it and we should say from him, from his own desire then you jump to another thing, to another of love. thing and to another thing. At this point comes Adishakti, which was Now this desire of love has also given a So Adishakti is embodiment of God's personality means ego, and that this ego has Divine Love, is God's Pure Love and in his to act on its own. It became, sort of, very love what did he desire ? He desired that he independent personality which was free to do should create human beings who would be whatever it liked. And we can not think very obedient, would be sublime, would be our mundane life that a husband and wife are like Angels; and that was his idea to create absolutely free to do what they like, because Adam and Eve. So Angels have no freedom, there is no cohesion, there is no understanding Angels are made like that. They are fixed they there is not that oneness, that rapport But do not know why they do it ! Animals also is like a moon and moonlight, sun and sunlight. donot know why they do certain things; they It is such a cohesion that whatever one does, just do it, because they are bound by nature. another enjoys. In that beautiful rift Adishakti They are bound by God Almighty. They say decided to change His plan. She is known for Shiva is Pashupati, means He controls all the her "Sankapvikalp Karoti"; anything you try animals. He is Pashupati. So all the desires to decide too much, she will make it different. come to animals but they donot repent, they like today's 11 O'elock Puja. So when this donot have ego, they donot think that this is Adam and Eve business started she thought wrong or that is good. They have no Karma that they will be just like other animals or problem because there is no ego, because they Angels. What is the use ? They must know what they are doing, they must know why have no freedom.

 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Divine Cool Breeze * Volumë: X they are doing. They must have the freedom talked about Kurndalini since long and that she to understand what is the knowledge and like is the Adishakti, reflected within us. Now, you fixed machine like life, that these animals are see it is already read it out to you that I wll having, why whould they have? So in her be in everyone of them. Now understand that arbitrary power which was conceded, of course, this Adishakti is the power of love-of pure She is the one who came as a serpent and told love-compassion. There is nothing else she them that you taste the fruit of knowledge. has, only the pure love within her heart. But Now for people who are not Sahaja Yogis you this pure love is so powerful, is so powerful, cannot tell this. They will be shocked. But this that is the love she has given to this Mother serpent that came for them to test and then Earth. Because of that this Mother Earth, the to tell them that you better taste this fruit. amount of sins we may commit, we may do This serpent told the woman, not the man, anything, she is pouring out her love through because woman is supposed to accept things these beautiful things to all of us. They have easily. He may even accept bhoots, he may also this beauty expressed in every way, of her even accept nonsense but she is the one who love through the galaxies you see, through the accepts. While the man does not accept easily. stars you see. Now if you want to see from a He argues, he discusses, that is why She came scientific way, then science means it has no and told the woman. She came and told love in it. There is no question of love. Even woman, I should say. This Holy Ghost actually people talk of Yoga, but they donot talk of is a feminine and so moves nearer to a woman. love and compassion. This feminine Ghost came as a serpent and told that better you taste the fruit of Knowledge. Now it was the job of the lady to there cannot be any divine power in that convince her husband because women know person. Everything is completely submerged in how to do that. Sometimes they may eonvince this Divine love. Everything that is created in them wrongly, tell them something which is this earth. Everything that is created in this very wrong, very sinister, as you know, in universe and universes and universes is all Macbeth what happened ? So many places, because of the love of the Divine Mother. So we have seen, women have misguided their this Adishakti's love is something so subtle, is husbands. But men can be misguided or could so subtle; vou cannot understand sometimes. be guided or could be emancipated, if they know you all leove me very much, tremendous have a proper wife. So he had all faith in his love for me, and when I get the vibrations wife, believed in it and they tästed the fruit of from you, it is like the ripples that reach the knowledge under the guidance of this Holy shores and again they return back and lots of Ghost who was a feminine personality of God. little little sparking drops are there on the This cannot be conceived that the people who shores also. In the same way, in my heart, are just getting a glimpse of Christ or a glimpse feel your love echoing the beauty of this of Mohammad Sahib or a glimpse of Nanak sparkled Divine love. 1 cannot explain to you Sahib. They cannot understand. They just had the experience, but the first thing that it creates a glimpse of them. If they have told people is that tears come into my eyes. Because it is would have said, Wah! What is this ? They the compassion, which is Sandra Karuna is would have never listened to them. When there is no love and compassion 'Ardra', it is not dry. Like a father's compassin should be very dry, alright; do this, otherwise but So at that time, the way the attention was, I will shoot you. Do this, mother will the way the reception was, they told about she will not say something that will be that Dharma, about ascent. But in India people hurting. she will have to say something to say,

 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Divine Cool Breeze # VolumeX 18 correct but her saying is very different from then you become the giver, you are no more the father's, because she has got Sandra the person who has to take anything, you Karuna. Ardra, Ardra' is which is not dry. become the giver. You are so fulfilled. Now This kind of a heart she developed because of this Advent came at a time which was judged this Divine love that she was having. So every what time it should come. As I said you have part of the body, everything is created out of freedom, people were going amuck doing all Divine love. Every bit of it emits nothing but kinds of things. So if you see that just before Divine love. Vibrations are nothing but Divine this we had a big problem of people working out their power, like people will go to India to occupy the territory of India, or to China Now as I have told you before also that or besides they went up to Africa and all these this incarnatiori had to come. The time had places. Even Americans went to, so called come. It was all being seen that the time has Americans, went to America and occupied It. love. come. But there is a difference between fixed time and the time which is Sahaja. Fixed time is such that, you can say that, this train will their freedom for power only. That was not leave of this time, this will reach this time. the time for the Adishakti to come. They were You can say that some machinary is producing the people who were power oriented; not that something, in such time it will produce so many today we donot have but these were seeking things: But living things which are sporntaneous, only power and also these territories. It is not which are Sahaja, you cannot say time. In the important. So it could not be at that time. At same way this process of freedom. You have that time, one has to fight for one's freedom, the maximum freedom. So one could not say for getting out of the clutches of these what time this will happen, that people will imperialists and people who were trying to be available to receive this subtle knowledge of overpower. Now gradually it changed. It divine love. Knowledge also could be very dry. changed and changed in such a smooth way! We had terrible people in India who were busy It is very surprising ! I saw the change coming with the reading and with the recitation of up myself. It worked out, as your know, I mantras, this, that and they became so dry-so myself took part in the freedom movement of dry that they had just bone structures left and India. It is important. In Irndia it started, first so hot tempered that they looked at anybody the freedom from imperialism, started spreading and that person will be reduced to ashes. I in every country. People started thinking about mean, is this the way you have come on this the freedom; they started understanding that earth, to do all the tapasayas and everything, there is no use having colonies and that better just to make somebody into ashes ? But that's come back to your own position. So when this how they thought that they were very great happened, I mean this happened in my own because they looked at somebody and that life time, I must say, first people who tried to So this was the time when they were using person disappears or becomes ashes. There was have freedom in our country died. So many no idea of benevolence in their heart. First were killed; you know, we have people like thing that is achieved through this Divine love Bhagat Singh in every country. is your benevolence. The benevolence itself is revolutioneries were thrown out and illtreated also a kind of a very misguided word. and killed. It is not a question of independence. Benevolence means whatever is good for your spirit. Now as you know the spirit is the freedom was tested. Now they thought that reflection of God Almighty, so when the spirit this was nonsensical thing we did. This was in you starts reflecting itself in its full beauty no freedom because after all doing all that All the But that one had to go through, so that,

 Divine Cool Breeze Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 19. Volume:X they started repenting and developing a kind religions got derailed and they formed a kind of fear and a fright from others and a kind of of puddings you see, Muslims here, Christians a very disturbed left Vishudhi started. They here, Hindus there. This is this, this is that. So felt very guilty, that they have done very you really needed this river of life to fill Wrong. That they should not have done. all up these puddles and make them one. It is complete ignorance. It is sheer stupidity to At this juncture also there were other think that one human being is higher than problems, like we have caste system and other another. You can only say one thing that at a problems like slavery and all kinds of things- different state you are, some are at a different disparities and some people were treated as stage, some are at a higher stage, but in general lower people and some as higher people, some you cannot condemn some body that he is not higher races, some lower races. All these stupid good, this society is not good. In general things were there. Through their freedom they individually you can say. In general you cannot created. It is not so, it is not the fact, it is not say. This ignorance was so dark it became a the truth but they created the things like that. collective ignorance-collective ignorance. They Now supposing I want to create something all joined hands together collectively, to say here just to say that alright, this is not a carpet, that this is the religion that is the best, we are go on telling you, this is not a carpet. The only the one who have saved ones. Another brain is washed there. This is not a carpet. It said no, no, no, these are absolutely condemned IS something else. It is like a mesmeric thing people, we are the best; and under the name I feel the way people accepted this nonsense of religion, under the name of God Almighty of racialism and all kinds of disparities of they started this nonsense. So now Adishakti slavery of caste system and specially ill treating had to assert with the complete force. So the women. Al this came out of the choice that first thing she realised that one should know was given to them to select what is good, what is the family. A child grows in the family. what is bad. So to them it was very good, it If the children do not get proper attention a nice thing to do. Under these from the father or the mother, we can say, if circumstances compassion would have been they are also spoiled or if not spoiled over wasted on these people, Divine love would indulge into or they are neglected, then the have been a waste on them, because mentally child does not know what love is. If a child people were not prepared to understand. You does not know what love is, love does not could not tell them that this is absolutely out mean that you spoil the child or you give him was of your blindness, ignorance that you are doing some toys to play and get rid of him. this. This is not the right thing for you, this is not right thing. This will not make you noble. This is ignoble. They are doing ignoble things is on your child and that attention is not of course, so many saints came, they talked of indulgence but an attention for the benevolence nobility, of foregiveness, of unity, of oneness, of the child. So all the time you are seeing that everything they said. Big seers were born. They there is benevolence and thus I thought the also reached that point, talked about it. But family life has to be first of all substantiated. still people were not prepared so much. Very important; because these days also under Gradually, I think their teachings and all that the name of religion they have started nunneries started working on them. It means that all the time your attention and these priests and then sanyasis and all kinds of 'babas' are there. They are so dry and But the highest problem came with the, so they are so misleading the that people called, religions that they started. AlIl these started taking to this kind of sanyasa, getting people

 Volume: X ssue 1-2 & 3 1998 20 Divine Cool Breeze out of their houses, getting away from the war for ? War has just killed all our society wives and children. So the first point I realised, and killed our children, everybody and what human beings cannot have love, who have not is great about the wars ? So the minds of the known what is love; and this love is more people, as a whole, was that somehow or other effective if it is collective. See we must have you just fight that the fittest man is the best. seen that in India people really love each other So the one who can dominate, the one who can come up is the best. So the domination of donot know how we are related to them ! We this imperial style of Govt. was over but just call them brothers, sisters, these, that, we individually it became a process of domination. donot know what is the relationship, whose With this process of domination, ego started father or whose sister, nothing, but we just developing. Even to children they used to give feel this is our brother or if you ask how he education in such a way that children became is your brother we donot know how he is our very arrogant, very artificial, extremely brother. The reason is we have joint family arrogant and artificial. It was impossible to understand why these children were not at all controlled when told that this is wrong! in a family. I mean in so many relations we system. The joint family system is just like a collective system. Nobody knew who was his real brother, who was his step brother, who mundane thing, I must say Dhyanagamaya, If the people are not meditating, it is very If was his cousin, nothing. All live together as just relation. But then this also broke, this joint with you. You are not my relations, you have family also broke because of economic reasons no right on me. No question is to be asked, and things like that. So now at this time, when why this is happening, why that is happening we see this very crucial time, it was, when the So if you do not meditate, I always say people had to know love and the family had mediatate, meditate, I have nothing to do with started breaking in every country, specially you. You are no more there for me. If you western countries, where men and women have no connection with me then you are like never realised the importance of a family life. all other people. You may be Sahaja Yogi, you They never had faith in their family. So it might have got your Sahaja Yoga degrees from became just a shifty thing for the poor children. your leaders, and may be that you are regaded They were on shifty grounds. They could not as something great, but if you do not do vour grow properly. So it created a violent, horribly possesed children. This you will not be, really, in the realm of Shri generation, then, went into warmongering. Mataji. Because this connection is only through They donot know-they feel like fighting. I have Dhyana, through meditation. I know people seen children fighting with the tree., I said why are you fighting ? It is nice to fight you their children suffer, when something happens know but why are you fighting ? They donot then they start coming and telling me, butI know the reason. There is no love. So see clearly that the person is not meditating everything gets detesting, you see, I don't like I have no relationship with him, he has no it. They try, out of their frustration, to destroy right to ask me anything. In the beginning, of anything that is there. So a new trend started, course, meditation takes sometime but once you apart from the war when it was over, naturally know what is meditation then you enjoy my the value system dropped. People felt what is company. How you are one with me ! How we the use, you see. We had all these values so can have rapport with each other ! There is what did we get ? And the war, what is the no need to have anything else in between-like you are not meditating then I have rto relations generation of meditatiorn everyday in the morning or evening. who do not do meditation. Then they suffer,

 Divine Cool Breeze Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Volume:X writing letters or may be some sort of a, social if it has happened, and it has been helpful to connection. Nothing. The only thing needed is you, it has been a great blessing to you then meditation. In meditation you grow in that must you know how to preserve it, must know spritually, you become higher and when that how to enhance it, must know how to enjoy happens, is that in a way, I would say, when it. You should not be just satisfied with one you reach a state of that maturity in Sahaja drama or one this thing or one that thing. But Yoga, then you do not want to give up your you should have a full oneness with the Divine, meditation because that time you are absolutely full oneness. That is possible only if you really one with me. That doesn't mean that three meditate, which is quite an easy thing to do. hours-four hours, you should do meditation. Some people say, Mother we can not get over But it is how much intensely you are with me, time, we are all the time thinking something is important. It is not how much time you or we want to see the watch. In the begining have given. Then, I am responsible for you, for you may have little problem, I am not saying your children, for everyone. I am responsible you may not have, you may have. Only in the for your ascent, for your protection, to save begining, but gradually you will be alright, you from all your negativity. So it's not like a gradually you will master it, gradually you father who will directly punish you. It is not will know it so well that you will not like to that but it's just alright, you are not my have anything else of a cheaper type. You won't relation, I am alright. But the only thing that hear it so to get to your beauty, to get to your can happen, If you are not meditating, It's glory, to get to your own great personality, alright, I cannot force you, I have nothing to which is now exposed, only thing you have to do with you. You can have other relations do really, religiously is to meditate. It is not with outside-outward. But this inner that at night I come very late, so I did not relationship by which you get your meditate, or tomorrow I have to go for work benevolence, you meditation. I have been telling all of you, please the excuses, it is between you and your self. meditate, please meditate everyday. But people It is your gain, nobody else's. It is for your are not understanding. The importance of what gain everything has happened. I am saying. They tell me, 'Mother we do not meditate. 'why ? Now we are realised souls, why should we meditate ?" Now this instrument achieved. A certain height of relations and is fully made, but if it is not all the time from inside you might go up to here, up to connected with the mains, what is the use of here, up to here, not saying it is not possible having it ? In that meditation you wil feel the to do that. But first and foremost thing that love, the Divine love, the beauty of that Divine whatever you may be, may consider yourself love. The complete panorama changes. A a very high class Sahaja Yogi, you have to be meditative person has a very different attitude, humble about meditation. This meditative very different temperament, a very different quality, even where I am talking to you on the life. He lives always in complete satisfaction Sahasrara. I am getting into it because it is cannot have without so I cannot meditate no body warnts to know Now one has to know. what we have so joygiving. You just jump into the ocean of First it will be difficult, but after sometime within you. So today, being the first day, as you say, you will know that this connection, that you of the Advent, we can say that it is the first have, is the only connection you were looking day when Advent took place, as you are after. And also there is another point people worshipping today. Of course, it is war, not get lost with, which I have seen very common today but still we can say that if that is true, with some people, who get lost. They meditate

 22 Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X issue 1-2 & 3 1998 individually, very much, it is very correct. Individually they will meditate. They will sit know, because there has been, no prayers or down, meditate, do the puja. But collectively anything about Adishakti. Up to Bhagwati they they will not meditate. So this is another point have gone. Beyond Bhagwati they have not one has to remember that you have to be gone. So I don't know what sort of puja you collectively meditative. Because I am a will have ! But let's try something, may be, I collective being of all beings. When you think the meditation is the best way we can meditate collectively, you are very close to me. really achieve something. So we can go into So even if you have a programme or meditation for about five minutes. something, you must do some meditation. Always have meditation as priority for every programme. You sing the songs, everything is Kundalini of all present) Eleven Rudras are done, then you meditate. If 1 am insisting on awakened and they will destroy all that is negative. something, you must know, that this must be Now ignorance is the greatest negative force. I am the truth I am telling you, absolutely the basis sure they will destroy this ignorance of people. of it. Though it looks rather mundane, it is very important. Now for us to worship Adishakti, 1 don't Please close your eyes. (Shri Mataji raises the May God bless you.

 Divine Cool Breeze Valume:X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 23 Lakshmi Must Give You Dignity and Balance Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi's Pravachana (Talk Diwali Puja-Lisbon 2-11-97 Today, we have gathered here to worship there is another befooling place called 'Saville Shri Lakshmi. In Diwali, in India, they worship Row'. So if you want to buy a suit, you have to Lakshmi because a cruel Rakshasa, calld pay sometimes 3000 pounds. Now people are so Narkasura, was killed. Also that Lakshmi came stupid, that now if they wear a suit from Saville out of the sea. At the same time, this is like her Row, they put the brand outside "Saville Row". diferent appearances. Lakshmi is the goddess All such tomfoolery is going on all over the which gives us wealth, gives us prosperity. She world. The clothes have no meaning, their is very blissful, no doubt. She gives you lifestyle has no meaning. Ultimately they end up protection and also she is very humble because in Swiss Bank. The Lakshmi Tatva of Swiss Bank she stands on the lotus. She is very light, means is also now showing its teeth, and if you read she does not put her pressure on anyone. There what's happening to them, I mean they are are symbols of Shri Lakshmi, but also she's a part of Mahamaya, in the modern times. When that they took the teeth, the golden teeth of the people get Lakshmi, the money, they don't jews! I mean its going too far All this tomfoolery understand that she is their mother first, and has been going on. They have military services, she is to be respected. When this kind of perverse why ? Who is going to conquer that country? idea of Shri Lakshmi comes in, such countries, Even Napolean didn't do that. They have made such people meet their last end and destruction big case to keep their weapons there. Why ? Who of the wors! type comes. So, this Lakshmi has is going to attack them ? Stupid people, suffering to he used with a big balance, like standing on from Ego! But the attack has come and this a lotus and not get into the pond, where there attack is so serious that they might be completely are all kind of creatures to eat you up. You shattered and destroyed. Now, who falls for this have to stand on the lotus, that means you are kind of things, you should see, are the people above all the lures of this Maya: Also in Sanskrit, who are crooks, who are dishonest, who are our language, we call Lakshmi as the Maya. If absolutely adharmis. They can be Mafia Dons or somebody has got lots of money, they would they can be some thugs, some black marketeers, say. he got lot of Maya. Now, this Maya plays same smugglers, the tricks. If money prosperity was salvation, then there would have been no problems in this world, because those people who have money always many are doing these days One fellow, was get ruined, if they are not ruined, their children, thrown out of Sahaja Yoga, because he was trying there grandchildren get ruined. shaking: They don't know, they went to this limit So going against the Lakshmi Principle, so to be very dominating and all. He said that's better, I said why ? He is doing now smuggling, This principle of Lakshmi within us is very making money out of smuggling and has become dubious and the allurement is so much that if very rich, according to him, But, it comes to an people see somebody having a good car these days, they say, Ah ! what a man he is: In any Iure for human beings that it kills allI cells of case, He is not going to give you the car. If decency, of higher values, everything. A brother, somebody is having, what you call, lots of say who is very nice and good fellow, if he gets palaces, or buildings, people start admiring him money out of proportion or by doing the hankey- This is Kaliyuga. They start admiring, see this pankey, he neglects his mother, father, brothers, man is so rich. Even clothes, people see you sisters, everything. So I would say then it comes wearing clothes which are very good tailored, to that point, that Lakshmiji becomes might be from some designers, say, they think there and all her blessings become a sort of a no end of that man. For example in England, challenge to your dignity. end and a very tragic, bad end. Money is such a a Bhoot

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 24 Now, certain countries, like America, which Lakshmi. Supposing I get money, supposing. Then is the area for Shri Krishna, because he is I will go to the market, say, and I'll see Kubera, they have no money as such, I have something nice, Ah this is very good for this seen, they are all poor, they are all indebted. So Sahaja Yogi or I'll say this will be very handy many Indians went to America and they can't for our Ashram, Immediately the mind starts come to India now, why ? We are indebted. Why working in a very socialistic way, I should say are you indebted ? Oh! we get everything free not individualistic. For example, I went to now, you see bank gives us loan, we can have Rajasthan and I saw such a lot of sand, just the best lifestyle. So, they will have three like a big desert and people starving ! So, I said, Mercedes, is nothing. We should have Rolls how to get money to these people ? I said, let Royces, we should have this. For What? What me start a factory, factory with unbreakable do you get out of it? Now, of course, little bit glass, which they make only in France. They they are shaken up with the stock exchange and make it very cheap, it is very cheap thing, not all that nonsense, they had started, all this joke, in India. In India, if you go to some elite's house, and all these very big camouflages. All now are They'll offer you tea in, in these unbreakable coming out. So, this is no Lakshmi, because things. They think its very elite, depends on Lakshmi must give you dignity, prosperity and what you think about what ! And they are very respect. I think Americans understood about it, proud of it, so I said if we make these things in so they became philanthropist, means they are India, these poor people, you know, because giving money to people. But whom did they give there is so much of sand and sand is needed by money ? All the names these people took from trucks. So I will utilize this to make this beautiful South Africa, where all money, was given by factory here and then give them some support the Philanthropist of America. What has to live well. happened to their wisdon that a sixteen year old boy went there and then all ages went there, and made a very big money. All this money You all had come also once, there is a gentleman, making proposition, (can you give seat to those who was a disciple of Gandhiji. He has organised musicians) so what is the matter if there is a this Varnă company for distributing milk. It blessing of Lakshmi ? Why a man who gets the became so very rich, so very rich, its a co- blessing of Lakshmi becomes so funny, so stupid operative; so he started giving money to all the and ultimately ends up his life, that people are co-operative people, those who are labour there. not there even to pick up his dead body ? Now when 1 went to one place called Varna. Now, this labour had never seen that money. So, he came to me, touched my feet and said, What is the difference between money and Mother you tell me, now what should I do? I Lakshmi ? She gives you money, alright, agreed. am so unhappy with the development of this But when she is giving the money, what happens Varna, because there are prostitutes who have to that money which comes to you, is a very arrived from Bombay, there are all kinds of hard subtle thing one should understand. In India, if drinks which have come from Bombay and these you give, say a 100 Rupees to a servant, people are smoking like hell, they are taking immediately he'll go to drink somewhere. First, drugs. Hain ! Yes, wherever there is monev the idea will come, what you should do, he'll go for drug goes there and the children are becoming a drink of the hard ones. I mean, your Vodka is absolutely useless. They don't want to study, they nowhere near that, such hard ones they make even slap their parents. So he said that this was in India, you know. It is called as eru means made with hands. So, in hundred rupees they He says, this is curse of money and he was are willing to go, I mean that any money you crying. Now, how can Lakshmi become a curse. give to them, it spoils their life completely. It does, it is in the Nabhi, what a central position Lakshmi has been given, alright. So what it has ? And when this Nabhi starts working it happens to this Lakshmi ? She changes her form is a very remarkable thing, that you feel gobbling and her form is so bad, that you are completely the food all the time, with this Nabhi. You go ruined with that. So, now understand, what is the way we can use the bhoot comes in to eat also with you, inside the not Gandhiji's ideal. Now what has happened ? CLITSE. we have to on eating, go on eating. like mad and then some

 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Nabhi. Then you can eat so much that no human cheese ? Where will they go ? Even if they go to hel, beings can eat like that, except for the people people will throw them away with the smell of who are rich. then you start a big science of, cheese. what you can call, etiguettes. hurt anybody, I don't mind. Eat well, but the first part is, because said there was a big snowfall and they had today is Diwali I am trying to tell you aill these some big-big containers, in a cave, of milk and interesting stories. I don't want to Then I read how this cheese came in ? So, they meari if yoLL are eating well, I put people forgot about it. Snowfall was there for about twenty days or whatever it was, and they just I went many a times for dinner with French forgot about it. So after one year, they got the smell diplomats. My goodness ! Now me and my husband coming out of it. So, they went and saw the cheese don't drink, so 45 minutes they were discussing being formed. Can you imagine! This is beginning what they will have today, then they remembered, of the end. Actually, one should never eat anything yesterday they had that, day before they had that, that is kept overnight, normally. But now, they so there should be variety, so then they came down have got fridges, so you can keep it for two days, to something. Not all of them drinking the same, three days at the most. Like on the ship they keep different different. So, they came to some point. it. But this I wouldn't understand that this cheese Alright we will have this, but some people asked which they told me is very old, I said really ? And for something, which was not available. So they they sell it by that, what old it is and their wines, said, you My Goodness! They took 45 minutes to decide hundred times more expensive. So, it's such a whät they are going to drink. Its regarded as bhootish thing to eat all that. So, when the Lakshmi French etiquettes, I think, and we two chief guests, goes into the hands of bhoots, on a very less levelI myself and my husband, looking at this man and should say, is this, then it goes into the heads of looking at that woman, didn't know what to do people who want to exploit money, exploit poor with these etiquettes of these people. We were people, exploit countries which are downtrodden. thinking now better go, then came the food. They Go on like this, collecting money, you know, looting, are so particular-I like this and I like that. They are looting. worse than Indians, I tell you. They took atleast, atleast eighty minutes to decide what they will eat ? Ultimately they found something nice. Each they used to take bribes. On Diwali day, If different, and the guest of the people were trying went there without any persent. They'll say to pamper chosen ! This is the best, wah, wah, wah. So, they they liked was our country liquor. I never knew this started seeing. The cheese was smelling so awful, I but later on I canme to know because my husband tell you, we couldn't bear it, you know, both of us. became Collector of Meerut (#). There were So have to have it, and they shouted at them. if they are say, two hundred years old, it is two When English came to India, we didn't know, you there ego. Oh, what a thing you have bakshish. You must give some present and what husband told them today is our fasting day, bottles of country liquor kept in that house. That my for both of us. He said why is it a fasting day. He house was itself more than a hundred years old. said, in India, we have fasting like this, sometimes Long time back, it was kept there, still, some of we have to fast. Today is our fasting day, I told them, you see, and we could have sent them to him, here one day you are saying, today is our England to sell. That would have been a geod idea. fasting, but we have to go to so many dinners, So, the older it is better. This Lakshmi, I think what will you do ? He said everywhere better to becomes old and dies and there is Alakshmi. say, that we are fasting. Such a horrible cheese they Alakshmi means when you have money and you brought and they started boasting that they have don't have the qualities of a person who should two hundred types of cheese. Wow! I said, two have money. In that quality of Alakshmi, you hundred types of the smelly ones ! Where did you become very miserly, you don't even want to help get ? They said, this is French perfection. See this, your brothers and sisters. You don't want to give I said what is this French perfection 7 But, then any money to anyone, and even if you give it, you you know tears came into my eyes. Sir C.P. said give it to false gurus and wrong things. This is upto why are you crying ? I said, I am not crying but I we can say is Alakshmi. The behaviour becomes think what will happen to these people with their very arrogant. So arrogant, that you behave like

 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X 26 horses, you know. People look like horses, they towards his wife-about the whole, entire family. walk like horses. But I don't know that if the horses The whole parivar, as they call it, all the relations, have ego. If you see these people you just don't that is his Dharma. But beyond that is, the Dharma understand, what's gone wrong with them you see. of Satya Dharma-How much he sticks to truth There is one gentleman who started Aeroplane business in India. I won't take his name, but say some Majidia or something. My grand daughter you know very well, these days with money people met him, with her was my grand- son-in-law and are standing orn their heads or I don't know how, they were walking like this, talking like this. They what they are doing ? The amount of nonsense they can't understand these two persons. So, They came are producing all over the world, in the name of and talked to them, who you are and all and ther modernism, is in no way e , no way. Then we they said, we are this Majidia, My grand daughter have also, what you call is Politics "TIGI aTem en. This said-who is Majidia ? My goodness, they fell from Dharma is also there. Now taking bribes, I mean heavens ! You don't know who are Majidia, do you the kind of things that are going on, corruption, all read newspapers or not? Then her husband come kinds of things that are going on. Competition, in. He said I do. Now what do you want to say- fighting and all that. They are falling from their we are Majidias. He said who are Majidias ? You Dharma of RIM RT. Education, same thing, we call don't know ? How sort of business you do ? What it fere . All such things are Dharmas. There's a is this ? Such stupid thing they did, that these kind of principle, which we have to keep. children felt it's no use having any business. If Otherwise we can topple down from the lotus, and business means this kind of behaviour, very that's what happens now we have also The indecent, very arrogent. They don't know how to is that's your country. You must, there's relate to people, they don't know and after dharma of your R when you have to fight for sometime I heard that their business was your country. You should, but you should not be completely finished or flopped, they call it flop. Then the Dharma for creativity. In creativity as agressive on other countries. It's not right to dominate other countries, nor you should bring bad So now, we have to realise that this Lakshmi, name to your country. It's very important. Sahaja now it takes us to wrong things. Firstly, she makes Yogis have all these intact, absolutely, because you you very egoistical. Somehow, the man who has are standing on the lotuses, already. You don't have money starts behaving like that. One cannot this problem, normally no. once in a while, there understand, how a person who was normal, are people who behave like that but mostly Sahaja suddenly becomes like this, starts talking like this ? Yogis don't fall into these traps, that's why their He might earn money, even in the horse races. Lakshmi Tatva will difinitely improve. They'll have Around the Lakshmi is the valency of Dharma. little problems here and there, but without Around the Lakshmi is the Dharma and this problems, if you get Lakshmi, you'll not have value Dharma if you cross, that's the best place where for that. So, with little problems you get Lakshmi. they can cross the Dharma, then you can do But Lakshmi, doesn't give you all this imbalance. whatever you like. Which is Adharmi, which is Such a man has to be extremely balanced because, religious, which is heinous. You have to first cross beyond that is the step of Mahalakshmi, where your that limit of Dharma. You have to first deviate from seeking starts, where you become a seeker. You go Dharma. Now, as I had said many a times that beyond Lakshmi principle and this Mahalakshmi there are 10 valencies, human beings have got. But principle starts coming into you. I would say in this apart from that, there are many Dharmas which western countries, this consumerism has started are surrounding you. Like Angels. First Dharma is and it's such a funny one. In America, one lady was love for humanity, is the first Dharma, but if married to an Indian and he used to tell me, how your you say from that end start, it starts with T u this consumerism works ? I said how ? he said, I is the Dharma of the woman. How she should gave my wife money to buy two shirts for me, live ? How she should get married ? How she because I had no shirts. She went and bought five should look after her children ? What should be skirts. So, I said you have so many skirtis, why did her behaviour, all is ' and then is 'qfa - buy skirts ? Because, in this monev, I could buy five How should be a husband ? How should he behave skirts, instead of two shirts, so I bought five skirts. towards his family ? How should he pay attention So, he said I can't wear skirts. So, how should I

 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X 27 correct her ? I said, you do one thing, tell her I want they used to sell it to people. Now they have to buy some skirts for you and go and buy five become expensive, in those days, they were shirts. Then she would realise that if the money was cheaper. Now, it has that value, they are very given to her for one purpose it should be used for honest, very religious. They were called that. This is a very subtle principle, which I follow, "Shalivahanas' because they uIsed to give shawl to because I don't understand money. So what I do, the goddess. They spread their kingdom very much whatever money I get, I put packets. This is for this, and also there is a calender in their name. This is for this, this is for this-into packets because I don't understand, you know, and I can't write accounts, you know. I am very bad at all that, very generous people and they have made beautiful somebody else does that. Now, if I spend some temples and beautiful places for peopie to rest near möney from one packet, for some emergency, then the river. I mean so many beautiful things they I again fill it back, it's written there so much is there, have done. Apart from them Rama and Sita, when so much is there. So the money is available at the they went to 'Dandkaranya' (US ), they went right time for whatever I want to do and the money to this place and this is the place where Sita took is in the packet. It is not in the, sort of a, open thing her bath: There's a little river flowing there and that I just want to buy a Mercedes, 1 wart to buy how it was covered from all the sides and how the a Rolls Royce. No, nothing doing, It is for some light was coming, so beautiful. But whatever Rama purpose the shop and you see something, you won't buy, of art. Then also there was a very beautiful temple, because that money is not kept for that particular thing. For Sahaja Yogis, it's very easy to handle there was some water flowing and there was Shri their money with respect. Sa, you go to any shop, Mahadeva's (a big thing) Pinda and also there was you won't buy anything. But, my nature also is a Parvati's statue, so old as that! I don't know if it But, the kind of life they lead, they were just and there is no need. So, when you go to had done, they redecorated it with the Rajput style I saw, that they had made. Also, I don't know how was put by Rama or by my own, you can call them, the grand, great great grand parents. But the spontaneous. So, I went to Frankfurt, they said Mother, beauty about that place, that it shows that Sita used there's a very nice watch shop. I just thought, I am to worship Mahadeva. The water was flowing going to get three son-in-laws and what will I give somehow by nature, inside up there in a steam and them. So, I went to that shop and I fouund such she used to take the water and put it on that Pinda. beautiful things. But i had not kept any money for How deep these people were ? They built that the watch. But I said, 1 must buy. One of the temple, such a beautiful temple they have built So watches turned out to be a very unique one, I must many temples are built like this in India by people tell which is no more available. Because of my who had money and they believed that, if you you, eyes, I saw, this is something unique and my son- spend your money in this kind of work you are in-law is, I mean. So overwhelmed, so overhelmed, blessed. There I bought a land near the river Nira, quite rich, he has no problems, but he said, this that's my own name Nira, and this land, 1 just watch, you cannot get. Then an article came about bought without thinking, and what they told that that particular watch. So, he has kept it with him. their Guru, Shalivahanas Guru was Shandilya and You see, to have something, it should have value this place belonged to him, long time back. It was behind it, that is the Dharma part, value behind it. an ashram of Shandilya, exactly the same and that What is the value ? When you want to buy land I bought, very surprising. Then in the something, just don't buy because you are mad, I newspaper, it came out, every thing about that land mean instead of shirts you buy skirts, not that way änd that this land was the place where, the great But anything that has a artistic value or some devotee of Shri Vishnu, Prahlada prayed. You must special value then you should buy that. Now this have heard about prahlada His mother had a Saree, I am wearing It has a special value, why ? husband named (fvu ), Hiranvakashyapa Not that it's is made with hands, it has a very Horrible Rakshasa. So she ran away from there and beautiful design. This was made in a place called Indra helped her. He brought this lady to the place Paithan (), which was the capital of a kingdom of Guru Shandilya and Shandilya told Indra, that which belonged to my fore-fathers, the you don't put any effort for her, I'll look after her, Shalivahanas. This saree was made there (4aa), and and the child, that is going to be born to this lady,

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X Issue 1-2&3 1998 28 is going to get the (Avtara) incarnation of (RRIE), terracotta. But that is very expensive-I said, this Narsimha. You know Narsimha is the man and the is the price. But I wanted to buy tarracotta from lion. He said how can that be. So Indra left her Portugal, because it is very rich in that. So, we wen! there. The child was born. Till 5 years that child to one factory, and the factory was quite far off. used to play in that grand land which I have None of them could find it but I told them, it's here bought. I didn't know about it. But I just saw it, I only, just go and see and then we bought the was surprised. But when the child grew up to 5 terracotta. But, on our way I told, stop, stop, stop. back to his father. I don't know They stopped, there was a shop. I had to buy he had to years, how many of you read about Prahlad raise your something for Sahaja Yogis in India and also for hands. I would like to know. The little boy- some people in Cabella and that shop had such prahlada, his father tried to kill him and tortured beautiful cottons. There were Sahaja Yogis from him. But he had certain boons, so Shri Vishnu here who saw that such beautiful clothes and I appeard as Narsimha, means the lion and the bought lots of it. I said thank God! Presents are human form, and then he killed this finished. Now for India. So joy giving it was! Hirnyakashyapa (feu 91), the father. Now, Everybody was surprised. Why, suddenly in a place, magine how much it was, that thousands of vears where mother has never been, suddenly She finds. back, this must have happened and that I should It has a value, because I wanted to buy something purchase that land. There is a very beautiful temple for Indians to be given as presents. built about 300 years back by Maharashtrians. So the story is that Prahlada came into the dream of the people who wanted to build the temple and told add to it value, it becomes so big. The sign of a them that I have already made the statue of Pperson, who is Lakshmipati is this : He should have Narsimha along the river Nira, Imagine, the name He should protect people who are depending on of the river is also mine and if you can walk along him and from the left hand he should give. This is the banks of Nira river, very close to the temple,I the image of the Lakshmi. This is what the Lakshmi have made the statue, in sand. Its a miracle. Só they is within you. If you have these four things in went there, and saw the statue. They brought it balance, without conditioning, without ego, then back and installed it in that temple. It is still there, vou are a Sahaja Yogi, otherwise you are not. On go s So if your Lakshmi is, say, this much, once you a house like the Lotus in the hands of the Goddess. made of sand. Also they say there is a kind of a you river or a waterflow upto, very small one, like the whatever we are going to get now as Läkshmi's finger, flows down from the top. God knows how ? principle or as a Lakshmi's prasad should be used a Diwali day, we have to promise ourselves that in getting things which have value and this you'll well. So, now see the value. The value of the money learn that you have used your Lakshmi which was collected to build this temple has such And with that your Mahalakshmi principle becomes an old value. So, the value is not money, this, one very strong. It will become very strong by which should understand. What is the value of the thing ? vou'll ascend very fast. Today, is a day for us to You want to give something to others, then the celebrate the Lakshmi Puja but Lakshmi Puja feelings you have in your heart, is the value and doesn't mean that you worship money. Money, as that value is the real Lakshmi. When you are it is, is the most dangerous thing and I think it is building a house, the plans you make, or things the hidden weapon of Lakshmi Devi. See, if you try you do, what is the idea behind and what you are to misuse her, she goes on punching with you. trying to express through that house is the value When with one punch if you don't realise, then of that house. Once, you understand, that you have she gives you another punch. Like that, then she to buy with this Lakshmi or you have to use this might little bit twist you, to suggest. She'll try Lākshmi for certain value and not for showing off everything to convince or for money. This superficialness that we have is nonsense, ultimately she sees youT destruction. about money itself is like on ordinary glass. But if So, the Lakshmi, though she is the one who is the you put behind the glass, the Mercury, you can see giver of boons, giver of everything, you should not the value, So, when you stärt buying something, be misled by the Mahamaya character. I am your what is the purpose ? Why are you buying ? This Mother, so I better tell you to be very careful. will determine the value. Like last time I came to Portugal and I said-that we will go and buy some very you that what you are doing Thank you very much.

 Every Individual has to work it out for himself so the whole can be alright. 0. so



----------------------

1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue: 1, 2 & 3.
1996
"Be sure that you are telling the Truth and nothing else and that you have felt the truth in
full ways. Those who have not felt the vibrations, should not talk of Sahaja Yoga. They have
no authority. They have to receive vibrations. They have to fully imbibe within them and then
they can say, "yes, we felt'.
This is a very important task Sahaja Yogis have to do in these modern times, t.e. to tell
aloud that they have found the truth."
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In This Issue:
Editorial
1
Sufism & Sahaja Yoga
2.
Navratri Puja 5-10-97
The Role of Women
16
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 6-6-93
(What is Adishakti)
Diwali Puja, 2-11-97 23
: Yogi Mahajan
Editor
Publisher V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Editorial
Have you met someone who gladly takes away all your woes and fills you with joy,
who washes the scars of sin and clothes you with shy innocence,
who sweetens anger into love,
who never gives up, no matter how often you fall,
whose hands only give but do not ask,
who unlocks all doors to meteoric heights,
whose mere presence exults the spirit into ecstasy,
even repeating her name wards off evil spirits.
The experience of this meeting is your marriage with goodness, virtue, innocence,
compassion, auspiciousness and Divine glory. Nay, it is the meeting with your creator. It is the
moment of fulfilment we have dreamt of since many births. To commemorate this blessing we
celebrate the Birthday of our Divine Mother, Shri Adi Shakti, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
Our most loving mother worked tirelessly for our ascent for 75 years. Her 75th birthday on
21st March 1998 ushers the birth of the golden age about which saint Gyaneshwar had
prophesied-The age "when men of god will become prophets" as described by William Blake.
The 'mental fight' is over and now Blossom Time has come. Let us reap the harvest of golden
fruits and celebrate.
In the light of the spirit darkness and ignorance has been dispelled. All illusions and mental
deceptions have fallen like the Berlin Wall. The global caucus of Sahaja Yoga is too powerful for
any negativity. This caucus of collective consciousness has exposed all falsehood. Valiant
Normalities have built a 'New Jerusalem' in our 'green and glorious land'. May her Lotus Feet
accept the petals of our realisation of Her Divine Vision as a humble offering on her 75th
Birthday.
Her 75th birthday is indeed the most auspicious moment for thanksgiving Thanking her
again and again for all the pangs of pain she suffered in giving us rebirth, of bearing with our
shortcomings, of giving us realisation and of nurturing. us as the most precious roses in her
delightful garden.
But what can one offer to one's own creator, to the one who has an abundance of everything,
who is verily the source of everything. A Sahaja Yogi can only offer flowers of love and devotion
at Her Lotus Feet. But she has often said that She loves those who love Her children. Let us see
Her in the eyes of our brothers and sisters, let us love Her in their spirit. Let us care for them
as She cared for us. When we would have done this, our gift may be received in heaven.
No crowds need witness and applause or deeds, but the witness is within and the witness
is above. Our Divine Mother recalled what Her father told Her in Childhood, that "one hand
must not know what the other gives". Yes, goodness is its own reward.
On our most loving Mother's 75th birthday there are many promises we must make and
keep. Yet, even they will not suffice to redeem her debt, perhaps a simple promise from the
heart to be truthful to our own spirit and love the spirit in others might gladden the Holy Spirit.
-Yogi Mahajan
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Essue 1-2 & 3 1998
Volume: X
Sufism & Sahaja Yoga
Dr. Amjad Ali, a Pakistani now working
tehzeeb and a seat of Islamic learning, at a hospital in Melbourne, Australia, gave
recently saw an intermingling of faiths the Islamic and Sufi interpretation of the
Sufism and Sahaja Yoga, at an international Chakras. The first Chakra Mooldhara is
seminar on the "Advent of Qayamah Qalabiya in Sufism and Alam-e-Fani in Islam.
through enlightenment" organised by the Likewise Swadhishthana is Nafsiya in Sufism
and Na-sout in Islam, Nabhi is Qaldiya in
Sufism and La-hout in Islam; Anhata is
Lucknow, famous for its Ganga-Jamuni
Islamic Study Group.
The Group, which is a conglomeration of Sirriya in Sufism and Sa-hout in Islam;
Muslim professionals from different parts of Vishudhi is Ruhiya in Sufism and Mala-
the world, is making a serious effort to khout in Islam. Aganya is Khafiya in Sufism
inspire the people that the path to salvation and fab-rout in Islam and Sahasrara is
lies in the subtle body of the human beings. Haqiquate in Sufism and La-hout in Islam.
Dr. Amjad dwelt at length on how Islam
Il has tried to draw a parallel between
the "Seven Heavens" as mentioned in The had explained the importance of 373 of these
Quran and the seven chakras or plexuses chakras in the resurrection of man:
described in the Sahaja Yoga of which Mata
Nirmala Devi is the torchbearer.
Mr. Jamail, an Algeria-born aeronautical
engineer now working in Paris, said that the
Renowned Turkish Sufi scholar Hussain fight was between "to be a Muslim" and
"being a Muslim." "God does not want his
Taup, who came all the way from Istanbul, children to suffer," he said adding that
explained at length the seven heavens of ayamat or the day of resurrection and
Chakras (consciousness) which were the
seven heavens mentioned by Prophet
set the temnpo of the conference when he
judgement, is the day when human beings
should judge themselves.
Dr. Zafar Rashid, a Pakistani now
working in Oxford University Hospital said
that no religion was meant to be exclusive
consciousness, and according to him, the The problem started when they were
most important step is when God is pleased organised and that denied to human beings
with man. Then God sees and hears through an opportunity to realise their own selves.
Mohammed.
of
each
explained
step
He
man. The final step is when man is
Defining the word Sufi, he said that it
comes from the word Safai (cleansing) and,
enveloped by the will of God.
This is the stage when man finds peace therefore, every human being should make
and union with the Almighty. Mr. Taup, who a serious effort of cleansing oneself of one's
all through his life has been an Imam, sins.
preacher and muezzin, has been the guiding
force behind this movement.
17.2.97, Times of India, New Delhi
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze * Volumrie : IX
Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Navratri Puja
Cabella 5-10-97
Pravachana (Talk) by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi.
Today, is the 6th day of Navratri. There have Now, supposing I give some present to
been many incarnations of the Goddess, for somebody and some present to another one.
different purposes. But when the great saints Even in Sahaja Yoga they feel Jealous. Very
introspect themselves, who were worshipping surprising ! How can you, when the goddess
the mother, they found out that what she has has given you the quality to love ? Very-very
done for us. The other day, I told you that the common nonsense about it is that human beings
Dharma is the innate valency of human beings, are very jealous. But, as Sahaja Yogis, you
and they are 10. This is already established should not, because that quality that the goddess
within is, but we deviate, deviate from dharma has given you is of loving. That quality should
and all the problems come in. Because to leave be shown, on the contrary you are very jealous.
the Dharma is not a human quality. The Goddess That means you are not a Sahaja Yogi blessed
herself has done so many things for us, already by Shri Mataji. No, if you are blessed then you'll
within us, though we are not aware of it said have no jealousy whatsoever. And this jealousy
that d all those whom you have sometimes goes to this extent that, now we are,
created means mostly the human beings, what say from Cabella, so you are from Albela,
you do ? As what do you exist inside the human finished. These are so close to each other just
beings ? Now, just introspect if you have these like the two nostrils together but there will be
qualities within you or not ? Because they are jealousy. There will be jealousy about why not
given to you by the Goddess, by the Shakti mother come to my country, if you can go to
within you, like, या देवीं सर्वभूतेषु शांतिरुपेण संस्थिता is that country
very important, that you exist within human
beings as peace. Do you find those human beings
who are peaceful within and without. Very this is mine, this is mine, this is yours. This
difficult, but she has given you that. She has jealousy starts in such a funny manner that, we
given you that peace, which you have to do not realise also, that she has given us the
So, this comes also from the ignorance that
power to love, tremendous power to love.
Inauspicious power cannot be our, but
achieve.
Now, it comes because you have fallen of auspicious dharmie power to love somebody
your human Dharmas, so this peace which she means without any lust and greed, without any
has given you, you have to achieve through your jealousy. But the human mind has developed
ascent, through the Kundalini awakening. You itself, so cunning, that it is proud that it can be
are excited, alright, or you want to take revenge, jealous of someone. Out of this jealousy only
vou want to hurt others, you want to trouble greed comes in, as I told you. It is a fact, because
others, You enjoy sometimes. Even as Sahaja you feel jealous, so you want to buy the same
Yogi, people enjoy hurting others, troubling thing; then you must compete with others. If
others. So, the second one she says is I a somebody has got a job better than yours then
सर्व भूतेषु प्रीति रूपेण संस्थिता, प्रीति is the quality of you must compete. These things are all
loving, that a human being has been given, the destructive and the powers of Goddess are
quality of loving, but its not there, because first constructive. She gives you all the powers that
nonsensical thing human beings have is jealousy. are absolutely constructive. Then she says,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Volume: X
Divine Cool Breeze
Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
देवी सर्व भूतेषुः, the saints have said क्षमा रूपेण संस्थिता put in you is, ग्रा देवी सर्वभूतेषु भ्रान्ति रूपेण संस्थिता
ET#I is what you call is the Forgiveness. She puts you into delusion. Because sometimes
Forgiveness from the heart, alright somebody the children cannot understand unless & until
has been cruel to you, has been nasty to you, they face the delusion. They have to face the
has exploited you, have troubled you, but you delusion, she allows, allows you to go wrong
have the power, great power to forgive. Do we to a point where you discover you are lost. Very
use that power to forgive ? Then for realising important it is, that She plays, this is the
also what does she do that she gives you the Mahamaya part, as they say, and this is
sleep, या देवी सर्वभूतेपु निदारूपे संस्थिता when youl discuSsed in every religion, that we get lost with
are tired and you can't sleep, she makes you this delusion. Now what are the delusions that
sleep. She relaxes
she does, because She acts through Para- for men as if they were very powerful, that they
sympathetic nervous system. The sympathetic can do what they like, and they are not going
nervous system can excite you, can depress you, to be punished for it. For women, they too
but the parasympatholytic relaxes yoLI, relaxes behave in the same manner. They don't
your heart, relaxes your body and you feel understand that this is a delusion the mother
completely relaxed and sleepy in the lap of your has given to us, for us to find out that we are
mother. But there are many people who cannot in the wrong. Because, if you tell somebody this
sleep, because they are thinking about something is wrong, you don't do it. Still they are not
they have to achieve. If you cannot sleep, then matured enough so they'll go on doing wrong
something wrong with you. And when you things. So the mother says go on, very nice,
cannot sleep, I also cannot sleep. Whatever is very good, very good thing. You jump in the
happening collectively also works on me. sea, jump. When you realize that you have been
Anything wrong you do, that works on me, in a delusion, then only you can return back.
specially collectively. So, you cannot sleep, Without any problem you cannot return, so
because you are thinking of things, which are many of you are so obstinate, so self-conscious.
of no value. Now to overcome that, in Sahaja Whatever one may tell will not listen.
Yoga, we know we have to go into thoughtless Whatever way, we may try to convince on a
awareness. But when your ego is working. (This mental level, you won't, so the delusion is
child is very disturbing I have seen him all the beyond the mind. It is beyond mind. It works
time running about. Better tell him.) You see in out sometimes very well for difficult people.
India you find children absolutely keeping quiet, Now, when you are in a position of a mother.
why ? Because the mother takes up the you don't want your child to be ruined,
responsibility to train the child. So many naturally. She feels responsible, and she thinks
programmes you have had. Have you ever seen that now they have got connection with the
any child running about? Yesterday also they divine and this connection should not be broken
were all running about here. The reason is that That they should be all the time blessed and be
the mother doesn't take responsibility as a mother happy. All this is within us, within us, built in
to see that the children are properly brought from our very childhood, but we forget it. Slowly,
Even you are so old but I have to tell you, slowly we start loosing it. May be this
you. So the power of relaxation we have ? We have the delusions of ego: Ego
you, you
up.
whatever is good for you, your society and new conditioning is such or may be the ego is such
generation that has come. In this new generation and may be that they forget that they are
if
realised souls. I am talking to you, to people
still are not behaving in a proper way, in
you
a normal way, how can you impress others ? who are realised souls, I am not talking to people
So, Mother has to tell you.
who are already lost or who may be on their
way to Sahaja Yoga. But the way you are
The most interesting thing that mother has brought up, the way you have been told very
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume:X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Sweetly, with love, with affection, with kindness, respect the body, but this seems to have gone
and if you don't understand that, then you go with the influence of America, I should say, they
into afa For example it is also said, 1 a are brainless people. Absolutely brainless,
H oa t a I don't know how to nothing to learn from them, only 200 years old
discribe ? Its not shyness. It is a kind of a shame people and we start behaving in their manner.
about your body. Now, they have beauty contest, We don't see even what is happening to their
India also they had beauty contest (why are country, what sort of people they are ? How
you writing ?...) Rear means you they live, what is their idea ? What is their goal
have to have shame of your body, that's specially in life ? Every false guru has exploited them,
for women. As a child, you will see, women are because they are brainless, if they had brains,
very shy, see little girls, they are very shy. they would never have accepted them. They
Shyness gradually disappears. But in the have brains how to run a computer or how to
beginning, they are even shy of me. They come run a television, mechanical things. But as far
before me, they'll put down their head, they'll as their own body is concerned, they don't
not even say amaste. Very sweet and they don't know how to manage.
like people wearing funny dresses. I remember
my granddaughter, once she saw one magazine
which there was a lady in the swimming many sensible people opposed it, because its like
dress. She said what are you doing ? Better wear selling your body and making money. What is
your dress, otherwise my grandma will come the difference between prostitution and this ? If
and hit you hard. To that lady she was saying you get money by selling your body then it's
like that and then she opened and saw one prostitution. Yoi are not supposed to sell your
man's dress with a small little knicker, I don't body. That's not what goddess has done to you,
know why they do it ! And she said this one but you should dress up well, different, different
seems to be absolutely shameless fellow. He is occasions are there. For those occasions you have
going to have a bad time now, and she closed to wear the way it is. The other day I gave, a
it and told the maid servant, burn this, burn very nice saree, which we call as to one
this off, I don't want to see. Such a little girl, lady, as a present and we had a function, for a
she knew that it was wrong. But the way now book was inaugrated, and this lady came there,
a days we are going about with the show of so I said why didn't you wear your tai i She
our body and sometimes I feel that all these said what ? There is no wedding on, how can
designers will die or will get bankrupt, because I wear for this function tadii There has to be
people wear such little clothes these days. There a wedding. Very sweet, in wedding I can wear.
is no space for any artist to show his work or It is all occasions, places, which are to be
to show his art, how he can dress you up. In celebrated. Like in India when husband-wife go
Japan I asked them, how this is, long time back, to the temple or to worship the idols or
now Japanese are American, but at that time, I anything, then they will wear all that is
said how is it you wear these dresses this necessary, to face the goddess after all. Imagine
kaemonas done so well, very expensive and it people coming for this programme lhere,
takes time to wear that ? So, they said that, wearing, I don't know what they call it but like
you see, if God has made a beautiful body, it is jute, jute clothes, like hippies. What would
his art and we have to make our art to decorate happen to me ? I would disappear in thin air,
it. So what we do is to make our art to decorate I can tell you that. So one has to have respect
it. I really liked it, because in India, it is the for the body, that is what she has said first that
In India they had a beauty competition and
Gi uvil
a aaa. Now you might say that there
same thing, If there's a lady she has to wear a
saree, which is being made very artfully, very are people who are taking bath in the river and
beautifully, just to decorate her body, just to this and that and give justification. But you are
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Issue 1-2 &3 1998
Volume: X
Divine Cool Breeze
saints, you are realised souls, you don't have to weak, your teeth will be falling and you wil
see those people who are not yet realised and become very soon an old hag. Same with the
who are misbehaving. You must do what a saint men, now a days men are also going to the
beauty parlour, I am told. Too much money, I
think, and stupidity together. There is no need.
There are so many qualities that the goddess If you lead a good healthy life, you have to
has given you. Another is aaaaa1, She is exercise and meditate. If you meditate, you
the one who has giveri us hunger, we have to become peaceful, with that peace, you'll be
eat our food. Now a days there is a fashion of amazed, you'll have so much of energy. So much
becoming thin or whatever you may call and energy is wasted in thinking, and what do you
you know so many diseases have developed, think? If you ask somebody what are you
Anorexia, this thing, that thing, because women thinking? Everything, but everything means
want to eat little. You can change the things what ? Why do you think so much ? What is
you are eating but it's not the aim of life to only the need to think ? It's a habit, human habit, to
look after your body. Body is not the only go on thinking about everything. For example,
important thing. What is important is your just now there are three carpets. Now, if I put
spirit She is the one who gives you the attention on it, I'll first see how nice they are
and just enjoy, enjoy what the artist have done
method by which you'll ascend. But all the time ? That's all, no words, nothing. Just the
worried about their body. This is something I enjoyment within yourself. But if you ask
can't understand, specially the women, who are somebody else, he'll just start saying, oh this is
shakti. Then another point is that they follow a not good, that's not good, this is not so bright,
fashion. Fashion is madness. When I was voung this thing, that thing. The joy of that artist is
used to wear my blouses like this only But in finished. You cannot get that joy, that joy about
India also fashion started, they used to increase which we are seeking. What we are seeking is
the size of the sleeves, then decrease the size of joy and even when you have got a way of doing
the sleeves, then some went up to here. Now, it, you don't achieve it. Because thinking is a
I thought what is this nonsense ? Why waste reaction. Reaction to everything and it makes
money like this ? You have a particular design the life so miserable, it makes the life of the
and this is traditionally accepted design, that person who thinks and of others also. I'll give
should have. Why do you want to go on you an example. This whole thing, we got it
increasing and decreasing the size of the sleeves done, just because, It's very heavy rains and
according to the fashion ? This is the fashion. also we have problems of sometimes snowing
Who makes the fashion ? Devi? Devi has nade So, I thought that's a nice thing, to have a nice
the fashions ? Who has made the fashions ? It thing done and it's very well done, we got it.
is the hungry, greedy people, who are befooling Now, there are thinking people in this Italy, lots
of them, that's why its not progressing. Now.
we applied three years back. Three years they
Now, for example, I told vou, you must put kept our money locked up in the bank, imagine.
oil in your hair, atleast on Saturday, put And first time they said, alright, everything is
sufficient oil and then wash your head. But, fine, it's alright you can have it. It had seventy
you will not do that and then you start losing signatures of these Italians, so called and then
your hair. I can understand that if you have no they came around to say, the same people, no,
said
should do.
kundalini, she is the one who gives you a
you
you, and you are trying to follow fashions
time, you are a very busy man. But why ? Why no, no, you must change it to copper.
not do something when it is needed to look after why ? Because copper will be aesthetically very
yourself also. So you look after your body to good. But don't they know, the stupid people,
thin down, you lose your hair, eyesight will be that copper will look the same as they are
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-8.txt 
 e Volume:X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
looking. After one month only they will have by train, even if train stops for two minutes,
the same colour. This is the idea of aesthetics men must get out. The wife will be worried now
and now I have told them, we don't want your and while the train will be moving, then they'll
land, you keep it to yourself and give us back jump. It's a crack brain, I think like a monkey
our money, In a simple thing like that, why ? because even monkeys won't do that. It's that
Because they have a committee, there is they cannot remain stationary in one place.
Rejuvne, bejvne, sejuvne ? We have to go Now, in meditation you have to sit down in one
through all that nonsense. Because they all sit place, not to jump from here to there, there to
down in chairs, very seriously, we must discuss, here, which is very difficult. Women have other
we must consult, we must ask everyone and problems. While cooking, they'll meditate. They
then this. Ultimätely what comes ? No progress have no time. They have their friends, they have
of anything. There is no peace. May be, I don't to go to shopping to buy things and fill the
know, may be some underhand dealings are house with all kind of rubbish. They have no
needed, for which they are feeling shy to tell time for anything. They are also very
me. I don't know what is the thing, but still I adventurous. They want to do business. They
can't understand when one office says yes, and want to do this, they want to do that. For
when it comes back to it, it says no. Three meditation they have no time ! So settling down
again
years. So what I am trying to say, that thinking is very important. Settle down with yourself.
too much is the sign of ego. But they don't find So, somebody told me, 'Mother if we settle down
any solutions. No solutions of anything, They'll we'll become very fat. Alright doesn't matter,
never hit the solution. Because they are but you settle down. All sorts of excuses are
discussing, arguing, thinking. They have no there, not to meditate. Yes, I meditate mother,
solutions.
know so difficult in these modern fimes.
but
you
There are crisis in our lives, there are problem
Now it is important that Sahaja Yogis have in our lives. But actually you'll be amazed. When
to do introspection, inward. Introspection is there is crisis, say in my family or in Sahaja
inward looking. Inward looking, why I am Yoga, immediately, I become thoughtless.
thinking ? What am I thinking. What is the need Spontaneously I become thoughtless, because the
to think ? You will become Nirvichar. Don't problem will be solved by the Parama
allow your mind to befool you. This mind is like Chaitanaya.
a monkey, I tell you. It's really like a monkey
and when it starts working, it makes you jump,
from this end to that end, that end to that end. the problem, why should I think ? Forget it, let
If you reach some conclusion, so called, and if the Parama Chaitanaya look. If you don't
it is not achieved, then you are the most depend on your Parama Chaitanaya, It doesn't
miserable person. I have seen people thinning help, doesn't give you any solution. Then you
down, only thinking about some thing which is go on round and round and round with your
absurd and you can see out of this thinking brain and work it out. This is what you have to
what comes out, on a global level also. What is know definitely, that you are connected to the
the need to go to the moon ? So many people all pervading power of Divine Love. This is not
are dying out ! What is the need to go to Mars love which is stupid. It's Love that thinks, love
? What are they going to get from there ? that is truth, love that is joy. All This is built-in
Because they have formed a habit, first they within you and now you have got realisation3;
came to India, then went to China, then went so instead of evolving yourself, you just jump
to this, then went to that. They can't sit down, into things which are of no value. And so many
settle down. They can't settle down in their Sahaja Yogis get lost. I have recently been told
house also, specially men. If you are travelling by someone that we have lost about 100 Sahaja
The Parama Chaitanaya is going to solve
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue 1-2 &3 1998
Yogis, because they started following another the saints have written, you have got the
Sahaja Yogi who started seeing things. So, they of truth, you know the reality much more than
also wanted to see. If youi can see something, those saints who have praised the Goddess. If
that means you are not there. Simple thing. If I you could just think as to what level you are
am, say, on the top of a mountain, then I am sitting, you wouldn't fall, you wouldn't go down
there, but if I am away from the mountain then that much, only problem is you have to know
I can see. The more you see something that that your ascent has to be spiritual and already
means you are away from that. Did you follow these qualities are very well balanced and
this point ? So, the subtle, the sukshama state is within you, more than dharma. May be vou
that where you are yourself that. How can you have the power to give up or to fall down, hut
see yourself ? This is the point Sahaja Yogis these powers are never destroyed within you.
must understand. Anybody who can see, remember once, I went to America, first time
Mother, oh, no he can see, he saw auras around and I met one gentleman and next day he came
you, he can see this thing, so, how can you see and told me Mother, I'm changed, I'm changed,
? Because you are that, you can't see. So all I'm changed. What happened ? You know I used
such people who are very popular sometimes in to hate my uncle and never wanted to talk him,
the biginning of Sahaja Yoga, try to control you very angry with him, but yesterday, just imagine,
and befool you and then you are thrown out. yesterday I met him. I went and hugged him
Now, this is what you call is the judgement. and kissed him and I said, now I have forgiven
There are sieves, and sieves and sieves through you, completely forgiven you. Now don't think
which you have to pass. Where you get about feeling guilty about it. He started looking
enamoured by this or that or you fall for this or at me like this. So with the kundalini awakening,
that, all these things are there. Step by step, all these beautiful qualities you have will come
how you are ariving ? You are ariving at that up and then your generosity, your beautiful being
point where your destruction is sure, because which is enlightened by the spirit, will prove to
you have to become the spirit, you have to rise the world that, Sahaja Yoga is the truth.
in spiritual life and if your movement is Yesterday's beautiful dramas have shown us,
downward, who can help you ? This is a very but it should not be a mental satisfaction within
interesting time as I told you, is the time of you that I have got the realization, I-am this,
judgement and at this time we have to be careful no, no, no mental. It's a state, and that state to
that we are our own judges. Nobody is to tell achieve, you have to really meditate. Find
you that you are catching this one and you are for meditation every night, every morning. The
catching that one. You yourself can feel it, what more you'll meditate, the better it will be. No
chakras are you catching. Whatever I may try excuses are to be given or to be convincing to
on my own to suck in all your problems, do yourself. Everything is unimportant, your ascent
whatever is possible to keep you rising and rising is very important, if you really want to save
and rising, but what I feel that this method of this world from this kaliyuga. I think today
helping you, will not make you so strong, have made it very clear to you, what qualities
because you will always think that afterall are already installed within you. They are,
Mother will suck my problems. If I get 100 are not dharmas but qualities, they are just
letters, 99 of them are of Sahaja Yogis who are within you, only thing you have turned your
suffering from this trouble or that trouble Iam attention to something opposite, otherwise all
amazed, you have all these qualities already these qualities are already instilled within you.
awakened in you, they are in you, you use them. They are already there, and nothing can destroy
Somebody will say, that fellow is troubling me, them except for you yourself. If you have
the wife is troubling me, the husband is troubling destroyed them, nobody can help
me, just forgive, just forgive, your power of
forgiveness is poor. Moreover, more than what
power
put
mẹ
they
15
May God bless you all.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Volurrie: X Issue I-2 & 3 1998
Divinie Cool Breeze
The Role of Women
Shudy Camps, June 1998
Yesterday, we have had a nice meditation, and Also, the tree fell down And she didn't know
we all felt the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost, and what to do. So she came back and she said to
told you that we have to understand that this this, another Sahaja Yogini, "I'm sorry I've said
is the greatest moment in the history, while you these things. That is what has happened, now you
are born, and you are doing the highest work that please save me from another disaster because
is of God, here. And you are specially chosen for have been rather selfish towards myself." She said,
it and how you must know that you are a saint. "No, I never said anything to mother. I never told
Apart from this, all the blessings that you have, Her. I just came back home, I forgot everything.
you also get lost sometimes in your blessings that I never told anything to Mother. I never carried
you have, you also get lost sometimes in your any malice in my mind. I was absolutely very
blessings and start behaving in a manner which forgiving. How it has happened ?"
doesn't behove a saintly person. Now after so
many years I have agreed, or I agreed to have Puja and she was worried that all her garden will
Ekadasha Rudra Puja, which was, I know, was be swept away one day. So she wrote a letter to
a dangerous thing to do because I know, still so me saying. "Mother, this is what has happened.
many Sahaja Yogis are half-baked, some are just I have done it because I have these bad habits
taking advantage of Sahaja Yoga, and making from my past life and I tried to save one
money out of it or getting some power out of it, Jackfruit.." and then she had to give it away
or fame or something.
This has happened after the Ekadasha Rudra
to beggars, to servants. Nobody would buy those
jackfruits from her. Then she lost all her money
So this was let loose now. this power, and She lost everything. I know it is rather dangerous,
is a very, very dangerous power in a way, and but how to destroy the negativity ?
you have to be very careful. It of course, protects
you from the people who attack you and try to
destroy you from all negativity. It wants to work Sahaja Yoga, very much, and Sahaja Yogis.
out all kinds of protection that is possible for you, through a very subtle method. As you must have
but if you start misbehaving, also it can act upon heard about Australia, what has happened there.
you. I'll give you a story about something happened One lady who was sent from her husband to
very recently in India. One Sahaja Yogi went to Australia to get corrected. So there's another one
another Sahaja Yogi's place, who had lots of who's a wife of someone. She's very conscious of
jackfruits in her garden and she said, "why don't her "wifeness." She got hold of this negative woman
vou give me one jackfruit because I wat to make and created a group of such riegative women. And
some Vegetable out of it ?" So she said, "Not today. all the vibrations of Sahaja Yoga were finished
give you. I will give you some other day; I there. On my birthday, not one person sent me
do'nt want to give you today. That's all. And she even a flower from Australia. They did my Puja,
had lots of jackfruits. So the Sahaja Yogi felt bad all right. That ritual they did : Puja.. but families
And today I find the negativity is also hurting
Ill
you see, she just wanted to make some She said that we are doing in our own family
that
vegetables for some nice people coming to her Which is your family ? The small little family of
house-costs you nothing in the market, just she ashram or your own family ? And the whole thing
liked the jackfruit so she said can I have one got destroyed. All the vibrations of all the
jackfruit ? Next day there was a
a kind of typhoon came, only in her garden,
nowhere else. And all her jackfruits fell down.
very big wind, Australias was destroyed.
Then I had to call the leader to Bombay, He
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X
10
was so upset with his own vibrations because he
started shaking before me. His hands started and England and America, the women have
trembling before me. He said, "I am sensitive." become very dominant. And they know how to
I said, "No, this is Bhoot, this is not sensitivity. control men by telling them stories about how to
If
Specially it is very much in Europe, I find,
you get anything, pains, or anything like that, look after the family, how to look after the childrer,
that means you Te
Don't be diverted. Don't think like that. Don't have get lost with it. I have seen so many of like that.
wrong ideas about yourself." I said, "you sit down It has created so many problems.
before me now." Then I took out the spirits from
him. Then he admitted "there was an assault of
Scottish people on me." Scottish people. Why ? themselves and understand they are wives. And
"Because she went from Scotland." I said, "Bhoots whatever blessing they have got from Sahaja Yoga
do not have any nationality. They do not have will be all withdrawn if you start misbehaving.
any caste. They don't have any religion. They're And all kinds of miseries will be upon them, not
bhoots. So don't call them Scotish. They could be because of me, but because of Ekdasha Rudra. As
Russians. They could be Italians. They could be you put everything on the bhoots, let me put it
Indians. They could be anything." But such a lot on all the deities. I don't take any responsibility.
them that the whole of Australia, the whole of Because if you are irresponsible, they'll hit you
New York got caught up.
Now I requested all the women to behave
hard and you will end up with cancer or something
very serious and then, don't blame me. This is the
So how the negativity crawls into it, and a situation today. I have known some Sahaja Yoginis
person like James who is a saint was hurt. Not who confessed to me that they have been doing
hurt but he was absolutely ruined and he admitted this, they have been doing that, they have been
that "Mother,I know what has happened to me." talking about families this, that. And they have
But I found out his wife who was guilty. She had been hurt. This is to be understood because I think
a very bad past, allergic to things, she was. All the women in the West do not have intelligence.
kinds of things she had. I told her that you have They are not intelligent. That's the simple equation
to get out of Australia. So the Maha Puja has been I have reached. Some have iritelligence and even
postponed in a way. I'll see to it that we do it, if they are caught up they are sensible, If they
but may not be any one of the Sahaja Yogis from are intelligent. But the women here are aggressive
that ashram come. And then to my surprise, all but not intelligent.
these horrible six women who had formed a group
with this woman, wrote a letter to me that "She
has uplifted us." And the vibrations were so bad point. She knows this is Adi Shakti. If her husband
that I just felt the whole vibrations started flowing is doint something wrong she'll just say "I'll fast
and fighting with them. I couldn't read the letter. for ten days. Will you behave yourself ?" or "Ill
And they felt they have been uplifted.
An intelligent woman is in India. She sees the
get out of this house if you don't behave yourself."
Is the women in India who have made Sahaja
So in Sahaja Yoga, you can be misled very Yoga successful in India; They are very intelligent
much by so many things, but now, be careful. women.
Don't try to cheat yourself. Must understand your
own value. As I told you yesterday that you are
Yogis, you are saints, and you should not yield are so aggressive. They do not see the point, They
to anything nonsensical and cheapish. Anybody do not understand who I am. They do not
who tries to do all those things, you should tell understand, what is our worth. To them all
them you are yogis. As I told you yesterday that nonsensical stupid things are important. Not all
for a person who is a yogi, the whole world is of you but some of you. And because the
his own family.
Here the women lack intelligence because they
intelligence is less, you yield to such women who
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze # Völue: X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
are stupid. They tell you all kinds of things. They Yoga, you must have the same knowledge as any
talk well. Here only the women talk, I have seen. Sahaja Yogi has. If you have produced children,
Men do not talk. If you see a television, only the it doesn't mean that you have achieved something
women are talking. Men never talk. A child has great. Anybody can produce children : dogs, cats,
died, it is the mother who is talking. I don't know everyone. Also your husbands are responsible
how she can talk when her child is dead. She's partly for it. So nothing you have achieved great
the one who will talk. And the father will be by producing children, looking after the children,
Lunhappy, like a mouse sitting there, keeping shut. dominating your husband all the time. How much
So many times I have told Sahaja Yogis in England do you know about Sahaja Yoga ? I know some
and elsewhere that you are like cabbages. If you of them do not know what are the chakras on
behave like this, the day will come when you all the feet. They don't want to know anything about
will be destroyed by these horrible women. Now Sahaja Yoga. Only they want to use Sahaja Yoga
women have to understand they are women sometimes to dominate the husbands. One has to
because they are compassionate, they are face it up. How much do you know deeply about
forbearing, They are like this Mother Earth. Their Sahaja Yoga.
ego is so developed. Be careful about it Why
America is finished today ? Because of their
Most of you have so many problems within
yourselves. As I have seen, some of you, as soon
as you put hands towards someone, you feel, oh,
I can give you so many examples of Indian here, I'm catching here. That's the sign of a regular
girls who are married here. They brought round bhooting. And I have seen people saying that they
their husbands. They put everything right. They are sensitive. It's such a misleading thing. I am
have slowly and steadily put them properly into very sensitive. I am very much higher in Sahaja
Sahaja Yoga. This is a very common failing of the Yoga. That's not the way you are going to be higher.
West and I don't know what has happened to You have to be absolutely perfect, in perfect health
the men here. They fell so guilty that they must and perfect knowledge about Sahaja Yoga you
become like slaves. Is the other way around in should have. How many of you have read Advent
India quite a lot in the North India, I should say, ? Let us see. How many of you have read full
that women are very much dominated. We had Advent ? Honestly. Honestly. That's good.
women.
one Sahaja Yogini. Her husband was a Sahaja Yogi,
he was a doctor. He got paralysis. When he got
Now what I'm trying to say that you have
paralysis, his wife started earning money. When to find out, what is Sahaja Yoga ? Your Guru is
she started earning money, he felt very humiliated. a woman. She is the source of all the knowledge.
Then he dominated her much more. She came and She is the Ocean of all the knowledge. And why
told me, "It was nice when I was not earning- should we lag behind ? In all things we want to
he was much sweeter to me.now I'm earning..." be absolutely equal, similar to men. Even in dressing
and she was giving every single pie to him. Still up and everything. And what about in knowledge
he was dominating her, all the time. "Why you about Sahaja Yoga ? How many have given
didn't do this ? Why you didn't do that ?" She realizations to others ? Raise your hands. Only
said, "He never did that before. As soon as he's the women I am interested in. That's good. So
all right, I am going to give up my earnings," she that is what one should be proud of One should
said, "because my husband cannot stand my know how much you know Sahaja Yoga mentally,
emotionally. How many of you dominate your
husband ? Be careful. She is the only honest
So I have to request you people, first and person, I think. I know all of you who dominate.
foremost thing, all the Sahaja Yoginis must know And try to crush them also, sometimes. I'm
Sahaja Yoga, as well as, the men know. Not just requesting you now because you are the Shakti:
smiling and dressing up is important. In Sahaja You are the power behind the man. You are the
earnings."
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue 1-2&3 1998
12
one who are going to make them great. You are I have seen now in Australia happening. One
the ones who are going to build up Sahaja Yoga woman has ruined the whole of Australia and
as a potential energy. You are like this Mother Earth one woman can make the whole of Australia a
who has to give everything beautiful. all these great thing. That's me. I'm very proud to be a
flowers. From where do they come ? All these trees.
This Mother Earth looks se simple. But what she Shri Krishna. He had to marry 16,000 women.
gives us, look at that Look at those beautiful things. He had to marry them. He could not have them
woman and I would hate to be a man. Look at
as disciples. They were shaktis, they were His
So, one has to understand that to be a good powers. They had to be women. They would have
Sahaja Yogini, first of all you have to be an said, already they are saying, that He was a ladies'
excellent wife. And not a dominating wife, man. But to me nobody can say that, because 1
pushing yourself forward all the time. I have anm a woman and a mother is not challenged
realized this ery much but now recently, I have Father is always challenged. Not the mother. So
got 3-4 cases, in which I'm really Shocked, the many things you can achieve as a woman. For
way things are happening. And they can hit at that you have to know a few things, how to express
me or hit at the leader, hit at anything. Because your pure love to others. How to express your
it's easy for bhoots to get the women than the genuineness to others. How to help your husband
men. Is true. When you go too much towards the in Sahaja Yoga.
right, you immediately get caught up on the left
because you move like a swving because naturally
you are the left sided thing and then the bhoots a promise to me, that you'll work for Sahaja Yoga
catch you much more that they catch other and you'll help your husband in doing Sahaja Yoga.
people. You'll be amazed, that when I see the You'll help your husband when he's looking after
women, who have led a perverted sex life, are other Sahaja Yogis. And you'll look after other
much worse than men. After marriage, men get Sahaja Yogis, who come to your house. You'll make
cured, women do not. They have mental your house a Sahaja Yoga center, receive the people
problems, because you must know you are the in your house and will always try to enhance the
emotions, you are the desires of the whole world. collectivity. Under these promises you are married.
You are so important, without you nothing can You are the ones who can show that. It is easy
start. If I had not come on this Earth, put all of for a woman to be Short-sighted, conceited and
them together, right from Sadashiva to Ganesha, mean. It takes time for a man to be that. But with
they could not have done anything. It is a fact. all these possiblities, even if you have another
It's me as a woman, as a
the
In the marriage of Sahaja Yoga, you have given
mother, as a wife, as possibility of men to dominate, then you are neither
has achieved this. And that's what for here nor there. You have no sex, then. I mean,
spouse
you, it should be the easiest thing to do because I don't know what even to call them then. You
I'm a woman and I've lived like a woman and better name it, a person who is neither woman
I've managed so many children, all over the nor a man. Let us be women and be proud of
world Managed the whole show, managed my it. That's how we can make a very good world
family also very well. I balanced it very well. And for everyone.
how it is now proved that a woman can not only
be a priest but she can be the highest Guru of
So now coming to the major problems of the
world. We have seen that I amn talking about politics
quite a lot these days, and may be one day all
Gurus.
I put all of you on the pedestal now, So I of you have to enter into politics, when the
have to tell you that you have to come up and time has come. Also, I'm going to see this Mr.
you have to look after your Sahaja. You are very Jackson in America. Let's see what works out. Also,
important because a bad woman and a bad wife as you know we are working it out in England.
is very much more detrimental than a bad man. I am going to within 2 years time, to see all these
proper
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X
Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
13
leaders. And we are going to work it out in a must learn.
way that is sensible, dignified but it is for you
people to show that you are very balanced, good
families.
Now, so we come to the deeper problems of
this world. Is that the mental projection has now
shown clearly... (Be with me, all of you try to
Hello, will you please keep quiet ? Who is understand.) It's a very deep problem, that if you
that? Your son is very mischievous. Would you go to the left or to the right you jump into the
please take him away ? You must teach them how extremes, into the problems and you create
to behave before Mother. You must teach them. problems: So we have to keep everybody in the
One child can spoil all the other children. Be careful. centre. And to keep in the centre, we have to
You must smack them sometimes, I think it's ascend. Now the problem is that, we have many
necessary. Otherwise the children can never behave people who have come to Sahaja Yoga. This was
themselves. They need two smackings on the left never achieved before, never achieved before. For
Swadisthana and they're all right. We have to build that the main reason was that it was impossible
up societies and families, with proper training, with to penetrate into the minds of the people and tel|
proper understanding. As I told you, till the age them what is to be done. Everybody tried their
of five years, you can smack them. Till the age level best.
of ten years, you should teach them and after the
age of sixteen years, they are to be treated just
Today only I was discussing Buddha. 1 said
like your friends. But first if you have missed these Buddha tried his level best to tell people that they
two points, you can never treat them. They'll just should get out of nonsensical ritualism, and get
sit on your head. This is the problem also of to their salvation. He tried everything. So when
he died, they said, "All right, he has said not to
make any statues; we'll make stupas." so they made
But today the problems are much deeper than stupas that they started worshiping. Just the
what we think of, a kind of a negative force like opposite of what he said, that just now you get
Hitler's force is rising up through women of all your salvation, your cleansing, introspection and
the countries. Through women this horrible Hitler the middle path. He even went up to the idea
and all these Germans who died are taking birth. that don't have families. With the families means
They are becoming like now...just like Nazis. So this nonsense. You just take to renunciation, within
but
to negative forces, that are working within us. They as usual, as they were again consolidated into their
have to be humble, they have to be sweet and nonsensical things, they made big stupas and things
sacrificing because they have power to do it. It's and worshiped. You see that in the life of Christ.
only the women who can do it. Not the men. Men You see that in the life of Mahavira. You see that
can't do it. They have other sweetness about them. in the lives of all the great incarnations and
Men have some other sweetness about them. But prophets, Islam and everything. Same thing has
the women have that intelligence which can build happened, that they have perverted it. But who
has perverted ? Who has spoiled the whole essence
every great Incarnation ? It was spoiled by the
disciples themselves because they were not realized.
children in this country.
women have to be very careful not to give way yourself, so that you see all these things
the whole world into a beautiful world.
of
Now what are you doing ? Sit quietly. Will
you please sit quietly ? Hello ! If you can't sit quietly
better go away Sit quietly. Yesterday you were not
here and they were all very quiet. Now behave
properly. All of you must learn to behave, all right
? You must teach your children when you bring
them here or bring anywhere that how to behave.
You must teach them. You must tell them. Children
Now, the deep problem I find is the women
who are supposed to be my disciples will be spoiling
Sahaja Yoga-very clearly. I can see it now. I can
see it so clearly, absolutely clearly. They are going
to spoil because they have become very dominating
Because they think they know Sahaja Yoga. Because
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze $ Volume : X
Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
14
they think they have become very great. A leader's if they are coming, immediately I can feel they
wife thinks she's the leader herself. If you call are coming. The whole atmosphere waits for them.
somebody that "All right, come and do this job for The whole cosmos, just in complete respectful
me," the wife thinks she has a right on her husband attendance, is waiting for their arrival There are
more than mother has. Is the women who are the women of that quality. We have to take them as
culprit today and that's why I want to warn you. ideals and not the stupid, useless, vain women.
Now I have seen it. I can point it out, at least ten We have to take them as something great. This
women like that who have done it. And now the is what I have to tell you that the potential within
you is very great. Sahaja Yoga should not be limited
to you or to your children. So the depth that you
eleventh. It's just here this is what it is.
And I have to request you to understand that have you touch.
the responsibility will be on you. When it will be
written down in history, as Ramayana was written,
it was the maid servant of Kaikai, the mother, the lost their values, they have lost their depth. This
stepmother of Rama is the one who is responsible is the basic problem of today. They have become
for the whole of thing that happened in the competitive, money oriented, success oriented, all
Ramayara. But that was to happen. But where nonsensical things. They are not ascent oriented.
is that Manthara today, and where is that Kaikai ? So you have to be very, very careful. Basically this
Indians do not take their names. They spit if is the problem you should see and I request all
anybody takes that name. To the dogs they have the Sahaja Yogis to be on the watch. The same
gone. They thought that time they have achieved woman today can be ladder to the heaven or could
a lot. This is what I have to tell you. If you want be a slide downward. Somehow they have achieved
like that, down in the history, because this that kind of a position now that they can dictate,
The problem of today, that the women have
to
go
is a very precarious time we are facing and we just like Hitler : took only eleven years. I think
have to be very, very careful about ourselves. What these women have taken, I don't know how many
are we up to ? What are we doing ? I deal with years, but now I see them on the scene. A woman
the present moment and the present times. And without righteousness, a woman without chastity,
I don't want to say what will happen to you in a woman without humility is not a woman
future. If you have to go to hell, you can go. I'm Compassion is her decoration. I wish I could write
not going to say who's going to go to hell and like William Blake. I wish he had written about
who's going to go to heaven, but it is for you to the women of the West and the beauty that they
decide through your introspection, to understand were. And that they have to achieve. Once the
what's going to happen.
women really know their strength, they will make
this world a beautiful world, I know that. But not
And I have to specially make a very important their weaknesses where they fall at the pattern
request to the women that in these modern times, of men. That's their weakness.
they are the ones who are going to save the world.
Not the men. They have done their job before.
Now it is for you to save, with your understanding. achieve two things. Yesterday I told you about
with your compassion, with your sacrifices, with introspection and today I have told you where
your wisdom and the innate love, not only your is the problem. Even if you make a big boat, the
children, your husband, your family, but the whole biggest boat, which is seaworthy, and make a big
world. It is a very good opportunity for all of you hole in it, that boat will be sunk. Even if
to do your bit. It has been a tremendous experience the brightest eyes, but a little hole goes into your
with some of the very great Sahaja Yoginis we eyes, you can't see the skies. And in their subtle
have. Some of them have achieved, really, as you method, these women have the knack to put that
can say,the constant state of bliss. Really. Some in your eyes. And they have also the knack to.
of them have. In the constant state of bliss. Even open the complete vision of beauty.
So, in this program we have been able to
have
you
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-16.txt 
 issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: IX
15
We are going to be a very ideal race, an ideal
I'm so very happy in India for one reason.
Most of the men come and tell me: "It's my wife family, an ideal everything, no doubt. We are
who brought me to Sahaja Yoga. It is she who going to show to the world, whatever people may
exposed me to sahaja Yoga. It is she who's done try tricks on us, we are not bothered. We have
so much for me and for Sahaja Yoga. And such to go further and further. Like Ganesha, you can
tremendous respect for the women. Even those say, a huge big elephant tied with all kinds of
who have come here, I've seen some of them have ropes and all kinds of chains can go and push
slowly and steadily brought their husbands to forward. In this manner, we all Sahaja Yogis are
Sahaja Yoga. Cf course Indians also have some going to work it out. But the ladies of Sahaja
horrid women and when they come abroad, if Yoga have to work it out. They have to see that
they are westernized and are exposed to western they give that power to their men. If I find any
life also, they can be very horrid too. But innately, husband weak, I know It's the wife who is a
a woman's attitude in India is different, that she nagger or or who is a dominating person,
has to establish the dharma in her family. She has who thinks no end of herself. And if I see a man
to establish the beauty of God in her family. She so powerful, I know there's a woman behind
has to give all that is good to her children, all him. It's just like electricity and light and a lamp.
righteousness. She has to be humble. She has not If the electricity is flowing all right, the lamp
to raise her voice. If she raises her voice, then she is burning. Absolutely fhat. But if you are
spoils her children : she teaches them how to raise identified with these stupid vain womerı, then
the voice. She has to, in a way, obey her husband you are lost. You'll be finished.
because children should obey her. It works ; the
society is much better there than it is here. So this
new, movement of women's lib and all that, is I am saying, and if you try to follow what you
of that secret work that is going on. Because have to do, then you will immediately see that
or
If you know what I am, if you know what
a sign
women are left-sided, they are sly. They work it mother is trying to strengthen our roots. Because
out very cleverly and cunningly.
you are the roots of the trees. You have to give
all the nourishment. You have to be notherly,
all could be like me. You all could sisterly towards alI the other Sahaja Yogis, not
But
you
achieve all my powers much more than men to quarrel, to fight, to say hard things. That's
achieve if you want to. But you have to get out not the job of a woman, not to argue but be
of your small visions and small ideas about quiet and watch out. Even if they are catching
glorifying yourself. I'm sure it will work out if you on certain chakras, you can cleanse them very
take it upon yourself that we all could do what well as wives. You can work it out secretly. You
Mother is doing today. First thing you must learn can do it. Because the problem, though it looks
to cook well. Don't allow men to do anywork in so dangerous, and so destructive and shocking,
the household. Never, never allow your husband the keys are in the hands of the wonmen of today.
to do anywork in the household. They will just They can just solve the problem like that if they
entirely depend on you. Make the best food. Be decide and understand their glory and their
an expert cook. The husband will be back home. value and do not make themselves cheap,
I'm giving you the tricks of the trade. Try to hankering after cheap popularity. If I have been
understand your husband like a witness. able to nail down this great problem to a very
Sometimes he gets angry for nothing at all and precise source of it and if you can manage the
all that. Be a witness to that. He is another child source, I'm sure we can manage Sahaja Yoga.
you have. It's a grown up child and you have We can manage the whole world and the
to look after a grown up child. Be kind and humanity at large is going to be absolutely saved
attentive. It is very surprising that you all have as that is your desire.
not yet learned those tricks. Perhaps your mothers
never told you.
May God bless you.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze $ Volume : X
Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
16
Shri Adishakti Puja
Cabella 6-6-93
"What is Adishakti
Today you are all going to worship me
first time. It has always been a puja of an pure love. So think of a father who has put
aspect of me or part of me. Now one has to all his love into one personality, then what is
know very clearly, what is Adishakti ? As you left in him ? Nothing. He is just watching.
say it is the Pure desire of God Almighty, the What does he think ? He is just watching the
Sadashiva. But what is the pure desire of God play of his desire, of his love. He is watching
Almighty ? If you see, your own desires come it, how it is working out. And when he is
out of what ? Not out of divine love, not out watching that he is very careful because he
of common love, out of material love or out of knows that this personality that I have created
power of love. Behind all these desires there is nothing but love and compassion; and
is love: If you donot love something you will compassion itself is such a noble variety that
not desire it. So these mundane type of love it cannot bear anybody challenging that
that you have for which you spend so much compassion, troubling that compassion or also
of your time uselessly, actually they donot give in any way demeaning it, lowering it
you satisfaction because that is not true love insulating it. He is so alert on that point and
that you have just, infatuation for the time he is very watchful. So a rift has taken place,
being and then you just get fed up with it and we should say from him, from his own desire
then you jump to another thing, to another of love.
thing and to another thing.
At this point comes Adishakti, which was
Now this desire of love has also given a
So Adishakti is embodiment of God's personality means ego, and that this ego has
Divine Love, is God's Pure Love and in his to act on its own. It became, sort of, very
love what did he desire ? He desired that he independent personality which was free to do
should create human beings who would be whatever it liked. And we can not think
very obedient, would be sublime, would be our mundane life that a husband and wife are
like Angels; and that was his idea to create absolutely free to do what they like, because
Adam and Eve. So Angels have no freedom, there is no cohesion, there is no understanding
Angels are made like that. They are fixed they there is not that oneness, that rapport But
do not know why they do it ! Animals also is like a moon and moonlight, sun and sunlight.
donot know why they do certain things; they It is such a cohesion that whatever one does,
just do it, because they are bound by nature. another enjoys. In that beautiful rift Adishakti
They are bound by God Almighty. They say decided to change His plan. She is known for
Shiva is Pashupati, means He controls all the her "Sankapvikalp Karoti"; anything you try
animals. He is Pashupati. So all the desires to decide too much, she will make it different.
come to animals but they donot repent, they like today's 11 O'elock Puja. So when this
donot have ego, they donot think that this is Adam and Eve business started she thought
wrong or that is good. They have no Karma that they will be just like other animals or
problem because there is no ego, because they Angels. What is the use ? They must know
what they are doing, they must know why
have no freedom.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Divine Cool Breeze * Volumë: X
they are doing. They must have the freedom talked about Kurndalini since long and that she
to understand what is the knowledge and like is the Adishakti, reflected within us. Now, you
fixed machine like life, that these animals are see it is already read it out to you that I wll
having, why whould they have? So in her be in everyone of them. Now understand that
arbitrary power which was conceded, of course, this Adishakti is the power of love-of pure
She is the one who came as a serpent and told love-compassion. There is nothing else she
them that you taste the fruit of knowledge. has, only the pure love within her heart. But
Now for people who are not Sahaja Yogis you this pure love is so powerful, is so powerful,
cannot tell this. They will be shocked. But this that is the love she has given to this Mother
serpent that came for them to test and then Earth. Because of that this Mother Earth, the
to tell them that you better taste this fruit. amount of sins we may commit, we may do
This serpent told the woman, not the man, anything, she is pouring out her love through
because woman is supposed to accept things these beautiful things to all of us. They have
easily. He may even accept bhoots, he may also this beauty expressed in every way, of her
even accept nonsense but she is the one who love through the galaxies you see, through the
accepts. While the man does not accept easily. stars you see. Now if you want to see from a
He argues, he discusses, that is why She came scientific way, then science means it has no
and told the woman. She came and told love in it. There is no question of love. Even
woman, I should say. This Holy Ghost actually people talk of Yoga, but they donot talk of
is a feminine and so moves nearer to a woman. love and compassion.
This feminine Ghost came as a serpent and
told that better you taste the fruit of
Knowledge. Now it was the job of the lady to there cannot be any divine power in that
convince her husband because women know person. Everything is completely submerged in
how to do that. Sometimes they may eonvince this Divine love. Everything that is created in
them wrongly, tell them something which is this earth. Everything that is created in this
very wrong, very sinister, as you know, in universe and universes and universes is all
Macbeth what happened ? So many places, because of the love of the Divine Mother. So
we have seen, women have misguided their this Adishakti's love is something so subtle, is
husbands. But men can be misguided or could so subtle; vou cannot understand sometimes.
be guided or could be emancipated, if they know you all leove me very much, tremendous
have a proper wife. So he had all faith in his love for me, and when I get the vibrations
wife, believed in it and they tästed the fruit of from you, it is like the ripples that reach the
knowledge under the guidance of this Holy shores and again they return back and lots of
Ghost who was a feminine personality of God. little little sparking drops are there on the
This cannot be conceived that the people who shores also. In the same way, in my heart,
are just getting a glimpse of Christ or a glimpse feel your love echoing the beauty of this
of Mohammad Sahib or a glimpse of Nanak sparkled Divine love. 1 cannot explain to you
Sahib. They cannot understand. They just had the experience, but the first thing that it creates
a glimpse of them. If they have told people is that tears come into my eyes. Because it is
would have said, Wah! What is this ? They the compassion, which is Sandra Karuna is
would have never listened to them.
When there is no love and compassion
'Ardra', it is not dry. Like a father's compassin
should be very dry, alright; do this, otherwise
but
So at that time, the way the attention was, I will shoot you. Do this, mother will
the way the reception was, they told about she will not say something that will be that
Dharma, about ascent. But in India people hurting. she will have to say something to
say,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Divine Cool Breeze # VolumeX
18
correct but her saying is very different from then you become the giver, you are no more
the father's, because she has got Sandra the person who has to take anything, you
Karuna. Ardra, Ardra' is which is not dry. become the giver. You are so fulfilled. Now
This kind of a heart she developed because of this Advent came at a time which was judged
this Divine love that she was having. So every what time it should come. As I said you have
part of the body, everything is created out of freedom, people were going amuck doing all
Divine love. Every bit of it emits nothing but kinds of things. So if you see that just before
Divine love. Vibrations are nothing but Divine this we had a big problem of people working
out their power, like people will go to India
to occupy the territory of India, or to China
Now as I have told you before also that or besides they went up to Africa and all these
this incarnatiori had to come. The time had places. Even Americans went to, so called
come. It was all being seen that the time has Americans, went to America and occupied It.
love.
come. But there is a difference between fixed
time and the time which is Sahaja. Fixed time
is such that, you can say that, this train will their freedom for power only. That was not
leave of this time, this will reach this time. the time for the Adishakti to come. They were
You can say that some machinary is producing the people who were power oriented; not that
something, in such time it will produce so many today we donot have but these were seeking
things: But living things which are sporntaneous, only power and also these territories. It is not
which are Sahaja, you cannot say time. In the important. So it could not be at that time. At
same way this process of freedom. You have that time, one has to fight for one's freedom,
the maximum freedom. So one could not say for getting out of the clutches of these
what time this will happen, that people will imperialists and people who were trying to
be available to receive this subtle knowledge of overpower. Now gradually it changed. It
divine love. Knowledge also could be very dry. changed and changed in such a smooth way!
We had terrible people in India who were busy It is very surprising ! I saw the change coming
with the reading and with the recitation of up myself. It worked out, as your know, I
mantras, this, that and they became so dry-so myself took part in the freedom movement of
dry that they had just bone structures left and India. It is important. In Irndia it started, first
so hot tempered that they looked at anybody the freedom from imperialism, started spreading
and that person will be reduced to ashes. I in every country. People started thinking about
mean, is this the way you have come on this the freedom; they started understanding that
earth, to do all the tapasayas and everything, there is no use having colonies and that better
just to make somebody into ashes ? But that's come back to your own position. So when this
how they thought that they were very great happened, I mean this happened in my own
because they looked at somebody and that life time, I must say, first people who tried to
So this was the time when they were using
person disappears or becomes ashes. There was have freedom in our country died. So many
no idea of benevolence in their heart. First were killed; you know, we have people like
thing that is achieved through this Divine love Bhagat Singh in every country.
is your benevolence. The benevolence itself is revolutioneries were thrown out and illtreated
also a kind of a very misguided word. and killed. It is not a question of independence.
Benevolence means whatever is good for your
spirit. Now as you know the spirit is the freedom was tested. Now they thought that
reflection of God Almighty, so when the spirit this was nonsensical thing we did. This was
in you starts reflecting itself in its full beauty no freedom because after all doing all that
All the
But that one had to go through, so that,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
19.
Volume:X
they started repenting and developing a kind religions got derailed and they formed a kind
of fear and a fright from others and a kind of of puddings you see, Muslims here, Christians
a very disturbed left Vishudhi started. They here, Hindus there. This is this, this is that. So
felt very guilty, that they have done very you really needed this river of life to fill
Wrong. That they should not have done.
all
up
these puddles and make them one. It is
complete ignorance. It is sheer stupidity to
At this juncture also there were other think that one human being is higher than
problems, like we have caste system and other another. You can only say one thing that at a
problems like slavery and all kinds of things- different state you are, some are at a different
disparities and some people were treated as stage, some are at a higher stage, but in general
lower people and some as higher people, some you cannot condemn some body that he is not
higher races, some lower races. All these stupid good, this society is not good. In general
things were there. Through their freedom they individually you can say. In general you cannot
created. It is not so, it is not the fact, it is not say. This ignorance was so dark it became a
the truth but they created the things like that. collective ignorance-collective ignorance. They
Now supposing I want to create something all joined hands together collectively, to say
here just to say that alright, this is not a carpet, that this is the religion that is the best, we are
go on telling you, this is not a carpet. The only the one who have saved ones. Another
brain is washed there. This is not a carpet. It said no, no, no, these are absolutely condemned
IS something else. It is like a mesmeric thing people, we are the best; and under the name
I feel the way people accepted this nonsense of religion, under the name of God Almighty
of racialism and all kinds of disparities of they started this nonsense. So now Adishakti
slavery of caste system and specially ill treating had to assert with the complete force. So the
women. Al this came out of the choice that first thing she realised that one should know
was given to them to select what is good, what is the family. A child grows in the family.
what is bad. So to them it was very good, it If the children do not get proper attention
a nice thing to do. Under these from the father or the mother, we can say, if
circumstances compassion would have been they are also spoiled or if not spoiled over
wasted on these people, Divine love would indulge into or they are neglected, then the
have been a waste on them, because mentally child does not know what love is. If a child
people were not prepared to understand. You does not know what love is, love does not
could not tell them that this is absolutely out mean that you spoil the child or you give him
was
of your blindness, ignorance that you are doing some toys to play and get rid of him.
this. This is not the right thing for you, this
is not right thing. This will not make you noble.
This is ignoble. They are doing ignoble things is on your child and that attention is not
of course, so many saints came, they talked of indulgence but an attention for the benevolence
nobility, of foregiveness, of unity, of oneness, of the child. So all the time you are seeing that
everything they said. Big seers were born. They there is benevolence and thus I thought the
also reached that point, talked about it. But family life has to be first of all substantiated.
still people were not prepared so much. Very important; because these days also under
Gradually, I think their teachings and all that the name of religion they have started nunneries
started working on them.
It means that all the time your attention
and these priests and then sanyasis and all
kinds of 'babas' are there. They are so dry and
But the highest problem came with the, so they are so misleading the that people
called, religions that they started. AlIl these started taking to this kind of sanyasa, getting
people
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Volume: X ssue 1-2 & 3 1998
20
Divine Cool Breeze
out of their houses, getting away from the war for ? War has just killed all our society
wives and children. So the first point I realised, and killed our children, everybody and what
human beings cannot have love, who have not is great about the wars ? So the minds of the
known what is love; and this love is more people, as a whole, was that somehow or other
effective if it is collective. See we must have you just fight that the fittest man is the best.
seen that in India people really love each other So the one who can dominate, the one who
can come up is the best. So the domination of
donot know how we are related to them ! We this imperial style of Govt. was over but
just call them brothers, sisters, these, that, we individually it became a process of domination.
donot know what is the relationship, whose With this process of domination, ego started
father or whose sister, nothing, but we just developing. Even to children they used to give
feel this is our brother or if you ask how he education in such a way that children became
is your brother we donot know how he is our very arrogant, very artificial, extremely
brother. The reason is we have joint family arrogant and artificial. It was impossible to
understand why these children were not at all
controlled when told that this is wrong!
in a family. I mean in so many relations we
system.
The joint family system is just like a
collective system. Nobody knew who was his
real brother, who was his step brother, who mundane thing, I must say Dhyanagamaya,
If the people are not meditating, it is very
If
was his cousin, nothing. All live together as
just relation. But then this also broke, this joint with you. You are not my relations, you have
family also broke because of economic reasons no right on me. No question is to be asked,
and things like that. So now at this time, when why this is happening, why that is happening
we see this very crucial time, it was, when the So if you do not meditate, I always say
people had to know love and the family had mediatate, meditate, I have nothing to do with
started breaking in every country, specially you. You are no more there for me. If you
western countries, where men and women have no connection with me then you are like
never realised the importance of a family life. all other people. You may be Sahaja Yogi, you
They never had faith in their family. So it might have got your Sahaja Yoga degrees from
became just a shifty thing for the poor children. your leaders, and may be that you are regaded
They were on shifty grounds. They could not as something great, but if you do not do vour
grow properly. So it created a
violent, horribly possesed children. This you will not be, really, in the realm of Shri
generation, then, went into warmongering. Mataji. Because this connection is only through
They donot know-they feel like fighting. I have Dhyana, through meditation. I know people
seen children fighting with the tree., I said
why are you fighting ? It is nice to fight you their children suffer, when something happens
know but why are you fighting ? They donot then they start coming and telling me, butI
know the reason. There is no love. So see clearly that the person is not meditating
everything gets detesting, you see, I don't like I have no relationship with him, he has no
it. They try, out of their frustration, to destroy right to ask me anything. In the beginning, of
anything that is there. So a new trend started, course, meditation takes sometime but once you
apart from the war when it was over, naturally know what is meditation then you enjoy my
the value system dropped. People felt what is company. How you are one with me ! How we
the use, you see. We had all these values so can have rapport with each other ! There is
what did we get ? And the war, what is the no need to have anything else in between-like
you are not meditating then I have rto relations
generation of meditatiorn everyday in the morning or evening.
who do not do meditation. Then they suffer,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Volume:X
writing letters or may be some sort of a, social if it has happened, and it has been helpful to
connection. Nothing. The only thing needed is you, it has been a great blessing to you then
meditation. In meditation you grow in that must you know how to preserve it, must know
spritually, you become higher and when that how to enhance it, must know how to enjoy
happens, is that in a way, I would say, when it. You should not be just satisfied with one
you reach a state of that maturity in Sahaja drama or one this thing or one that thing. But
Yoga, then you do not want to give up your you should have a full oneness with the Divine,
meditation because that time you are absolutely full oneness. That is possible only if you really
one with me. That doesn't mean that three meditate, which is quite an easy thing to do.
hours-four hours, you should do meditation. Some people say, Mother we can not get over
But it is how much intensely you are with me, time, we are all the time thinking something
is important. It is not how much time you or we want to see the watch. In the begining
have given. Then, I am responsible for you, for you may have little problem, I am not saying
your children, for everyone. I am responsible you may not have, you may have. Only in the
for your ascent, for your protection, to save begining, but gradually you will be alright,
you from all your negativity. So it's not like a gradually you will master it, gradually you
father who will directly punish you. It is not will know it so well that you will not like to
that but it's just alright, you are not my have anything else of a cheaper type. You won't
relation, I am alright. But the only thing that hear it so to get to your beauty, to get to your
can happen, If you are not meditating, It's glory, to get to your own great personality,
alright, I cannot force you, I have nothing to which is now exposed, only thing you have to
do with you. You can have other relations do really, religiously is to meditate. It is not
with outside-outward. But this inner that at night I come very late, so I did not
relationship by which you get your meditate, or tomorrow I have to go for work
benevolence, you
meditation. I have been telling all of you, please the excuses, it is between you and your self.
meditate, please meditate everyday. But people It is your gain, nobody else's. It is for your
are not understanding. The importance of what gain everything has happened.
I am saying. They tell me, 'Mother we do not
meditate. 'why ? Now we are realised souls,
why should we meditate ?" Now this instrument achieved. A certain height of relations and
is fully made, but if it is not all the time from inside you might go up to here, up to
connected with the mains, what is the use of here, up to here, not saying it is not possible
having it ? In that meditation you wil feel the to do that. But first and foremost thing that
love, the Divine love, the beauty of that Divine whatever you may be, may consider yourself
love. The complete panorama changes. A a very high class Sahaja Yogi, you have to be
meditative person has a very different attitude, humble about meditation. This meditative
very different temperament, a very different quality, even where I am talking to you on the
life. He lives always in complete satisfaction Sahasrara. I am getting into it because it is
cannot have without so I cannot meditate no body warnts to know
Now one has to know. what we have
so joygiving. You just jump into the ocean of
First it will be difficult, but after sometime
within
you.
So today, being the first day, as you say, you will know that this connection, that you
of the Advent, we can say that it is the first have, is the only connection you were looking
day when Advent took place, as you are after. And also there is another point people
worshipping today. Of course, it is war, not get lost with, which I have seen very common
today but still we can say that if that is true, with some people, who get lost. They meditate
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X issue 1-2 & 3 1998
individually, very much, it is very correct.
Individually they will meditate. They will sit know, because there has been, no prayers or
down, meditate, do the puja. But collectively anything about Adishakti. Up to Bhagwati they
they will not meditate. So this is another point have gone. Beyond Bhagwati they have not
one has to remember that you have to be gone. So I don't know what sort of puja you
collectively meditative. Because I am a will have ! But let's try something, may be, I
collective being of all beings. When you think the meditation is the best way we can
meditate collectively, you are very close to me. really achieve something. So we can go into
So even if you have a programme or meditation for about five minutes.
something, you must do some meditation.
Always have meditation as priority for every
programme. You sing the songs, everything is Kundalini of all present) Eleven Rudras are
done, then you meditate. If 1 am insisting on awakened and they will destroy all that is negative.
something, you must know, that this must be Now ignorance is the greatest negative force. I am
the truth I am telling you, absolutely the basis sure they will destroy this ignorance of people.
of it. Though it looks rather mundane, it is
very important.
Now for us to worship Adishakti, 1 don't
Please close your eyes. (Shri Mataji raises the
May God bless you.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Valume:X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
23
Lakshmi Must Give You Dignity and Balance
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi's Pravachana (Talk
Diwali Puja-Lisbon 2-11-97
Today, we have gathered here to worship there is another befooling place called 'Saville
Shri Lakshmi. In Diwali, in India, they worship Row'. So if you want to buy a suit, you have to
Lakshmi because a cruel Rakshasa, calld pay sometimes 3000 pounds. Now people are so
Narkasura, was killed. Also that Lakshmi came stupid, that now if they wear a suit from Saville
out of the sea. At the same time, this is like her Row, they put the brand outside "Saville Row".
diferent appearances. Lakshmi is the goddess All such tomfoolery is going on all over the
which gives us wealth, gives us prosperity. She world. The clothes have no meaning, their
is very blissful, no doubt. She gives you lifestyle has no meaning. Ultimately they end up
protection and also she is very humble because in Swiss Bank. The Lakshmi Tatva of Swiss Bank
she stands on the lotus. She is very light, means is also now showing its teeth, and if you read
she does not put her pressure on anyone. There what's happening to them, I mean they are
are symbols of Shri Lakshmi, but also she's a
part of Mahamaya, in the modern times. When that they took the teeth, the golden teeth of the
people get Lakshmi, the money, they don't jews! I mean its going too far All this tomfoolery
understand that she is their mother first, and has been going on. They have military services,
she is to be respected. When this kind of perverse why ? Who is going to conquer that country?
idea of Shri Lakshmi comes in, such countries, Even Napolean didn't do that. They have made
such people meet their last end and destruction big case to keep their weapons there. Why ? Who
of the wors! type comes. So, this Lakshmi has is going to attack them ? Stupid people, suffering
to he used with a big balance, like standing on from Ego! But the attack has come and this
a lotus and not get into the pond, where there attack is so serious that they might be completely
are all kind of creatures to eat you up. You shattered and destroyed. Now, who falls for this
have to stand on the lotus, that means you are kind of things, you should see, are the people
above all the lures of this Maya: Also in Sanskrit, who are crooks, who are dishonest, who are
our language, we call Lakshmi as the Maya. If absolutely adharmis. They can be Mafia Dons or
somebody has got lots of money, they would they can be some thugs, some black marketeers,
say. he got lot of Maya. Now, this Maya plays same smugglers,
the tricks. If money prosperity was salvation, then
there would have been no problems in this world,
because those people who have money always many are doing these days One fellow, was
get ruined, if they are not ruined, their children, thrown out of Sahaja Yoga, because he was trying
there grandchildren get ruined.
shaking: They don't know, they went to this limit
So going against the Lakshmi Principle, so
to be very dominating and all. He said that's
better, I said why ? He is doing now smuggling,
This principle of Lakshmi within us is very making money out of smuggling and has become
dubious and the allurement is so much that if very rich, according to him, But, it comes to an
people see somebody having a good car these
days, they say, Ah ! what a man he is: In any Iure for human beings that it kills allI cells of
case, He is not going to give you the car. If decency, of higher values, everything. A brother,
somebody is having, what you call, lots of say who is very nice and good fellow, if he gets
palaces, or buildings, people start admiring him money out of proportion or by doing the hankey-
This is Kaliyuga. They start admiring, see this pankey, he neglects his mother, father, brothers,
man is so rich. Even clothes, people see you sisters, everything. So I would say then it comes
wearing clothes which are very good tailored, to that point, that Lakshmiji becomes
might be from some designers, say, they think there and all her blessings become a sort of a
no end of that man. For example in England, challenge to your dignity.
end and a very tragic, bad end. Money is such a
a Bhoot
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
24
Now, certain countries, like America, which Lakshmi. Supposing I get money, supposing. Then
is the area for Shri Krishna, because he is I will go to the market, say, and I'll see
Kubera, they have no money as such, I have something nice, Ah this is very good for this
seen, they are all poor, they are all indebted. So Sahaja Yogi or I'll say this will be very handy
many Indians went to America and they can't for our Ashram, Immediately the mind starts
come to India now, why ? We are indebted. Why working in a very socialistic way, I should say
are you indebted ? Oh! we get everything free not individualistic. For example, I went to
now, you see bank gives us loan, we can have Rajasthan and I saw such a lot of sand, just
the best lifestyle. So, they will have three like a big desert and people starving ! So, I said,
Mercedes, is nothing. We should have Rolls how to get money to these people ? I said, let
Royces, we should have this. For What? What me start a factory, factory with unbreakable
do you get out of it? Now, of course, little bit glass, which they make only in France. They
they are shaken up with the stock exchange and make it very cheap, it is very cheap thing, not
all that nonsense, they had started, all this joke, in India. In India, if you go to some elite's house,
and all these very big camouflages. All now are They'll offer you tea in, in these unbreakable
coming out. So, this is no Lakshmi, because things. They think its very elite, depends on
Lakshmi must give you dignity, prosperity and what you think about what ! And they are very
respect. I think Americans understood about it, proud of it, so I said if we make these things in
so they became philanthropist, means they are India, these poor people, you know, because
giving money to people. But whom did they give there is so much of sand and sand is needed by
money ? All the names these people took from trucks. So I will utilize this to make this beautiful
South Africa, where all money, was given by factory here and then give them some support
the Philanthropist of America. What has to live well.
happened to their wisdon that a sixteen year
old boy went there and then all ages went there,
and made a very big money. All this money You all had come also once, there is a gentleman,
making proposition, (can you give seat to those who was a disciple of Gandhiji. He has organised
musicians) so what is the matter if there is a this Varnă company for distributing milk. It
blessing of Lakshmi ? Why a man who gets the became so very rich, so very rich, its a co-
blessing of Lakshmi becomes so funny, so stupid operative; so he started giving money to all the
and ultimately ends up his life, that people are co-operative people, those who are labour there.
not there even to pick up his dead body ?
Now when 1 went to one place called Varna.
Now, this labour had never seen that money.
So, he came to me, touched my feet and said,
What is the difference between money and Mother you tell me, now what should I do? I
Lakshmi ? She gives you money, alright, agreed. am so unhappy with the development of this
But when she is giving the money, what happens Varna, because there are prostitutes who have
to that money which comes to you, is a very arrived from Bombay, there are all kinds of hard
subtle thing one should understand. In India, if drinks which have come from Bombay and these
you give, say a 100 Rupees to a servant, people are smoking like hell, they are taking
immediately he'll go to drink somewhere. First, drugs. Hain ! Yes, wherever there is monev the
idea will come, what you should do, he'll go for drug goes there and the children are becoming
a drink of the hard ones. I mean, your Vodka is absolutely useless. They don't want to study, they
nowhere near that, such hard ones they make even slap their parents. So he said that this was
in India, you know. It is called as eru means
made with hands. So, in hundred rupees they He says, this is curse of money and he was
are willing to go, I mean that any money you crying. Now, how can Lakshmi become a curse.
give to them, it spoils their life completely. It does, it is in the Nabhi, what a central position
Lakshmi has been given, alright. So what it has ? And when this Nabhi starts working it
happens to this Lakshmi ? She changes her form is a very remarkable thing, that you feel gobbling
and her form is so bad, that you are completely the food all the time, with this Nabhi. You go
ruined with that. So, now
understand, what is the way we can use the bhoot comes in to eat also with you, inside the
not Gandhiji's ideal. Now what has happened ?
CLITSE.
we have to on eating, go on eating. like mad and then some
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X
Nabhi. Then you can eat so much that no human cheese ? Where will they go ? Even if they go to hel,
beings can eat like that, except for the people people will throw them away with the smell of
who are rich. then you start a big science of, cheese.
what you can call, etiguettes.
hurt anybody, I
don't mind. Eat well, but the first part is, because said there was a big snowfall and they had
today is Diwali I am trying to tell you aill these some big-big containers, in a cave, of milk and
interesting stories.
I don't want to
Then I read how this cheese came in ? So, they
meari if yoLL are eating well, I
put
people forgot about it. Snowfall was there for about
twenty days or whatever it was, and they just
I went many a times for dinner with French forgot about it. So after one year, they got the smell
diplomats. My goodness ! Now me and my husband coming out of it. So, they went and saw the cheese
don't drink, so 45 minutes they were discussing being formed. Can you imagine! This is beginning
what they will have today, then they remembered, of the end. Actually, one should never eat anything
yesterday they had that, day before they had that, that is kept overnight, normally. But now, they
so there should be variety, so then they came down have got fridges, so you can keep it for two days,
to something. Not all of them drinking the same, three days at the most. Like on the ship they keep
different different. So, they came to some point. it. But this I wouldn't understand that this cheese
Alright we will have this, but some people asked which they told me is very old, I said really ? And
for something, which was not available. So they they sell it by that, what old it is and their wines,
said, you
My Goodness! They took 45 minutes to decide hundred times more expensive. So, it's such a
whät they are going to drink. Its regarded as bhootish thing to eat all that. So, when the Lakshmi
French etiquettes, I think, and we two chief guests, goes into the hands of bhoots, on a very less levelI
myself and my husband, looking at this man and should say, is this, then it goes into the heads of
looking at that woman, didn't know what to do people who want to exploit money, exploit poor
with these etiquettes of these people. We were people, exploit countries which are downtrodden.
thinking now better go, then came the food. They Go on like this, collecting money, you know, looting,
are so particular-I like this and I like that. They are looting.
worse than Indians, I tell you. They took atleast,
atleast eighty minutes to decide what they will
eat ? Ultimately they found something nice. Each they used to take bribes. On Diwali day, If
different, and the guest of the people were trying went there without any persent. They'll say
to pamper
chosen ! This is the best, wah, wah, wah. So, they they liked was our country liquor. I never knew this
started seeing. The cheese was smelling so awful, I but later on I canme to know because my husband
tell you, we couldn't bear it, you know, both of us. became Collector of Meerut (#). There were
So
have to have it, and they shouted at them. if they are say, two hundred years old, it is two
When English came to India, we didn't know,
you
there ego. Oh, what a thing you have bakshish. You must give some present and what
husband told them today is our fasting day, bottles of country liquor kept in that house. That
my
for both of us. He said why is it a fasting day. He house was itself more than a hundred years old.
said, in India, we have fasting like this, sometimes Long time back, it was kept there, still, some of
we have to fast. Today is our fasting day, I told them, you see, and we could have sent them to
him, here one day you are saying, today is our England to sell. That would have been a geod idea.
fasting, but we have to go to so many dinners, So, the older it is better. This Lakshmi, I think
what will you do ? He said everywhere better to becomes old and dies and there is Alakshmi.
say, that we are fasting. Such a horrible cheese they Alakshmi means when you have money and you
brought and they started boasting that they have don't have the qualities of a person who should
two hundred types of cheese. Wow! I said, two have money. In that quality of Alakshmi, you
hundred types of the smelly ones ! Where did you become very miserly, you don't even want to help
get ? They said, this is French perfection. See this, your brothers and sisters. You don't want to give
I said what is this French perfection 7 But, then any money to anyone, and even if you give it, you
you know tears came into my eyes. Sir C.P. said give it to false gurus and wrong things. This is upto
why are you crying ? I said, I am not crying but I we can say is Alakshmi. The behaviour becomes
think what will happen to these people with their very arrogant. So arrogant, that you behave like
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X
26
horses, you know. People look like horses, they towards his wife-about the whole, entire family.
walk like horses. But I don't know that if the horses The whole parivar, as they call it, all the relations,
have ego. If you see these people you just don't that is his Dharma. But beyond that is, the Dharma
understand, what's gone wrong with them you see. of Satya Dharma-How much he sticks to truth
There is one gentleman who started Aeroplane
business in India. I won't take his name, but say
some Majidia or something. My grand daughter you know very well, these days with money people
met him, with her was my grand- son-in-law and are standing orn their heads or I don't know how,
they were walking like this, talking like this. They what they are doing ? The amount of nonsense they
can't understand these two persons. So, They came are producing all over the world, in the name of
and talked to them, who you are and all and ther modernism, is in no way e , no way. Then we
they said, we are this Majidia, My grand daughter have also, what you call is Politics "TIGI aTem en. This
said-who is Majidia ? My goodness, they fell from Dharma is also there. Now taking bribes, I mean
heavens ! You don't know who are Majidia, do you the kind of things that are going on, corruption, all
read newspapers or not? Then her husband come kinds of things that are going on. Competition,
in. He said I do. Now what do you want to say- fighting and all that. They are falling from their
we are Majidias. He said who are Majidias ? You Dharma of RIM RT. Education, same thing, we call
don't know ? How sort of business you do ? What it fere . All such things are Dharmas. There's a
is this ? Such stupid thing they did, that these kind of principle, which we have to keep.
children felt it's no use having any business. If Otherwise we can topple down from the lotus, and
business means this kind of behaviour, very that's what happens now we have also The
indecent, very arrogent. They don't know how to is that's your country. You must, there's
relate to people, they don't know and after dharma of your R when you have to fight for
sometime I heard that their business was your country. You should, but you should not be
completely finished or flopped, they call it flop.
Then the Dharma for creativity. In creativity as
agressive on other countries. It's not right to
dominate other countries, nor you should bring bad
So now, we have to realise that this Lakshmi, name to your country. It's very important. Sahaja
now it takes us to wrong things. Firstly, she makes Yogis have all these intact, absolutely, because you
you very egoistical. Somehow, the man who has are standing on the lotuses, already. You don't have
money starts behaving like that. One cannot this problem, normally no. once in a while, there
understand, how a person who was normal, are people who behave like that but mostly Sahaja
suddenly becomes like this, starts talking like this ? Yogis don't fall into these traps, that's why their
He might earn money, even in the horse races. Lakshmi Tatva will difinitely improve. They'll have
Around the Lakshmi is the valency of Dharma. little problems here and there, but without
Around the Lakshmi is the Dharma and this problems, if you get Lakshmi, you'll not have value
Dharma if you cross, that's the best place where for that. So, with little problems you get Lakshmi.
they can cross the Dharma, then you can do But Lakshmi, doesn't give you all this imbalance.
whatever you like. Which is Adharmi, which is Such a man has to be extremely balanced because,
religious, which is heinous. You have to first cross beyond that is the step of Mahalakshmi, where your
that limit of Dharma. You have to first deviate from seeking starts, where you become a seeker. You go
Dharma. Now, as I had said many a times that beyond Lakshmi principle and this Mahalakshmi
there are 10 valencies, human beings have got. But principle starts coming into you. I would say in this
apart from that, there are many Dharmas which western countries, this consumerism has started
are surrounding you. Like Angels. First Dharma is and it's such a funny one. In America, one lady was
love for humanity, is the first Dharma, but if married to an Indian and he used to tell me, how
your
you say from that end start, it starts with T u this consumerism works ? I said how ? he said, I
is the Dharma of the woman. How she should gave my wife money to buy two shirts for me,
live ? How she should get married ? How she because I had no shirts. She went and bought five
should look after her children ? What should be skirts. So, I said you have so many skirtis, why did
her behaviour, all is ' and then is 'qfa - buy skirts ? Because, in this monev, I could buy five
How should be a husband ? How should he behave skirts, instead of two shirts, so I bought five skirts.
towards his family ? How should he pay attention So, he said I can't wear skirts. So, how should I
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Issue 1-2 & 3 1998
Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: X
27
correct her ? I said, you do one thing, tell her I want they used to sell it to people. Now they have
to buy some skirts for you and go and buy five become expensive, in those days, they were
shirts. Then she would realise that if the money was cheaper. Now, it has that value, they are very
given to her for one purpose it should be used for honest, very religious. They were called
that. This is a very subtle principle, which I follow, "Shalivahanas' because they uIsed to give shawl to
because I don't understand money. So what I do, the goddess. They spread their kingdom very much
whatever money I get, I put packets. This is for this, and also there is a calender in their name.
This is for this, this is for this-into packets because
I don't understand, you know, and I can't write
accounts, you know. I am very bad at all that, very generous people and they have made beautiful
somebody else does that. Now, if I spend some temples and beautiful places for peopie to rest near
möney from one packet, for some emergency, then the river. I mean so many beautiful things they
I again fill it back, it's written there so much is there, have done. Apart from them Rama and Sita, when
so much is there. So the money is available at the they went to 'Dandkaranya' (US ), they went
right time for whatever I want to do and the money to this place and this is the place where Sita took
is in the packet. It is not in the, sort of a, open thing her bath: There's a little river flowing there and
that I just want to buy a Mercedes, 1 wart to buy how it was covered from all the sides and how the
a Rolls Royce. No, nothing doing, It is for some light was coming, so beautiful. But whatever Rama
purpose
the shop and you see something, you won't buy, of art. Then also there was a very beautiful temple,
because that money is not kept for that particular
thing. For Sahaja Yogis, it's very easy to handle there was some water flowing and there was Shri
their money with respect. Sa, you go to any shop, Mahadeva's (a big thing) Pinda and also there was
you won't buy anything. But, my nature also is a Parvati's statue, so old as that! I don't know if it
But, the kind of life they lead, they were just
and there is no need. So, when you go to had done, they redecorated it with the Rajput style
I saw, that they had made. Also, I don't know how
was put by Rama or by my own, you can call them,
the grand, great great grand parents. But the
spontaneous.
So, I went to Frankfurt, they said Mother, beauty about that place, that it shows that Sita used
there's a very nice watch shop. I just thought, I am to worship Mahadeva. The water was flowing
going to get three son-in-laws and what will I give somehow by nature, inside up there in a steam and
them. So, I went to that shop and I fouund such she used to take the water and put it on that Pinda.
beautiful things. But i had not kept any money for How deep these people were ? They built that
the watch. But I said, 1 must buy. One of the temple, such a beautiful temple they have built So
watches turned out to be a very unique one, I must many temples are built like this in India by people
tell
which is no more available. Because of my who had money and they believed that, if you
you,
eyes, I saw, this is something unique and my son- spend your money in this kind of work you are
in-law is, I mean. So overwhelmed, so overhelmed, blessed. There I bought a land near the river Nira,
quite rich, he has no problems, but he said, this that's my own name Nira, and this land, 1 just
watch, you cannot get. Then an article came about bought without thinking, and what they told that
that particular watch. So, he has kept it with him. their Guru, Shalivahanas Guru was Shandilya and
You see, to have something, it should have value this place belonged to him, long time back. It was
behind it, that is the Dharma part, value behind it. an ashram of Shandilya, exactly the same and that
What is the value ? When you want to buy land I bought, very surprising. Then in the
something, just don't buy because you are mad, I newspaper, it came out, every thing about that land
mean instead of shirts you buy skirts, not that way änd that this land was the place where, the great
But anything that has a artistic value or some devotee of Shri Vishnu, Prahlada prayed. You must
special value then you should buy that. Now this have heard about prahlada His mother had a
Saree, I am wearing It has a special value, why ? husband named (fvu ), Hiranvakashyapa
Not that it's is made with hands, it has a very Horrible Rakshasa. So she ran away from there and
beautiful design. This was made in a place called Indra helped her. He brought this lady to the place
Paithan (), which was the capital of a kingdom of Guru Shandilya and Shandilya told Indra, that
which belonged to my fore-fathers, the you don't put any effort for her, I'll look after her,
Shalivahanas. This saree was made there (4aa), and and the child, that is going to be born to this lady,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
Volume :X
Issue 1-2&3 1998
28
is going to get the (Avtara) incarnation of (RRIE), terracotta. But that is very expensive-I said, this
Narsimha. You know Narsimha is the man and the is the price. But I wanted to buy tarracotta from
lion. He said how can that be. So Indra left her Portugal, because it is very rich in that. So, we wen!
there. The child was born. Till 5 years that child to one factory, and the factory was quite far off.
used to play in that grand land which I have None of them could find it but I told them, it's here
bought. I didn't know about it. But I just saw it, I only, just go and see and then we bought the
was surprised. But when the child grew up to 5 terracotta. But, on our way I told, stop, stop, stop.
back to his father. I don't know They stopped, there was a shop. I had to buy
he had to
years,
how many of you read about Prahlad raise your something for Sahaja Yogis in India and also for
hands. I would like to know. The little boy- some people in Cabella and that shop had such
prahlada, his father tried to kill him and tortured beautiful cottons. There were Sahaja Yogis from
him. But he had certain boons, so Shri Vishnu here who saw that such beautiful clothes and I
appeard as Narsimha, means the lion and the bought lots of it. I said thank God! Presents are
human form, and then he killed this finished. Now for India. So joy giving it was!
Hirnyakashyapa (feu 91), the father. Now, Everybody was surprised. Why, suddenly in a place,
magine how much it was, that thousands of vears where mother has never been, suddenly She finds.
back, this must have happened and that I should It has a value, because I wanted to buy something
purchase that land. There is a very beautiful temple for Indians to be given as presents.
built about 300 years back by Maharashtrians. So
the story is that Prahlada came into the dream of
the people who wanted to build the temple and told add to it value, it becomes so big. The sign of a
them that I have already made the statue of Pperson, who is Lakshmipati is this : He should have
Narsimha along the river Nira, Imagine, the name He should protect people who are depending on
of the river is also mine and if you can walk along him and from the left hand he should give. This is
the banks of Nira river, very close to the temple,I the image of the Lakshmi. This is what the Lakshmi
have made the statue, in sand. Its a miracle. Só they is within you. If you have these four things in
went there, and saw the statue. They brought it balance, without conditioning, without ego, then
back and installed it in that temple. It is still there, vou are a Sahaja Yogi, otherwise you are not. On
go
s
So if your Lakshmi is, say, this much, once
you
a house like the Lotus in the hands of the Goddess.
made of sand. Also they say there is a kind of a you
river or a waterflow upto, very small one, like the whatever we are going to get now as Läkshmi's
finger, flows down from the top. God knows how ? principle or as a Lakshmi's prasad should be used
a Diwali day, we have to promise ourselves that
in getting things which have value and this you'll
well.
So, now see the value. The value of the money learn that you have used your Lakshmi
which was collected to build this temple has such And with that your Mahalakshmi principle becomes
an old value. So, the value is not money, this, one very strong. It will become very strong by which
should understand. What is the value of the thing ? vou'll ascend very fast. Today, is a day for us to
You want to give something to others, then the celebrate the Lakshmi Puja but Lakshmi Puja
feelings you have in your heart, is the value and doesn't mean that you worship money. Money, as
that value is the real Lakshmi. When you are it is, is the most dangerous thing and I think it is
building a house, the plans you make, or things the hidden weapon of Lakshmi Devi. See, if you try
you do, what is the idea behind and what you are to misuse her, she goes on punching with you.
trying to express through that house is the value When with one punch if you don't realise, then
of that house. Once, you understand, that you have she gives you another punch. Like that, then she
to buy with this Lakshmi or you have to use this might little bit twist you, to suggest. She'll try
Lākshmi for certain value and not for showing off everything to convince
or for money. This superficialness that we have is nonsense, ultimately she sees youT destruction.
about money itself is like on ordinary glass. But if So, the Lakshmi, though she is the one who is the
you put behind the glass, the Mercury, you can see giver of boons, giver of everything, you should not
the value, So, when you stärt buying something, be misled by the Mahamaya character. I am your
what is the purpose ? Why are you buying ? This Mother, so I better tell you to be very careful.
will determine the value. Like last time I came to
Portugal and I said-that we will go and buy some
very
you that what you are doing
Thank you very much.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_1,2,3.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Every Individual has to work
it out for himself so the
whole can be alright.
0.
so
