FUEL Divine Cool Breeze X lNGue : 11& 12 1998 Volume "We must learn to be one. After coming to Sahaja Yoga, after your Realisation, if you do not understand this message that we all have to be one, one single unit, one single body, if you cannot be, if you are identified with other things, then it is no way you have grown, you have not matured.

 In this Issue: Editorial Sahasrara Day Puja 2. Shri Mataji's 75th Birthday Celebrations 12 News From Around the Worid 24 Edited by Yogi Mahajan : Vl. Nalgirkar Published by 162, Munirka Vihar New Deihi-110 067

 Editorial Looking at glass of water one may observe that 'it is half full', another may observe that 'it is half empty'. When we look at the leaner side of life we only defeat ourself, For instance if some one is asked, 'please phone Mr X' without even trying, the answer comes, "he may not be home". Even before making an attempt if people start imagining the difficulties then they create an invincible mountain by which they defeat themselves. The mental process has a ready explanation or an excuse for everything. For instance a Sahaja Yogi suggested "let us do a public programme;" pat came the reply "we may nat get the hall". We have to realise that the mental process is lenear and has to recoil back. So let us overcome it and change our outlook to saying", Of course we will get the hall, we are doing God's work." We know very well the power working behind us. Let us yoke our mental process to it and leave it to work out everything. By our imagination we block the flow of vibrations and tire ourselves. Thus we are defeated and exhausted by our own reactions. When our attention is centred there is no reaction. We can be in action and achieve many things without getting overwhelmed. The depth of our faith can cause anything to happen. Sahaja yogis have many experiences of the power of bandhan. "It was raining, we had to conduct a public programme outside. We gave a bandhan and behold the sun suddenly appeared." "It hadn't rained for a long time, the crops were drying, we gave a bandhan and it rained." Whenever Shri Mataji arrives or departs in any part of the world, the weather shows exuberance and turns favourable. Very recently at Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella in August it was very hot. There was the largest congregation of sahaja yogis. Sahaja yogis were even sleeping in the open. Therefore it was important to have dry weather. The weather cooperated till the puja was over. The next morning there was such a heavy downpour, but by then every one had left. The temperature became very pleasant and heavenly. In September, Navaratri puja, Cabella it rained throughout the music programme. But on the day of the puja the sun beamed everywhere and there was no trace of any cloud in the sky. There are many other experiences where it was very hot and Shri Mataji brought the temperature down by bringing down her right side. Thus we know very well how nature is so obedient to her. Also there are the miracle photographs and thousands of cases of healing. From these experiences our faith has grown into enlightened faith. We know that vibrations actualise into reality, our pure desires. Our confidence in the power of the paramachaitanya has become absolute. We apply its power not only to our problems but also to the problems of our society, country and the whole world. Sometimes the paramachaitanya may take its time to work out things need time to overcome negativity. We should remember that time is a human concept. Paramachaitanya is beyond time. As our brain is monitored by time we bind ourselves in time schedules and are panicky if things do not work out in those time schedules. It may However, since paramachaitanya is not bound by time it functions its own freedom. Maybe something we wish to happen tomorrow may be worked out by the paramachaitanya after ten years. For instance many things Shri Mataji told us ten years ago are happening now. Whatever paramachaitanya takes up it achieves. It always keeps its commitments but it cannot be bound by time. Whenever it performs is the right moment for that event. For the moment our job is to put our attention to world problems and pray fervently to our Divine Mother for the solutions. At our level we should continue giving bandhans and rely completely on the paramachaitanya to work it out. Our Divine Mother is the Mightiest of the mighty and even the impossible must yield to her or perish . We pray at her lotus feet and marvel at her miracles; O Devi, Let our eyes only behold the world redeemed by your miracles, Let our ears hear only your praise, Let our lips only sing Thy glory. Let our hands perform only Thy commands, Let our existence be only to please you.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 11 &12 1995 Sahasrara Day Puja Pravachna (Talk) by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi foday, it's a great day because Sahasrara Day T. must be something that Would be just a very damaging or could be very harsh, could create problems between human beings which should not have. It was not meant and Mother's Day have come together That's I à very Sakaja happening, I think and that is what we have to understand, as to how Sahasrara to be but whenever they talked of truth, the people and the Motherhood go together Sahasrara was definitely opened and Mother had to do it. Because about human beings that they start using things for a formerly those people who came on this earth, tried wrong attitude, for a wrong message, and try to use to teach people about Dharma-to bring them to the it for their own purpose. It is such a common thing Central path, to the straight forward path of ascent. with human beings that they want to have power over used it for a wrong purpose. It is something special They tried everything, whatever way they thought was other men. good for a particular area, particularly community. Now, I have seen in my own country when people particular country They talked about it and lots of wanted to have separate nations. Those people who books came out of it. But instead of all these books wanted to have separate nations actually did it, not creating people of religious, spiritual and a united to achieve anything great but just because they can nature, created people who were all against each become something great in their own country. So they other Absurd! It is an absurd thing. But it happened. So all these books that were written, all this knowledge that was given, was all misused by human beings, just countries, and by separating I have seen, all these to get their own power, I should say. So it was all countries are suffering, suffering very much. There is a power oriented, also money oriented game going no growth, they have financial problem, all kinds of on When we see the outcome of all these religions, is you feel it's all empty. They talk of love, they talk of suffering because they have now developed enmity compassion but it all is for a purpose. It is all a and all this is working out against the main country political game sometimes because they still feel that So to have a separatist idea itself is against Sahaja, they should have power. Not the spiritual power, but say for example, a flower growing on the tree looks never wanted to be in a country where they may not rise to that height: So then, they separated those problems are there And also the main country the worldly power so that they can dominate the whole world So this domination started working so very nice, it develops there, matures there and it produces seeds also. But, supposing you cut the flower, and take it away, then what happens? The tree loses the flower no doubt, but mostly, it is the loss of the much in the human mind that we had lots of wars, killings. all kinds of things And when it subsided. I felt that now, may be, opening Sahasrara might help flower Now, this they did all of them and when they people to see the truth. did it you see what is the result that people who tried to have their own country, their own domain At the level of Sahasrara you know the truth. So all kinds of illusions, all kinds of misunderstandings, all kinds of self imposed ignorance, they all have to they were killed, murdered abused and some of them are o in jail So the attitude even outside Sahaja Yoga has disappear Because, what you know is the truth. The shown that it doesn't help. So we must learn to be truth is not sharp, its not harsh Ii is not something one So after Sahaja Yoga, after your Realisation, if which is difficult to assimilate. People thought iruth you do not understand this message that we all have

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 11 & 12 1998 right thing to do, what is the best thing to do. But after realisation in the light of the spirit you get the truth and you know what is to be done. For example after self realization you can judge people on their to be one, one single unit, one single body, if you can not be, if you are identified with other things, then it is no way you have grown, you have not matured, very important point. vibrations. You don't have to use your brains for that. On Sahasrara Day one has to understand that all Just on your vibrations, immediately, you know what the seven chakras have their pithas in the Sahasrara. is wrong with yourself and with others. So here it is a double correction. One is you see your own midriff of your brain. And they act, through that area being, your own self, your self knowledge comes to All the seven chakras are nicely settled down in the wherever they are, on the chakras and work it out. you and secondly you can also make out another Now all these seven chakras become one I should person-what sort of a things he is doing. If somebody is not Sahaja, and claims to be Sahaja you can easily say or go into unison. Complete integration takes place in these centres. Because these are governed by find out that he is not Sahaja, his behaviour is not these seven main chakras we can call them, you can Sahaja. call them by any name, and they govern all the other chakras and because they are in unison completely integrated, that's why all your chakras are integrated, absolutely working out within ourselves. We should So best thing is for all of us, is to get this integration not shun it but we should accept that whatever defects we have, whatever wrong we have been doing, what Pithas which are enlightened I should say by Kundalini, also blessed by the Divine power immediately wrong thinking we had, whatever destructive we had become integrated. They say that like pearls in one taken to, all this has to disappear because you are Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis have a special job to be string. It is even more than that. All these pithas within you get integrated in such a manner as if there is no done. They are not like other people, who are just difference in their manifestation. Supposing you have working for money, working for power, working for a chakra which is not alright, something wrong domination, you are not. You are working in Sahaja physically, mentally emotionally whatever it is. The Yoga for the emancipation of humanity. So whole other chakras try to help this sick chakra and try to thing is that this Sahasrara is a global field where we evolve a personality as a Sahaja Yogi in a way that enter in. We enter into a global field and when we he is integrated. Now integration within yourself is are there, we just become ourselves, a global very important. Unless and until you are integrated personality. So all these minor things like your race, your country, your religion and all these which are artificial barriers between human beings just drop out within yourself, you cannot be integrated outside And the within yourself, the integration is such a blessing of Sahaja Yoga that a person who gets this realisation becomes a personality which is above the normal personality. It is not attached to all the negative forces become a realised soul and you know what and you is humanity, you understand the humanity. This has to happen in all the Sahaja Yogis - when they are together. They should understand that we are not, no the destructive forces. It just gives up so many things which are normally very difficult to give up. All these more ordinary human beings. We are special people, seven chakras that we have within ourselves are then guided by these pithas in unison. Just the help that Cchosen for a very special work, which is the most comes from the unison, helps all the chakras to get important thing today. Now as you know what is going on in Kaliyuga. I need not describe all that to you. But what is the completely integrated. As it is we are not integrated because our mind goes on one side, our body goes on another side, our heart goes on another side, our light of the spirit which is going to show you what you can do to remove the ills of Kaliyuga. Starting right emotions are different. We do not know which is the

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X issue: 11& 12 1998. over Agnya, goes above and is now stationed in the Sahasrara, in thoughtless awareness. Then the reality of Sahasrara, the beauty of Sahasrara starts pouring in your own character, in your own temperament. Unless and until you meditate, not meditate just to get well or just to feel that I was meditating but meditation is very important for all of you that you develop your Sahasrara in such a manner that you imbibe the beauty of your Sahasrara. If you don't use your Sahasrara in this way, after sometime you will find, Sahasrara will close down. You will have no vibrations and you will have no understanding of yourself So very very important thing is to meditate. I can immediately make out a person who has been meditating, and the one who has not been meditating. Because a person who does not meditate still thinks that oh it's all right, am doing this, I am doing that. from yourself, you just see for yourself, with great amusement what you have been doing was all stupid You should not have done that but you have been doing, so it is alright, you can forgive others who are dong it And you will understand that those who have heen doing it, have been doing all this out of ignorance. But now you have your Sahasrara open. In the open Sahasrara divine is pouring its grace all the time. With that reception, with that, we should say the nourishing of your Sahasrara, what happens is something really great One thing happens that you get detached from yourself You can see yourself, You can see your past, you can understand yourself that you have been doing so many wrong things, and misunderstanding people: This sometimes takes you too far away from yourself But once this light comes, and the Sahasrara is nourished, in that light you see clearly what wrong Meditation is the only way you can enrich you have been coing to yourself. Then as a person you can see your faults. But also you see the faults yourself with the beauty of reality. There is no other way, I can not find any other way but of your society, where you live. I have seen immediately after people get their realisation, they start meditation by which you rise into the realm of telling me Mother I was a Christian but see this is divinity. For example, I would say, that myself whatever Christianity. Somebody will say Mother I was very I have done is this that I have been able to find out a method-how to give you Self Realisation, to masses. But that doesn't mean that if I give to masses, they are all Sahaja Yogis. No. You must have seen whenever patriotic but see now what patriotism is. Like that everybody starts seeing its own background, its own styles in which he has lived And Just gets out of it. And Once you are out of it, its no more identified you have your programmes, people get realisation when I am there and they come to programmes for a while and then they drop off The Reason is that they have not meditated. If they had meditated, they would have known, what is their quality, what are with you and it is such a spontaneous happening, only thing you have to learn to be spontaneous. And that's what I find that in Sahaja people, though they are out of this ocean of illusion, still sometimes their one leg is there in the ocean and still they are pulling it out they Without meditation you don't understand what is and pushing it back That should not be. That is only best for you. So today is a day when you have to because people don't meditate promise me that you will meditate; every night, every evening, may be in the morning also. Whenever it is possible if you can go into meditative mood, you are a kind of ritual, or may be a kind of a style of Sahaja in contact with this divine power. Then whatever Yoga No: Meditation is for you to go deep down good for you, whatever is good for your society, for into yourself, to achieve all that your Sahasrara wants your country, all is done by this divine power. You to give. To achieve that height of detachment, of don't have to overpower the divine power, you don't say you must meditate, people think it is Now to understanding is only through meditation So that have to order, you don't have to ask. Just if you happens in meditation is that your awareness crosses meditate you are one with this all pervading power.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 11 & 12 1998 complete insight, what is happening, what the truth is, about any situation. So this detachment helps, the Unless and until your Sahasrara is open, all the greatest thing of the detachment is that you are not which is another great blessings to us. blessings of the divine power cannot come to you, affected. No use saying that oh if you are not affected Mother, so how can you feel for another person, how can you have compassion for another person. Because if you feel for another person then only you can solve cannot, may be you might get some money you might get some job you might get this and that. But your own development is only possible when you meditate and your Sahasrara is completely open and open to truth. Now the truth is that this divine power is compassion, is love. This is the truth. They say God is love, God is truth. So the equation has to be made that truth is love and love is truth. But it is not a truth the problem. But this feeling that you have is again a kind of an attachment. It is not a real feeling. Because it doesn't help. The person is crying, you are also crying. The person is in trouble you are also in trouble. And this does not help that person; nor will it help you. So to have detached in no way means do not feel the another person. You do feel, you GERT that as you have for your children, you have for your family. Attached love is not truth. If you are attached you to somebody then you never see the bad points of feel the agony of that person, the trouble of that that person. If you are angry with somebody then you can never see the good points of that person. But it is a complete detached love and that love is extremely powerful. Because wherever you project never full faith in the capability of this all pervading that love to anyone, you will be surprised, the problems power. As soon as you are detached you say you do of that person will be solved, his personality will it. Finished, once you say that you are going to do improve, everything will work out in a very big way it, it is you who is going to do it - whole thing and his life will be changed. But if you are attached changes completely. Because you transfer all your to anything what so ever, that attachment itself causes responsibilities, all your problems to this divine power problems and doesn't allow Sahaja to grow. This which is so powerful which is so capable, which can attachment could be of any kind. For example you work out anything. So whenever you think that this person, of the whole society sometimes and of the whole country. But, that your feeling is so detached that the all pervading power takes over. First we must can be attached to your country, attached to your problem you are going to solve. You are the one who society, attached to your family. is going to do it then alright, Divine Power says, alright try your luck. But if you can really put this problem to the Divine power it will work out. But when Sahasrara is open you learn one thing is detachment. It just happens that you get detached. Though I mean you are not running away. As it is in Sahaja Yoga we don't believe in people, who run specially when we find that people are not so much away from society and go to Himalayas. For that I attracted to Sahaja Yoga, they are few in number, call it escapism. That is not the point, what happens then feel very bad about it. But have you tried is that you are there you see everyone, watch everyone, you know everyone, you are close to everyone but you are a detached person. It is a state of mind that worry, when we have divine power available through you achieve when Sahasrara is open. In that state, our Sahasrara. Why should we worry why should we you are dealing with people, you are dealing with think about it? Just leave it to the Divine Power. If problems, you are dealing with situations but you are that is possible if that you can achieve which is very We have all Kinds of problems in Sahaja Yoga, you to meditate on this point, and have you tried to put this problem to the divine power. Why should we not involved in it. There is no involvement and that difficult for human beings because they live with their involvement which you had before can never give you ego, they live with their conditionings. But if that

 Dlvine Cool Breeze Voluie:X Issue 11& 12 1998 leave it to this Divine Power to stop all these things happening I don't want it to rain and to have any problem till I come back home and go off to sleep. attachment to all these things goes away, then what you do is just leave things to this power. Krishna has said in His Gita, 'Sarava Dharmanam Pratyajyam Mamekam Sharnam Vaj And it was surprising, people told me, that Mother the clouds and everything were there, all throughout Forget about all but it did not rain, did not do anything and there was have a dharma of a wife, of a husband, of a member no chaos of any kind. He went to another island of the society. All of them have their own dharma. But where he had to go, he did Sahaja Yoga and came He says leave them and leave them to me and I will back. And then, when he went to sleep, then only manage. This, we have to learn, is to say that it is everything started pouring down the Divine Power which will solve our problems. As human beings its a very dificult state, and this state can only be achieved through meditation I am not saying that you go on meditating for hours together Not necessary, but with full faith in yourself and in the your dharmas Dharmas means we So nature, everything every leaf, every flower, every thing is worked out through the Divine Power So we should not have our ego that we can do something ourselves we can manage ourselves. Onee you have that kind of a thing you are not yet that much developed, you are not that much grown in Sahaja Yoga. But to grow up in Sahaja Yoga should not be difficult for you because you have guidelines. Those people who got their realisation, very few of them like sufis and we had some saints in India, how much they Divine Power, if you work it out, I am sure, it is not difficult to rise to that state of consciousness. That is what we have to achieve It is possible for men as well as for women They don't have to think how can we, Mother, do it All such people are no good for Sahaja Yoga. Those who have diffidence about nust have struggled, no body to guide them, nobody to help them, no body to tell them about what they can achieve and despite that they were very satisfied themselves can not do anything But those who are surrendered and those who are surrendered and those who think they can do it, can manage all this transfer of their power to the Divine power. Just put it on the people, very happy people. And they worked it out so well, they saw the whole world with another angle as you can also see. But they were not upset, and Now supposing I have a car which can drive they had such self confidence, they had such knowledge me down. So if I have a car, then 1 dont put of their own, that they achieved through their meditative bullocks on it. I dont push my car, I just sit inside process and the way they have written bookS, some and use it. In the same way if you heve this great of them are so great. It is very surprising now they power around you, if your Sahasrara is ahsolutely. have achieved these great verses, such full of then you will be knowledge One cannot understand that they had no amazed how things work out for yourself. I will guidance, no body was to tell them. But one thing Divine Power. completely submerged in it, give you an example of a Sahaja Yogi who is no more now. He was a fisherman, ordinary fisherman but also he was educated so he was working in a bank This Sahasrara, is the movement of your Agnya into one, was going one day to do some Sahaja Yoga thoughts. That is the only thing that stops your entry work, and he had to go by boat. So when he came into Sahaja Yoga. Thoughts are coming all the times out he saw the whole place was clouded and it was because a human being is born who reacts to about to burst out into a big havoc. So he get very everything React to this and react to that and thoughts, much perturbed about it that what is this. His Sahasrara coming and thoughts going There is a big crowd of was so open and good, immediately he said now I thoughts because of that your attention cannot cross with them was that they always tried to look after their Sahasrara. Now one thing is there, obstructing

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 11 & 12 1998 transfer, to give you all the help that you need through the all pervading power. Your connection of Sahasrara with the all pervading power is established and by that you will be amazed how all these seven chakras work for you, how they help you, how they try to give you whatever is the real knowledge about everything. This real knowledge that you get is very joy giving. You can see this real knowledge in everything, you don't have to start reading any book about it. In every situation, and in every person, in every flower, in every natural happening, you see clearly the hand of the Divine. Once you see the hand of the divine, once over Agnya and cannot reside in the Sahasrara. So first of all one should see, what sort of thoughts are coming. You have to condemn yourself sometimes. You have to say what nonsense, what have I been doing, what is the matter with me, how could I do all that? Once you start doing that, these thoughts will start disappearing. These thoughts are coming from two angles- one from the ego and another from your conditionings, and these are so much built up within you, that they don't allow your agnya to be crossed. That is why we have two bija mantras of 64, TH. First one is when it is conditioning, you are endowed with this kind of fear, I should not do like this, I should not do like that, this is not allowed, that is not you say that it is you, you do everything your ego starts disappearing. Kabira has said something great about this. He said that when the Goat is alive it goes an saying I, #, #, I am, I am. But when it is slaughtered and its intestines are made into strings, which are used for cleaning the cotton, then it says 8, you are, you are, you are. See in this symbolic way, they have suggested that you have to dissolve allowed. That is the conditioning part of it. Conditioning can be of many types. But the ego part is that I must overpower everybody, I must get this, I must be able to rule everyone. These two things are there in the mind which are all the time crossing. So it is important into this divine power. It is the divine power that does everything. What am I, I was just a drop that fell into that we should go into thoughtless awareness, and that thoughtless awareness is the real way that your Sahasrara can be nourished by the Kundalini. Because this ocean of awareness of the divine power and that Kundalini cannot go through, cannot pass through and for that as I said, there are two bija mantras, one is is taking over and working it out. That will help you a lot to be a great Sahaja Yogi. another is &H. हम, You develop curing powers but still you are not proud of it. You develop off course awakening powers So if you are conditioned, you are frightened, you are afraid and you had ideas about yourself. These days the way people are describing. They say, I am powers and you are not proud of it. You become an extrovert, somebody will say I am introvert, really very very creative, extremely creative. But the somebody will say, I am hippy. I am that, I am that, greatest thing happens to you that you become a all kinds of things they can have attributed to global personality. So you start seeing the problems themselves. But these ideas are all coming from outside, of every country, of every other nation where they you are not proud of it. You develop so many creative they are not from inside. To get to the inner side of have problems. But these problems when you see, yourself, the subtler side of your being, you must you don't see like other people because others may allow the Kundalini to go through the Agnya. like to use it for their own purpose, may be for media, To cross the Agnya is a very important thing in the may be for something. What you want to see is that modern times. And for that you have to meditate. If these problems are solved. Your powers are so great you can meditate with complete faith in yourself, with this kind of a mind I would say which is this agnya can be opened up. You have to surrender dominated completely by the Divine power that yourself to the Divine and when this Agnya opens, whatever disturbs you is immediately taken over, and it starts working out. will be amazed, your Sahasrara is just waiting to you

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 11 & 12 1998 You will be surprised I have got so many letters from people, how Sahaja has helped them. How, at Many problems have been solved by Sahaja Yogis, and also they can be solved on a very universal level, if you are a global person. If you are a global person the right moment they got the help at the point of then what happens is that you become sort of a complete destruction, how they were saved. So many vehicle or you can become like a channel for this people have written to me but I am not surprised because if you are one with the divine, it looks after Divine power to act because you are purely a global personality. Not attached to this, attached to that but you. It has all the powers, all the powers, only one pure Sahaja personality which can be used by this power it doesn't have, to control, if you went to ruin divine power very easily. For that as I told in the yourself it gives you freedom, complete freedom. If afternoon also that we have to be careful about few you want to ruin yourself, ruin. If you don't want to things that we have. Firstly anger, anger is the worst accept divine power, alright, don't accept. It is a thing that we have. Angry for what? There are people complete freedom to do what you like with yourself. That is one thing it has given and that is why, you must curb down that freedom and respect the divine who talk like this 'I was very angry. They are proud of their anger. Anger is a sign of complete stupidity, absolute stupidity. There is not need to get angry with power. anyone. Because by anger you don't solve the problem. With anger you spoil yourself, with anger you ruin your own nature, with anger you really spoil the whole situation. So no use having any anger-about anything But if anything happens that angers you, you should settle down and see for yourself why is it wrong, why it is disturbing you. Your seeing itself will help this Today is, I should say Mothers day also. Because I think only a mother can work it out that way, one has to have lot's of patience. What I have seen about all these great incarnations who came, they just disappeared in a very short time they lived, very short time. Somebody was crucified at about 33 years of age. Somebody took a samadhi at 23 years of age. Because problem to be solved. You must first of all, realise that I think they couldn't bear, the way the people were you are a special personality, that your Sahasrara has stupid.? They couldn't see the point that they could do been opened out, to this all pervading divine power, something for human beings. They lost their confidence as if you have entered into the realm of divinity. You I think or may be they thought it is useless to work for are a great guest, in the great court of divine domain. these people. Like that they took a position that it is You are not an ordinary person, and so once you better to disappear. But mother's position is different. understand why you have Sahaja Yoga and why you She will go on struggling and fighting for her child. She have got realisation, is that there is something special. will fight it out to the last to see that the child gets all But that should not give you any ego. It is not for the benefits, and this patience, and this love and this ego that you have to have this but it is for understanding forgiveness is innately built in a mother. Because her you have to play into the hands of the divine. It attitude is very different, not any achievement, not any that is this play, something I could explain like this that, big name or what you call a sort of an award or anything. It is just she does it because she is a Mother, and that is what is a sign of any mother, is a real Mother, at least if you are supposing an artist, then in the hand of the artist is the brush and the brush never thinks that it is doing anything. It is the artist who is doing everything. In the same way when you are one with the divine power, you just feel 1 am not doing anything. It is the artist who is doing. It is the artist who is managing & who is the artist? It is this Divine Power which for her own children she will go all out. She will work out everything, day in & day out and try to save the child from disaster. But Sahaja Yoga is a much bigger family and for that you really have to be worked out through the Mother's principle. You cannot take any loves you, which cares for you, which looks after you, which absolutely is identified with you. other principle. Like there were very great warriors we had and they have done a great job and have worked 00

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X lEsue 11 & 12 1998 who are affectionate and then gradually all these complicated people will also join Your way of dealing with others has to be motherly Motherly relationship has to be there, I was surprised that in a Western literature don't find any description of a child and a mother's relationship. Very surprising There is no description at all, how the mother sees the child, how he walks, how he falls down then how he gets up, and out as warriors, then we had some who were very sacrificing, all kinds of people they had They worked very hard to establish Dharma in people. but they could not I thought of one thing that no uIse establishing dharma First of all give them realisation. When in the light of the spirit they see what is wrong they became dharmic automatically Best way is to do that, not to force dharma on them. Because you put dharma on them, they don't how he talks. All kinds of beautiful things have been described but not in the wvestern countries. I don't know, know how to bear it, they can't digest So this will be they never saw this point I think. That is very important. that to describe the attention of a mother. How she is loving, how she is kind, how she tolerates so much nonsense and how she keeps it as sort of a forgiving thing, Not just to use it against the child or to trouble. Sometimes you have to correct, you have to tell but at the right time, at a right place if they are told the child also sees the point whatever is there the best way, is to just make them aware of their spirit. Once the light of the spirit comes, in the light they see everything clearly then no problem is there and that's why this Mother's quality is very helpful. I mean in every country there has been a manifestation of the Mother's principle, in every country, and it has been depicted and said, but later on it was taken over by people who didn't want to talk about Mother. Because they could not justify themselves, the way they were behaving. So they said best is not to talk of the Mother The first most convincing thing is the affection and the love of the Mother She goes on forgiving and giving that assurance that I have a mother. Nothing can happen Also those who are very much advanced people, very mature, who were really incamations did talk about and this assurance works very well. But the same the Mother all the time but still talk was talk Now this assurance you have to give to other Sahaja Yogis who has to be worked out as a Mother has to do So in are getting realisation from you Let them feel that you your own way when you are doing Sahaja Yoga, there are not angry with them. They are stupid I know, they also you have to be a Mother More Mother's quality are sometimes violent, I have gone through all kinds of then the Father's quality. That there is no ambition, people. But the only thing that has worked is pure love, there is no competition, there is no jealousy, nothing pure love has no attributes of expecting something You Just you want your children to come up and to grow in Just give love & try to improve that person with full their spirituality If that is the only attitude we have then attention But in divine work you don't have to get you will be amazed how satisfied you will feel because attached to that person. this is a very very joy giving thing to see people growing in spirituality. Not only talking about it, not only reading point, is also troublesome, gets angry with you, annoys about it, but actually happening, actualizing within you and insults you, so forgot it, there are many others. yourself. So this quality is very helpful and that really There is no need to run after one person, to get attached helps every Sahaja Yogi - to be patient, to be kind, to be humble but you have to correct also. There is a way Sahaja Yogis always feel that I am their own which is of correction of another person, of people who are a fact whether I talk to you whether I meet you or coming not from the divine world but from the normal whatever it is, you have to know that I am your Mother world. So it's a difficult task to correct them. Some And any problem you have you can always tell me. But people are so hot tempered they can't bear it Doesn't sometimes the way people tell me problems also. I fel matter, you have to forgive them. But best is to how low they are. Their mentality is so low, what are concentrate on people, who are simple, who are loving. they asking me. Supposing you go to some king and Supposing, there is somebody who is not up to the to that person. Now main thing is that I feel all the

 10 Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X issue 11 & 12 1998 ask him, say, for half a dollar. What will the king say, well. what is the matter with this person. He doesn't know, what he should for? In the same way, one feels that is growing, and you are part and parcel of that society way that when you are asking anything to your Mother, which is Sahaja Yoga. It is a very rare society, which it should be of some value. Some great value, it should they never had. They had one or two sufis here and have the value of complete satisfaction When you ask there, one or two realised souls here and there, who It is what we have to think globally that Sahaja Yoga for something it should give you complete satisfaction only suffered. All their lives they were tortured. No But I have seen people asking for this thing, for that body looked at them. I had great hopes about thing I mean it is to such an extent that sometimesI Maharashtra but I was so disappointed because they feel, oh God, how am I getting all these people around me, who are desiring something very low, very mean, very insignificant. But if you are one with the Sahasrara. then Sahasrara itself works. It will bring you in contact with such people that you are amazed, how it works? I went to Turkey and my experience of Turkey has proved that beyond doubt. I never expected but the Turkish people of all the people of the world have taken to Sahaja Yoga just like a windfall, can't understand, how they have accepted, and they were at least 2000 people in the follow up and people were finding it impossible to get them around and tell them. And when they had very close meetings also they had so many people, and they continue to be there. Now, may be that it is a very disturbed country, with fundamentalism tortured all these great saints, all throughout, so badly, in such a mean manner that I think they are still paying for it. And despite the fact that I have done so much for them, what I feel is that their Karmas are not good because they still, I would say, it is a rotten country It t has become so rotten. You can see that the way people are behaving, whole thing is so bad. Though Sahaja Yoga is there, no doubt but I would not say it is of that level as it is in the North, North of India. Very surprising, North Indians never know anything about Sahaja Yoga. They were not such religious people either, but how the North people have taken to Sahaja Yoga is very surprising. So you can't say where the light will show. Just can't say, and wherever it shows we should accept. Where it doesn't show, we should not feel bad about very much working out. it What can you do? You can not, sort of, break their heads for Sahasrara. Their Sahasrara has to be opened out and with your motherly love, with your motherly understanding I am sure you can do it. May not be, to the same extent in every country but I am sure I feel that may be the 'punayas" of these great saints will work. And may be where I felt little bit disappointed, I feel that all these places will work out and Sahaja But everywhere, every country has problems and has, you should say, a kind of very destructive image- every country has. But in some countries I do not know how it sparks, and once they become Sahaja Yogis, no problem. There is no problem about anything if they are Sahaja Yogis. You see you don't have to tell them. They themselves work it out. They understand it, what Yoga will grow. But first and foremost is your Sahasrara. Only your Sahasrara can reflect the light of divine. So your Saharara is extremely important. You must meditate to enrich your Sahasrara, to cure it, to make it completely nourished by the Kundalini. There is no need to do is it? Like we have every country which has problems. which has people who are not of a very great level, who are not great seekers. May be in some countries. I feel those who were great seekers are lost. Like England I feel that all the seekers are lost by drugs. hippism, all nonsense America is the worst of all which many rituals but meditation and also little bit of taking bandhan, even now, today is necessary I think when you go out because still Kaliyuga is working its own is so much lost into wrong seeking and it is difficult to find people there who have right seeking. Gradually it is working out, but still I must say, we should not think pangs and the Satyayuga is trying to come up. We are the ones who are going to support, look after the of any one particular country where Sahaja Yoga is not working out so much or in some places working out so Satyauga and that is why Sahasrara opening is very,

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 11 & 12 1998 that reaction is not there, then everything, you will be surprised, is divine, because reaction is your Agnya's problem. Once you are absolutely thoughtlessly aware, you are one with the divine So much so that Divine takes over every activity, every moment of your life and looks after it and you feel cormpletely secured, one with the Divine and enjoy the blessings of the Divine. very important. It is very important and those who want to grew should meditate every day Whatever time you may come home, may be in the moming may be in the evening, any time but you will know that you are meditating when you can get into thoughtless awareness Then you will know, your reaction will be zero. Look at something, you will just look at it, you will not react because you are thoughtless. You won't react, when May God Bless You!. Dear Sahaji Brother/Sister The purpose of the Divine Cool Breeze is to communicate to all the seekers the Divine Knowledge being revealed by our Divine Mather in her pravachanas (talks) delivered all over the world, and also to keep them informed about the developments in Sahaja Yoga, miracles and events that occur, and news from various Sahaja Countries. Sahaja Yogis from all over the world are encouraged to oontribute articles for publication. This being the last issue öf the year 1998, your subscription ends with it Please renew your Membership tor the year 1999. Enclosed herewith is the Renewal Form. Annual Subscription is as under- Rs. 300/- Rs. 300/- Rs. 500/- The Divine Cool Breeze Chaltanya Lahiri For both- (D.C.B. & C.L) The above amount should be sent by M.O. or payee A/c Demand Draft, payable at Delh/New Delhi along with completed farm to- The Divine Cool Breeze, C-17, Institutional Area, (Behind Qutub Hotel) New Delhi 110 016 Your suggestions/complaints/articles, if any maybe addressed to- Mr. O.P. Chandna 463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi-110034 Tel. 7013464 (Subscription Form) (To be filled in Capital Letters) Name Complete Address with Pin Code Phone Date Amount of Subscription D.D.No. (D.C.B)/C.L)/ Both Magazine subscribing for

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X issue 11 & 12 1998 12 Shri Mataji's 75th Birthday Celebrations (Penned by Western Sahaja Yogis) eventy-five years after the birth of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Her children from the Nation of it's open. Sitting on the earth and appreciating the Vishwa Nirmala Dharma have followed the speed with which agitation and tension are absorbed- course of many rivers to arrive at the shores of one Mother India. Things forgotten in our daily life suddenly The heart doesn't have time to think about opening. sea, assembling from the far-flung corners of the Earth to celebrate, worship, and gve our heartfelt thanks for come back and make sense again. The world is changing. We are instruments for a new age. Her birth. It appeared that every Sahaja Yogi whom one had How to begin to describe such a rich and condensed met during the past 18 years of India Tours was experience? This is a mixture of journal entries and present. Yogis who had not come to India for many recollections of the six-day festivities marking the 75th vears had come to pay homage to Shri Mataji. birthday of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, on March 20- While walking around the camp one could not proceed for more than a few metres before there Prior to arriving in India all indications suggested would be a reunion with an old friend, with much that we would be taking part in a celebration the likes back slapping, re-establishing old friendships. Time 26. 1998. of which had never been seen before: The significance of Shri Mataji's 75th birthday had not been missed The call had been made and answered, with Yogis 20 vears in some cases, pleasant reminiscences of was spent in earnest dialogue about all manner of matters Sahaja during the past five, ten, 15, and even from all nations making their wvay to India, the birthplace of Our Holy Mother Once again embarking upon a This seemed to be a retrospective occasion, faces pilgrimage to our spiritual birthplace, to place our féet in the crowd discussing past Tours and upon the Holy Earth of an ancient land, and travel experiences of Sahaja Yoga in their countries, old upon the path leading to that place set aside for Shri days gone by, and hopes expressed for the future: milling friendships rekindled, and new ones formed. Mataji's worship. The Nizamuddin camp has taken on a family It has been said that it is Shri Mataji who invites nerspective with the presence of the Dharamasala us to India to perform Her puja. She arranges for our leave. for the required funds to be present, for all school children. In earlier times Sahaja Yoga was comprised of many young single people, but as the necessary things to be done. We answer the eall, and follow the path fashioned for us Yogis have matured and begun families, the next generation of Sahaja Yogis are being introduced to the pilgrimage to India perhaps at a much younger age than any of us would have envisaged Our children have become familiar and comfortable with all aspects of camp life, totally happy and joyous in each others' company, indifferent to any hardship or discomfort Sahaja Yogis from all over the world began assembling at the Nizamuddin Scout camp in Delhi in Tnumbers unseen before. Over 1,000 foreign Sahaja Yogis, and more than 7,000 Indian brothers and sisters, all converging to be present before Shri Mataji The children operate at a level of unqualified acceptance of each other as members of their Here we are. "Ohhh!" "Hey. hello!" "Ah!" and meeting more old triends than one could imagine.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X issue 11 & 12 1998 The first group of speakers were Western leaders who spoke of their love for Shri Mataji. As one said, it was like being a grain of sand standing before Mount Kailasha Shri Mataji has shown us the path to Heaven within our heart. Another said that She has collective, accommodating all facets of each others' personality They possess a beautiful and natural affection for each other which allows them to avoid the disputes one normally sees between young children They live day by day within a natural and spontaneous universal brotherhood, united in their Sahaja collectivity They teach us that the things that divide us are an illusion, and the most important union we have beyond that with Shri Mataji is with each other. Shri Mataji once said our children would be teaching us how Sahaja Yoga should be freed us of our confines and has brought lasting peace words being inadequate to express our feelings of love and gratitude, but with a humble heart we bow before . Her. One most moving speech eame from Philip, the leader of Germany, who revealed the dilemma he had practiced. Friday, 20th march The Felicitation been facing on the plane on the way to India. He, as welll as the other leaders, had been asked to: Ceremony prepare a short speech, not to exceed three minutes, as there were so many speakers and time was limited. The formal part of the celebration began during the early evening hours with the commencement of the Felicitation program The scenes prior to the start of the program wvere indicative of the coming seven days: enormous numbers of people arriving at the camp 20th century "in only three minutes"? He concluded the program, long queues forming at the two entrances that even with all the powers She has bestowed upon to the pendal, space within the pendal in short supply. us it was not possible to express everything to Her access restricted to those displaying their registration in only three minutes. With his humour, he had hit Thus he agonized over how to thank Shri Mataji for all She has done "in only three minutes " How to thank the Primordial Mother for taking birth in the for badges. upon the essential, and with such depth.. Shri Mataji arrived to find the pendal absolutely full, with hundreds of people standing along the outer Those of us who were sitting close to the stage were able to notice the amazement and awe in the perimeter of the pendal and large crowds outside unable to gain entry. faces of these politicians and dignitaries while the Sahaja Yogis were speaking These dignitaries were Many prominent Indian politicians and citizens were all very deeply touched to see the miracle of people invited to speak, as well as several of the country from all over the world being so united, without regard leaders in Sahaja Yoga. Several messages were read to age, colour, nationality, race or any other artificial out or synopsized from various people who could not barriers These people have probably heard many attend the ceremony, such as the President and Vice lectures about unity and integration, but never saw the President of India, who sent greetings and gratitude for Shri Mataji's "selfless service to mankind"; Claes realization of these lofty dreams. A minister from the BJP party spoke of the universal Nobel, who sent congratulations and said that all the members of the "one big family united by the earth" message of love which is at the core of Shri Mataji's were present in spirit at the ceremony. Ayatollah life and Sahaja Yoga, so evident in the nature of the Rouhani, and a cabinet minister of U.P. The yogi people gathered from around the world He said he reading these messages told us that Shri Mataji had was a person new to Sahaja Yoga, and it was difficult received thousands of letters, telegrans, e-mails, and to understand how people could gather from the far reaches of India for this weekend. Yet people had come from more than 50 nations to be present, which faxes from the four cormers of the world, wishing Her a Happy Birthday.

 14 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue: 11 & 12 1998 He said, "I would like to go one step further, and in itself spoke of the universal nature and appeal of Sahaja Yoga. With this degree of dedication, the transformation of the world could now be possible. humans achieves their self realization, and then until say that may You live until every one of the five billion every one of them is established in Sahaja Yoga, and Other dignitaries spoke in their native tongue about then live on to make sure everyone is continuing to the importance of Shri Mataji, not only to India, but dwell in the right path. He concluded by saying that the entire world. They all remarked on the love and until this point he had considered himself as an compassion of "the Mother," and one mentioned that he was not here to thank Shri Mataji, because a son never thinks of thanking his mother. he takes her for apprentice vogi, but he asked us to now accept him as a Sahaja Yogi. Tears rolled down many cheeks as we stood to applaud this very great saint. granted. He was here, he said, to ask for more and Several books were released, and then it was time more of Her love and blessings. for Shri Mataji Herself to speak. It was almost like Mr. Rajesh Shah concluded by saying that Sahaja a public program, in that She directed Her speech to Yoga had literally transformed the lives of millions of yogis as well as the non-yogis present She said that people the world over and tonight we, their all of the problems of the world come because the representatives had come to pay our respects and give thanks to Shri Mataji. He said now a million people have been transformed but there are five billion attention is outside, and that we have to be one with our spirit. She also told the politicians present in a stern yet maternal way, that they must not avoid the people remaining. importance of spiritual life. All of the speeches were moving and came directly from the heart. The surprise came when Sir C.P. all that was needed, but through the richness of our stood up to say a few words and addressed his wife hearts, our love has spread throughout the world, as Shri Nirmala Mataji. It was the first time he had reaching people, who have never before known the ever addressed Her as Mataji. and he explained that, "I think, on the occasion of Her 75th birthday. all manner of destructive habits which arose through Shri Mataji said, alone She could not have done spirit. In the light of the spirit people have given up that the time has come to surrender Myself fully to frustration, and a kind of loneliness. The time has Her" (Big applause ) He described the "Divine Lady" and Her very devoted and very persistent hard work. to establish Sahaja Yoga. He spoke of his days in developing a universal mind directed towards the spirit London where he saw Shri Mataji's ability to transform people into veritable glowing flowers of humanity, done through Her overriding sense of love and compassion He told a few anecdotes in his inimitable style, to a that it covers all the corners of the world, and creates rapt audience, and exclaimed that it was a "gathering a beautiful world of tomorrow. of angels. a part of heaven presided over by the Divine Herself" come where Sahaja Yoga has to be worked out at a global level, which can be done by collectively Shri Mataji concluded by saying, "I wish you a great growth in your spiritual life, your spirituality. so To conclude the program a most moving and stiring rendition of lande Mataram was sung The entire Quoting an Urdu couplet. Sir CP said to Shri audience stood, and as if Mother India herself was rising in all Her stature, strength and splendour, Shri Mataji stood with awe-inspiring dimension. It was a Mataji what we all had in our hearts: I Was May You live ren thousand years most moving and poignat moment as Shri Mataji And may each year of Your life last fifty sang with the audience the spiritual anthem of India Thюusand years. with full voice before Her who is Mother India, and

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 11 8 12 1998 15 Again Shri Mataji's talk was almost like a public forget. This memorable evening was conceived with program, so universal and touching on so many practical the utmost regard for its significance, meticulousły things. She again spoke about turning the attention towards the spirit. When this happens we enter into the state known as Ginateet, which is beyond the all nations. It was a moment those present will never planned, and executed with love: Saturday, 21st March The Puja three gunas, beyond the desires of the three gunas Our attention moves beyond our conditionings and the From early morning the camp began to swell to even greater proportions than seemed possible, as Sahaja qualities of the ego that have dominated us Then Kalateet, beyond time, where the past or present no Yogis continued to arrive from all over India. An Tonger binds us, and we become responsible for the present moment Then Dharmateet, beyond human expectant air hung around the camp as we prepared for Puja It seemed most appropriate that the maximum nature, beyond dharma, meaning we are not bound to any particular pattern, or ritual, entering that awareness number of people possible would gather to celebrate the 75th Birthday Puja. where all solutions arise. In some cases dharma may Puja was scheduled to commence at 7 p.m. By 5 become a ritual or a conditioning of the mind and p.m the queue to enter the pendal extended for over becomes nonsensical half a kilometre, indicative of the general awareness that the capacity of the venue may not adequately someone who enjoys everyone and every situation. A match the collective desire of those wishing to be realized soul sees himself, what is wrong, and knows Shri Mataji went on to say that a Sahaja Yogi is present. By 6 p.m the pendal was completely füll with thousands of people still queuing to gain entry. The when to correct himself In Sahaja Yoga we have become the spirit and then everything changes. our audience was continually nsked to move forward to genes change, we become people who know joy, can extract all available space to accommodate those still outside Crammed to bursting in the hot, hot pendal no question of big bags placed out on either side- give joy, and who enjoy the company of others. Then we can live anywhere, sleep anywhere, beeause our everyone with a shawl, a bottle of water, and their spirit is always with us to give happiness. Then we knees up to their chest We waited for a miraculous become one with all Sahaja Yogis, crossing the extension of the pendal, which did not materialize By boundary which stops one from seeing the truth. 7 p.m. the pendal was fill like never before, with over seven thousand people inside, and a further three sari held up by seven ladies. The photographs at the thousand that would view the puja via remnote television The puja itself was quite short, without the traditional end were long as usual, but there was not, the mad efnd monitors stationed in the courtyard. rush to the stage, especially as the decor had cleverly incorporated potted plants which completely covered Shri Mataji arrived at 7.45 p.m. with Her family welcomed by a procession of flags of all nations and yogis dressed in colourful traditional national costumes. the front steps of the stage. blocking access from this direction. Balloons were popped with great gusto on all sides of the pendal, in a collective effort to symbolize The flags were presented to Shri Mataji before the commencement of the Puja Shri Mataji asked that these flags be carried back to their countries with the message that the time has come for our resurrection. the deflating of the Ego. At the conclusion of the puja, the international gift was presenteda very large oil painting (large enough to fill an entire wall, like a mural) with large figures of Shiva and Parvati in the centre, surrounded. by small scenes depicting stories of Shiva. The painting We should rise to a higher level of existence where everything in our lives will change to reflect the beauty of the inner life of the spirit.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 11 & 12 1988 16 not be room enough for physical comfort, but little did we care for there was no other place we wished to be. Evenings were taken up with listening to the music of the Divine within a heavenly court surrounded by the saints of this age. several centuries old. was originally hung in a palace in Tanjore Then representatives from many nations queued in alphabetical order to present their gifts to Shri Mataji The offering would take over two hours as the nations of the Sahaja world bowed before Our Holy Mother. The decor in the pendal, and the speed with which Many of the gifts were made by the Yogis of the it was remade each day, was something extraordinary. presenting nations which seemed most appropriate and Flower chains by the hundreds, balloons, sparkling pleasing to Shri Mataji. These included pieces made stars, and the styrofoam-oh, what they could do by children, woven fabric, and beautifully constructed with styrofoam! The most exquisite murals, borders. and decorated furniture A young Malaysian boy pillars, friezes-all made out of painted styrofoam. presented an inspirational painting depicting Shri Mataji Small trees as well as rock gardens formed part of in a selection of Her aspects from this incarnation: the decor, and the flowering plants which lined the scenes from Her youth, Her married life with Sir stairs seemed to grow inches every day with the C.P. the freedom struggle, aspects of Her work vibrations. After three days, the top row of plants had establishing Sahaja Yoga, followed at the highest level gotten so high that it had to be removed so that the by Her Divine aspects audience could see the performers! As for what happened to the decorations as they This was a fitting conclusion to the occasion of the were removed and changed each day, well, one yogini spotted a small Indian boy near the Nizamuddin roundabout, walking with a big smile on his face 75th Puja celebration of the birth of Shri Adi Shakti Nirmala Devi. Sunday, 22nd March The Celebrations Continue carrying a huge set of styrofoam tablas. Never, ever, in one's wildest dreams, could we imagine that there would be so many artists of such completely astounding accomplishment in their field Each night there were at least five performances of either classical dance or music, as well as performances by the students of the Nagpur Academy and some of Following the Puja, birthday celebrations continued for another five days-music programs from the 22nd through the 26th. The pattern of the days to come would be generally similar. free time during the days, music throughout the evening and into the early hours of the morning. the Western Sahaja Yogis. It was like having a huge. Some spent their days shopping in Delhi, some exquisite banquet spread out in front of you and, parents went with their children to the zoo and to because it is such rich, nourishing and satisfying food, other attractions around the city Those immune to the you would be completely full even with a small serving shopkeepers' lure spent pleasant hours in the camp, sun high in the sky overhead, whiling the hours away as we saw our limited attention get "full up" on the under the cool shade of trees, conversing with friends. nourishing food by about 2 or 3 o'clock in the morming Shadows would find that the day had gone, time slipped away, hours, days. the week would fall, and one would be spent this way, bathing in the waters creaked from sitting for such a long time, and we At times we wished for a greater absorption capacity, Each night's program began 6 p.m. and carried on to 3 to 4 or 5 o'clock in the morning. The bones of Sahaja collectivity. enthusiastically took every chance we could to stretch It would be not quite dark, approaching evening. our legs, staying on our feet long after the standing ovations had died down. In fact we waited until Baba i we would assemble at the pendal. There would when

 17 Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X Issue 11 & 12 1998 were well received In fact, each night as the performances carried on, people started saying to each other how much they would love to attend the academy, even people who had not previously been attracted to Indian music or dance. He expressed Shri Mataji's wish that there be 100 students at the academy, and after the birthday concerts, circumstances pemitting, there would be 5,000 students waiting to register. Mama insisted that we sit back down before doing SO. It was noticeable that virtually every artist had a deep recognition of Shri Mataji, far beyond the usual politeness with which artists greet a spiritual personality Many of them said a few words before beginning their performance, and it was such a joy to hear them praising the Goddess, as well as thanking Her for helping them to perform at their best, which they all said they did when it was in front of yogis and in the During one of the concerts Baba Mama said that once he had asked Shri Mataji to stop time, She said that if She stopped time then there would be no moments where we could feel joy, no opportunity to change our fate. We need time in order to improve presence of Shri Mataji The contrast with performers in the West was striking one visualizes a singer taking his final ego-inflating bow, separating himself from the audience, versus these performers who with great and to change our destiny. reluctance came forward to be applauded, and who saluted us with folded hands, as if to thank us for performance on shehenai by Pandit Jaggannath Mishra The first evening's program began with a listening and being part of the experience. Such beautiful humility, and such music! At times during the concerts, one went so deeply into meditation that it was difficult to know where the music ended and our spirit began, and party, who hail from Uttar Pradesh. He is a disciple of Anant Lal who is a disciple of Bishmillah Khan. It was a virtuoso performance of Raga Madhvanti and Raga Marubihag, both meditative such was the complete union of the two. This must be what listening with the Kundalini is, instead of then performed a bhajan and seemed appreciative of and moving and much enjoyed by the audience. He merely with the ears the audience's warm reception. Sir C.P. and Kalpana Didi and Sadhana Didi all seemed to enjoy the programs very much Their Kadkade who again displayed his classical virtuosity appreciation for Indian classical music and dance was with a rendition of Dhannakani Kalya followed by evident in their responsive and attentive listening bhajans. His sensitivity to the spirit of the Indian throughout the performances. It was sweet to see Sir classical tradition was evident to all present. C.P and Shri Mataji sitting together, occasionally leaning This was followed by a vocal performance by Ajit Ms. Vanaji Vdaya treated us to a performance of towards one another to comment about the music. Kuchipudi dance. She captivated us with the elegance and poetry of her performance, depicting the leela of Krishna and Yeshoda This was followed by a dance share a smile, or take a handful of chanas together At certain times the yogis spontaneously started clapping with the rhythm of the music. It seems we of the Devi to the music of Ai Giri Nandini. The have come a long way since the days when Baba dance was most expressive in conveying the fierce in Her role as both protector the beat instead of around it. He was the Master of and destroyer. The union of dance, rhythm, body and Ceremony for the proceedings each night, and it facial expressions helped create the image of She couldn't have been more graciously and appreciatively who is the support of the universe, and who vanquishes done. One felt such a love for this uncle who has with a mere glance Shri Mataji was most appreciative done so much to spread music in Sahaja Yoga, His of the performance and was later to say it was the first occasion that She had seen a dance performance aspects of the Devi Mama desperately tried to get our clapping to fall with frequent "advertisements" for the Nagpur Academy

 18 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X losus 11 & 12 1998 of Ai Giri Nandini. The next artist to take the stage was Satish Vyas who performed on the santoor, The intricacies and The concluding performance for the evening was a selection of Western classical orchestral pieces performed by a collective of western classicists. They first played the Spring element form Vivaldi's Four subtlety of the instrument did take some time to tune and setup, but the wait was worthwhile as he enchanted the audience with an interpretation of Kaunsi Kamuda Ms Meena Patarpekar then presented a classical vocal Seasons This was followed by selections from Sammartini, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky Shri Mataji was very pleased that the Indian Sahaja Yogis had been presented with an opportunity to appreciate these great western composers. The evening ended with a Mrs. Zarin Daruwala who Shri Mataji first heard rendition of Vinati Suniye, accompanied by the perform as a child prodigy in 1960 with Baba Mama audience who sang with full voice, providing a stirring Since that time she has won numerous awards for her finale to a memorable evening performance of Maru-Bihag, followed by a rendition of Hasat Ali The last performance for the evening was from playing. She heralded the early hours of the moning with a subtle and sensitive interpretation of Raga Jog She also received a standing ovation. Monday, 23rd March The evening's concert began at 5:30 with two hours Tuesday, 24th March of music from Nimal Sangeet Sarita. The first performer was Gaby (Govind) Jasray who performed Raga Jog. followed by Dhananjay Dumar who Played a Raga roused itself into normal routine morning meditation, Jahansamohini on the synthesiser, followed by Brahma early morning showers, and breakfast queues swelled Shodhile. He was succeeded by a vocal piece by by those who had missed the previous evening's meal Mrs. Basu. Nirmal Sangeet Sarita and the students of the Academy then took the stage, and our hearts, of music from Nirmala Sangeet Sarita. The first with a performance of the qawwali, Tu Duniya Men performer was Mr. Nicholas Buff who performed on Considering the previous late evening, the camp The evening concert began at 6:00 with two hours Aaya, the saxophone accompanied by Sandesh Popatkar. Nicholas demonstrated a profound understanding, sensitivity and proficiency in Indian classical music earned through many years of study at the academy. The group featured a Romanian now living in France currently studying at the Academy. He was a founding member of the Romanian Qawwali group. It was a most impressive performance, and a clear demonstration of the work the Academy is doing in preserving and spreading the classical traditions of Indian muSIC. The received the first of what would be many standıng The Swiss Bhajan Group then took the stage with performers playing sitar, tabla, harmonium and flute. They accomplished moving renditions of Raga Yama, and bhajans Jai Durge Durgati and Dharoon Tumaro group ovations that evening Dhyan (I meditate upon You). The next performance was upon sarod by Danishq Khan, accompanied by the more than impressive Shafat Ahmed Khan on tabla, who performed a moving rendition of Raga Rageshree. Straight was the track they wound to our hearts and another standing ovation. This was followed by a dazzling solo performance on the table by Shafat Ahmed Khan The next piece was a drama by the Delhi Yogis about the introduction of Sahaja Yoga to a group of college students and their conversion from the culture of Kali yuga to that of Sahaja. Ms. Shashwati Sen then performed a Kathak dance accompanied by a troupe of dancers who presented an intricate and expressive performance, dazzling the audience. Throughout the performance Ms. Sen narrated the

 19 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue: 11& 12 1998 Tu Pyar Paane Se Majboor: significance of the various movements within the dance, speaking of dance as a reflection of the music of nature, the wind blowing through the trees, water moving in the seas and clouds swirlilng through the sky She is compelled to give Her Divine Love to you, Since even if She wants to, She cannot stop the At Shri Mataji's request, a video documentary of low of Love, Shri Mataji's life, made by the American yogis, entitled The Vision, was shown. In it, there are scene from Shri Mataji's childhood and youth, then following Her life through to the establishment of Sahaja Yoga Shri accepting the love. Mataji had commented that every Sahaja Yoga centre in the world should have a copy of this tape. Shri Through which She passes Her energy to us, While we are incapable and unworthy of Five of the Academy students then performed Kathak dance rendition of the Maha Mantras, and a Mataji arrived just as the tape was finishing. dance in praise of Shri Shiva. Anil, Guruji, Sandesh The next performance was Raga Ahhogi, the raga and Ashok then performed Ma Tere Nirmala Prem that takes you away form Maya (Bhog), played on Ko, and Sahaja hee esi Shakti. the flute by Ronu Majumdar accompanied by Abhijeet The next performance was by Awininda Shivalikar on sitar of Raga Yaman, accompanied by Sandesh on tabla The flute seems to lend itself most easily to instilling meditative mood, and this he established to full effect, the ascending mood of the piece mimicking Popatkar on tabla. A very sweet man, Mr. Toor Sahib then came on to the stage He was introduced the movements of the Kundalini along the Sushumna as a deputy police commissioner who wrote devotional music "on the side" and who had formed a band. Up they came with synthesizer, drums, electric guitar and chairs to sit on The group's music was a nice The concluding performance was by Pandit Bhajan Sapori who delivered a masterful performance on the santoor of Raga Kanshi Kamuda. It was a performance of different style to the santoor of Satish Vyas we had heard previously, being more lively in its execution, with its moods varying from meditative to combination of East and West, somehow even the electrie guitar sounded Indian, and at the conclusion of their performance, Shri Mataji gave a beautiful speech. She said how great it was that someone who lived in a world of criminals and miscreants could be ecstatie as he displaved his command of the instrument This concluded another enjoyable evening of So spiritual and come so close to Sahaja Yoga. She went on to say that Sahaja Yoga is even being taught performances played before the Creator of all music and art in the jails, which is "miraculous." This man, She said, was proof that the world is changing in à beautiful way, because he had that music inside himself despite his circumstances. Wednesday, 25th March The evening concert began at 6 30 with two hours. of music from Nirmal Sangeet Sarita The first performance was Steve Day who sang beautiful westem performed Raga Jaijaivant and a bhajan to Rama, songs he had written inspired by the sky, rolling river, the beautiful expression of Mother Earth around the has become someone well known to us, having Nagpur Academy. Nirmal Sangeet Sarita and the captivated us on many occasions with the beauty and students of the Acadeny took the stage with a stirring depth of her playing Arun Apte then performed Raga rendition of a qawwali, Vo Pyar Dene Ko Majhoor, Shyam Kalyan and Raga Durga, followed by two Dr N Rajam, a virtuoso of the violin, then accompanied by Abhijeet Banerjee on tabla Dr Rajam

 20 Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X Issue : 11 & 12 1998 The second qawwali group who took centre stage bhajans. hailed from Lucknow. They were Shia Muslims, and The evening ended with a masterful performance also Sufis. They sang poetical verses praising the by Vishwa Mohan Bhatt on mohan vina/guitar. He Mother and Shri Ganesha. The third group was the was accompanied by Sandeep Das on tabla. Vishwa Nizamuddin qawwals, with their charismatic leader, Mohan Bhatt has the distinction of being the only who is part singer, actor and poet He sang most Indian performer to have won a Grammy Award, for movingly, prose composed in praise of Shri Mataji a Meeting by the River, recorded with Ry Cooder It was an enthralling and dazzling performance of Raga Hemant, which was very much appreciated by those fortunate enough to be present. Although the language was foreign to Westerners, the joy it imparts is universal. The meaning of the words could be clearly read upon the faces of our Indian brothers and sisters who frequently jumped to: Shri Mataji later said that She had enjoyed the their feet dancing with joy as they roared their performance and commented that the Indian classicist appreciation of the words being sung had demonstrated how the guitar can be played incorporating a continuous melodious component compared to the breaks normally accompanied by the strumming of the guitar in Western music. Sir C.P. then rose to give the closing address to the 75th birthday celebrations. Sir C.P. epitomizes dignity, wisdom and enlightened intelligence: he chose words that were a fitting tribute and conclusion to the week. Thursday, 26th March The Last Evening He said that we had all gathered in celebration of that momentous occasion 75 years ago when the light Shri Mataji had been in attendance for all of the of the world was born. There had been many incarnations in the past, great beings who through the example of their lives had started great religions, and who had helped show mankind the way forward. But these religions had diverged, separating people, resulting in conflict. evening programs, except the last one (26th March) when Sir C.P. came on Her behalf. "Im sure you will be disappointed to see me here alone" he began, and went on to say that because of the strain of several late nights, he had encouraged Shri Mataji to rest. He said he hoped this was our wish as well, and was met with strong applause. As always, he found exactly the right words to embody grace and dignity. He said "but don't think for a moment that She is not here because Sir C.P. said another incarnation was needed to bring all religions into one, and this incarnation was our Holy Mother He said that tonight we had heard She resides in each and every one of your hearts." the qawwali referring to Hindus, Muslims and Christians The evening concert began at 6:30 with music from coming from different parts of the world, becoming a combined Western bhajan group who performed one before Her This dream is becoming a reality. He five songs. Deepak Verma, Simple, Sanjay Talwar and Dr Rajesh performed, followed by a performance on why not? Or a church or synagogue, why not? violin by Annapooma from Romania, now living in Delhi. Everything is now possible. said he could riow go to a mosque and worship Sir C.P. referred to the Felicitation program and This was an evening devoted to gawwali, with fumber of groups presenting pieces. The first was the the account of the early days of Sahaja Yoga where qawwali of Amir Khusrou of Maiya Tere Charano Shri Mataji had helped a destitute boy. He said that Ki Next was a performance on Sitar by Pratik Chaudhuri of Raga Shudh Basant. Shri Mataji had not asked him his religion, his caste, background. In Her love and compassion, all that or

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue : 11 & 12 1998 21 a complete rainbow over the camp. mattered was that he was in need. He has seen this all-pervading love transforming people In the beginning many people came to Her, some of whom were to make everything run so smoothly was a tribute to The tireless effort of our Indian brothers and sisters brilliant young people, who all came away newly- realized souls. Then groups of people came, and so their great humility and love. Everything from selling became realized souls, and now the multitudes have Limcas to arranging taxis to reserving space in the become Her children. front of the pendal for "foreigners"-we only hope that amid all of their responsibilities, they too had We should all see how Sahaja Yoga has grown some time to enjoy and when we return home we must take a message Each of us was blessed to have been allowed to back to everyone, and that is today there are a million Sahaja Yogis. But now the time has come when Sahaia Yoga has to enfold the whole world, so that when we spend six consecutive days in Shri Mataji's presence. Not since the India tours of old has Shri Mataji celebrate the 80th birthday there will be 100 million allowed us such a unique opportunity to spend this Sahaja Yogis, and when we celebrate the 100th amount of time in Her presence. It was matchless birthday there should be 5 billion Sahaja Yogis. occasion we shall always cherish and for which we humbly thank Shri Mataji. We are returning home with the messages of the week's celebrations ringing in our Mr. Nalgirkar was called to thank all the organizers of the event and related how the committee in charge of the celebrations had to convince Shri Mataji to allow us to celebrate the occasion over seven days. heart and mind. Also this day over 300 parents, children and staff At first She was reluctant but with time eventually finalized preparations to make their way to Talnoo, gave Her consent, and now we look forward to the 80th birthday celebrations where we will have fourteen Shri Mataji had recommended that the children travel days of celebrations. near Dharamshala for the beginning of the school year. to the school by rail due to difficulty of the road. On the evening of March 27th over 150 children. Friday, 27th March Postscript parents, teachers and staff assembled at platform I at Delhi Central Train Station to board the train to At the conclusion of the oflicial celebrations of Shri Pathankot, which would take them to within 100 Mataji's birthday the camp took on the appearance kilometres of Dharamshala The rest of the journey of a departure lounge of an international airport, with would be completed by bus. large groups of foreign Yogis completing preparations to board airplanes to take them home. Somehow a pilgrimage to India would not feel complete unless it included a long bus journey to a It was so nice to have had several days, rather lar off place with your brothers and sisters by your than just a weekend, to settle down And to realiy U side, This was in store for the remaining parents and others who travelled to the school. The journey incorporated all the ingredients of the classic India tour bus trip-thirteen hours of ovemight travel, loading baggage, a long steep winding road up the Himalayan converse with people, rather than rushing by saying, "nice to see you." The atmosphere was relaxed, and the clearing out (which inevitably takes place during large collective gatherings) was more of the "enjoy" variety than the "pain and suffering" variety. foothills, the bus travelling from one pothole to the next, and drivers throwing their vehicles at breakneck We cannot forget the brief rain shower one day, speed around hairpin comers without a hint of a guard falling from a cloudless sky, which was followed by rail.

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 11 & 12 1998 Saturday 28th March Dharamshala and wonder at the endless majesty of Her creation. time of the day people could be found at At any any number of a vantage points absorbing the vibrations. Meditating in the land of silence seems to impose that silence upon one's busy mind. This seems to recharge body, mind and soul, as one enters into communion with the Divine as reflected with such clarity in Nature. The majority of the parents and children arrived at Dharamshala during the morning to be greeted by grey skies and rain. The children were unloaded at the beginning of the unsealed road a few hundred metres from the school. The children seemed to negotiate the muddy and slippery surface with a greater sense of Mere words cannot capture or do justice to the beauty, ease than did their parents who tried to follow in their glory and completeness of the scene, or its effect footsteps. It was an amusing scene as we tried to negotiate our way over the muddy pools and small streams that had formed along the road. upon you. The children seem to naturally fall into a routine of play, reunited with old friends, and at times seem blithely unaware of the panorama stretched before We rounded the last bend in the road to catch our them. first breathtaking impression of the school. The school is nestled upon a hill at a height of around 7,000 feet We spent three days with the children helping them (2100m), directly facing the majestic snow-capped settle into their dorms, privileged to be allowed to Himalayan Dhauladhar Mountain range. The school is share their meals and play a small part in their daily routine. The children have everything they require- clean and tidy dormitories, good food and eating facilities, spacious play areas, kind and loving staff, and teachers genuinely devoted to their care and well- within the lap of the Gods, surrounded on three sides by a cavernous ravine, the bottom of which cannot be fathomed. Our children are privy to the simplest yet most being. enduring pleasures of life, unspoilt Nature in all Her breathtaking glory, high mountain calm, pure pristine the longer parents stay after school commences, air, an idyllic haven surrounded with pines, sometimes the more difficult it is for the children to Three days seem an appropriate period of time; rhododendrons and deodar (Himalayan cedar) forests, far from the madding crowds, the heat and stress of modern society. adjust to their school routine, making the staff's job more difficult. Monday, 30th March Outside the school the mountains are a land of This was the first day of the school year and it was shifting colours and moods, grey foreboding, dazzling agreed to be the day most parents would leave for and brilliant, and all the time the school shining more Delhi. We farewelled the children at 6 pm just before brilliantly because of them. The children are resident evening meditation. in a place where the Kundalini of Mother India meets the Sahasrara, where Shiva and Parvati once danced, leaving behind those dear sweet ones. It is quite a and where swayambhus of Shiva and the Devi create heart-wrenching experience as parents and children an environment of such auspiciousness that one cannot part for a period of many months. Despite the best help but feel oneness with the Divine. On the side of of intentions, detachment is an art badly practised at The time of parting is never an easy one, especially one of the mountains, in view of the school, is a a time when so many mixed emotions flood into one's temple containing a Devi swayambhu. No wonder the vibrations here are so strong! heart. Yet somehow Shri Mataji gives one the necessary strength to tum around and walk the lonely few hundred The Mountains dominate one's attention, the majestic Himalayan panorama bathing one with a sense of awe metres back down the muddy road to the waiting bus,

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue: 11 & 12. 1998 23 As we return home, it's the post-Birthday Puja landing-coming down from heaven into the unreality which covers the world today. Will it be a bumpy landing or smooth? One always prays to be able to retain what was absorbed the vibrations, the joy, the and commence the journey home There is no doubt the school is situated at one of the remotest corners of the earth and implicit with this are difficulties with regard to physical amenities; however, the children have developed an indiference depth, and thus penetrate our local environments with the subtlety of reality, raising the level a step closer to our Mother's vision of what it can and will be like, with respect to any inconvenience. They are sustained by the comfort of their spirit, their closeness to Shri Mataji's all-pervading love and attention, and the communion and brotherhood they have formed with each other What is left from this great week is an overwhelming sense of gratitude and a feeling of joy that will sustain us until the next opportunity to meet again at the Lotus Feet of our Mother. As a sufi poet who was quoted during the felicitations ceremony wrote, If our children can show us anything, it is the deep and abiding love and friendship they share, obliterating any concept of country, race, or class. In this aspect we their parents have much to learn, and to achieve. to become truly united souls as we enter into the Heuvens are under the Mother's feet. coming spiritual age Victoria Zbylut, France and Chris Kyriacou, Australila Photographs by Beth Checkley

 24 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 11 & 12 1998 News from Around the World The Smog Situation in Southeast Asia First Scandinavian Seminar his is the story of the first Scandinavian Seminar, held in Stockholm, Sweden, on T: Kuala Lumpur, September 19, 1997. Irresponsible plantation companies in Indonesia have set fires to August 29-31, 1997. clear huge areas of land, and because of the dry season, the fires have gone out of control. To date, One week after Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella, we were happy to be the hosts of the first Scandinavian more than 300,000 hectares of land have been razed Sahaja Yoga seminar. Shri Krishna's special blessings The resulting smoke has enveloped the region, and must have still been flowing, for many more brothers visibility as of September 19th was 300-500 metres and sisters than we dared hope for, came to join us and going down. East Malaysia (Borneo) has been in a truly international meeting In the end there were declared an emergency area with the Air Pollution no less than 12 countries represented. Index (API) hitting 675 (under 50 is good. 50-100 is hazy. 100-200 is unhealthy and 300+ is hazardous.) In the capital city of Kuala Lumpur, the hazardous level has already been reached. We were especially happy to receive a large family from a really far-off land: the small country of Benin in West Africa. Having recently come to Sweden as political refugees they almost doubled our Swedish collective! Initially, the govemment said that if the API hit 300 in urban regions, they would close schools and declare We felt Shri Krishna's presence throughout the a national emergency, but they are afraid of the whole week-end, both through His blessings and economic ramifications and have raised the level to through some mischievous tricks of His. For lack of 500 before they will take drastic measures, Health one single place to stay, our activities were spread out problems are escalating at a tremendous rate. over the city-sleeping here, eating there, havan by the sea, puja in the Sahaja Centre, Please put your attention on this area and give it a bandhan, of this there were no telephones in either On top of the main places. However, everybody seemed to around the world who have put attention on this be quite above all these things, the vibrations spread problem. Last weekend, a few of us decided to do nicely over the city, and the public program attracted something more than bandhans about the smog, and a dozen new seekers. October 1, 1997. Thanks to all the Sahaja Yogis spontaneous trip to Fraser's Hill, a hill station in the mountains, worked out. We all felt this gathering of our common powers and desire was very much needed, and it strengthened us in our work in these sometimes harsh and A yogi had booked a huge 8-room bungalow for and the 22 of us were very Clean air for the first time in two months. For those individualistic countries that are just beginning to wake up to the call of our Mother. May we be blessed to enjoy more new yogis to spread the wamth throughout of you who have watched CNN and other news channels-yes, the situation was very bad. Breathing dark and chilly countries. was difficult, eyes were irritated all the time outdoors.. there are more than 300,000 ill from haze-related -Sahaja Yoga, Sweden

 Divine Cool Breeze Valume X lsue 11 & 12 1998 request for bandhans to be given, The Indian New complications. Year marks a very auspicious start to the spreading Amidst the green lushness of Mother Nature, we of Sahaja Yoga in mainland China. On Sunday, had an Adi Bhoomi Devi Puja. It was really powerful November 2 we will be holding a public program in with incredible vibrations. We surrendered all the causes of the haze and the slowness of action taken over the border The program will be held at the Shenzhen, the closest Chinese city to Hong Kong, just by the authorities to rectify the situation. Also the greed which got us into this position in the first place. mainland Chinese Yogini, May, who is coordinating We prayed for wisdom and discretion for our nation's the program. May is a teacher of English at the leaders, a slower growth rate which does not cost us Polytechnic and received her realisation from Shri Polytechnic in one of the lecture rooms. We have one our environment and natural resources and most of all. Mataji in Beijing when she attended the UN women's conference there The programs will be held every at the politicians' healthy respect for Shri Bhoomi Devi. Sunday afternoon from 3 p.m. - 5 p.m for the next On our returm trip, there was a huge storm sweeping month This is an experiment to see how the general through the region. Jai Shri Mataji! We have not seen public responds to such a program and if it is successful month by month basis. The Puja It was fantastic and awesome to watch. And Polytechnic has given us permission to hold the today, the Finance Minister has announced that programs which is a real breakthrough as it is often Malaysia's growth rate will be between 6-8 per difficult to get permission for such activities in China cent He was assuring the country that we don't have In order not to raise suspicions, only Chinese yogis to develop so fast, that a 6-7 per cent growth rate will run the programs as westerners attract the attention of the authorities who are very strict about public such rain since the last time we had a Bhoomi Devi we will continue on a is perfectly alright. gatherings. When Shri Mataji was here last, She told us that pollution would be our biggest problem, and now The other major step forward for Sahaja Yoga in China is a program on stress management that will be conducted in a Beijing women's clinic, starting Thursday November 6 from 7 p.m.-9 p.m. London de Valle. who is living in Beijing with his family, will be conducting the program which is focusing more on the medical benefits of Sahaja Yoga. The eight-week course will gradually introduce participants to the basic practices of Sahaja Yoga, demonstrating how to eliminate stress from daily life. Two yogis from Hong Kong will attend things are working out We are just praying that the authorities realize their errors and will take firmer preventive action and make more enlightened decisions in future Experts have predicted that the haze will return and the rain we are getting every day now (since the Puja) is only temporary. But we'll see, eh? We have a lot more on our side than they have ever dreamed about. Bolo Shri Bhoomi Devi Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Ki Jai !! the first program to boost the vibrations but if we have collective attention on the programs, it will definitely help to move things along. Love from your brother, We are also looking for established yogis to come Ramesh Tan, Malasia and in China and Hong Kong. Two of our collective will be returning to England in December and we have a vacancy in the Hong Kong ashram for 2-5 yogis Also in Beijing we need some help so if anyone is interested in coming to China to work and live, even News from China We have some good news from China to share with our brothers and sisters around the world and

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X Issue 11& 12 1998 26 In March 1997, the First Latin American Seminar of Sahaja Yoga was held in Rio. It was a wonderful experience of meeting Yogis from Colombia, Bolivia, Paraguay, Argentina and Brazil. This was the occasion for a few months, then please let us know. Lots of love to all our brothers and sisters from around the world - The China Sahaja Yoga Collective to organize the steps to be taken in order to give a public program in Uruguay. Sahaja Yoga in Uruguay On April 26th. 1997, ten yogis from Argentina and In the beginning of 1995, my husband was assigned Eduardo Marino were in Montevideo to help us to to Unuguay AS you know, Uruguay is a small country have our first public program. Some days before it in Latin America (about 176.000 square km) with was held, two yogis from Argentina came to assist us around 3,100.000 inhabitants, located between Brazil in postering in the main avenues of the city, spreading and Argentina Uruguay is well-known for its meat and dairy products that are exported to many countries. vibrations with Shri Mataji's picture. With the financial support of the Sahaja collectivity of Rio de Janeiro, a beautiful advertisement containing Shri Mataji's picture was published in two of the local news-papers. On Having a 7-month-old baby and very little Spanish. I wondered whether I would be able to spread Sahaja the day of the program we had our hearts full of joy. Yoga in Uruguay For about two years, all my efforts to tell people about Sahaja Yoga and to give realization bore no fruit. Notwithstanding, keeping to my daily Room of Hotel Embajador. Approximately 90 people meditations, shoe-beatings and foot-soaking, I did not attended and most of them could feel the cool breeze. lose hope. Sometimes, 1 felt compelled to call my At the first follow-up. 15 people came back. In the brothers and sitters of New York's collectivity (where following meetings. the balance of incoming and 1 lived for three years and where 1 first got my outgoing people resulted in a steady number of 15 realization in 1993) to break the feeling of isolation people. I had. During that time, I did not fully understand the The public program was held at the Conference In May 1997, an interview was given to a very importance of the collectivity before jumping into the experience of becoming Shri Mataji's instrument well-known broadcaster on a radio show which brought to us some additional seekers of high quality. When attending the North American Krishna Puja of 1996, held in New Jersey. and presenting a small eift on Uruguay's behalf, I had the opportunity to refer the situation to Shri Mataji. I felt very relieved when Mother said "some help would be sent to Uruguay" Another public program was given on August 9th. Just a few posters and an announcement on the radio show was enough to draw 55 people that filled up the room we had. For the first follow-up, 35 people came back and about 20 people are still coming after It was all that was necessary to make the pieces fall 15 weeks! The meetings were held on Saturdays and into their places. we decided to convene Sunday morning meetings for In December 1996, the South American leader the more established people. Eduardo Marino, a physicist living in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), was invited by the Physies College of went to Argentina in October to take part in the Universidad de la Republica in Uruguay to take part Navaratri Puja 1997. Needless to say how special in a two-week long scientific activity in the month of t experience was. The hospitality and love of our A new step was taken when a group of 7 ladies that brothers and sisters in the ashram of Buenos Aires April. It was a perfect opportunity to organize a public program. were the expression of Shri Mataji's love While

 27 Divine Cool Breeze Volume:Xissue: 11 & 12 1998 curious and careful, so we don't miss our country too returning to Montevideo we all witnessed the play of our conditionings being broken and negativity that had troubled us before being overcome much, despite the fact that we are in the "left channel of the Universe." as Shri Mataji named this Cordillieri Anzi which crosses South America In November, we had the chance to perform Diwali Puja in Unuguay Argentina's collectivity gifted us most of the materials and thalis required for the puja, and three yogis came all the way from Buenos Aires to assist us We had 14 new Sahaja Yogis attending the Puja and washing Mother's feet with devotion. The Mother Bhoomi Devi is so generous, powerful so many vibrations come up from Her body to make the beauty that is all around us here. It's almost like in India, really a blissful place. They have a monument here at a very important location in the city called La Madre India, which means Indian Mother. The We are to embark on a transition period, as I am monument is very well made, showing a native Indian Mother with her little boy in her strong arms, embracing about to leave Uniguay to accompany my husband back to Brazil It's time for the collectivity to stand him with love. The child looks so safe and attached on its own feet, still with the support and periodic to his Mother truly Mother India, presence of our always-caring brothers and sisters from Argentina until Shri Matajai sends an established There are many seekers here, many ancient souls, so and experienced Yogi to guide the collectivity. We all deep inside, ancient souls with ancient eyes, We pray gave a bandhan for that and the vibrations were very and hope for them to be blessed by and have Self cool. The new contact person in Uruguay is Adriana Realization, Our humble request for all our brothers Anon, Calle pedro Vidal 2217, Montevideo, Uruguay, and sisters around the world is to put their Divine love CP 11600, Her phone number is (5982) 4818781. Her e-mail atldress is. anona@adinet.com.uy or hearts. anona @fing edu uy and attention in a bandhan and send it here to people's We also have the desire to communicate with the The opportunity I received to spread Sahaja Yoga Sahaja world, so please send us Sahaja news and meant a whole new phase in my spiritual development information To be able to witness the Paramehaitanya's work @duende.cafenet.com.bo and specify, 'message for made me fully understand what Shri Mataji expects Luis and Cristina." Tharik you very much! We embrace from us. I am very grateful for all the love and guidance you all, with all the petals of our hearts. e-mail address this to provided by our Mother's attention. To all my brothers and sisters, Jai Shri Mataji! With love, - Luis and Cristina -Virginai Cury Intense Public Programs in Turkey News from Bolivia This message comes from Santa Cruz de la Sierra. a big and very niece city in Bolivia (South America) We are two yogis here, a Spanish boy and a Reomanian girl, and neither of us is aborigen, native people. We just imet here by the Grace of Shri Mataji. This Santa From 8 October on we had intense public programs in the three biggest cities of Turkey. Istanbul, Ankara and Izmir, with 2 days between each city. Yogi Mahajan jed the programs in which some 2,000 people got their realization. Cruz de la Sierra has such a nice name and is such This year, the media had a very positive attitude! a beautiful place In general, people are very nice. speak very sweetly, and are very communicative, There was coverage by three radio stations and two

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X issue : 11 & 12 1998 Yogi Mahajan pointed out that the word Anatolia (the name of the Turkish peninsula) means Motherland: TV programs, plus articles in newspapers. The same media was very hostile and sarcastic toward Sahaja ana means mother and tolia means filled or full. This Yoga two years ago. comes from worshipping the Mother-God on this land where a lot of Mother icons and statues have been The most important outcome was that realization was program is also emitted to the whole world by satellite! found, most of them 3,000 to 5,000 years old Many spectators phoned to say they felt the cool In the historical parts of Istanbul, there are strong cool vibrations inside the famous Byzantine church, Saint given on TV on the 8 p.m. news to millions! This breeze. Since Turkey is the first and only Islamic country built between 360 and 525 AD so it is 1,500 years where Sahaja Yoga is practised, this evet is also important for the Islamic world where fundamentalism visited a house that is said to be the birthplace of old. This is the Mother's church! Near Izmir we is widespread. This TV transmission was also watched in all these lands-the Middle East, Europe, and Centrel Asia, reaching more than 150 million people. Seekers are coming in increasing numbers to the follow- Mother Mary Very strong rain followed these programs Yogi Mahajan missed his plane to India so we had more ups: This was surprising because the contrary was opportunity to be with him (old and new yogis) More expected, based on our experiences in past years. No contacts have been developed with the media also. bad reactions or arguing questions were observed We send our love to the universe! Jai Shri Majaji! during the programs (also surprising in an Islamic country), and the interest was very high. -Ender Enon, Turkey News from International Sahaja School, Dharamshala such great work that she is doing. On 28th October 1998 A Sahaja Boarding School has been opened for Indian Children The Himachal Pradesh Minister for Transport and Welfare Mr. Kishan Kapoor presented an award to the International Sahaja School Dharamshala for excellence and said. Parents must register their children immediately, otherwise it may not be possible to make provision "The Himalayas are the Crown of India and this School is a precious Sparkling Diamond adorning that crown. I salute those parents who have sent their children so far away from their home to receive true education and spread it throughout the world. This school reminds me of great universities like Takshila and Nalanda. The message that this school is spreading throughout the world will make India emerge as Jagat Guru Bharat as these students are going to be the pioneers of 21st Century to spread Shri Mataji's message. I for them before the school opens on 23rd March1999. (Yogi Mahajan) Address- Sahaja School Village Mamoon 145001 Pathankot Punjab Phone : 0186-20128 am highly grateful to Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi for

 Record Congressional PROCEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE 105TH CONGRESS, FIRST SESSION United States of Armerica HONORING SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI HON. ELIOT L. ENGEL OF NEW YORK IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES is married to Sir C. P. Srivastava, former Secretary General of the United Nations Maritime Mr. Speaker, Sahaja Yoga Meditation, since its founding in 1970 by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, has helped tens of thousands of people in more than 65 countries to attain a deeper spiritual self knowledge which leads to a greater ability to become their own best advisor. Organisation. In her youth, she studied in the ashram of Mahatma Gabdhi and was very active in India's struggle for Independence from Great Britain. The meditation helps one to identify, heal and integrate the spiritual, emotional, intellectual and physical self to improve health. It gives an increased sense of integration and peace. She was named "Women of the Year" in Italy in 1986. She also received an honorary membership to Peter's Academy of Arts and Sciences in St. Petersburg, Russia. In her recent visit to New York, more than 3,000 people received their "self- Shri Mataji has carried the message of Sahajá Yoga Meditation worldwide for the past 27 years, educating Westerners and Easterners to their common spiritual roots, She has always offered her meditating techniques free of charge to help the greatest number to achieve a reawakening. realization" from her. On August 23rd and 24th, she will lead an international celebration in Cabella, Italy, to focus on the spiritual growth of America. She is a woman of deep caring and compassion whose spirituality has improved the world. Shri Mataji is a mother and a grandmother who Congressional Record presented to Slhri Mataji, Shri Krishia Puja 1997-

 "Once you are absolutely thoughtlessly aware, you are one with the Divine - so much so that Divine takes over every activity, every moment of your life, and looks after you."



----------------------

1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-0.txt 
 FUEL
Divine Cool Breeze
X lNGue : 11& 12
1998
Volume
"We must learn to be one. After coming to Sahaja Yoga, after your Realisation, if you do not
understand this message that we all have to be one, one single unit, one single body, if you
cannot be, if you are identified with other things, then it is no way you have grown, you have
not matured.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Editorial
Sahasrara Day Puja
2.
Shri Mataji's 75th Birthday Celebrations
12
News From Around the Worid
24
Edited by
Yogi Mahajan
: Vl. Nalgirkar
Published by
162, Munirka Vihar
New Deihi-110 067
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
Looking at glass of water one may observe that 'it is half full', another may observe that 'it is half
empty'. When we look at the leaner side of life we only defeat ourself, For instance if some one
is asked, 'please phone Mr X' without even trying, the answer comes, "he may not be home". Even
before making an attempt if people start imagining the difficulties then they create an invincible mountain
by which they defeat themselves. The mental process has a ready explanation or an excuse for
everything. For instance a Sahaja Yogi suggested "let us do a public programme;" pat came the reply
"we may nat get the hall". We have to realise that the mental process is lenear and has to recoil
back. So let us overcome it and change our outlook to saying", Of course we will get the hall, we
are doing God's work."
We know very well the power working behind us. Let us yoke our mental process to it and leave
it to work out everything. By our imagination we block the flow of vibrations and tire ourselves. Thus
we are defeated and exhausted by our own reactions. When our attention is centred there is no
reaction. We can be in action and achieve many things without getting overwhelmed.
The depth of our faith can cause anything to happen. Sahaja yogis have many experiences of the
power of bandhan. "It was raining, we had to conduct a public programme outside. We gave a bandhan
and behold the sun suddenly appeared." "It hadn't rained for a long time, the crops were drying, we
gave a bandhan and it rained." Whenever Shri Mataji arrives or departs in any part of the world, the
weather shows exuberance and turns favourable. Very recently at Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella in August
it was very hot. There was the largest congregation of sahaja yogis. Sahaja yogis were even sleeping
in the open. Therefore it was important to have dry weather. The weather cooperated till the puja was
over. The next morning there was such a heavy downpour, but by then every one had left. The
temperature became very pleasant and heavenly. In September, Navaratri puja, Cabella it rained
throughout the music programme. But on the day of the puja the sun beamed everywhere and there
was no trace of any cloud in the sky. There are many other experiences where it was very hot and
Shri Mataji brought the temperature down by bringing down her right side. Thus we know very well
how nature is so obedient to her. Also there are the miracle photographs and thousands of cases
of healing. From these experiences our faith has grown into enlightened faith. We know that vibrations
actualise into reality, our pure desires. Our confidence in the power of the paramachaitanya has become
absolute. We apply its power not only to our problems but also to the problems of our society, country
and the whole world. Sometimes the paramachaitanya may take its time to work out things
need time to overcome negativity. We should remember that time is a human concept. Paramachaitanya
is beyond time. As our brain is monitored by time we bind ourselves in time schedules and are panicky
if things do not work out in those time schedules.
It may
However, since paramachaitanya is not bound by time it functions its own freedom. Maybe
something we wish to happen tomorrow may be worked out by the paramachaitanya after ten years.
For instance many things Shri Mataji told us ten years ago are happening now. Whatever paramachaitanya
takes up it achieves. It always keeps its commitments but it cannot be bound by time. Whenever it
performs is the right moment for that event.
For the moment our job is to put our attention to world problems and pray fervently to our Divine
Mother for the solutions. At our level we should continue giving bandhans and rely completely on the
paramachaitanya to work it out. Our Divine Mother is the Mightiest of the mighty and even the
impossible must yield to her or perish . We pray at her lotus feet and marvel at her miracles;
O Devi, Let our eyes only behold the world redeemed by your miracles, Let our ears hear only
your praise,
Let our lips only sing Thy glory.
Let our hands perform only Thy commands,
Let our existence be only to please you.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue 11
&12 1995
Sahasrara Day Puja
Pravachna (Talk) by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
foday, it's a great day because Sahasrara Day
T.
must be something that Would be just a very damaging
or could be very harsh, could create problems between
human beings which should not have. It was not meant
and Mother's Day have come together That's
I
à very Sakaja happening, I think and that is
what we have to understand, as to how Sahasrara to be but whenever they talked of truth, the people
and the Motherhood go together Sahasrara was
definitely opened and Mother had to do it. Because about human beings that they start using things for a
formerly those people who came on this earth, tried wrong attitude, for a wrong message, and try to use
to teach people about Dharma-to bring them to the it for their own purpose. It is such a common thing
Central path, to the straight forward path of ascent. with human beings that they want to have power over
used it for a wrong purpose. It is something special
They tried everything, whatever way they thought was other men.
good for a particular area, particularly community. Now, I have seen in my own country when people
particular country They talked about it and lots of wanted to have separate nations. Those people who
books came out of it. But instead of all these books wanted to have separate nations actually did it, not
creating people of religious, spiritual and a united to achieve anything great but just because they can
nature, created people who were all against each become something great in their own country. So they
other Absurd! It is an absurd thing. But it happened.
So all these books that were written, all this knowledge
that was given, was all misused by human beings, just countries, and by separating I have seen, all these
to get their own power, I should say. So it was all countries are suffering, suffering very much. There is
a power oriented, also money oriented game going no growth, they have financial problem, all kinds of
on When we see the outcome of all these religions, is
you feel it's all empty. They talk of love, they talk of suffering because they have now developed enmity
compassion but it all is for a purpose. It is all a and all this is working out against the main country
political game sometimes because they still feel that So to have a separatist idea itself is against Sahaja,
they should have power. Not the spiritual power, but say for example, a flower growing on the tree looks
never wanted to be in a country where they may not
rise to that height: So then, they separated those
problems are there And also the main country
the worldly power so that they can dominate the
whole world So this domination started working so
very nice, it develops there, matures there and it
produces seeds also. But, supposing you cut the flower,
and take it away, then what happens? The tree loses
the flower no doubt, but mostly, it is the loss of the
much in the human mind that we had lots of wars,
killings. all kinds of things And when it subsided. I
felt that now, may be, opening Sahasrara might help
flower Now, this they did all of them and when they
people to see the truth.
did it you see what is the result that people who tried
to have their own country, their own domain
At the level of Sahasrara you know the truth. So all
kinds of illusions, all kinds of misunderstandings, all
kinds of self imposed ignorance, they all have to
they
were killed, murdered abused and some of them are
o in jail So the attitude even outside Sahaja Yoga has
disappear Because, what you know is the truth. The shown that it doesn't help. So we must learn to be
truth is not sharp, its not harsh Ii is not something one So after Sahaja Yoga, after your Realisation, if
which is difficult to assimilate. People thought iruth you do not understand this message that we all have
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 11 & 12 1998
right thing to do, what is the best thing to do. But
after realisation in the light of the spirit you get the
truth and you know what is to be done. For example
after self realization you can judge people on their
to be one, one single unit, one single body, if you can
not be, if you are identified with other things, then it
is no way you have grown, you have not matured,
very important point.
vibrations. You don't have to use your brains for that.
On Sahasrara Day one has to understand that all
Just on your vibrations, immediately, you know what
the seven chakras have their pithas in the Sahasrara.
is wrong with yourself and with others. So here it
is a double correction. One is you see your own
midriff of your brain. And they act, through that area being, your own self, your self knowledge comes to
All the seven chakras are nicely settled down in the
wherever they are, on the chakras and work it out.
you and secondly you can also make out another
Now all these seven chakras become one I should
person-what sort of a things he is doing. If somebody
is not Sahaja, and claims to be Sahaja you can easily
say or go into unison. Complete integration takes
place in these centres. Because these are governed by
find out that he is not Sahaja, his behaviour is not
these seven main chakras we can call them, you can
Sahaja.
call them by any name, and they govern all the other
chakras and because they are in unison completely
integrated, that's why all your chakras are integrated, absolutely working out within ourselves. We should
So best thing is for all of us, is to get this integration
not shun it but we should accept that whatever defects
we have, whatever wrong we have been doing, what
Pithas which are enlightened I should say by
Kundalini, also blessed by the Divine power immediately
wrong thinking we had, whatever destructive we had
become integrated. They say that like pearls in one
taken to, all this has to disappear because you are
Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis have a special job to be
string. It is even more than that. All these pithas within
you get integrated in such a manner as if there is no
done. They are not like other people, who are just
difference in their manifestation. Supposing you
have
working for money, working for power, working for
a chakra which is not alright, something wrong domination, you are not. You are working in Sahaja
physically, mentally emotionally whatever it is. The Yoga for the emancipation of humanity. So whole
other chakras try to help this sick chakra and try to thing is that this Sahasrara is a global field where we
evolve a personality as a Sahaja Yogi in a way that enter in. We enter into a global field and when we
he is integrated. Now integration within yourself is are there, we just become ourselves, a global
very important. Unless and until you are integrated
personality. So all these minor things like your race,
your country, your religion and all these which are
artificial barriers between human beings just drop out
within yourself, you cannot be integrated outside
And the within yourself, the integration is such a blessing
of Sahaja Yoga that a person who gets this realisation
becomes a personality which is above the normal
personality. It is not attached to all the negative forces
become a realised soul and you know what
and
you
is humanity, you understand the humanity. This has to
happen in all the Sahaja Yogis - when they are
together. They should understand that we are not, no
the destructive forces. It just gives up so many things
which are normally very difficult to give up. All these
more ordinary human beings. We are special people,
seven chakras that we have within ourselves are then
guided by these pithas in unison. Just the help that Cchosen for a very special work, which is the most
comes from the unison, helps all the chakras to get
important thing today.
Now as you know what is going on in Kaliyuga.
I need not describe all that to you. But what is the
completely integrated. As it is we are not integrated
because our mind goes on one side, our body goes
on another side, our heart goes on another side, our
light of the spirit which is going to show you what you
can do to remove the ills of Kaliyuga. Starting right
emotions are different. We do not know which is the
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X issue: 11& 12 1998.
over Agnya, goes above and is now stationed in the
Sahasrara, in thoughtless awareness. Then the reality
of Sahasrara, the beauty of Sahasrara starts pouring
in your own character, in your own temperament.
Unless and until you meditate, not meditate just to get
well or just to feel that I was meditating but meditation
is very important for all of you that you develop your
Sahasrara in such a manner that you imbibe the beauty
of your Sahasrara. If you don't use your Sahasrara
in this way, after sometime you will find, Sahasrara
will close down. You will have no vibrations and you
will have no understanding of yourself So very very
important thing is to meditate. I can immediately make
out a person who has been meditating, and the one
who has not been meditating. Because a person who
does not meditate still thinks that oh it's all right,
am doing this, I am doing that.
from yourself, you just see for yourself, with great
amusement what you have been doing was all stupid
You should not have done that but you have been
doing, so it is alright, you can forgive others who are
dong it And you will understand that those who have
heen doing it, have been doing all this out of ignorance.
But now you have your Sahasrara open. In the
open Sahasrara divine is pouring its grace all the time.
With that reception, with that, we should say the
nourishing of your Sahasrara, what happens is something
really great One thing happens that you get detached
from yourself You can see yourself, You can see your
past, you can understand yourself that you have been
doing so many wrong things, and misunderstanding
people: This sometimes takes you too far away from
yourself But once this light comes, and the Sahasrara
is nourished, in that light you see clearly what wrong
Meditation is the only way you can enrich
you have been coing to yourself. Then as a person
you can see your faults. But also you see the faults yourself with the beauty of reality. There is no
other way, I can not find any other way but
of your society, where you live. I have seen
immediately after people get their realisation, they start meditation by which you rise into the realm of
telling me Mother I was a Christian but see this is divinity. For example, I would say, that myself whatever
Christianity. Somebody will say Mother I was very
I have done is this that I have been able to find out
a method-how to give you Self Realisation, to masses.
But that doesn't mean that if I give to masses, they
are all Sahaja Yogis. No. You must have seen whenever
patriotic but see now what patriotism is. Like that
everybody starts seeing its own background, its own
styles in which he has lived And Just gets out of it.
And Once you are out of it, its no more identified you have your programmes, people get realisation
when I am there and they come to programmes for
a while and then they drop off The Reason is that
they have not meditated. If they had meditated, they
would have known, what is their quality, what are
with you and it is such a spontaneous happening, only
thing you have to learn to be spontaneous. And that's
what I find that in Sahaja people, though they are out
of this ocean of illusion, still sometimes their one leg
is there in the ocean and still they are pulling it out they Without meditation you don't understand what is
and pushing it back That should not be. That is only best for you. So today is a day when you have to
because people don't meditate
promise me that you will meditate; every night, every
evening, may be in the morning also. Whenever it is
possible if you can go into meditative mood, you are
a kind of ritual, or may be a kind of a style of Sahaja in contact with this divine power. Then whatever
Yoga No: Meditation is for you to go deep down good for you, whatever is good for your society, for
into yourself, to achieve all that your Sahasrara wants your country, all is done by this divine power. You
to give. To achieve that height of detachment, of don't have to overpower the divine power, you don't
say you must meditate, people think it is
Now to
understanding is only through meditation So that have to order, you don't have to ask. Just if you
happens in meditation is that your awareness crosses meditate you are one with this all pervading power.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 11 & 12 1998
complete insight, what is happening, what the truth is,
about any situation. So this detachment helps, the
Unless and until your Sahasrara is open, all the greatest thing of the detachment is that you are not
which is another great blessings to us.
blessings of the divine power cannot come to you,
affected. No use saying that oh if you are not affected
Mother, so how can you feel for another person, how
can you have compassion for another person. Because
if you feel for another person then only you can solve
cannot, may be you might get some money you might
get some job you might get this and that. But your
own development is only possible when you meditate
and your Sahasrara is completely open and open to
truth. Now the truth is that this divine power is
compassion, is love. This is the truth. They say God
is love, God is truth. So the equation has to be made
that truth is love and love is truth. But it is not a truth
the problem. But this feeling that you have is again
a kind of an attachment. It is not a real feeling.
Because it doesn't help. The person is crying, you are
also crying. The person is in trouble you are also in
trouble. And this does not help that person; nor will
it help you. So to have detached in no way means
do not feel the another person. You do feel, you
GERT
that as you have for your children, you have for your
family. Attached love is not truth. If you are attached
you
to somebody then you never see the bad points of feel the agony of that person, the trouble of that
that person. If you are angry with somebody then
you can never see the good points of that person.
But it is a complete detached love and that love is
extremely powerful. Because wherever you project never full faith in the capability of this all pervading
that love to anyone, you will be surprised, the problems power. As soon as you are detached you say you do
of that person will be solved, his personality will it. Finished, once you say that you are going to do
improve, everything will work out in a very big way it, it is you who is going to do it - whole thing
and his life will be changed. But if you are attached changes completely. Because you transfer all your
to anything what so ever, that attachment itself causes responsibilities, all your problems to this divine power
problems and doesn't allow Sahaja to grow. This which is so powerful which is so capable, which can
attachment could be of any kind. For example you work out anything. So whenever you think that this
person, of the whole society sometimes and of the
whole country. But, that your feeling is so detached
that the all pervading power takes over. First we must
can be attached to your country, attached to your problem you are going to solve. You are the one who
society, attached to your family.
is going to do it then alright, Divine Power says,
alright try your luck. But if you can really put this
problem to the Divine power it will work out.
But when Sahasrara is open you learn one thing
is detachment. It just happens that you get detached.
Though I mean you are not running away. As it is in
Sahaja Yoga we don't believe in people, who run specially when we find that people are not so much
away from society and go to Himalayas. For that I attracted to Sahaja Yoga, they are few in number,
call it escapism. That is not the point, what happens then feel very bad about it. But have you tried
is that you are there you see everyone, watch everyone,
you know everyone, you are close to everyone but
you are a detached person. It is a state of mind that worry, when we have divine power available through
you achieve when Sahasrara is open. In that state, our Sahasrara. Why should we worry why should we
you are dealing with people, you are dealing with think about it? Just leave it to the Divine Power. If
problems, you are dealing with situations but you are that is possible if that you can achieve which is very
We have all Kinds of problems in Sahaja Yoga,
you
to meditate on this point, and have you tried to put
this problem to the divine power. Why should we
not involved in it. There is no involvement and that
difficult for human beings because they live with their
involvement which you had before can never give you
ego, they live with their conditionings. But if that
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Dlvine Cool Breeze Voluie:X Issue 11& 12 1998
leave it to this Divine Power to stop all these things
happening I don't want it to rain and to have any
problem till I come back home and go off to sleep.
attachment to all these things goes away, then what
you do is just leave things to this power. Krishna has
said in His Gita, 'Sarava Dharmanam Pratyajyam
Mamekam Sharnam Vaj
And it was surprising, people told me, that Mother
the clouds and everything were there, all throughout
Forget about all but it did not rain, did not do anything and there was
have a dharma of a wife, of a husband, of a member no chaos of any kind. He went to another island
of the society. All of them have their own dharma. But where he had to go, he did Sahaja Yoga and came
He says leave them and leave them to me and I will back. And then, when he went to sleep, then only
manage. This, we have to learn, is to say that it is everything started pouring down
the Divine Power which will solve our problems. As
human beings its a very dificult state, and this state
can only be achieved through meditation I am not
saying that you go on meditating for hours together
Not necessary, but with full faith in yourself and in the
your dharmas Dharmas means we
So nature, everything every leaf, every flower, every
thing is worked out through the Divine Power So we
should not have our ego that we can do something
ourselves we can manage ourselves. Onee you have
that kind of a thing you are not yet that much
developed, you are not that much grown in Sahaja
Yoga. But to grow up in Sahaja Yoga should not be
difficult for you because you have guidelines. Those
people who got their realisation, very few of them like
sufis and we had some saints in India, how much they
Divine Power, if you work it out, I am sure, it is not
difficult to rise to that state of consciousness. That is
what we have to achieve It is possible for men as
well as for women They don't have to think how can
we, Mother, do it All such people are no good for
Sahaja Yoga. Those who have diffidence about
nust have struggled, no body to guide them, nobody
to help them, no body to tell them about what they
can achieve and despite that they were very satisfied
themselves can not do anything But those who are
surrendered and those who are surrendered and those
who think they can do it, can manage all this transfer
of their power to the Divine power. Just put it on the people, very happy people. And they worked it out
so well, they saw the whole world with another angle
as you can also see. But they were not upset, and
Now supposing I have a car which can drive they had such self confidence, they had such knowledge
me down. So if I have a car, then 1 dont put of their own, that they achieved through their meditative
bullocks on it. I dont push my car, I just sit inside process and the way they have written bookS, some
and use it. In the same way if you heve this great of them are so great. It is very surprising now they
power around you, if your Sahasrara is ahsolutely. have achieved these great verses, such full of
then you will be knowledge One cannot understand that they had no
amazed how things work out for yourself. I will guidance, no body was to tell them. But one thing
Divine Power.
completely submerged in it,
give you an example of a Sahaja Yogi who is no more
now. He was a fisherman, ordinary fisherman but also
he was educated so he was working in a bank This Sahasrara, is the movement of your Agnya into
one, was going one day to do some Sahaja Yoga thoughts. That is the only thing that stops your entry
work, and he had to go by boat. So when he came into Sahaja Yoga. Thoughts are coming all the times
out he saw the whole place was clouded and it was because a human being is born who reacts to
about to burst out into a big havoc. So he get very everything React to this and react to that and thoughts,
much perturbed about it that what is this. His Sahasrara coming and thoughts going There is a big crowd of
was so open and good, immediately he said now I thoughts because of that your attention cannot cross
with them was that they always tried to look after
their Sahasrara. Now one thing is there, obstructing
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 11 & 12 1998
transfer, to give you all the help that you need through
the all pervading power. Your connection of Sahasrara
with the all pervading power is established and by that
you will be amazed how all these seven chakras work
for you, how they help you, how they try to give you
whatever is the real knowledge about everything. This
real knowledge that you get is very joy giving. You
can see this real knowledge in everything, you don't
have to start reading any book about it. In every
situation, and in every person, in every flower, in
every natural happening, you see clearly the hand of
the Divine. Once you see the hand of the divine, once
over Agnya and cannot reside in the Sahasrara.
So first of all one should see, what sort of thoughts
are coming. You have to condemn yourself sometimes.
You have to say what nonsense, what have I been
doing, what is the matter with me, how could I do
all that? Once you start doing that, these thoughts will
start disappearing. These thoughts are coming from
two angles- one from the ego and another from your
conditionings, and these are so much built up within
you, that they don't allow your agnya to be crossed.
That is why we have two bija mantras of 64, TH.
First one is when it is conditioning, you are endowed
with this kind of fear, I should not do like this, I
should not do like that, this is not allowed, that is not
you say that it is you, you do everything your ego
starts disappearing. Kabira has said something great
about this. He said that when the Goat is alive it goes
an saying I, #, #, I am, I am. But when it is
slaughtered and its intestines are made into strings,
which are used for cleaning the cotton, then it says
8, you are, you are, you are. See in this symbolic
way, they have suggested that you have to dissolve
allowed. That is the conditioning part of it. Conditioning
can be of many types. But the ego part is that I must
overpower everybody, I must get this, I must be able
to rule everyone. These two things are there in the
mind which are all the time crossing. So it is important
into this divine power. It is the divine power that does
everything. What am I, I was just a drop that fell into
that we should go into thoughtless awareness, and that
thoughtless awareness is the real way that your
Sahasrara can be nourished by the Kundalini. Because
this ocean of awareness of the divine power and that
Kundalini cannot go through, cannot pass through and
for that as I said, there are two bija mantras, one is
is taking over and working it out. That will help you
a lot to be a great Sahaja Yogi.
another is &H.
हम,
You develop curing powers but still you are not
proud of it. You develop off course awakening powers
So if you are conditioned, you are frightened, you
are afraid and you had ideas about yourself. These
days the way people are describing. They say, I am powers and you are not proud of it. You become
an extrovert, somebody will say I am introvert, really very very creative, extremely creative. But the
somebody will say, I am hippy. I am that, I am that, greatest thing happens to you that you become a
all kinds of things they can have attributed to global personality. So you start seeing the problems
themselves. But these ideas are all coming from outside, of every country, of every other nation where they
you are not proud of it. You develop so many creative
they are not from inside. To get to the inner side of have problems. But these problems when you see,
yourself, the subtler side of your being, you must you don't see like other people because others may
allow the Kundalini to go through the Agnya.
like to use it for their own purpose, may be for media,
To cross the Agnya is a very important thing in the may be for something. What you want to see is that
modern times. And for that you have to meditate. If these problems are solved. Your powers are so great
you can meditate with complete faith in yourself, with this kind of a mind I would say which is
this agnya can be opened up. You have to surrender dominated completely by the Divine power that
yourself to the Divine and when this Agnya opens,
whatever disturbs you is immediately taken over, and
it starts working out.
will be amazed, your Sahasrara is just waiting to
you
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 11 & 12 1998
You will be surprised I have got so many letters
from people, how Sahaja has helped them. How, at
Many problems have been solved by Sahaja Yogis,
and also they can be solved on a very universal level,
if you are a global person. If you are a global person the right moment they got the help at the point of
then what happens is that you become sort of a complete destruction, how they were saved. So many
vehicle or you can become like a channel for this people have written to me but I am not surprised
because if you are one with the divine, it looks after
Divine power to act because you are purely a global
personality. Not attached to this, attached to that but
you. It has all the powers, all the powers, only one
pure Sahaja personality which can be used by this power it doesn't have, to control, if you went to ruin
divine power very easily. For that as I told in the yourself it gives you freedom, complete freedom. If
afternoon also that we have to be careful about few you want to ruin yourself, ruin. If you don't want to
things that we have. Firstly anger, anger is the worst accept divine power, alright, don't accept. It is a
thing that we have. Angry for what? There are people complete freedom to do what you like with yourself.
That is one thing it has given and that is why, you
must curb down that freedom and respect the divine
who talk like this 'I was very angry. They are proud
of their anger. Anger is a sign of complete stupidity,
absolute stupidity. There is not need to get angry with
power.
anyone. Because by anger you don't solve the problem.
With anger you spoil yourself, with anger you ruin
your own nature, with anger you really spoil the whole
situation. So no use having any anger-about anything
But if anything happens that angers you, you should
settle down and see for yourself why is it wrong, why
it is disturbing you. Your seeing itself will help this
Today is, I should say Mothers day also. Because I
think only a mother can work it out that way, one has
to have lot's of patience. What I have seen about all
these great incarnations who came, they just disappeared
in a very short time they lived, very short time.
Somebody was crucified at about 33 years of age.
Somebody took a samadhi at 23 years of age. Because
problem to be solved. You must first of all, realise that
I think they couldn't bear, the way the people were
you are a special personality, that your Sahasrara has stupid.? They couldn't see the point that they could do
been opened out, to this all pervading divine power, something for human beings. They lost their confidence
as if you have entered into the realm of divinity. You I think or may be they thought it is useless to work for
are a great guest, in the great court of divine domain. these people. Like that they took a position that it is
You are not an ordinary person, and so once you better to disappear. But mother's position is different.
understand why you have Sahaja Yoga and why you She will go on struggling and fighting for her child. She
have got realisation, is that there is something special. will fight it out to the last to see that the child gets all
But that should not give you any ego. It is not for the benefits, and this patience, and this love and this
ego that you have to have this but it is for understanding forgiveness is innately built in a mother. Because her
you have to play into the hands of the divine. It attitude is very different, not any achievement, not any
that
is this play, something I could explain like this that,
big name or what you call a sort of an award or anything.
It is just she does it because she is a Mother, and that
is what is a sign of any mother, is a real Mother, at least
if you are supposing an artist, then in the hand of the
artist is the brush and the brush never thinks that it
is doing anything. It is the artist who is doing everything.
In the same way when you are one with the divine
power, you just feel 1 am not doing anything. It is the
artist who is doing. It is the artist who is managing
& who is the artist? It is this Divine Power which
for her own children she will go all out. She will work
out everything, day in & day out and try to save the
child from disaster. But Sahaja Yoga is a much bigger
family and for that you really have to be worked out
through the Mother's principle. You cannot take any
loves you, which cares for you, which looks after you,
which absolutely is identified with you.
other principle. Like there were very great warriors we
had and they have done a great job and have worked
00
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X
lEsue 11 & 12 1998
who are affectionate and then gradually all these
complicated people will also join Your way of dealing
with others has to be motherly Motherly relationship
has to be there, I was surprised that in a Western
literature don't find any description of a child and a
mother's relationship. Very surprising There is no
description at all, how the mother sees the child, how
he walks, how he falls down then how he gets up, and
out as warriors, then we had some who were very
sacrificing, all kinds of people they had They worked
very hard to establish Dharma in people. but they could
not
I thought of one thing that no uIse establishing dharma
First of all give them realisation. When in the light of the
spirit they see what is wrong they became dharmic
automatically Best way is to do that, not to force dharma
on them. Because you put dharma on them, they don't
how he talks. All kinds of beautiful things have been
described but not in the wvestern countries. I don't know,
know how to bear it, they can't digest So this will be
they never saw this point I think. That is very important.
that to describe the attention of a mother. How she is
loving, how she is kind, how she tolerates so much
nonsense and how she keeps it as sort of a forgiving
thing, Not just to use it against the child or to trouble.
Sometimes you have to correct, you have to tell but at
the right time, at a right place if they are told the child
also sees the point whatever is there
the best way, is to just make them aware of their spirit.
Once the light of the spirit comes, in the light they see
everything clearly then no problem is there and that's
why this Mother's quality is very helpful. I mean in
every country there has been a manifestation of the
Mother's principle, in every country, and it has been
depicted and said, but later on it was taken over by
people who didn't want to talk about Mother. Because
they could not justify themselves, the way they were
behaving. So they said best is not to talk of the Mother
The first most convincing thing is the affection and
the love of the Mother She goes on forgiving and giving
that assurance that I have a mother. Nothing can happen
Also those who are very much advanced people,
very mature, who were really incamations did talk about and this assurance works very well. But the same
the Mother all the time but still talk was talk Now this assurance you have to give to other Sahaja Yogis who
has to be worked out as a Mother has to do So in are getting realisation from you Let them feel that you
your own way when you are doing Sahaja Yoga, there are not angry with them. They are stupid I know, they
also you have to be a Mother More Mother's quality are sometimes violent, I have gone through all kinds of
then the Father's quality. That there is no ambition, people. But the only thing that has worked is pure love,
there is no competition, there is no jealousy, nothing pure love has no attributes of expecting something You
Just you want your children to come up and to grow in Just give love & try to improve that person with full
their spirituality If that is the only attitude we have then attention But in divine work you don't have to get
you will be amazed how satisfied you will feel because attached to that person.
this is a very very joy giving thing to see people growing
in spirituality. Not only talking about it, not only reading point, is also troublesome, gets angry with you, annoys
about it, but actually happening, actualizing within you and insults you, so forgot it, there are many others.
yourself. So this quality is very helpful and that really There is no need to run after one person, to get attached
helps every Sahaja Yogi - to be patient, to be kind, to
be humble but you have to correct also. There is a way Sahaja Yogis always feel that I am their own which is
of correction of another person, of people who are a fact whether I talk to you whether I meet you or
coming not from the divine world but from the normal whatever it is, you have to know that I am your Mother
world. So it's a difficult task to correct them. Some And any problem you have you can always tell me. But
people are so hot tempered they can't bear it Doesn't sometimes the way people tell me problems also. I fel
matter, you have to forgive them. But best is to how low they are. Their mentality is so low, what are
concentrate on people, who are simple, who are loving. they asking me. Supposing you go to some king and
Supposing, there is somebody who is not up to the
to that person. Now main thing is that I feel all the
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X issue 11 & 12 1998
ask him, say, for half a dollar. What will the king say, well.
what is the matter with this person. He doesn't know,
what he should for? In the same way, one feels that is growing, and you are part and parcel of that society
way that when you are asking anything to your Mother, which is Sahaja Yoga. It is a very rare society, which
it should be of some value. Some great value, it should they never had. They had one or two sufis here and
have the value of complete satisfaction When you ask there, one or two realised souls here and there, who
It is what we have to think globally that Sahaja Yoga
for something it should give you complete satisfaction only suffered. All their lives they were tortured. No
But I have seen people asking for this thing, for that body looked at them. I had great hopes about
thing I mean it is to such an extent that sometimesI Maharashtra but I was so disappointed because they
feel, oh God, how am I getting all these people around
me, who are desiring something very low, very mean,
very insignificant. But if you are one with the Sahasrara.
then Sahasrara itself works. It will bring you in contact
with such people that you are amazed, how it works?
I went to Turkey and my experience of Turkey has
proved that beyond doubt. I never expected but the
Turkish people of all the people of the world have taken
to Sahaja Yoga just like a windfall, can't understand,
how they have accepted, and they were at least 2000
people in the follow up and people were finding it
impossible to get them around and tell them. And when
they had very close meetings also they had so many
people, and they continue to be there. Now, may be
that it is a very disturbed country, with fundamentalism
tortured all these great saints, all throughout, so badly,
in such a mean manner that I think they are still paying
for it. And despite the fact that I have done so much for
them, what I feel is that their Karmas are not good
because they still, I would say, it is a rotten country It
t
has become so rotten. You can see that the way people
are behaving, whole thing is so bad. Though Sahaja
Yoga is there, no doubt but I would not say it is of that
level as it is in the North, North of India. Very surprising,
North Indians never know anything about Sahaja Yoga.
They were not such religious people either, but how the
North people have taken to Sahaja Yoga is very
surprising. So you can't say where the light will show.
Just can't say, and wherever it shows we should accept.
Where it doesn't show, we should not feel bad about
very much working out.
it What can you do? You can not, sort of, break their
heads for Sahasrara. Their Sahasrara has to be opened
out and with your motherly love, with your motherly
understanding I am sure you can do it. May not be, to
the same extent in every country but I am sure I feel
that may be the 'punayas" of these great saints will
work. And may be where I felt little bit disappointed,
I feel that all these places will work out and Sahaja
But everywhere, every country has problems and
has, you should say, a kind of very destructive image-
every country has. But in some countries I do not know
how it sparks, and once they become Sahaja Yogis, no
problem. There is no problem about anything if they are
Sahaja Yogis. You see you don't have to tell them.
They themselves work it out. They understand it, what
Yoga will grow. But first and foremost is your Sahasrara.
Only your Sahasrara can reflect the light of divine. So
your Saharara is extremely important. You must meditate
to enrich your Sahasrara, to cure it, to make it completely
nourished by the Kundalini. There is no need to do
is it? Like we have every country which has problems.
which has people who are not of a very great level,
who are not great seekers. May be in some countries.
I feel those who were great seekers are lost. Like
England I feel that all the seekers are lost by drugs.
hippism, all nonsense America is the worst of all which
many rituals but meditation and also little bit of taking
bandhan, even now, today is necessary I think when
you go out because still Kaliyuga is working its own
is so much lost into wrong seeking and it is difficult to
find people there who have right seeking. Gradually it
is working out, but still I must say, we should not think
pangs and the Satyayuga is trying to come up. We are
the ones who are going to support, look after the
of any one particular country where Sahaja Yoga is not
working out so much or in some places working out so
Satyauga and that is why Sahasrara opening is very,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 11 & 12 1998
that reaction is not there, then everything, you will be
surprised, is divine, because reaction is your Agnya's
problem. Once you are absolutely thoughtlessly aware,
you are one with the divine So much so that Divine
takes over every activity, every moment of your life and
looks after it and you feel cormpletely secured, one with
the Divine and enjoy the blessings of the Divine.
very important. It is very important and those who want
to grew should meditate every day Whatever time you
may come home, may be in the moming may be in the
evening, any time but you will know that you are
meditating when you can get into thoughtless awareness
Then you will know, your reaction will be zero. Look
at something, you will just look at it, you will not react
because you are thoughtless. You won't react, when
May God Bless You!.
Dear Sahaji Brother/Sister
The purpose of the Divine Cool Breeze is to communicate to all the seekers the Divine Knowledge being revealed by our
Divine Mather in her pravachanas (talks) delivered all over the world, and also to keep them informed about the
developments in Sahaja Yoga, miracles and events that occur, and news from various Sahaja Countries. Sahaja Yogis
from all over the world are encouraged to oontribute articles for publication.
This being the last issue öf the year 1998, your subscription ends with it Please renew your Membership tor the year
1999. Enclosed herewith is the Renewal Form.
Annual Subscription is as under-
Rs. 300/-
Rs. 300/-
Rs. 500/-
The Divine Cool Breeze
Chaltanya Lahiri
For both- (D.C.B. & C.L)
The above amount should be sent by M.O. or payee A/c Demand Draft, payable at Delh/New Delhi along with completed
farm to-
The Divine Cool Breeze,
C-17, Institutional Area,
(Behind Qutub Hotel)
New Delhi 110 016
Your suggestions/complaints/articles, if any maybe addressed to-
Mr. O.P. Chandna
463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi-110034
Tel. 7013464
(Subscription Form)
(To be filled in Capital Letters)
Name
Complete Address with Pin Code
Phone
Date
Amount of Subscription
D.D.No.
(D.C.B)/C.L)/ Both
Magazine subscribing for
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X issue 11 & 12 1998
12
Shri Mataji's 75th Birthday Celebrations
(Penned by Western Sahaja Yogis)
eventy-five years after the birth of Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi, Her children from the Nation of it's open. Sitting on the earth and appreciating the
Vishwa Nirmala Dharma have followed the speed with which agitation and tension are absorbed-
course of many rivers to arrive at the shores of one Mother India. Things forgotten in our daily life suddenly
The heart doesn't have time to think about opening.
sea, assembling from the far-flung corners of the Earth
to celebrate, worship, and gve our heartfelt thanks for
come back and make sense again. The world is
changing. We are instruments for a new age.
Her birth.
It appeared that every Sahaja Yogi whom one had
How to begin to describe such a rich and condensed met during the past 18 years of India Tours was
experience? This is a mixture of journal entries and present. Yogis who had not come to India for many
recollections of the six-day festivities marking the 75th vears had come to pay homage to Shri Mataji.
birthday of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, on March 20-
While walking around the camp one could not
proceed for more than a few metres before there
Prior to arriving in India all indications suggested would be a reunion with an old friend, with much
that we would be taking part in a celebration the likes back slapping, re-establishing old friendships. Time
26. 1998.
of which had never been seen before: The significance
of Shri Mataji's 75th birthday had not been missed
The call had been made and answered, with Yogis 20 vears in some cases, pleasant reminiscences of
was spent in earnest dialogue about all manner of
matters Sahaja during the past five, ten, 15, and even
from all nations making their wvay to India, the birthplace
of Our Holy Mother Once again embarking upon a This seemed to be a retrospective occasion, faces
pilgrimage to our spiritual birthplace, to place our féet in the crowd discussing past Tours and
upon the Holy Earth of an ancient land, and travel experiences of Sahaja Yoga in their countries, old
upon the path leading to that place set aside for Shri
days gone by, and hopes expressed for the future:
milling
friendships rekindled, and new ones formed.
Mataji's worship.
The Nizamuddin camp has taken on a family
It has been said that it is Shri Mataji who invites nerspective with the presence of the Dharamasala
us to India to perform Her puja. She arranges for our
leave. for the required funds to be present, for all
school children. In earlier times Sahaja Yoga was
comprised of many young single people, but as the
necessary things to be done. We answer the eall, and
follow the path fashioned for us
Yogis have matured and begun families, the next
generation of Sahaja Yogis are being introduced to the
pilgrimage to India perhaps at a much younger age
than any of us would have envisaged Our children
have become familiar and comfortable with all aspects
of camp life, totally happy and joyous in each others'
company, indifferent to any hardship or discomfort
Sahaja Yogis from all over the world began
assembling at the Nizamuddin Scout camp in Delhi in
Tnumbers unseen before. Over 1,000 foreign Sahaja
Yogis, and more than 7,000 Indian brothers and sisters,
all converging to be present before Shri Mataji
The children operate at a level of unqualified
acceptance of each other as members of their
Here we are. "Ohhh!" "Hey. hello!" "Ah!" and
meeting more old triends than one could imagine.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X issue 11 & 12 1998
The first group of speakers were Western leaders
who spoke of their love for Shri Mataji. As one said,
it was like being a grain of sand standing before
Mount Kailasha Shri Mataji has shown us the path
to Heaven within our heart. Another said that She has
collective, accommodating all facets of each others'
personality They possess a beautiful and natural
affection for each other which allows them to avoid
the disputes one normally sees between young children
They live day by day within a natural and spontaneous
universal brotherhood, united in their Sahaja collectivity
They teach us that the things that divide us are an
illusion, and the most important union we have beyond
that with Shri Mataji is with each other. Shri Mataji
once said our children would be teaching us how
Sahaja Yoga should be
freed us of our confines and has brought lasting peace
words being inadequate to express our feelings of love
and gratitude, but with a humble heart we bow before
.
Her.
One most moving speech eame from Philip, the
leader of Germany, who revealed the dilemma he had
practiced.
Friday, 20th march The Felicitation been facing on the plane on the way to India. He,
as welll as the other leaders, had been asked to:
Ceremony
prepare a short speech, not to exceed three minutes,
as there were so many speakers and time was limited.
The formal part of the celebration began during the
early evening hours with the commencement of the
Felicitation program The scenes prior to the start of
the program wvere indicative of the coming seven days:
enormous numbers of people arriving at the camp 20th century "in only three minutes"? He concluded
the program, long queues forming at the two entrances that even with all the powers She has bestowed upon
to the pendal, space within the pendal in short supply. us it was not possible to express everything to Her
access restricted to those displaying their registration in only three minutes. With his humour, he had hit
Thus he agonized over how to thank Shri Mataji for
all She has done "in only three minutes " How to
thank the Primordial Mother for taking birth in the
for
badges.
upon the essential, and with such depth..
Shri Mataji arrived to find the pendal absolutely
full, with hundreds of people standing along the outer
Those of us who were sitting close to the stage
were able to notice the amazement and awe in the
perimeter of the pendal and large crowds outside
unable to gain entry.
faces of these politicians and dignitaries while the
Sahaja Yogis were speaking These dignitaries were
Many prominent Indian politicians and citizens were all very deeply touched to see the miracle of people
invited to speak, as well as several of the country from all over the world being so united, without regard
leaders in Sahaja Yoga. Several messages were read to age, colour, nationality, race or any other artificial
out or synopsized from various people who could not barriers These people have probably heard many
attend the ceremony, such as the President and Vice lectures about unity and integration, but never saw the
President of India, who sent greetings and gratitude
for Shri Mataji's "selfless service to mankind"; Claes
realization of these lofty dreams.
A minister from the BJP party spoke of the universal
Nobel, who sent congratulations and said that all the
members of the "one big family united by the earth" message of love which is at the core of Shri Mataji's
were present in spirit at the ceremony. Ayatollah life and Sahaja Yoga, so evident in the nature of the
Rouhani, and a cabinet minister of U.P. The yogi people gathered from around the world He said he
reading these messages told us that Shri Mataji had was a person new to Sahaja Yoga, and it was difficult
received thousands of letters, telegrans, e-mails, and
to understand how people could gather from the far
reaches of India for this weekend. Yet people had
come from more than 50 nations to be present, which
faxes from the four cormers of the world, wishing Her
a Happy Birthday.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue: 11 & 12 1998
He said, "I would like to go one step further, and
in itself spoke of the universal nature and appeal of
Sahaja Yoga. With this degree of dedication, the
transformation of the world could now be possible. humans achieves their self realization, and then until
say that may You live until every one of the five billion
every one of them is established in Sahaja Yoga, and
Other dignitaries spoke in their native tongue about then live on to make sure everyone is continuing to
the importance of Shri Mataji, not only to India, but dwell in the right path. He concluded by saying that
the entire world. They all remarked on the love and until this point he had considered himself as an
compassion of "the Mother," and one mentioned that
he was not here to thank Shri Mataji, because a son
never thinks of thanking his mother. he takes her for
apprentice vogi, but he asked us to now accept him
as a Sahaja Yogi. Tears rolled down many cheeks as
we stood to applaud this very great saint.
granted. He was here, he said, to ask for more and
Several books were released, and then it was time
more of Her love and blessings.
for Shri Mataji Herself to speak. It was almost like
Mr. Rajesh Shah concluded by saying that Sahaja a public program, in that She directed Her speech to
Yoga had literally transformed the lives of millions of yogis as well as the non-yogis present She said that
people the world over and tonight we, their all of the problems of the world come because the
representatives had come to pay our respects and
give thanks to Shri Mataji. He said now a million
people have been transformed but there are five billion
attention is outside, and that we have to be one with
our spirit. She also told the politicians present in a
stern yet maternal way, that they must not avoid the
people remaining.
importance of spiritual life.
All of the speeches were moving and came directly
from the heart. The surprise came when Sir C.P. all that was needed, but through the richness of our
stood up to say a few words and addressed his wife hearts, our love has spread throughout the world,
as Shri Nirmala Mataji. It was the first time he had reaching people, who have never before known the
ever addressed Her as Mataji. and he explained
that, "I think, on the occasion of Her 75th birthday. all manner of destructive habits which arose through
Shri Mataji said, alone She could not have done
spirit. In the light of the spirit people have given up
that the time has come to surrender Myself fully to
frustration, and a kind of loneliness. The time has
Her" (Big applause ) He described the "Divine Lady"
and Her very devoted and very persistent hard work.
to establish Sahaja Yoga. He spoke of his days in developing a universal mind directed towards the spirit
London where he saw Shri Mataji's ability to transform
people into veritable glowing flowers of humanity, done
through Her overriding sense of love and compassion
He told a few anecdotes in his inimitable style, to a that it covers all the corners of the world, and creates
rapt audience, and exclaimed that it was a "gathering a beautiful world of tomorrow.
of angels. a part of heaven presided over by the
Divine Herself"
come where Sahaja Yoga has to be worked out at
a global level, which can be done by collectively
Shri Mataji concluded by saying, "I wish you a
great growth in your spiritual life, your spirituality. so
To conclude the program a most moving and stiring
rendition of lande Mataram was sung The entire
Quoting an Urdu couplet. Sir CP said to Shri audience stood, and as if Mother India herself was
rising in all Her stature, strength and splendour, Shri
Mataji stood with awe-inspiring dimension. It was a
Mataji what we all had in our hearts:
I Was
May You live ren thousand years
most moving and poignat moment as Shri Mataji
And may each year of Your life last fifty sang with the audience the spiritual anthem of India
Thюusand years.
with full voice before Her who is Mother India, and
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 11 8 12 1998
15
Again Shri Mataji's talk was almost like a public
forget. This memorable evening was conceived with program, so universal and touching on so many practical
the utmost regard for its significance, meticulousły things. She again spoke about turning the attention
towards the spirit. When this happens we enter into
the state known as Ginateet, which is beyond the
all nations. It was a moment those present will never
planned, and executed with love:
Saturday, 21st March The Puja
three gunas, beyond the desires of the three gunas
Our attention moves beyond our conditionings and the
From early morning the camp began to swell to even
greater proportions than seemed possible, as Sahaja
qualities of the ego that have dominated us Then
Kalateet, beyond time, where the past or present no
Yogis continued to arrive from all over India. An
Tonger binds us, and we become responsible for the
present moment Then Dharmateet, beyond human
expectant air hung around the camp as we prepared
for Puja It seemed most appropriate that the maximum
nature, beyond dharma, meaning we are not bound to
any particular pattern, or ritual, entering that awareness
number of people possible would gather to celebrate
the 75th Birthday Puja.
where all solutions arise. In some cases dharma may
Puja was scheduled to commence at 7 p.m. By 5 become a ritual or a conditioning of the mind and
p.m the queue to enter the pendal extended for over becomes nonsensical
half a kilometre, indicative of the general awareness
that the capacity of the venue may not adequately someone who enjoys everyone and every situation. A
match the collective desire of those wishing to be realized soul sees himself, what is wrong, and knows
Shri Mataji went on to say that a Sahaja Yogi is
present. By 6 p.m the pendal was completely füll with
thousands of people still queuing to gain entry. The
when to correct himself In Sahaja Yoga we have
become the spirit and then everything changes. our
audience was continually nsked to move forward to
genes change, we become people who know joy, can
extract all available space to accommodate those still
outside Crammed to bursting in the hot, hot pendal
no question of big bags placed out on either side-
give joy, and who enjoy the company of others. Then
we can live anywhere, sleep anywhere, beeause our
everyone with a shawl, a bottle of water, and their spirit is always with us to give happiness. Then we
knees up to their chest We waited for a miraculous become one with all Sahaja Yogis, crossing the
extension of the pendal, which did not materialize By boundary which stops one from seeing the truth.
7 p.m. the pendal was fill like never before, with over
seven thousand people inside, and a further three sari held up by seven ladies. The photographs at the
thousand that would view the puja via remnote television
The puja itself was quite short, without the traditional
end were long as usual, but there was not, the mad
efnd
monitors stationed in the courtyard.
rush to the stage, especially as the decor had cleverly
incorporated potted plants which completely covered
Shri Mataji arrived at 7.45 p.m. with Her family
welcomed by a procession of flags of all nations and
yogis dressed in colourful traditional national costumes.
the front steps of the stage. blocking access from this
direction. Balloons were popped with great gusto on
all sides of the pendal, in a collective effort to symbolize
The flags were presented to Shri Mataji before the
commencement of the Puja Shri Mataji asked that
these flags be carried back to their countries with the
message that the time has come for our resurrection.
the deflating of the Ego.
At the conclusion of the puja, the international gift
was presenteda very large oil painting (large enough
to fill an entire wall, like a mural) with large figures
of Shiva and Parvati in the centre, surrounded. by
small scenes depicting stories of Shiva. The painting
We should rise to a higher level of existence where
everything in our lives will change to reflect the beauty
of the inner life of the spirit.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 11 & 12 1988
16
not be room enough for physical comfort, but little did
we care for there was no other place we wished to
be. Evenings were taken up with listening to the music
of the Divine within a heavenly court surrounded by
the saints of this age.
several centuries old. was originally hung in a palace
in Tanjore Then representatives from many nations
queued in alphabetical order to present their gifts to
Shri Mataji The offering would take over two hours
as the nations of the Sahaja world bowed before Our
Holy Mother.
The decor in the pendal, and the speed with which
Many of the gifts were made by the Yogis of the it was remade each day, was something extraordinary.
presenting nations which seemed most appropriate and Flower chains by the hundreds, balloons, sparkling
pleasing to Shri Mataji. These included pieces made stars, and the styrofoam-oh, what they could do
by children, woven fabric, and beautifully constructed with styrofoam! The most exquisite murals, borders.
and decorated furniture A young Malaysian boy pillars, friezes-all made out of painted styrofoam.
presented an inspirational painting depicting Shri Mataji Small trees as well as rock gardens formed part of
in a selection of Her aspects from this incarnation: the decor, and the flowering plants which lined the
scenes from Her youth, Her married life with Sir stairs seemed to grow inches every day with the
C.P. the freedom struggle, aspects of Her work vibrations. After three days, the top row of plants had
establishing Sahaja Yoga, followed at the highest level gotten so high that it had to be removed so that the
by Her Divine aspects
audience could see the performers!
As for what happened to the decorations as they
This was a fitting conclusion to the occasion of the
were removed and changed each day, well, one yogini
spotted a small Indian boy near the Nizamuddin
roundabout, walking with a big smile on his face
75th Puja celebration of the birth of Shri Adi Shakti
Nirmala Devi.
Sunday, 22nd March
The Celebrations Continue
carrying a huge set of styrofoam tablas.
Never, ever, in one's wildest dreams, could we
imagine that there would be so many artists of such
completely astounding accomplishment in their field
Each night there were at least five performances of
either classical dance or music, as well as performances
by the students of the Nagpur Academy and some of
Following the Puja, birthday celebrations continued
for another five days-music programs from the 22nd
through the 26th. The pattern of the days to come
would be generally similar. free time during the days,
music throughout the evening and into the early hours
of the morning.
the Western Sahaja Yogis. It was like having a huge.
Some spent their days shopping in Delhi, some exquisite banquet spread out in front of you and,
parents went with their children to the zoo and to because it is such rich, nourishing and satisfying food,
other attractions around the city Those immune to the you would be completely full even with a small serving
shopkeepers' lure spent pleasant hours in the camp,
sun high in the sky overhead, whiling the hours away as we saw our limited attention get "full up" on the
under the cool shade of trees, conversing with friends. nourishing food by about 2 or 3 o'clock in the morming
Shadows would find that the day had gone, time
slipped away, hours, days. the week would fall, and
one would be spent this way, bathing in the waters creaked from sitting for such a long time, and we
At times we wished for a greater absorption capacity,
Each night's program began 6 p.m. and carried on
to 3 to 4 or 5 o'clock in the morning. The bones
of Sahaja collectivity.
enthusiastically took every chance we could to stretch
It would be not quite dark, approaching evening.
our legs, staying on our feet long after the standing
ovations had died down. In fact we waited until Baba
i we would assemble at the pendal. There would
when
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
Divine Cool Breeze Volume:X Issue 11 & 12 1998
were well received In fact, each night as the
performances carried on, people started saying to each
other how much they would love to attend the academy,
even people who had not previously been attracted
to Indian music or dance. He expressed Shri Mataji's
wish that there be 100 students at the academy, and
after the birthday concerts, circumstances pemitting,
there would be 5,000 students waiting to register.
Mama insisted that we sit back down before doing
SO.
It was noticeable that virtually every artist had a
deep recognition of Shri Mataji, far beyond the usual
politeness with which artists greet a spiritual personality
Many of them said a few words before beginning
their performance, and it was such a joy to hear them
praising the Goddess, as well as thanking Her for
helping them to perform at their best, which they all
said they did when it was in front of yogis and in the
During one of the concerts Baba Mama said that
once he had asked Shri Mataji to stop time, She said
that if She stopped time then there would be no
moments where we could feel joy, no opportunity to
change our fate. We need time in order to improve
presence of Shri Mataji The contrast with performers
in the West was striking one visualizes a singer taking
his final ego-inflating bow, separating himself from the
audience, versus these performers who with great and to change our destiny.
reluctance came forward to be applauded, and who
saluted us with folded hands, as if to thank us for performance on shehenai by Pandit Jaggannath Mishra
The first evening's program began with a
listening and being part of the experience. Such beautiful
humility, and such music! At times during the concerts,
one went so deeply into meditation that it was difficult
to know where the music ended and our spirit began,
and party, who hail from Uttar Pradesh. He is a
disciple of Anant Lal who is a disciple of Bishmillah
Khan. It was a virtuoso performance of Raga
Madhvanti and Raga Marubihag, both meditative
such was the complete union of the two. This must
be what listening with the Kundalini is, instead of then performed a bhajan and seemed appreciative of
and moving and much enjoyed by the audience. He
merely with the ears
the audience's warm reception.
Sir C.P. and Kalpana Didi and Sadhana Didi all
seemed to enjoy the programs very much Their Kadkade who again displayed his classical virtuosity
appreciation for Indian classical music and dance was with a rendition of Dhannakani Kalya followed by
evident in their responsive and attentive listening bhajans. His sensitivity to the spirit of the Indian
throughout the performances. It was sweet to see Sir classical tradition was evident to all present.
C.P and Shri Mataji sitting together, occasionally leaning
This was followed by a vocal performance by Ajit
Ms. Vanaji Vdaya treated us to a performance of
towards one another to comment about the music.
Kuchipudi dance. She captivated us with the elegance
and poetry of her performance, depicting the leela of
Krishna and Yeshoda This was followed by a dance
share a smile, or take a handful of chanas together
At certain times the yogis spontaneously started
clapping with the rhythm of the music. It seems we
of the Devi to the music of Ai Giri Nandini. The
have come a long way since the days when Baba dance was most expressive in conveying the fierce
in Her role as both protector
the beat instead of around it. He was the Master of and destroyer. The union of dance, rhythm, body and
Ceremony for the proceedings each night, and it facial expressions helped create the image of She
couldn't have been more graciously and appreciatively who is the support of the universe, and who vanquishes
done. One felt such a love for this uncle who has with a mere glance Shri Mataji was most appreciative
done so much to spread music in Sahaja Yoga, His of the performance and was later to say it was the
first occasion that She had seen a dance performance
aspects of the Devi
Mama desperately tried to get our clapping to fall with
frequent "advertisements" for the Nagpur Academy
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-19.txt 
 18
Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X losus
11 & 12 1998
of Ai Giri Nandini.
The next artist to take the stage was Satish Vyas
who performed on the santoor, The intricacies and
The concluding performance for the evening was a
selection of Western classical orchestral pieces
performed by a collective of western classicists. They
first played the Spring element form Vivaldi's Four
subtlety of the instrument did take some time to tune
and setup, but the wait was worthwhile as he enchanted
the audience with an interpretation of Kaunsi Kamuda
Ms Meena Patarpekar then presented a classical vocal
Seasons This was followed by selections from
Sammartini, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky Shri Mataji was
very pleased that the Indian Sahaja Yogis had been
presented with an opportunity to appreciate these
great western composers. The evening ended with a Mrs. Zarin Daruwala who Shri Mataji first heard
rendition of Vinati Suniye, accompanied by the perform as a child prodigy in 1960 with Baba Mama
audience who sang with full voice, providing a stirring Since that time she has won numerous awards for her
finale to a memorable evening
performance of Maru-Bihag, followed by a rendition
of Hasat Ali
The last performance for the evening was from
playing. She heralded the early hours of the moning
with a subtle and sensitive interpretation of Raga Jog
She also received a standing ovation.
Monday, 23rd March
The evening's concert began at 5:30 with two hours
Tuesday, 24th March
of music from Nimal Sangeet Sarita. The first performer
was Gaby (Govind) Jasray who performed Raga Jog.
followed by Dhananjay Dumar who Played a Raga roused itself into normal routine morning meditation,
Jahansamohini on the synthesiser, followed by Brahma early morning showers, and breakfast queues swelled
Shodhile. He was succeeded by a vocal piece by by those who had missed the previous evening's meal
Mrs. Basu. Nirmal Sangeet Sarita and the students
of the Academy then took the stage, and our hearts, of music from Nirmala Sangeet Sarita. The first
with a performance of the qawwali, Tu Duniya Men performer was Mr. Nicholas Buff who performed on
Considering the previous late evening, the camp
The evening concert began at 6:00 with two hours
Aaya,
the saxophone accompanied by Sandesh Popatkar.
Nicholas demonstrated a profound understanding,
sensitivity and proficiency in Indian classical music
earned through many years of study at the academy.
The group featured a Romanian now living in France
currently studying at the Academy. He was a founding
member of the Romanian Qawwali group. It was a
most impressive performance, and a clear demonstration
of the work the Academy is doing in preserving and
spreading the classical traditions of Indian muSIC. The
received the first of what would be many standıng
The Swiss Bhajan Group then took the stage with
performers playing sitar, tabla, harmonium and flute.
They accomplished moving renditions of Raga Yama,
and bhajans Jai Durge Durgati and Dharoon Tumaro
group
ovations that evening
Dhyan (I meditate upon You).
The next performance was upon sarod by Danishq
Khan, accompanied by the more than impressive
Shafat Ahmed Khan on tabla, who performed a moving
rendition of Raga Rageshree. Straight was the track
they wound to our hearts and another standing ovation.
This was followed by a dazzling solo performance on
the table by Shafat Ahmed Khan
The next piece was a drama by the Delhi Yogis
about the introduction of Sahaja Yoga to a group of
college students and their conversion from the culture
of Kali yuga to that of Sahaja. Ms. Shashwati Sen
then performed a Kathak dance accompanied by a
troupe of dancers who presented an intricate and
expressive performance, dazzling the audience.
Throughout the performance Ms. Sen narrated the
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-20.txt 
 19
Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue: 11& 12 1998
Tu Pyar Paane Se Majboor:
significance of the various movements within the dance,
speaking of dance as a reflection of the music of
nature, the wind blowing through the trees, water
moving in the seas and clouds swirlilng through the
sky
She is compelled to give Her Divine Love to
you,
Since even if She wants to, She cannot stop the
At Shri Mataji's request, a video documentary of low of Love,
Shri Mataji's life, made by the American yogis, entitled
The Vision, was shown. In it, there are scene from
Shri Mataji's childhood and youth, then following Her
life through to the establishment of Sahaja Yoga Shri accepting the love.
Mataji had commented that every Sahaja Yoga centre
in the world should have a copy of this tape. Shri
Through which She passes Her energy to us,
While we are incapable and unworthy of
Five of the Academy students then performed
Kathak dance rendition of the Maha Mantras, and a
Mataji arrived just as the tape was finishing.
dance in praise of Shri Shiva. Anil, Guruji, Sandesh
The next performance was Raga Ahhogi, the raga and Ashok then performed Ma Tere Nirmala Prem
that takes you away form Maya (Bhog), played on Ko, and Sahaja hee esi Shakti.
the flute by Ronu Majumdar accompanied by Abhijeet
The next performance was by Awininda Shivalikar
on sitar of Raga Yaman, accompanied by Sandesh
on tabla The flute seems to lend itself most easily to
instilling meditative mood, and this he established to
full effect, the ascending mood of the piece mimicking
Popatkar on tabla. A very sweet man, Mr. Toor
Sahib then came on to the stage He was introduced
the movements of the Kundalini along the Sushumna
as a deputy police commissioner who wrote devotional
music "on the side" and who had formed a band. Up
they came with synthesizer, drums, electric guitar and
chairs to sit on The group's music was a nice
The concluding performance was by Pandit Bhajan
Sapori who delivered a masterful performance on the
santoor of Raga Kanshi Kamuda. It was a
performance of different style to the santoor of Satish
Vyas we had heard previously, being more lively in its
execution, with its moods varying from meditative to
combination of East and West, somehow even the
electrie guitar sounded Indian, and at the conclusion
of their performance, Shri Mataji gave a beautiful
speech. She said how great it was that someone who
lived in a world of criminals and miscreants could be
ecstatie as he displaved his command of the instrument
This concluded another enjoyable evening of
So spiritual and come so close to Sahaja Yoga. She
went on to say that Sahaja Yoga is even being taught
performances played before the Creator of all music
and art
in the jails, which is "miraculous." This man, She said,
was proof that the world is changing in à beautiful
way, because he had that music inside himself despite
his circumstances.
Wednesday, 25th March
The evening concert began at 6 30 with two hours.
of music from Nirmal Sangeet Sarita The first
performance was Steve Day who sang beautiful westem performed Raga Jaijaivant and a bhajan to Rama,
songs he had written inspired by the sky, rolling river,
the beautiful expression of Mother Earth around the has become someone well known to us, having
Nagpur Academy. Nirmal Sangeet Sarita and the captivated us on many occasions with the beauty and
students of the Acadeny took the stage with a stirring depth of her playing Arun Apte then performed Raga
rendition of a qawwali, Vo Pyar Dene Ko Majhoor, Shyam Kalyan and Raga Durga, followed by two
Dr N Rajam, a virtuoso of the violin, then
accompanied by Abhijeet Banerjee on tabla Dr Rajam
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X Issue : 11 & 12 1998
The second qawwali group who took centre stage
bhajans.
hailed from Lucknow. They were Shia Muslims, and
The evening ended with a masterful performance also Sufis. They sang poetical verses praising the
by Vishwa Mohan Bhatt on mohan vina/guitar. He Mother and Shri Ganesha. The third group was the
was accompanied by Sandeep Das on tabla. Vishwa Nizamuddin qawwals, with their charismatic leader,
Mohan Bhatt has the distinction of being the only who is part singer, actor and poet He sang most
Indian performer to have won a Grammy Award, for movingly, prose composed in praise of Shri Mataji
a Meeting by the River, recorded with Ry Cooder
It was an enthralling and dazzling performance of Raga
Hemant, which was very much appreciated by those
fortunate enough to be present.
Although the language was foreign to Westerners,
the joy it imparts is universal. The meaning of the
words could be clearly read upon the faces of our
Indian brothers and sisters who frequently jumped to:
Shri Mataji later said that She had enjoyed the their feet dancing with joy as they roared their
performance and commented that the Indian classicist appreciation of the words being sung
had demonstrated how the guitar can be played
incorporating a continuous melodious component
compared to the breaks normally accompanied by
the strumming of the guitar in Western music.
Sir C.P. then rose to give the closing address to
the 75th birthday celebrations. Sir C.P. epitomizes
dignity, wisdom and enlightened intelligence: he chose
words that were a fitting tribute and conclusion to the
week.
Thursday, 26th March
The Last Evening
He said that we had all gathered in celebration of
that momentous occasion 75 years ago when the light
Shri Mataji had been in attendance for all of the
of the world was born. There had been many
incarnations in the past, great beings who through the
example of their lives had started great religions, and
who had helped show mankind the way forward. But
these religions had diverged, separating people, resulting
in conflict.
evening programs, except the last one (26th March)
when Sir C.P. came on Her behalf. "Im sure you will
be disappointed to see me here alone" he began, and
went on to say that because of the strain of several
late nights, he had encouraged Shri Mataji to rest. He
said he hoped this was our wish as well, and was met
with strong applause. As always, he found exactly the
right words to embody grace and dignity. He said "but
don't think for a moment that She is not here because
Sir C.P. said another incarnation was needed to
bring all religions into one, and this incarnation was
our Holy Mother He said that tonight we had heard
She resides in each and every one of your hearts."
the qawwali referring to Hindus, Muslims and Christians
The evening concert began at 6:30 with music from coming from different parts of the world, becoming
a combined Western bhajan group who performed one before Her This dream is becoming a reality. He
five songs. Deepak Verma, Simple, Sanjay Talwar and
Dr Rajesh performed, followed by a performance on why not? Or a church or synagogue, why not?
violin by Annapooma from Romania, now living in Delhi. Everything is now possible.
said he could riow go to a mosque and worship
Sir C.P. referred to the Felicitation program and
This was an evening devoted to gawwali, with
fumber of groups presenting pieces. The first was the the account of the early days of Sahaja Yoga where
qawwali of Amir Khusrou of Maiya Tere Charano Shri Mataji had helped a destitute boy. He said that
Ki Next was a performance on Sitar by Pratik
Chaudhuri of Raga Shudh Basant.
Shri Mataji had not asked him his religion, his caste,
background. In Her love and compassion, all that
or
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue : 11 & 12 1998
21
a complete rainbow over the camp.
mattered was that he was in need. He has seen this
all-pervading love transforming people In the beginning
many people came to Her, some of whom were to make everything run so smoothly was a tribute to
The tireless effort of our Indian brothers and sisters
brilliant young people, who all came away newly-
realized souls. Then groups of people came, and so their great humility and love. Everything from selling
became realized souls, and now the multitudes have Limcas to arranging taxis to reserving space in the
become Her children.
front of the pendal for "foreigners"-we only hope
that amid all of their responsibilities, they too had
We should all see how Sahaja Yoga has grown
some time to enjoy
and when we return home we must take a message
Each of us was blessed to have been allowed to
back to everyone, and that is today there are a million
Sahaja Yogis. But now the time has come when Sahaia
Yoga has to enfold the whole world, so that when we
spend six consecutive days in Shri Mataji's presence.
Not since the India tours of old has Shri Mataji
celebrate the 80th birthday there will be 100 million allowed us such a unique opportunity to spend this
Sahaja Yogis, and when we celebrate the 100th amount of time in Her presence. It was matchless
birthday there should be 5 billion Sahaja Yogis.
occasion we shall always cherish and for which we
humbly thank Shri Mataji. We are returning home with
the messages of the week's celebrations ringing in our
Mr. Nalgirkar was called to thank all the organizers
of the event and related how the committee in charge
of the celebrations had to convince Shri Mataji to
allow us to celebrate the occasion over seven days.
heart and mind.
Also this day over 300 parents, children and staff
At first She was reluctant but with time eventually finalized preparations to make their way to Talnoo,
gave Her consent, and now we look forward to the
80th birthday celebrations where we will have fourteen Shri Mataji had recommended that the children travel
days of celebrations.
near Dharamshala for the beginning of the school year.
to the school by rail due to difficulty of the road.
On the evening of March 27th over 150 children.
Friday, 27th March
Postscript
parents, teachers and staff assembled at platform I at
Delhi Central Train Station to board the train to
At the conclusion of the oflicial celebrations of Shri Pathankot, which would take them to within 100
Mataji's birthday the camp took on the appearance kilometres of Dharamshala The rest of the journey
of a departure lounge of an international airport, with would be completed by bus.
large groups of foreign Yogis completing preparations
to board airplanes to take them home.
Somehow a pilgrimage to India would not feel
complete unless it included a long bus journey to a
It was so nice to have had several days, rather lar off place with your brothers and sisters by your
than just a weekend, to settle down And to realiy
U
side, This was in store for the remaining parents and
others who travelled to the school. The journey
incorporated all the ingredients of the classic India
tour bus trip-thirteen hours of ovemight travel, loading
baggage, a long steep winding road up the Himalayan
converse with people, rather than rushing by saying,
"nice to see you." The atmosphere was relaxed, and
the clearing out (which inevitably takes place during
large collective gatherings) was more of the "enjoy"
variety than the "pain and suffering" variety.
foothills, the bus travelling from one pothole to the
next, and drivers throwing their vehicles at breakneck
We cannot forget the brief rain shower one day, speed around hairpin comers without a hint of a guard
falling from a cloudless sky, which was followed by rail.
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume : X Issue : 11 & 12 1998
Saturday 28th March
Dharamshala
and wonder at the endless majesty of Her creation.
time of the day people could be found at
At
any
any number of a vantage points absorbing the vibrations.
Meditating in the land of silence seems to impose that
silence upon one's busy mind. This seems to recharge
body, mind and soul, as one enters into communion
with the Divine as reflected with such clarity in Nature.
The majority of the parents and children arrived at
Dharamshala during the morning to be greeted by grey
skies and rain. The children were unloaded at the
beginning of the unsealed road a few hundred metres
from the school. The children seemed to negotiate the
muddy and slippery surface with a greater sense of Mere words cannot capture or do justice to the beauty,
ease than did their parents who tried to follow in their glory and completeness of the scene, or its effect
footsteps. It was an amusing scene as we tried to
negotiate our way over the muddy pools and small
streams that had formed along the road.
upon you.
The children seem to naturally fall into a routine of
play, reunited with old friends, and at times seem
blithely unaware of the panorama stretched before
We rounded the last bend in the road to catch our
them.
first breathtaking impression of the school. The school
is nestled upon a hill at a height of around 7,000 feet
We spent three days with the children helping them
(2100m), directly facing the majestic snow-capped settle into their dorms, privileged to be allowed to
Himalayan Dhauladhar Mountain range. The school is share their meals and play a small part in their daily
routine. The children have everything they require-
clean and tidy dormitories, good food and eating
facilities, spacious play areas, kind and loving staff,
and teachers genuinely devoted to their care and well-
within the lap of the Gods, surrounded on three sides
by a cavernous ravine, the bottom of which cannot
be fathomed.
Our children are privy to the simplest yet most being.
enduring pleasures of life, unspoilt Nature in all Her
breathtaking glory, high mountain calm, pure pristine the longer parents stay after school commences,
air, an idyllic haven surrounded with pines, sometimes the more difficult it is for the children to
Three days seem an appropriate period of time;
rhododendrons and deodar (Himalayan cedar) forests,
far from the madding crowds, the heat and stress of
modern society.
adjust to their school routine, making the staff's job
more difficult.
Monday, 30th March
Outside the school the mountains are a land of
This was the first day of the school year and it was
shifting colours and moods, grey foreboding, dazzling agreed to be the day most parents would leave for
and brilliant, and all the time the school shining more Delhi. We farewelled the children at 6 pm just before
brilliantly because of them. The children are resident evening meditation.
in a place where the Kundalini of Mother India meets
the Sahasrara, where Shiva and Parvati once danced, leaving behind those dear sweet ones. It is quite a
and where swayambhus of Shiva and the Devi create heart-wrenching experience as parents and children
an environment of such auspiciousness that one cannot part for a period of many months. Despite the best
help but feel oneness with the Divine. On the side of of intentions, detachment is an art badly practised at
The time of parting is never an easy one, especially
one of the mountains, in view of the school, is a
a time when so many mixed emotions flood into one's
temple containing a Devi swayambhu. No wonder the
vibrations here are so strong!
heart.
Yet somehow Shri Mataji gives one the necessary
strength to tum around and walk the lonely few hundred
The Mountains dominate one's attention, the majestic
Himalayan panorama bathing one with a sense of awe
metres back down the muddy road to the waiting bus,
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume: X Issue: 11 & 12. 1998
23
As we return home, it's the post-Birthday Puja
landing-coming down from heaven into the unreality
which covers the world today. Will it be a bumpy
landing or smooth? One always prays to be able to
retain what was absorbed the vibrations, the joy, the
and commence the journey home
There is no doubt the school is situated at one of
the remotest corners of the earth and implicit with this
are difficulties with regard to physical amenities;
however, the children have developed an indiference
depth, and thus penetrate our local environments with
the subtlety of reality, raising the level a step closer
to our Mother's vision of what it can and will be like,
with respect to any inconvenience. They are sustained
by the comfort of their spirit, their closeness to Shri
Mataji's all-pervading love and attention, and the
communion and brotherhood they have formed with
each other
What is left from this great week is an overwhelming
sense of gratitude and a feeling of joy that will sustain
us until the next opportunity to meet again at the Lotus
Feet of our Mother. As a sufi poet who was quoted
during the felicitations ceremony wrote,
If our children can show us anything, it is the deep
and abiding love and friendship they share, obliterating
any concept of country, race, or class. In this aspect
we their parents have much to learn, and to achieve.
to become truly united souls as we enter into the
Heuvens are under the Mother's feet.
coming spiritual age
Victoria Zbylut, France and
Chris Kyriacou, Australila
Photographs by Beth Checkley
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
Divine Cool Breeze Volume X Issue 11 & 12 1998
News from Around the World
The Smog Situation in
Southeast Asia
First Scandinavian Seminar
his is the story of the first Scandinavian
Seminar, held in Stockholm, Sweden, on
T:
Kuala Lumpur, September 19, 1997. Irresponsible
plantation companies in Indonesia have set fires to
August 29-31, 1997.
clear huge areas of land, and because of the dry
season, the fires have gone out of control. To date,
One week after Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella, we
were happy to be the hosts of the first Scandinavian
more than 300,000 hectares of land have been razed
Sahaja Yoga seminar. Shri Krishna's special blessings The resulting smoke has enveloped the region, and
must have still been flowing, for many more brothers visibility as of September 19th was 300-500 metres
and sisters than we dared hope for, came to join us and going down. East Malaysia (Borneo) has been
in a truly international meeting In the end there were declared an emergency area with the Air Pollution
no less than 12 countries represented.
Index (API) hitting 675 (under 50 is good. 50-100
is hazy. 100-200 is unhealthy and 300+ is hazardous.)
In the capital city of Kuala Lumpur, the hazardous
level has already been reached.
We were especially happy to receive a large family
from a really far-off land: the small country of Benin
in West Africa. Having recently come to Sweden as
political refugees they almost doubled our Swedish
collective!
Initially, the govemment said that if the API hit 300
in urban regions, they would close schools and declare
We felt Shri Krishna's presence throughout the
a national emergency, but they are afraid of the
whole week-end, both through His blessings and economic ramifications and have raised the level to
through some mischievous tricks of His. For lack of 500 before they will take drastic measures, Health
one single place to stay, our activities were spread out problems are escalating at a tremendous rate.
over the city-sleeping here, eating there, havan by
the sea, puja in the Sahaja Centre,
Please put your attention on this area and give it
a bandhan,
of this there were no telephones in either
On
top
of the main places. However, everybody seemed to around the world who have put attention on this
be quite above all these things, the vibrations spread problem. Last weekend, a few of us decided to do
nicely over the city, and the public program attracted something more than bandhans about the smog, and
a dozen new seekers.
October 1, 1997. Thanks to all the Sahaja Yogis
spontaneous trip to Fraser's Hill, a hill station in the
mountains, worked out.
We all felt this gathering of our common powers
and desire was very much needed, and it strengthened
us in our work in these sometimes harsh and
A yogi had booked a huge 8-room bungalow for
and the 22 of us were very
Clean air for the first time in two months. For those
individualistic countries that are just beginning to wake
up to the call of our Mother. May we be blessed to
enjoy more new yogis to spread the wamth throughout
of you who have watched CNN and other news
channels-yes, the situation was very bad. Breathing
dark and chilly countries.
was difficult, eyes were irritated all the time outdoors..
there are more than 300,000 ill from haze-related
-Sahaja Yoga, Sweden
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Valume X lsue 11 & 12 1998
request for bandhans to be given, The Indian New
complications.
Year marks a very auspicious start to the spreading
Amidst the green lushness of Mother Nature, we of Sahaja Yoga in mainland China. On Sunday,
had an Adi Bhoomi Devi Puja. It was really powerful
November 2 we will be holding a public program in
with incredible vibrations. We surrendered all the
causes of the haze and the slowness of action taken over the border The program will be held at the
Shenzhen, the closest Chinese city to Hong Kong, just
by the authorities to rectify the situation. Also the
greed which got us into this position in the first place. mainland Chinese Yogini, May, who is coordinating
We prayed for wisdom and discretion for our nation's the program. May is a teacher of English at the
leaders, a slower growth rate which does not cost us Polytechnic and received her realisation from Shri
Polytechnic in one of the lecture rooms. We have one
our environment and natural resources and most of all.
Mataji in Beijing when she attended the UN women's
conference there The programs will be held every
at the politicians' healthy respect for Shri Bhoomi
Devi.
Sunday afternoon from 3 p.m. - 5 p.m for the next
On our returm trip, there was a huge storm sweeping month This is an experiment to see how the general
through the region. Jai Shri Mataji! We have not seen public responds to such a program and if it is successful
month by month basis. The
Puja It was fantastic and awesome to watch. And Polytechnic has given us permission to hold the
today, the Finance Minister has announced that programs which is a real breakthrough as it is often
Malaysia's growth rate will be between 6-8 per difficult to get permission for such activities in China
cent He was assuring the country that we don't have In order not to raise suspicions, only Chinese yogis
to develop so fast, that a 6-7 per cent growth rate will run the programs as westerners attract the attention
of the authorities who are very strict about public
such rain since the last time we had a Bhoomi Devi
we will continue on a
is perfectly alright.
gatherings.
When Shri Mataji was here last, She told us that
pollution would be our biggest problem, and now
The other major step forward for Sahaja Yoga in
China is a program on stress management that will be
conducted in a Beijing women's clinic, starting Thursday
November 6 from 7 p.m.-9 p.m. London de Valle.
who is living in Beijing with his family, will be conducting
the program which is focusing more on the medical
benefits of Sahaja Yoga. The eight-week course will
gradually introduce participants to the basic practices
of Sahaja Yoga, demonstrating how to eliminate stress
from daily life. Two yogis from Hong Kong will attend
things are working out We are just praying that the
authorities realize their errors and will take firmer
preventive action and make more enlightened decisions
in future Experts have predicted that the haze will
return and the rain we are getting every day now
(since the Puja) is only temporary. But we'll see, eh?
We have a lot more on our side than they have ever
dreamed about.
Bolo Shri Bhoomi Devi Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Ki Jai !!
the first program to boost the vibrations but if we
have collective attention on the programs, it will
definitely help to move things along.
Love from your brother,
We are also looking for established yogis to come
Ramesh Tan, Malasia
and in China and Hong Kong. Two of our collective
will be returning to England in December and we have
a vacancy in the Hong Kong ashram for 2-5 yogis
Also in Beijing we need some help so if anyone is
interested in coming to China to work and live, even
News from China
We have some good news from China to share
with our brothers and sisters around the world and
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume :X Issue 11& 12 1998
26
In March 1997, the First Latin American Seminar
of Sahaja Yoga was held in Rio. It was a wonderful
experience of meeting Yogis from Colombia, Bolivia,
Paraguay, Argentina and Brazil. This was the occasion
for a few months, then please let us know. Lots of
love to all our brothers and sisters from around the
world
- The China Sahaja Yoga Collective
to organize the steps to be taken in order to give a
public program in Uruguay.
Sahaja Yoga in Uruguay
On April 26th. 1997, ten yogis from Argentina and
In the beginning of 1995, my husband was assigned Eduardo Marino were in Montevideo to help us to
to Unuguay AS you know, Uruguay is a small country have our first public program. Some days before it
in Latin America (about 176.000 square km) with was held, two yogis from Argentina came to assist us
around 3,100.000 inhabitants, located between Brazil in postering in the main avenues of the city, spreading
and Argentina Uruguay is well-known for its meat
and dairy products that are exported to many countries.
vibrations with Shri Mataji's picture. With the financial
support of the Sahaja collectivity of Rio de Janeiro,
a beautiful advertisement containing Shri Mataji's picture
was published in two of the local news-papers. On
Having a 7-month-old baby and very little Spanish.
I wondered whether I would be able to spread Sahaja
the day of the program we had our hearts full of joy.
Yoga in Uruguay For about two years, all my efforts
to tell people about Sahaja Yoga and to give realization
bore no fruit. Notwithstanding, keeping to my daily Room of Hotel Embajador. Approximately 90 people
meditations, shoe-beatings and foot-soaking, I did not attended and most of them could feel the cool breeze.
lose hope. Sometimes, 1 felt compelled to call my At the first follow-up. 15 people came back. In the
brothers and sitters of New York's collectivity (where following meetings. the balance of incoming and
1 lived for three years and where 1 first got my outgoing people resulted in a steady number of 15
realization in 1993) to break the feeling of isolation people.
I had. During that time, I did not fully understand the
The public program was held at the Conference
In May 1997, an interview was given to a very
importance of the collectivity before jumping into the
experience of becoming Shri Mataji's instrument
well-known broadcaster on a radio show which brought
to us some additional seekers of high quality.
When attending the North American Krishna Puja
of 1996, held in New Jersey. and presenting a small
eift on Uruguay's behalf, I had the opportunity to refer
the situation to Shri Mataji. I felt very relieved when
Mother said "some help would be sent to Uruguay"
Another public program was given on August 9th.
Just a few posters and an announcement on the radio
show was enough to draw 55 people that filled up
the room we had. For the first follow-up, 35 people
came back and about 20 people are still coming after
It was all that was necessary to make the pieces fall
15 weeks! The meetings were held on Saturdays and
into their places.
we decided to convene Sunday morning meetings for
In December 1996, the South American leader the more established people.
Eduardo Marino, a physicist living in Rio de Janeiro
(Brazil), was invited by the Physies College of went to Argentina in October to take part in the
Universidad de la Republica in Uruguay to take part Navaratri Puja 1997. Needless to say how special
in a two-week long scientific activity in the month of t experience was. The hospitality and love of our
A new step was taken when a group of 7 ladies
that
brothers and sisters in the ashram of Buenos Aires
April. It was a perfect opportunity to organize a public
program.
were the expression of Shri Mataji's love While
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-28.txt 
 27
Divine Cool Breeze Volume:Xissue: 11 & 12 1998
curious and careful, so we don't miss our country too
returning to Montevideo we all witnessed the play of
our conditionings being broken and negativity that had
troubled us before being overcome
much, despite the fact that we are in the "left channel
of the Universe." as Shri Mataji named this Cordillieri
Anzi which crosses South America
In November, we had the chance to perform Diwali
Puja in Unuguay Argentina's collectivity gifted us most
of the materials and thalis required for the puja, and
three yogis came all the way from Buenos Aires to
assist us We had 14 new Sahaja Yogis attending the
Puja and washing Mother's feet with devotion.
The Mother Bhoomi Devi is so generous, powerful
so many vibrations come up from Her body to make
the beauty that is all around us here. It's almost like
in India, really a blissful place. They have a monument
here at a very important location in the city called La
Madre India, which means Indian Mother. The
We are to embark on a transition period, as I am
monument is very well made, showing a native Indian
Mother with her little boy in her strong arms, embracing
about to leave Uniguay to accompany my husband
back to Brazil It's time for the collectivity to stand
him with love. The child looks so safe and attached
on its own feet, still with the support and periodic
to his Mother truly Mother India,
presence of our always-caring brothers and sisters
from Argentina until Shri Matajai sends an established There are many seekers here, many ancient souls, so
and experienced Yogi to guide the collectivity. We all deep inside, ancient souls with ancient eyes, We pray
gave a bandhan for that and the vibrations were very and hope for them to be blessed by and have Self
cool. The new contact person in Uruguay is Adriana Realization, Our humble request for all our brothers
Anon, Calle pedro Vidal 2217, Montevideo, Uruguay, and sisters around the world is to put their Divine love
CP 11600, Her phone number is (5982) 4818781.
Her e-mail atldress is. anona@adinet.com.uy or hearts.
anona @fing edu uy
and attention in a bandhan and send it here to people's
We also have the desire to communicate with the
The opportunity I received to spread Sahaja Yoga Sahaja world, so please send us Sahaja news and
meant a whole new phase in my spiritual development information
To be able to witness the Paramehaitanya's work @duende.cafenet.com.bo and specify, 'message for
made me fully understand what Shri Mataji expects Luis and Cristina." Tharik you very much! We embrace
from us. I am very grateful for all the love and guidance you all, with all the petals of our hearts.
e-mail address
this
to
provided by our Mother's attention. To all my brothers
and sisters, Jai Shri Mataji!
With love,
- Luis and Cristina
-Virginai Cury
Intense Public Programs in
Turkey
News from Bolivia
This message comes from Santa Cruz de la Sierra.
a big and very niece city in Bolivia (South America)
We are two yogis here, a Spanish boy and a Reomanian
girl, and neither of us is aborigen, native people. We
just imet here by the Grace of Shri Mataji. This Santa
From 8 October on we had intense public programs
in the three biggest cities of Turkey. Istanbul, Ankara
and Izmir, with 2 days between each city. Yogi Mahajan
jed the programs in which some 2,000 people got
their realization.
Cruz de la Sierra has such a nice name and is such
This year, the media had a very positive attitude!
a beautiful place In general, people are very nice.
speak very sweetly, and are very communicative, There was coverage by three radio stations and two
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume X issue : 11 & 12 1998
Yogi Mahajan pointed out that the word Anatolia (the
name of the Turkish peninsula) means Motherland:
TV programs, plus articles in newspapers. The same
media was very hostile and sarcastic toward Sahaja
ana means mother and tolia means filled or full. This
Yoga two years ago.
comes from worshipping the Mother-God on this land
where a lot of Mother icons and statues have been
The most important outcome was that realization was
program is also emitted to the whole world by satellite! found, most of them 3,000 to 5,000 years old
Many spectators phoned to say they felt the cool In the historical parts of Istanbul, there are strong cool
vibrations inside the famous Byzantine church, Saint
given on TV on the 8 p.m. news to millions! This
breeze.
Since Turkey is the first and only Islamic country built between 360 and 525 AD so it is 1,500 years
where Sahaja Yoga is practised, this evet is also
important for the Islamic world where fundamentalism visited a house that is said to be the birthplace of
old. This is the Mother's church! Near Izmir we
is widespread. This TV transmission was also watched
in all these lands-the Middle East, Europe, and
Centrel Asia, reaching more than 150 million people.
Seekers are coming in increasing numbers to the follow-
Mother Mary
Very strong rain followed these programs Yogi
Mahajan missed his plane to India so we had more
ups: This was surprising because the contrary was opportunity to be with him (old and new yogis) More
expected, based on our experiences in past years. No contacts have been developed with the media also.
bad reactions or arguing questions were observed We send our love to the universe! Jai Shri Majaji!
during the programs (also surprising in an Islamic
country), and the interest was very high.
-Ender Enon, Turkey
News from International Sahaja School, Dharamshala
such great work that she is doing.
On 28th October 1998
A Sahaja Boarding School
has been opened for
Indian Children
The Himachal Pradesh Minister for Transport and
Welfare Mr. Kishan Kapoor presented an award to
the International Sahaja School Dharamshala for
excellence and said.
Parents must register their children immediately,
otherwise it may not be possible to make provision
"The Himalayas are the Crown of India and this School
is a precious Sparkling Diamond adorning that crown.
I salute those parents who have sent their children so
far away from their home to receive true education
and spread it throughout the world. This school reminds
me of great universities like Takshila and Nalanda.
The message that this school is spreading throughout
the world will make India emerge as Jagat Guru
Bharat as these students are going to be the pioneers
of 21st Century to spread Shri Mataji's message. I
for them before the school opens on 23rd March1999.
(Yogi Mahajan)
Address-
Sahaja School
Village Mamoon 145001
Pathankot
Punjab
Phone : 0186-20128
am highly grateful to Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi for
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Record
Congressional
PROCEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE 105TH CONGRESS, FIRST SESSION
United States
of Armerica
HONORING
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
HON. ELIOT L. ENGEL
OF NEW YORK
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
is married to Sir C. P. Srivastava, former Secretary
General of the United Nations Maritime
Mr. Speaker, Sahaja Yoga Meditation, since its
founding in 1970 by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
has helped tens of thousands of people in more
than 65 countries to attain a deeper spiritual self
knowledge which leads to a greater ability to
become their own best advisor.
Organisation. In her youth, she studied in the
ashram of Mahatma Gabdhi and was very active in
India's struggle for Independence from Great
Britain.
The meditation helps one to identify, heal and
integrate the spiritual, emotional, intellectual and
physical self to improve health. It gives an increased
sense of integration and peace.
She was named "Women of the Year" in Italy
in 1986. She also received an honorary membership
to Peter's Academy of Arts and Sciences in St.
Petersburg, Russia. In her recent visit to New York,
more than 3,000 people received their "self-
Shri Mataji has carried the message of Sahajá
Yoga Meditation worldwide for the past 27 years,
educating Westerners and Easterners to their
common spiritual roots, She has always offered her
meditating techniques free of charge to help the
greatest number to achieve a reawakening.
realization" from her.
On August 23rd and 24th, she will lead an
international celebration in Cabella, Italy, to focus
on the spiritual growth of America. She is a woman
of deep caring and compassion whose spirituality
has improved the world.
Shri Mataji is a mother and a grandmother who
Congressional Record presented to Slhri Mataji, Shri Krishia Puja 1997-
 1998_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_11,12.pdf-page-31.txt 
 "Once you are
absolutely thoughtlessly
aware, you are one with
the Divine - so much
so that Divine takes
over every activity,
every moment of your
life, and looks after
you."
