75th Birthday Felicitation ICI Date 20th March 1998 : Place Delhi : Type Other Event English Speech Language CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 09 English Hindi Marathi || Translation English 10 - 17 Hindi 18 - 21 Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK I bow to all the seekers of truth. So much has been said and really my heart is full of gratitude for all of you to come here, all the way, and the way people have described about Sahaja Yoga. To understand Sahaja Yoga, we should know where are we today in this Kali Yuga. What are we facing today? It should really make you feel quite disturbed to see the way things are going on in every country, everywhere. What's the problem? What is the, such a need for people to become so restless, full of tensions. Collectively, country-wise, anywhere you go you find some sort of a confusion. Terrible. The whole society seems to be boiling with a kind of a fear of destruction. What is the reason? There are so many religions, so many organized, disorganized, all kinds of things. There are so many sadhus and saints. There are so many books written about what you should have. But the only one who is a seeker of truth should see one point: Why, why there is so much problem in this world and how can you help them? Where is the problem? It is inside the human being. As described, you see, we have come out of a animal stage to a human stage. We have a human awareness, no doubt. In that awareness, we start seeing all kinds of things that are not good, which are destructive, which are disturbing. If it doesn't disturb you, that means you are not at all a sensitive person. But you are sensitive as a human being. So now what is the reason for this, is there. In every field of life, whether it is political, economic or any field of life in which human beings are living, there's a very subtle problem which people don't understand. Now if I say that, "There is spirit within us which shines in our heart," you need not believe, need not believe. But our attention is not on the spirit. They call it "atma vimukh" - our attention is outside. At this stage at the human awareness, our attention is outside, outside in various things. Now where should our attention go? To evolve, for what? To achieve what? The firstly, our attention has now go towards our spirit, towards spiritual understanding. This is one thing has to happen to human beings to begin with. Otherwise our attention is outside. We are worried about money, worried about power, worried about this, worried about that, in competition and all kinds of things going on. But if your attention is turned somehow towards your spirit then what happens to you is that you become a power of the spirit. And the power of the spirit is the highest power that you could think of. First of all, spirit is the one that loves. Loves without asking for anything, without expecting anything, just loves. It's an unconditional type of a personality which just emits love. Anybody in trouble, anybody having a problem, just it flows. This capacity to flow in the heart exists but on top of that, is the closing point, is that our attention is not on our spirit. Even in political endeavors or your economic endeavors, any endeavor, what happens is that attention is outside. So you go into competition, you go into this thing, you go on becoming very competent and then suddenly you find another one coming up. There are so many struggles when your attention is outside. Because in attention outside, there is no purity. There is no purity. It's just attention to yourself and that too is so limited. Very limited it is because if you pay attention to yourself, there's no end to your troubles and woes. For a person, as they said, really is fact that: I don't mind sleeping anywhere. I don't mind eating anything. I am not bothered about all these things, is a fact. Because, you see, it's not very important I think. But without thinking, I am made like that. I am like that, all right. But Sahaja yogis have become like this. This is the miracle that human beings have turned their attention to their spirit. Then you are amazed how things work out. Without any competition, without any fights, without any quarrels, how your attention becomes fixed on your spirit.

 Original Transcript : English First, the first thing that happens to you is good health. Your health improves. Firstly, if your health is all right, I mean so many problems are solved. This world, I think at least 30% people are always sick. Because of the tensions, maybe because of bad food and this and that. This is first thing that happens to you is your health improves. Today now in Sahaja Yoga, we have people who have learned that by these modern ways of economics and all that, has not given any peace to anyone. We think of America; I mean I've been to America, I know Americans: How terribly disturbed they are. Their families are ruined. Their children are ruined. And all kinds of stupid things are happening. Our Indian gurus are going and making a big money there. And they just want peace. They just want peace of the heart. That's only possible when your attention goes to your heart because in the heart resides the spirit and the spirit is the source of peace. First is the love and second as I told you just now is the peace. You become extremely peaceful. You become like a witness and you see the whole drama like a joke. It's nothing so serious to be worried about. It all works out. And this is what one has to become is to become the spirit which is your own, which is in your own heart and that is the source, as I told you, of love and again I say of peace. And the third thing that happens to you, that the source of spirit being joy, that joy bubbles in your life. It just bubbles in your life. You don't know how to get out of that great ocean of joy. You start swimming in it, enjoying it, every bit ofit. You touch all the shores, going round the whole world, their hearts and everything. It is in the heart that resides. Again I say, it is not in the brain. No mental activity can take you to spirit. Spirit is only possible if your attention could be somehow taken to the spirit. And that's possible only through Kundalini awakening. This change of attitude towards life, this change of complete peace and joy has come to you all because your attention is now on your spirit. Now you don't think of money, money walks your way. You don't think of power, power walks your way. And the power of the spirit is the highest, the most powerful and the most righteous thing. It is not necessary that you should become a sanyasi, sadhu baba, do all kinds of things. No necessity of these rituals. The spirit is residing within you. Already all you have done in last lives. Now this life only thing you have to do is to put attention to your spirit. And that's only possible through the awakening of this Kundalini – the Primordial Mother. When She starts, I mean that's also your own. When She starts rising, She passes through the centers and enriches them, integrates them, and pierces through the last fontanel bone area and makes you connected to this all pervading power of divine love. But this power of divine love is not only "the love," if you want to say, it is also peace and joy and also it is the superior wisdom. It is rather subtle for normal man to understand. I know that. I've gone through that. For persons to understand that one can become the spirit, but this is in the evolutionary process. Today is the time for people to become the spirit. This is the blessing of this blossom time as I call it and people have to become the spirit. Otherwise what is left of them is like all other human beings who'll, I don't where they'll end up. So this is an essential step today to become the spirit. All the saints, all the prophets, the religions have talked about it. Not that they have not. Of course, we have twisted them. We have made separate, separate things. But it's only one simple thing is that you are a spirit and that spirit, unless and until you become, you cannot achieve any peace, any joy and no love. all The Sahaja yogis here are sitting have achieved it. They don't think they are from foreign countries or from this country or that country. They don't want. Now here it is in this camp we don't have very good arrangement for sleeping or eating or anything, no good bathrooms, nothing. They are just enjoying themselves. Nobody minds it. Of course certain things of particular country may linger on. But then it drops, it drops. Gradually it starts dropping out. Like a flower when it becomes the fruit. All its petals and everything drops out and then it becomes the fruit. So you have now become the fruit -fruit of knowledge, fruit of wisdom and of love. For knowledge, you don't have to read books. There's no need to. People who have read too many are difficult to get Sahaja Yoga. But what you have to see yourself: What is the reality? But that's only possible if you are a realized soul. Otherwise you get lost in the illusions of the world. You live with the illusions all your life, struggling, fighting and I don't want to say what's the end is. 3

 Original Transcript : English So a simple thing that has happened with Sahaja Yoga, in your evolutionary process your attention now has gone to spirit than to anything else. As soon as the power of the spirit comes, you find yourself successful in everything. You don't want;. You don't ask for it and if you are not, you don't mind. You don't mind because you think they don't understand. It's all right, forget it. So there's no use fighting for it, asking for it. For this, one thing is important, first and foremost thing, you have to forgive everyone. Human beings, I don't know sometimes they're illogical. Supposing somebody tries to harm you. All right, I forgive him. Forget it because I have no headache of that. What he is trying to do is to give me a headache which I will not take. I just forgive. So that is a very important point, that Christ has also said that, “You have to forgive." Mohammad Sahib has said so many things but I don't know how people have twisted. Christ has said so many things, how I don't know how they are being twisted. Every one of them has said one thing: that you have to become the Spirit. And how people have twisted it and have formed so many religions and in that religion why should they quarrel? If there is one God there should be no quarrel. 99 Now in Sahaja yoga, you find people have come from different race, different countries, different ideologies, everything. One thing great about Sahaja yogis, they are very pure people. There's so much of purity in them. There's no problem. I do not have that problem of immorality in Sahaja Yoga. We don't find anybody being immoral. If somebody has been immoral, he just gets corrected. If somebody has been cheating, he gets corrected. If somebody has been a corrupt person, he gets corrected. Because spirit gives the light for you to see for yourself what is good for you. Supposing you are going on a road and you are blind. You can walk into a ditch. But supposing you have the light and the eyes open. You know how to go. And that's exactly what has happened in Sahaja Yoga, that people have realized how to move, how to go about, how to walk, and not to fall in the ditch. I have seen people who have fallen into ditch also. But I have nothing but love for them. Because they were blind, you see, for a blind person you can just have love, isn't it? And I found that once I forgive them completely and I ask them, all right, even if they have abused Me, said things against Me, it's all right. Because they don't know what they are doing. They are blind people. So once you feel that way about others, that doesn't matter. Whatever they have done, whatever they have so far, so called harmed you also, is no harm to you because you are standing on a pedestal of truth. So the second point is that the spirit is the source of truth, not of untruth. For example, there is some false guru. Immediately you will know who is false. How? On your vibrations, on your fingertips you know that this man is false. Is all said by Mohammad Sahib that, “Your hands will speak at the time of resurrection." That exactly happens that you see: this is the trouble. Now if you want you can avoid that person or if you want you can bring him round and put him right. But we should not try on the complicated characters very much in the beginning, I said, because they will complicate you. Now those people who have matured in Sahaja Yoga can easily manage that also. And also we must know that all the elements are working for us. All the events of the world are just to show how wrong things are wrong and how right things should be done. Say for example, when Hitler came. He started destroying people. And he took nine years to build himself up. And he did all kinds of things which cannot be forgiven by anyone. But he died and suddenly you find in Germany, people are so enlightened. Now you heard some people, I was amazed how they are so enlightened about love and about the divine. All these countries, I've seen are doing so well unexpectedly. Imagine in England, who came to India and ruled us for three hundred years, there are so many Sahaja yogis. And also as you see today when I speak there, we have the whole hall filled up with people, in England. I've seen also in the countries like Russia, where these people were on the verge of collapsing after they started on democracy. Whether it is democracy or communism or anything, these are all isms. You have to come out of it and see for yourself that so called democracy has become demon-ocracy. So called communism has failed. Why? Basically what's wrong with them? It was all based not on the spiritual level. There was no spirit involved in it. It was all based on, I 4

 Original Transcript : English should say, on the endeavors which are outside, which were very limited. And those limits, once they break, you see you have a problem. Now economics, the world economics if you see is collapsing. Everywhere there is recession. If they are such experts then why there is recession? Why there are problems? Now the people say we must remove the poverty. I agree but not by giving some sort of a beggar's gift but with self respect. You can do it. You can do it because if you can approach people who need with Sahaja Yoga and enrich them, you'll be amazed, they themselves will do better and work it out. All kinds of things, you see, like in abroad people used to say, "Mother, You talk of spiritual life then why is it India is so poor?" I said, “They are not so poor in spirituality." They may be poor in money. Those who have got lots of money, are they also very good people? Are they also doing something very good? In the same way, those who are poor are not doing something good that one should have compassion on them. Agreed. Now what to do? If both sides are so miserable, what should we do? Is to change them. Change the whole attitude towards life. Immediately I've seen people who are supposed to be rich start understanding poverty. They start sharing. They start working it out. In Sahaja Yoga, you'll be amazed how people help each other. How they work out everybody's difficulties and problems into something very beautiful. You see, it's the wisdom that you get from this all pervading divine power. This power has been described in every religion. You call it nirakar, you call it ruuh, you can call it paramchaitanya; you can call by any name. But name is not the point. Whatever it is, once you are connected with this power, you are blessed. Thousand times you are blessed than you are as a normal human being. As a normal being, no blessings it has. It has nothing but your own endeavors that the amount you push in, that's what you get. Here nobody pushes oneself. Automatically you are pushed into that. This force, divine force brings you to that. And you have seen that in your own lives how you came to Me, how you came to Sahaja Yoga. It was some sort of a divine force which worked it out, which is Sahaja, which you may not realize but when you get your realization, you just think about your own life: "How I came to Sahaja Yoga? How I got this?" And then you see this peace, reigning over your hearts. The love, affection, everything. What is, as you said, I have many powers, maybe I don't know, but one thing for definite, one thing that Sahaja yogis can get all My powers. As a Mother, Mother wants to give everything to Sahaja yogis. This greatest joy for a Mother is to see Her son or daughter grow up like Her. I, I have a great vision of life. And I see the picture of that here today. I was a ordinary housewife without much money. You know My interest in money is zero. I don't understand even the bank and the somebody has to sign a cheque for Me. My husband has to count My money, I am so bad. But still I've never had problem. Never had problem because it is the greed in man, terrible greed in man that creates problems. But if he learns how to be satisfied, automatically the greed drops out and you feel absolutely comfortable. But that doesn't mean that you become a sadhu baba or you become a sanyasi or a something you give up. Those days are gone. Those ordeals you have passed through. You've been to the Himalayas. You've stood on your heads and did all kinds of things. Now no more is needed. What is needed is that: you have to put your attention to your spirit, the more you do it, the more you absorb all other attentions and put it to your spirit, which is there already existing. There is nothing to be brought from outside or nothing to be learnt. It is inside every one of you, is in the heart. Only thing you have to, you have to just feel it. Now that feeling can only come if you are awakened in the Kundalini. I know that no one like Mohammad Sahib or Christ or Abraham or Moses, who have created books or whatever history they have created, no where They would have ever thought that people will form an organized religion and start in a way as if they are against each other. But it has happened. It has happened. To remove that, you have to give them the knowledge, the knowledge. Not the knowledge of the book but the pure knowledge. And the knowledge that is pure pure is wisdom. Through this wisdom only I've worked. This wisdom I had from My childhood. Nobody has given Me. It's there. But this wisdom has taught Me one thing: that whatsoever maybe the 5

 Original Transcript : English condition of a human being, whatsoever maybe his style, whatsoever may be his ego or his conditioning ifhe can feel the love then his spirit gets [transformed?]. This transformation has taken place. Here we have only one percent of the people who have got realization all over the world. But I know, I remember them all today who are not here, that they have been seekers, madly seeking, seeking the truth. They went through horrible time seeking. They had very bad gurus. They had all kinds of expenses, everything they did. But once they came to Sahaja Yoga, they have found what was the truth is. And the truth is very simple: that you are the spirit. You are not this body, this mind, but you are the spirit. This is the truth and they have found the spirit. That's what is the truth that they have found. Once this truth is established within you, that you are the spirit, nothing can destroy you, nothing can harm you. It cannot have any wants. It doesn't have. What wants can you have when you have the spirit because such a satisfying thing? It doesn't condemn anyone. It doesn't runs after anyone. Is satisfied with itself, absolutely satisfied. You see, I was very anxious that I should lead a very normal life. I should not be like some Himalaya fellow or something like that. Because this is needed for a common people. Today it's a aim en mass, en mass awakening. It is not for one person. This was the thing because once any discovery is made, supposing, and that discovery only is for one individual, it has no meaning. It has to go to masses. And this is what I knew: I have to do it. And I had to work - they say so but I don't think I ever worked. I was just witness to whole thing. I saw it just like a witness enjoying all kinds of things as you sit on the shore of a ocean. You see waves coming, going like that. But inside, inside that is a human being who wants to evolve, who wants to become the spirit. Then he starts thinking what good he can do to others. So far I've been very anxious that people should become Sahaja yogis. I didn't take to any missionary work or any social work. I used to do when I was not in Sahaja Yoga, I should say, when I didn't start the Sahaja Yoga. But later on, I discovered that unless and until you transform people, unless and until you become the spirit, you'll become like any other social worker. I was working in a, say, blind school. I was the chairman of the blind school, blind people. And I was surprised, the people who were with Me were very funny type you know? The governor was to come and they said, "Who will sit next to governor?" I said, "What is this?" So they said also, "I being the president, I have to sit." I said, "Not necessary. I can sit anywhere." But they all started quarreling on this point. So I said, “All right, we'll take a plank and put it on head of the - of the governor and you all sit on that like sparrows." That humor helped a lot and they settled down. So this is the stupid thing where you see it, what is your position, what do you get? I mean it's so stupid that even the ant knows how to work out the collectivity. I don't know how human beings are dying after useless nonsensical things. But the only thing is, he has not yet become the spirit. So he doesn't respect himself, no respect. So he does all these things which are not very respectable I think. Then I thought that this kind of work people are doing, they think no end of themselves. 99 66 Once you start doing something good, why should you think you are very great? I, I can't understand, you see, My brain is that way useless. Because what I found with these people who were working with Me, very anxious to take the credit for this. Somebody wanted to become the chairman, vice-chairman. I said, “You become everything." So the attention being on your promotion, it's not a real promotion, no promotion. Everybody used to laugh at them, it's a degradation. Your promotion is not through your own being but through your own spirit. Being means a very big thing, I think, but spirit is very subtle, very beautiful which is residing in all of you like a light. It's a light in you. Now there are Sahaja, so many Sahaja yogis who are giving enlightenment to others. There are people who are going all over the world. I was surprised that people from Germany and Austria came to help Me when I first went to Russia. I said, "What are you doing here?" Said, "Mother we have to do something because so many people were killed by our forefathers." Then My heart started really thanking them. Look at this, what has come into them? Then they went, you'll be amazed, to Israel and 99

 Original Transcript : English from Israel they brought lots of Sahaja yogis to Egypt. So I asked the Israelis, Sahaja yogis, “Why are you here?" They said, "Mother it's our job now to make friends with these Sahaja yogis from Egypt." Just see how love engulfs all these angularities, all these thorns of life and dissolves it completely. It's so joy giving to see your love acting on others. Small, small things and very big things, all that works out with love. For example, in an industry now people have problems of strikes. Very common struggle, haves and have not and this going on. But if you can raise the people to the spiritual height, to their spiritual need which is the most important need today, you'll be amazed there will be no problem of any kind. You see, it is a kind of a communism. It's a kind of a socialism. It's a kind of a democracy. It's all things put together which works. Democracy means we have Sahaja yogis who wanted to organize this. They said, “Mother what should we do?" I said, "I am not going to say anything. You do what you like. You choose whatever you like, whatever you want to do." And I was just busy arranging the flowers in the house because so many flowers came and I am worried about the flowers. I was just arranging the flowers in the house. And what I find, now see how they've done: no quarrel, no fight, no discussion, nothing. How have they done? Otherwise you cannot make ten people sit together and talk the same way. One will talk, another will talk, another will talk, will go on discussing, discussing this, reaching nowhere. Otherwise only one man has to work it out, otherwise nothing can work. So you see, it changes the whole atmosphere of every human being. Changes his attitude, changes his endeavors and everything becomes so beautiful and joy giving. 99 You are a socialist also because you start thinking about the people who are down trodden, people who have no money who are poor, and you try to work out something by which they get some money. I used to go with My father for a case in a district called Chanda. And there I saw people just with one cloth around them. What was shocking to Me: just one cloth, whether it is winter or summer. I used to weep so My father would say, "Why to weep before them?" I said, "What can I do? I must try to do something for them." Now when I got so many Sahaja yogis, I told them, "I want to help these people somehow. And what they make is pottery." So they said, "Mother, all right. You can get the pottery. We'll import here and we'll sell them." You'll be amazed now, these people have got houses, they have got a good life to live and they are living very well. So in a way, it is a kind of a socialism. That you see problems and you know collectively to solve it, collectively, not singularly but collectively. The all of the Sahaja yogis suggest, “Mother, this can be solved." So far I have not done anything directly, I must say, like starting a organization of that kind. But now when there are so many Sahaja yogis with their attention on their heart, now My attention is going to the people who need our help. So first time, I have asked them to make an NGO for destitute women and for children who are being deserted by their parents. And immediately, you'll be amazed, it all did. We got the land. We got the people. I mean, I'm not doing anything and it's all done. Moreover, so many people have written, "Mother if You want land, we can give You. You come here, do this, do that." Can you imagine? Once I just thought of it: that we have to do something for the poor people. Also other so many things can be done with your attention which is pure, full of love because the love, you see, is something that gives the wisdom how to do it. If you have love, it gives you the complete insight into the problems and 6. you how it works. See it's surprising for Me, I mean, I used to do that always but even after Sahaja Yoga I found that is the love is the solution. Is this only way we can enter into the hearts of people. But for that love, we should not try to do it for some money or for some achievements or for some sort of a reward, but just the whim of the love and that is what is today paying all of you: The way you love all the people. The way you have done so much work. You don't know what gratitude I have for you. Single-handed I could not have done it. I could not have gone to so many countries. It's a like a place like Benin, where

 Original Transcript : English there are only Muslims are there, I would never - I could never have thought of going to that farfetched place where these people are there and imagine these people are Muslims and they have all taken to Sahaja Yoga. And in that they are understanding the beauty of love. You, this is done by French. Can you believe these French? Going down all the way to Benin and getting it done. Even English have all the way to different countries; even the Austrians and also Germans and Italians are another gone quality of people who have a very rich heart, I must say. They have a very rich heart and the way they are spreading Sahaja Yoga throughout Italy is really remarkable. I am amazed how these people are approaching all these people who have never known what is spirit is and how they are getting them to Mother. Now with that, you see, we don't have to say "prohibition." We don't have to say "don't take drugs," nothing. No don'ts in Sahaja Yoga. Automatically they drop. I don't have to say, "Don't do it." Just automatically they drop. 99 66 99 I mean you'll be amazed, once we had a program and there was a light to be put in a one of the deepas and nobody had a matchbox. Can you imagine? Nobody has a matchbox. Is such a problem with thousands of people there, nobody has matchbox. So we had to send somebody to get the matchbox. There's no need. So I never say, "Don't do this," never. I've never said it but it has worked like that, it has worked. I don't know how, how you have dropped it but it's very simple when the light of the spirit is there. In that light, you just don't. 99 Now all the people have said, “Don't drink." Say for example: Sikhs, Muslims but you see they all drink because they are not really Muslims, they are not really Sikhs. If they were really that, they would not have drunk. How is it possible then? They have to be the spirit. In the light of the spirit, we just don't do anything that is destructive, just don't do it. You don't have to tell anybody. Now you are all sitting here, you know that I've never told you anyone, “Don't do this." But I was amazed in London that people overnight gave up drugs, overnight. People employ military, this, that drugs is [INAUDIBLE]. They gave up prostitution. They gave (up) drugs, all kinds of destructive things to which human being take sometimes out of frustration and sometimes because they feel very lonely. But now in Sahaja Yoga, you can never be lonely. All over the world, you have brothers and sisters. If they come to know somebody is there somebody is coming, they'll all go to the airport to receive. It's not a brotherhood of a ordinary life. It's a very deep type of a brotherhood. It's a very deep understanding. But they are very deep people, I must say, because they have been seekers and in that seeking they have really got completely into a turmoil and that has made them very deep people. This book is "Light of Quran" is written by a lady Gilmet. You read it. I would request you to read it because she is so deep. I knew she was very deep but the way she has expressed is so beautiful, so joy giving that she's not a Muslim, she married a Muslim, so called, because they were all Sahaja yogis and the way she has narrated her seeking is so beautiful. We have so many big writers in Sahaja Yoga who have given very, very nice books and things. But this Gilmet is very shy. She doesn't talk. She keeps quiet. But inside, she's so deep because of her seeking. So there are many people in this world who are seeking the truth because they cannot bear the nonsense of modern world and they are very sensitive. They are not insensitive, very sensitive people. That's how you all got your realization. It's nothing of Mine. To say that "I did it," is not proper. If you were not like a candle, I could not have enlightened you. So I am very thankful to you. And I am so much enamored by the way you people are feeling about Sahaja Yoga: that collectively you have to work it out, globally you have to work it out. You have to help each other and bring up the people. Most important thing is to create a mind universally which is towards the spirit. Then we'll solve all the problems, no problem. Now ifI I say am starting some sort of a project here for the poor. Immediately all of them will send Me money. Immediately they'll all work. They'll find out who can work it out, who can come and help Mother. What work can we give them? How to work it out, all over the world. I mean, it spreads so fast. I have to just say that. I never asked for money. I never said, "I need money," but immediately they will plan 8.

 Original Transcript : English out the whole thing, bring the whole thing here and work it out. It can work in India, it can work anywhere. It's not just they are interested in India. But globally they are interested in the problems. It is not for making some sort of a show or some sort of a, we can say, a cult. It is something which is very innate, which is very subtle and that works, that gives them joy. That gives them joy to do something for Sahaja Yoga. I am sometimes amazed how they feel for the whole world, how they care for the whole world, how they are willing to do for [?]. Of course as I said, every country has some problems. Like, we can say that north Indians are interested always in politics because Delhi is here. But is reduced now, very much reduced now. There's not much going on. And they don't like to hear anything against anyone. That's a good thing. And in the south, we can say in the beyond Narmada river, whatever we have, Maharashtra and all that, they are very ritualistic, very ritualistic people. Even if they put the thali [thali MEANS PLATE FOR DINING], you must put salt here, you must put vegetable here, you.. so that a blind man can also eat food properly. You must use only one hand. You must keep another hand tied up. They're very, very ritualistic because of these two things, you see, in Sahaja Yoga they do not grow. Whatever it is, we have to understand that these are [lingering PROBABLY ?] still are behind us. For example in north India, I would say if anybody speaks anything ill about anybody, just put your. This principle of Gandhiji was correct. Never listen to any nonsensical gossip. Gossip is going on. People like to listen to gossip because of this media also. They were showing nothing but gossip before election. And the whole gossip goes into our mind and that's how we work out. So for this part, I would request all the people from the north India to never to listen any criticism, never to criticize anyone. What is the use? Just see logically: if you listen to somebody's criticism, what is the use? What do you gain out of it? Now by repeating it to somebody else, what do you gain? What is the gain? Simple thing, always ask the question: What is the gain? And why to see something wrong with others? I know by that you can be cheated. Somebody can deceive you, is true. But doesn't matter. You don't get anything into your head. You don't get any filth and any poison in your head. I know there are people who create problem, talk from one to another, do this, do that. But that should not harm you in anyway because you have the spirit and the spirit cannot be harmed. It cannot be destroyed. It is said that, "It cannot be destroyed by any weapon. It lives and lives forever." So the attention towards the atma is lacking, atma vimukta. We, our eyes have gone, our attention is gone to something away from the spirit and that's why all the problems are there. Once you are one with your spirit, it works. It works for you because it is in connection with the God almighty. It is in connection with the all pervading power, which works out everything. I know this all pervading power. It has showing so many miraculous photographs about Me. And actually I, I didn't ask It but It is doing. Because very active, It is very active. And if It sees anybody who is subtle and who is deep, It acts. In your business, in your politics, in your family in everywhere you'll find this light will shine and you'll respect, respect the hearts of a person. You'll respect the love of others. You will respect the spirit that is shining in others. This is the reason why you have learned to respect each other, because your spirit is enlightened. I can see it so clearly. I am so very happy to see so many of you here for My birthday. I don't know what is the significance ofa birthday is but whatever it is, it is one of the things that I can meet you, all of you here, so very happy. I am thankful to these people who are elites of our society. They are very great people elected and sometimes given very high positions and also there are some very well known industrialists. All of them have to understand the value of sprititual life. It's very important for them. Not to avoid this point but to be one with your spirit is your own property, is in your own, I should say, the complete glory that you have is to be the spirit. With all this, I don't know how to thank you all and how to thank all these people who spoke so nicely. Only thing, I wish you all a great growth in your spiritual life atmonnati, into your spirituality so that it covers all the corners of the world and create a beautiful world of tomorrow. May God bless you!

 HINDI TRANSLATION (English Talk) Scanned from Hindi Chaitanya Lahari जाना चाहिए, आत्म ज्ञान को ओर जाना चाहिए। आरम्भ में आप सभी सत्य साधकों को हमारा प्राणाम । मेरे तथा सहजयोग के विषय में आप लोगों ने इतना कुछ कह दिया है मानव के साथ यह घटित होना चाहिए अन्यथा हमारा चित्त बाहर की आर है, हमें धन, सत्ता, प्रतिस्पर्धा तथा अन्य सभी कि मेरा हृदय दूर-दूर से इस अवसर पर आए हुए आप सभी लोगों के प्रति कृतज्ञता से भर गया है। सहजयोग समझने के प्रकार की चीजा की चिन्ता लगी रहती है। एक बार यदि लिए यह आवश्यक है कि इस कलियुग में हमें अपनी स्थिति किसी प्रकार से आपका चित्त आत्मा की ओर चला जाए का ज्ञान हो । हम किन परिस्थितियों का सामना कर रहे है? तो आप आत्मा की शक्ति बन जाते हैं । और आत्मशक्ति हर जगह, हर देश में जिस प्रकार घटनाए घटित हो रही हैं सर्वोच्च शक्ति है। सर्वप्रथम आत्मा प्रेम करती है, विना उनके विषय में सोच कर आप परेशान हो जाएंगे। समस्या क्या है? इतना अशान्त एवं तनावग्रस्त होने की लोगा की क्या व्यक्तित्व है जोकि मात्र प्रेम प्रसारित करता है। किसी का आवश्यकता है? सामूहिक रूप से एवं किसी देश विशेष में जहां भी जाते हैं. आपको एक प्रकार की भ्रान्तिपूर्ण स्थिति दिखाई पड़ती है। भयानक ! पूरा समाज ही विनाश के भय कुछ आशा किए । बस प्रेम करती है। यह बन्धन मुक्त कष्ट हो, किसी की समस्या हो, तुरन्त यह प्रेम प्रसारित होन लगता है। हृदय में प्रम प्रसारण को यह शक्ति है। परन्तु हमारा चित्त आत्मा पर न होने के कारण यह कार्यान्वित नहीं हो पाती। राजनीतिक, आर्थिक तथा अन्प्य प्रकार के प्रयत्नां में भी चित्त बाहर की ओर हाने के कारण आप प्रतिस्पर्धा में फसते चल से चिन्तित नजर आता है। कारण क्या है? आयोजित तथा अनायोजित सभी प्रकार के धर्म आदि हैं। बहुत से साधुसन्त हैं, बहुत सी पुस्तकें लिखी गई हैं कि आपमें कौन से गुण हाने चाहिए । परन्तु केवल सत्य साधक (जिज्ञासु) ही दख सकता है कि इस विश्व में इतनी समस्याएं क्यों हैं और आप किस प्रकार इनके समाधान में सहायक हो सकते हैं। समस्या कहा है। समस्या मानव में है। जिस प्रकार हैं क्यांकि बाहर की ओर रहने वाले चित्त में पावित्र्य नही वर्णन किया गया है हम पशु अवस्था से मानवावस्था में है और वह भी बहुत विकसित हुए हैं। नि:सन्देह हममें मानवीय चतना है। इस चतना में हम है तो आपके कष्टों एवं दु:खों का काई अन्त नहीं हागा। मुझे जाते हैं। आप बहुत यांग्य बनते जाते हैं परन्तु अचानक काई आपसे भी अधिक योग्य व्यक्ति खड़ा हो जाता है। म वहुत सं संघर्ष आपका चित्त यदि बाहर की ओर है ता हाता। यह चित्त केवल आप पर होता सीमित अवस्था में । आप यदि कंवल अपने पर चित्त का रखते सभी प्रकार की चीजें देखने लगते हैं जो अच्छी नहीं हैं विध्वंसक हैं और परेशान करने वाली हैं। यदि ये आपका में इन चीजों की विल्कुल चिन्ता नहीं करती । यह सत्य है परेशान नहीं करतीं तो इसका अभिप्राय है कि आप सर्वेदनशाल क्योंकि यह सब महत्वहीन है। परन्तु सम्भवत: मरी रचना हा कहीं भी सांने में, कहीं भी खाता खाने में परंशानी नहीं होती। नहीं हैं। परन्तु मानव रूप में आप संदेवदनशील हैं। इसका क्या कारण है? जीवन के हर क्षेत्र में चाहे ये राजनैतिक हो आर्थिक हो या कोई और एक सूक्ष्म समस्या है जिसे लोग नहीं समझते । अब यदि में कहती हूँ कि हमारे अन्दर आत्मा है, यह हमारे हृदय में चमकती है. तो आपको मुझ पर विश्वास करने की कोई आवश्यकता नहीं है। परन्तु हमारा चित्त वाहर को आर है। इसे आत्म-विमुख कहा जाता है, अर्थात हमारा चित्त बाहर की ओर है। इस मानवास्था में हमारा चित्त बाहर है, भिन्न बाह्य बस्तुओं पर । हमारे चित्त को क्या प्राप्त करने के लिए और विकसित होने के लिए कहां होना चाहिए? किस चीज को प्राप्त करने के लिए? सर्वप्रथम अब हमारे चित्त को आत्मा पर एसी हुई है। ठीक है, परन्तु सहजयांगी भी ऐसे ही बन गए हैं ं। यह चमत्कार है कि मनुष्य अपना चित्त आत्मा पर ले गया है! आत्मा पर चित्त ले जाने के पश्चात् आप हैरान होते हैं कि किस प्रकार बिना किसी प्रतिस्पर्धा, बिना किसी लड़ाई-झगड़ के कार्य होते हैं। किस प्रकार आपका चित्त आत्मा पर स्थापित हो सकता है? सर्वप्रथम आपका स्वास्थ्य सुधर जाता है, आप सुस्वस्थ हो जाते हैं। और इस प्रकार बहुत सी समस्याओं का समाधान हो जाता है। विश्व में मानसिक तनाव और गर्दै भांजन आदि. के कारण 30 प्रतिशत लाग सदैव बीमार रहते सर्वप्रथम आपका स्वास्थ्य सुधर जाता है। 10

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) के प्रेम की यह दिव्य शक्ति केवल प्रेम ही नहीं है यह सहजयोग में लोगों ने समझ लिया है कि आधुनिक , आर्थिक गतिविधियां ने किसी का शान्ति प्रदान नहीं की । हम अमेरिका का लें । मैं अमेरिका गई. बहुत से अमेरिकन लोगों को जानती हैं । ते बच्चे बर्बाद हो गए हैं। सभी बेवकूफी की बातें हो रही हैं। हमारे भारतीय गुरु वहां जाकर धन बना रहे हैं । अमेरिका के लोगों को कंवल शान्ति चाहिए, हार्दिक शान्ति । यह तभी शान्ति आनन्द एवम् उच्च विवेक भी है। सामान्य मानव के लिए इसे समझ पाना अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म कार्य है। यह सब में जानती हूँ। लोग जानते हैं कि व्यक्ति आत्मा बन सकता है। यह विकास प्रक्रिया है। आज आत्मा बनने का समय है। कितन परेशान है! उनके परिवार, उनके बसन्त ऋदु का यह वरदान है। लोगों को आत्मा बनना है नहीं ता उनका अन्त न जाने क्या होगा । आज आत्मा बनना अत्यन्तु आवश्यक है। 'सभी सन्तों, पैगम्बरों, धर्मपरायण लोंगों ने इसके विषय में बताया परन्तु हमने उनकी बातं का तोड़-मरोड़ करके भिन्न मत बना लिए । फिर भी एक सर्वसाधारण बात यह है सम्भव है जब आपका चित्त आपके हृदय पर जाता है, क्योंकि हृदय में आत्मा का निवास है और आत्मा ही शान्ति का सांत है। तो पहला प्रेम है और दूसरी शान्ति है। आप अल्यन्त शान्त हो जाते हैं। साक्षी भाव होकर सारे नाटक को आप एक मेजाक की तरह से दंखते हैं। किसी चीज की चिन्ता करने की कोई आवश्यकता नहीं । सभी कुछ हाता रहता है। तो और प्रम प्राप्त नहीं कर सकते । यहां उपस्थित सहजयोगियों व्यक्ति को यही बनना है जोकि आपकी अपनी है, जो आपके हृदय में है और जो प्रेम का, तथा शान्ति का स्रोत है। तोसरो चीज जो आपके মाथ घटित होती है वह यह है कि आनन्द क्याकि आत्मा का सरांत है अत: आनन्द आपके जीवन में है। इस प्रकार से यह उमड़ता है कि आपका समझ में नहीं आता कि जैसे फल बनने पर फूल झड़ जाता है। फूल को सभी कि आप आत्मा है और आत्मा बने बगैर आप शान्ति, आनन्द ने यह सब प्राप्त कर लिया है। वह नहीं सोचते कि वे विदेशी हैं। इस देश के हैं या उस देश के । इस शिविर में सोने, खाने नहानें आदि का अच्छा प्रबन्ध नहीं है फिर भी वे आनन्द ले रहे हैं। असुविधाओं की चिन्ता किसी को नहीं। नि:सन्देह किसी देश विशेष के कुछ संस्कार बचे हुए हों परन्तु वे भी छूट जाते हैं। शनै: शनैे: ये कुसंस्कार उसी प्रकार झड़ने लगते - आत्मा बनना है। आत्मा उमड पड़ता किस प्रकार आनन्द के इस महान सागर से बाहर आए । आप द्वसम तेरन लगत है और इसका पूर्ण आनन्द लने लगने हैं। पखुड़िया झड़ जाता है और वह फल बन जाता है । अब आप भी फल बन गए हैं। ज्ञान, विवेक एवम् प्रेम के फल। ज्ञान के लिए पुस्तकं पढ़ने की आपका कोई आवश्यकता अधिक पढ़े-लिखे लोगों को सहज में लाना कठिन कार्य है। आपको स्वयं मात्र इतना देखना है कि वास्तविकता क्या है? और यह साक्षात्कारी व्यक्ति बन जाने पर ही संभव है। अन्यथा आप विश्व के भ्रम में ही खो जाते हैं। भ्रमों में फंस कर संघर्ष करते हुए लड़त विश्व भर में जाकर लागों के हृदय छूकर आप इस आनन्द के सभी तट छु लेते हैं । मैं फिर कहती हूं कि आत्मा का निवास हृदय गतिविधियां आपको आत्मा तक नहीं पहुंचा सकती । नहीं, इसकी काई आवश्यकता नहीं । में है। यह मस्तिष्क में नहीं रहती । मानसिक आत्मा पर चित्त रखने से ही आत्मा को प्राप्त किया जा सकता है और यह बटित होना तभी सभव है जब कुण्डलिनी जीवन के दृष्टिकाण का परिवर्तित हो का जागृति हो जाए जञाना पुर्ण शान्ति एवम् आनन्द का आपको प्राप्त हो जाना में नहीं कहना चाहती । सहजयाग में आकर आपकी विकास । हुए आप जीवन-यापन करते हैं और अन्त क्या होता है यह आपके चिन के आत्मा पर स्थित होान के कारण है। अब आप प्रक्रिया में एक विशेष चीज जो घटित हुई है वह है आपक धन के विपय में नहीं सीचते । धन आपको सहेज हो में प्राप्त चित्त का आत्मा पर चले जाना । आत्मा की शक्ति प्रापत होते नहीं ही जाता है। आप शक्ति के बारे में नहों साचते । सत्ता आपको हो आप स्वयं को हर क्षेत्र में सफल पात हैं। आप कुछ स्वतः ही मिल जाती है। और आत्मा को शक्ति हो सर्वांच्च चाहते, आप कुछ नहीं मांगते । फिर भी आपको सभी कुछ प्राप्त हो जाता है । कोई यदि आपके साथ ज्यादती कर दे ता कि आप सन्यासी, साधुवाबा बन जाएं और सभी प्रकार के भी आप बुरा नहीं मानते । सोचते हैं ठीक है, इसे भूल जाओं। कमंकाण्ड करें कमंकाणड अनावश्यक हैं। आत्मा का निवास तो छोटी-छोटी चीजों के लिए लड़ते रहने का, इनके लिए आपमें है । पूर्व जन्मों में आप सभी कमंकाण्ड कर चुक है। याचना करने को कोई लाभ तहीं । परन्तु इस स्थिति को पान इस जन्म में आपने केवल चित्त का आत्मा पर रखना है और के लिए सभी को क्षमा करना आवश्यक हैं। ही सकता है कांई व्यक्ति असंगत हो, आपकी हानि पहुंचाने का प्रयत्न करता हो, ठीक है मैं उसे क्षमा करता हूँ। बह मुझे सिरदर्द देने की कोशिश कर रहा है परन्तु में वह सिर दर्द नहीं लंगा। मैं उसे क्षमा करता हूँ। यही महत्वपूर्ण बात ईंसा ने कही थी कि है अत्यन्त शक्तिशाली एवम् धर्मंपरायण । आवश्यक नहीं आपकी अपनी ' आदि मां' की जागृति द्वारा यह कुण्डलिनी ही संभव है। जब यह उठने लगती है ता सभी चक्रों को भदती हुई उनका पांपण करती है, उन्हें संघटित करती है और सिर के तालू भाग (सहस्रार) का भदन कर परमात्मा के प्रम की सर्वव्यापो शक्ति से आपका सम्बन्ध जाड़ती है। परमात्मा आपको क्षमा करना होगा । 11

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) भुलाया नहीं जा सकता । परन्तु उसकी मृत्यु हा गई और आज अचानक, आप देखते हैं कि जर्मनी कंलोग कितन साक्षात्कारी है। मैं आश्चर्य चकित थी कि किस प्रकार लोंग े मोहम्मद साहब ने भी बहुत कुछ बताया है । मेरी समझ में नहीं आता कि लोगों ने उन्को वातों को किस प्रकार तोड़ मरोड़ दिया ! ने अपने हिसाब से परिवर्तित कर लिया । सभी ने एक ही बात कही कि. 'आपकी आत्मा बनना होगा । परन्तु उनके कथनों को ताड़-मराड कर बहुत से धर्म बना लिए । धर्म में लड़ने की क्या आवश्यकता है? यदि परमात्मा एक ही है तो धर्म के नाम पर झगड़ा नहीं होना चाहिए। अब सहजयोग में भिन्न स्थान, भिन्न देशों, भिन्न आदर्शां से लोग आते हैं। सहज इसा ने बहुत कुछ बताया. उन्हें भी लोगों प्रेम एवं परमात्मा कं विषय में ग्रबुद्ध हैं । ये सभी देश मैं हैं। इतनी तो आशा भी नहीं की जा सकती । आप इंग्लेण्ड की कल्पना कीजिए जो भारत आया और बहां तीन सी बार्ष तक राज्य किगया दखा है, बहुत अच्छी तरह चल रहे आज वहा बहुत से सहजयोगों हैं और जब में प्रवचन देती हैं ता सभागार लागा से भर जात हैं। यही चीज मैंन रूस जैसे दशा योगियों को एक महान बात यह है कि वे पावन हैं, उनमें में देखो है जो कि प्रजातन्त्र होने के पश्चात् पतन के कगार पवित्रता है। सजह योग में चरित्रहीनता की समस्या नहीं पर थे । प्रजातन्त्र बा साम्यवाद आदि ता कंवल 'वाद' हो है उनसे बाहर निकल कर आपको देखना होगा कि यह प्रजातन्त्र बहुत है कोई भी चरित्रहीन दिखाई नहीं पड़ता । चरित्रहीन, धोखबाज भ्रष्ट यदि कोई हो तो वह सुधर जाता है। क्योंकि आत्मा पत राक्षसतन्त्र बन गया है और साम्यवाद भी असफल हो गया है। आपको स्वयं को देखने के लिए प्रकाश देती है कि आपके क्यों? मूलतः उनमें क्या दाप है? आध्यात्मिकता उनका आधार हित में क्या है। आप यदि चक्षुहीन हैं तो सड़क पर चलते हुए नहीं है। इनमें आध्यात्मिकता का कांई स्थान न था । यह सब बाह्य प्रयत्नों पर आधारित थे और यह प्रयत्न वहुत हो से देख सकते हैं तो आप जानते हैं कि आपको किस प्रकार सीमित थे एक बार जब यह सीमाएं टूट जाती है तो समस्या चलना है। सहजयाग में यही घटित हो रहा है लाग जान गये खड़ी हो जाती है। अब आप दखें कि विश्व का आर्थिक ढाचा चरमरा रहा है; हर जगह मन्दा है। वा यदि इतने विशेपज्ञ हैं तो फिर ये मन्दा क्यों है, ये समस्यायं क्यों हैं? लाग कहते हृदय में प्रम है, क्यांकि वे अन्धे थे । किसी भी अन्ध व्यक्ति हैं कि हमें गरीबी की दूर भगाना है, में सहमत हूँ। पर्तु के लिए आपक हृदय में प्रेम के अतिरिक्त क्या ही सकता है? उपहार द कर नहीं, आत्म साक्षात्कार द्वारा आप यह कार्य कर काई यदि मुझे गाली भी दे दे तो भी में उसे क्षमा कर देतीं सकते हैं। इच्छुक लागां के पास जा कर सहजवाग द्वारा आप हूँ क्योंकि वे नहीं जानते कि वे क्या कर रहे हैं व चक्षुहीन उन्हें बैभवशाली वना सकत हैं। आप हैरान होंग कि वे स्वयं हैं। आप सत्य मार्ग पर खड़े हैं अत: किसी ने यदि आपको बहतर कार्य करेंगे और गरीबी का दूर भगायंगे । विदेशों में हानि भी पहुंचाई हो ता भी आप उसे क्षमा कर दें । ता दूसरी लांग पूछा करते थे कि श्री माताजी आप आध्यात्मिक जीवन के विपय में बात करती हैं, परन्तु भारत निर्धन क्या है। मरा उत्तर होता है कि आध्यात्मिकता में व निर्धन नहीं हैं। धन के मामले में चाहे ब निर्धन हो। जिन लागों के पास बहुत धन है क्या वं अच्छ लाग है? क्या व कुछ अच्छा का्य कर रहे है? इसी प्रकार जो लोग निर्शन है क्या व काई अच्छाई नहीं कर रहे ताकि उन पर करुणा की जा सके । जब दांनों ही तरह के लोग दुःखो है ता उन्हें परिवर्तित करने के लिए हम क्या करना चाहिए? जीवन के प्रति पूर्ण दृष्टिकोण ही परिवर्तित आप खडड में गिर सकते हैं परन्तु यदि आप अपनी आंखो हैं कि किस प्रकार चलना है और किस प्रकार पतन से बचना है। मैंने पतित लोगों को भी देखा है परन्तु उनक लिए भी मंर मैं बात यह है कि आत्मा सत्य का सात है असत्य का नहीं । उदाहरणार्थ यदि कोई कुगुरु है तो आप तुरन्त जान जायंगे । कैसे? अपनी चैतन्य लहरियों से, अपनी अंगुलियों क्रे सिरों पर कि यह व्यक्ति झुठा है। माहम्मद साहब ने बताया है कि पुनर्डत्थान के समय आपके हाथ बोलेग किसी भी कष्ट के समय वास्तव में एसा ही होता है। अतः यदि आप चाहे तो उस व्यक्ति को टाल सकते हैं और चाहें तो उसे मार्ग पर ला सकते हैं। परन्तु आरम्भ में हमें उलझे हुए चरित्र के लोगो को सुधारने की कोशिश नहीं करनी चाहिए नहीं तो वह आपका भी उलझा देंगे । लाग अब सहज योग में परिपक्व हो गये हैं और सुगमता से इन समस्याओं का सुलझा सकते हैं। हम यह भी जानते हैं कि सभी तत्व हमारे लिए कार्यरत हैं। विश्व की सारी घटनायें केवल यह दर्शाने के लिए हैं कि गलत चीजें तो गलत ही हैं और किस प्रकार अच्छे कार्य किये जाने चाहिए। कर देना चाहिए । आत्म साक्षात्कार के पश्चात मंन दखा है कि धनी लाग एकदम निर्धनता का समझने लगते हैं। व अपना धन दूसरे लीगां के साथ बांटन लगत हैं और इस तरह से चीजें कार्यान्वित होने लगती हैं। सहज यांग में, आप हरान होंगे, किस प्रकार लाग एक दूसरे की सहायता करते हैं । किसी की भी कठिनाई या समख्या कां किस सुन्दरता से व दूर करने का प्रयत्न करते हैं ! परमात्मा की इस सर्वव्यापे उदाहरण के रूप में जब हिटलर आया तो उसने लोगों का वध करना शुरू करे दिया। अपनी सत्ता स्थापित करने के शक्ति से हमें यह विवेक प्राप्त करना है। सभी धुर्मा में इस लिए उसने सभी प्रकार के उल्टे-सीधे कार्य किए जिन्हें शक्ति का वर्णन किया गया है इसे 'निराकार', 'रूह', परम 12

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) करना है। यह भावना तभी आ सकती है जब आपकी कुण्डलिनी जागृत हो । मैं जानती हूँ कि मोहम्मद साहब, ईसा मसीह, अब्राहम या मोजिज आदि, जिन्होंने धर्मग्रन्थों की सृष्टि की है. ने कभी भी नहीं सोचा था कि लोग आयोजित रूप से धर्म बना कर इस प्रकार चलने लगेंगे मानो वे एक दूसरे चैतन्य, कहा गया है। आप इसे किसी भी नाम से बुला सकते हैं, नाम ही सभी कुछ नहीं है। एक बार जब आप इस शक्ति से जुड़ जाते हैं तो आशीवादित हो जाते हैं। हजारों बार आशोवादित हाने के पश्चात आप एक सामान्य मानव बन पाते हैं। सामान्य मानव को उसके प्रयत्नों के अनुकूल ही फल प्राप्त होते हैं। परन्तु सहजयोगी को बहुत अधिक प्रयत्न के विरोधी हो। परन्तु ऐसा हुआ । यह विरोध दूर करने के नहीं करना पड़ता, स्वतं: ही वह उस स्थिति में चला जाता है। लिए आपको उन्हें ज्ञान दना होगा, शुद्ध ज्ञान, पुस्तकों का ज्ञान वह शक्ति, वह दिव्य शक्ति आपको वहा तक ले आती है नहीं. शुद्ध ज्ञान । शुद्ध ज्ञान ही विवेक है। इसी विवेक से मैंने कार्य किया है। शैशव काल से ही मुझमें यह विवेक था किसी ने मुझे यह ज्ञान दिया नहीं-यह विद्यमान था । इसी विवेक ने मुझे सिखाया कि मानव की जो भी दशा हो, जो भी और यह बात आपने अपने जीवन में देखी है। किस प्रकार आप मेरे पास आय थे? किस प्रकार आप सहजयोग में आये? इसी दिव्य शक्ति ने यह सब कार्य किया आप यह महसूस करें या नहीं परन्तु यह (शक्ति) सहज है। आत्मसाक्षात्कार के उसकी शेली हो, जितने भी उसमें अहम् और बन्धन हों. यदि बाद आप अपने जीवन के विषय में साचने मात्र से कि मैं किस प्रकार सहजयाग में आया. किस प्रकार मुझे यह प्राप्त हुआ, आपका लगेगा कि यह शक्ति आपके हृदय पर शान्ति, प्रेम एवम् स्नेह की वरषा कर रही है। जैसा इन्हांने अभी कहा कि मंर पास बहुत-सी शक्तियां हैं, हों सकता है, में नहीं लोग आज यहां नहीं हैं मैं उन्हें जानती हूँ. और वे लोग मुझे जानती, परन्तु एक बात निश्चित है कि सहज यांगी मेरी सभी शक्तियों का प्राप्त कर सकते हैं। वह प्रम को महसूस कर सकता है तो उसकी आत्मा जागृत हो जाती है । यह परिवर्तन घटित हो चुका है। विश्वभर में जिन लागों ने आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त किया है उनकी कवल एक प्रतिशत यहां उपस्थित है, परन्तु जो याद हैं। वे साधक हैं और पागलों की तरह से उन्होंने सत्य को खोजा, इस साधना में उन्होंने बहुत से कष्ट सहे । उन्हें कई कुगुरु मिले और बहुत-सा धन उन्हें बर्बाद करना पड़ा। माँ सहजयोगियों का सभी कुछ दंना चाहती हैं। अपने वंट-वेटीयों को अपनी हौ तरह से विकसित होते हुए देखना सभी कुछ उन्होने किया परन्तु सहजयांग में आ कर ही वो मां के लिए महानतम आनन्द है। मेर जावन का एक महान् स्वप्न है और आज में उसकी स्पष्ट तस्वीर दंख रही हूँ। मैं एक सर्वसाधारण गृहणीं थी जिसके पास बहुत अधिक धन भी न था । आप जानते हैं कि धन में मरी काई रुचि नहीं यही सत्य हैं और उन्होंने सत्य को पा लिया है। यह सत्य कि सत्य की प्राप्त कर सके! सत्य बहुत सरल है कि आप आत्मा हैं। आप यह शरीर या वुद्ध नहीं हैं, आप आत्मा हैं। यही सत्य है। और उन्होंने आत्मा को प्राप्त कर लिया है। आप आत्मा है, जब आपके अन्दर स्थापित हो जाता है तो है। बैंक मरी समझ में नहीं आते, मरा चैक कोई और हस्ताक्षर कुछ भी न तो आपको हानि पहुंचा सकता है और न ही आपका नाश कर सकता है। आपकी कोई इच्छाएं भी नहीं रह जाती। जब आप आत्मा बन गये तो फिर आपको क्या इच्छा करता है और मेरे पति को मरे लिए रूपये गिनते पड़ते हैं। इस मामले में मैें इतनी दुबंल हूं । फिर भी मुझे कभी भी समस्या नहीं हुई -क्यांकि मानव के अन्तर्निहित लालच ही सभी समस्याओं को जन्म दता है। एक बार यदि व्यक्ति सबूरी हा सकती है? आप में इतना सन्तोष आ जाता है! ऐसा व्यक्ति सीख ले ता स्वत: ही लालच छूट जाता है और व्यक्ति पूर्णंत: न तो किसी की भर्तस्ना करता है न किसी के पीछे दौड़ता सुखी हो जाता है। परन्तु इसका अभिप्राय यह भी नहीं है कि है। वह सन्तुष्ट होता है, पूर्णत: सन्तुष्ट । मेरी तीव्र इच्छा थी आप लाग साधु-बाबा या सन्यासी वन जायें या सभी कुछ कि मैं अत्यन्त सामान्य जोवन गुजारू, हिमालयवासी सत्य साधकों की तरह से न बनू क्योंकि आम लोगों के लिए सामन्य जीवन ही आवश्यक है। आज यह सामूहिक जागृति है। यह किसी व्यक्ति विशेष के लिए नहीं है। मान लो कोई आविष्कार होता है और यह किसी एक व्यक्ति के लिए है तो यह अर्थहीन है। यह जन जन तक पहुँचना चाहिए । में जानती थी कि मुझे यह कार्य करना है। लोग कहते हैं कि मुझे इसके लिए कार्य करना पड़ा. परन्तु में नहीं सोंचती मैंने লाभान्वित होंगे । इसके लिए आपको वाहर से कुछ नहीं कुछ किया । में तो इसकी एक साक्षी मात्र थी । एक साक्षी लाना पड़ता और न ही कुछ सोखना पड़ता है। यह आप सभी के रूप में हर चीज का आनन्द लेते हुए मैंने इसे देखा, विल्कुल उसी तरह से जिस प्रकार समुद्र के तट पर वैठकर त्याग द । ल्याग के वे दिन चले गये हैं,. वा सारं कष्ट आप मह चुक है। आप हिमालय में रह चुक है. सिर के भार खड़े रह चुक हैं और सभी प्रकार को तपस्याएं कर चुके हैं। अब इसकी कोई आवश्यकता नहीं है। अब आवश्यकता इस बात की है कि आप अपना चित आत्मा पर रखें। अपने अन्तःस्थित 1 आत्मा पर जितना अधिक से अधिक आप अपने चित्त को रखगे, जितना बाहय चीजों से चित्त को हटायंगे उतना हो आप में है। आपको इसे केवल महसूस के अन्दर है, आपके हृदय 13

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) माताजी हमें कुछ तो करता ही चाहिए क्योंकि हमारे पूर्वजों ने यहा के बहुत । मेरा हुृदय उन्हें धन्यवाद देने लगा । आप लहरों को आतं जाते देखते हैं। परन्तु व्यक्ति के अन्दर का मानव विकसित हाना चाहता है, आत्मा बनना चाहता है। से लोगों को हत्या की थो आप देखें कि उनमें क्या परिवर्तन आ तब वह सोचने लगता है कि दूसरां का क्या हित कर सकता है। अभी तक मैं बहुत उत्सुक थी कि लोग सहजयोगी बनें। मैंने धर्मप्रचारकों या सामाजिक कार्यकर्ताओं का कार्य नहीं गया है। तत्पश्चात् वे सहजयोगी मिस्र आए । मैंने इज़राइल के सहजयांगियों से पूछा कि आप यहां क्यों आए? तो वे कहने लगे कि श्रीमाताजी मिस के सहजयोगियों को मित्र बनाना हमारा कार्य हे। आप बहुत से इज़राइल गए और वहा से अपनाया । सहज योग शुरु करने से पूर्व में सामाजिक कार्य किया करती थी परन्तु वाद में मैंने महसूस किया कि लोगो को परिवर्तित किए बिना और आल्मा बन विना आप भी अन्य सामाजिक कार्यकर्ताओं की तरह से हो जाएंगे । मैं एक अन्ध विद्यालय में कार्य करती थी, अन्ध विद्यालय की मैं अध्यक्षा थी । अपने साथ कें लोगों को देखकर मैं हैरान थी कि वे किस प्रकार के अटपटे लोग हैं! गवर्नर आने वाले थे और वे ध्यान से देखें कि किस प्रकार प्रेम जीवन के सभी भेद-भावों तथा कांटा को निगल लता है तथा इन्हें पूर्णत: समाप्त कर देता है। अपने प्रेम का दूसरों पर कार्यान्वित हाते हुए दंखना बहुत आन्नददायी है। छोटी-छांटी और बड़ी-बड़ी चीजें, प्रम से सभी कुछ कार्यान्वित हा जाता है। उदाहरणत:, कारखानों में हड़तालां की समस्या है, एक सर्वसामान्य संघर्ष है कि एसा होना चाहिए, ऐसा नहीं होना चाहिए । परन्तु यदि आप लोगो की आध्यात्मिक आवश्यकता के अनुसार उन्हें अध्यात्मिक बुलन्दियों तक उठा सके तो, आप हैरान हांगे. किसी भी प्रकार की काई समस्या न रह जाएगी । इसकी आज अल्यन्त ये सब कहने लगे कि गवर्नर के पास कौन बैठेगा? मॅन 12 पूछा क्या है? वे कहने लगे कि अध्यक्षा होने के नात आपको गवर्नर के समीप बैठना चाहिए। मैंने कहा कि यह आवश्यक नहीं है, मैं कहीं भी बैठ सकती हूँ। परन्तु इस बात को लेंकर वे झगड़ने लगे मैंन कहा ठीक है हम एक पलंग गर्वनर के सिर पर रख देगे और चिड़ियों की तरह से उस पर बैठ जाएंगे । इस मजाक ने कार्य किया और वे सब शान्त हो गए। पदवी का अहम् मात्र मूर्खता है। चौटियां भी जानती हैं कि सामूहिकता में कार्य किस प्रकार करना है। मेरी समझ में नहीं आता कि किस प्रकार मानव वेवकूफी भरी चीजों के प्रति मरा जा रहा है! केवल एक हो कारण ही सकता है कि वह अभी आत्मा नहीं बना । यही कारण है कि वह, अपना सम्मान आवश्यकता है। यह एक प्रकार का साम्यवाद है, एक प्रकार का समाजवाद है, एक प्रकार का प्रजातंत्र हैं। सारी चीजों के ताल-मल से हो कार्य हाता है। कुछ सहजयागी इसका आयोजन करना चाहते थे । क्या करना चाहिए? मैंन कहा, मैं कुछ नहीं कहुंगी. आपकी जो इच्छा हा आप करें, जा आपको पसंद हा वा छांट लें और जो करना चाहे कर और मैं घर में पुष्प सजानं में व्यस्त हो गई. क्यांकि वहुत से फूल आए थे और मुझे इनकी चिन्ता श्री। फलों को ठीक-ठाक करते हुए मुझे पता चला कि उन सहजयोगियों ने सारा कार्य सुन्दरतापूर्वक कर दिया है। न कांई लड़ाई हुई, न झगड़ा. न कोई बहस, कुछ भी नहीं । किस प्रकार उन्होंने यह सब कर दिया? वैसे आप दस लोगों को साथ बिठा दें तो व एकमत नहीं हो पात एक बोलेगा, दूसरा उन्होंने पूछा कि श्रीमाताजी हमें नहीं करता और सभी अपमान जनक कार्य किए चला जाता है। मुझे लगा कि इस प्रकार का कार्य करने वाले लोग स्वयं को अति महान मान वैठते हैं। कोई अच्छा कार्य जब आप करने लगते हैं तो क्यों आप स्वयं को महान समझ लें? मेरी इस मामले में मेरा मस्तिप्क बेकार है समझ में नहीं आता । क्योंकि मुझे लगा कि मेरे साथ कार्य करने वाले ये लोंग श्रेय बालगा. बहस चलती रहेगी परन्तु परिणाम कुछ भी न हांगा या फिर केवल एक ही व्यक्ति उस कार्य को करे अन्यथा कार्य हो ही न पाएगा । ता सहजयोग मानव के सार वातावरण का. उसके दृष्टिकांण को, उसके प्रयत्नों का परिवर्तित कर देता है और सभी कुछ आनन्ददायी हो जाता है। यहीं प्रजातंत्र है। आप समाजवादी भी हैं क्यांकि आप पिछड़े हुए धनहीन दरिद्र लांगों के विषय में भी सांचते हैं और उनके लिए कुछ एसा कार्य करना चाहते हैं जिससे उन्हें कुछ पैसा मिल सके। अपने पिताजी के साथ एक मुकद्दमे के सिलसिल में मैं चांदा ज़िले जाया करती थी । वहां मंने कंवल एक वस्त्र पहने । मेरे लिए यह आघात था। सदो हा या गर्मी, केवल एक वस्त्र! मैं राया करती थी, मेरे पिताजी कहते पहली वार जब मैं रूस गई ता मरी सहायता करने के लिए उनके लिए तुम क्यों रोती हो? मैं कहती - और मैं क्या कर सकती हूँ? उनकी बेहतरी के लिए मुझे कुछ करने का प्रयत्न लन के लिए उत्सुक रहते थे। काई अध्यक्ष बनना चाहता था तो कोई उपाध्यक्ष । चित्त का पदांन्नति पर बने रहना वास्तविक पदोन्नति नहीं है। मैन कहा आप सभी कुछ बन जाइय । हर आदमी उन पर हंसा करता था। यह अवनति हैं । आपकी उन्नति तो कंवल आपकी आत्मा के माध्यम से ही हो सकती है। शारीरिक अस्तित्व बहुत बड़ी चवीज है परन्तु आत्मा और आपमें सुन्दर है और प्रकाश की तरह अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म निवास करती है। यह आपके अन्तनिहित प्रकाश से औ है। बहुत से सहजयागी अन्य लोगों को साक्षात्कार दे लोगों को दखा हुए सकते हैं। कुछ लोग पूरे विश्व में जा रहे हैं। मैं हैरान थी कि वहा जमनी और ऑसट्रिया से बहुत से सहजयोगी आए । मैंनें ता करना ही चाहिए । पृछा आप यहां क्या कर रहे हैं! तो उत्तर मिला कि श्री 14

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) अब जब इतने सहजयोगी हो गए तो मैंने उनसे बताया अच्छे किस्म के लोग हैं जिनके पास बहुत ही अच्छा हृदय है। कि किसी पकार में इन लोगों की सहायता करना चाहती हूँ। उनके पास अत्यन्त विशाल हृदय है और जिस प्रकार वे वे मिट्टी के वर्तन बनाते हैं । तो उन्होंने कहा, श्रीमाताजी, ठीक है आप उनसे बर्तन मंगवाएं हम इन्हें बेचेंगे आप हैरान हैरान हूँ कि किस प्रकार वे उन लोगों तक पहुंच जाते हैं जिन्हें होंगे कि अब इन लोगों के पास रहने के लिए घर हैं और आत्मा के विषय में कुछ भी ज्ञान नहीं और किस प्रकार वे अब ये अच्छी तरह से अच्छा जीवन विता रहे हैं। तो, एक प्रकार से, यह समाजवाद है. कि आप समस्या को देखते हैं कहना पड़ता, हम नशीले पदार्थ संवन के लिए मना नहीं और सामूहिक रूप से इसका समाधान करना जानते हैं। सामूहिक रूप से. अकले नहीं । सभी सहजयोगी इस बात की छूट जाती हैं, मुझे नहीं कहना पड़ता कि एंसा मत करा सलाह दते हैं कि श्रीमाताजी इसी प्रकार इस समस्या का समाधान हो सकता है। अभी तक मेंन स्वयं कोई संस्था आदि हैरानी होगी । एक बार एक कार्यक्रम में दीपक जलाने थे बनाने का कार्य नहीं किया है । अब जबकि हृदय में ध्यान करने वाले इतने सारे सहजयोगी हैं, मेरा चित्त उन लोगों पर सहजयोग को पूरी इटली में फैला रहे हैं वह प्रशंसनीय है। मैं करते हैं। हमें नशा बन्दी के लिए नहीं उन लोगों को एकत्र करते । सहजयोग में काई मनाही नहीं है। स्वत: सब बुराइया स्वत: ही सारी बुराइयां छूट जाती हैं। इस बात पर आपको । क्या आप सोच परन्तु किसी के पास मानिस तक न थी सकते हैं-किसी के पास माचिस न थी । हजारों लोग वहां थे परन्तु किसी के पास माचिस न थी । मैंन कभी नहीं कहा पहली वार मैंन उनसे आश्रय विहीन महिलाओं और बच्चों के 'ऐसा करो ऐसा मत करो' परन्तु सब कुछ हो गया। में नहीं लिए, जिन्हें उनके माता-पिता ने त्याग दिया है, एक गैर-सरकारी जानती कंसे, किस प्रकार आपको सारी बुराइया छूट गई। यह संस्था (NGO) बनाने के लिए कहा आप हैरान हांगे कि बड़ी सहज बात है। एक वार जब आप आत्मा कं प्रकाश में आ जाते हैं तो आप कोई बुरा कार्य करते ही नहीं । सभी कहने का अभिप्राय है कि मैं कुछ भी नहीं कर रही हूँ। बहुत गुरुओं और पैगम्बरों ने शराव पीनं को मना किया है | से लोगों ते मुझे लिखा है कि श्रीमाताजी यदि आपका भूमि उदाहरणार्थ, सिखों और मुसलमानों को शराब न पीने की आज्ञा है। परन्तु उनमें से अधिकतर शराब पीते हैं क्योंकि वे सच्चे मुसलमान और सच्चे सिख नहीं हैं। यदि वे सच्च हाते आपके पवित्र एवम् स्नहमय चित्त से और भी बहुत से कार्य तो शराब न पीते । तो यह किस प्रकार संभव है? व्यक्ति को आत्मा वनना पड़ता है। आत्मा के प्रकाश में व्यक्ति काई भी विनाशकारी कार्य नहीं करता । इसके लिए किसी को बताने को आवश्यकता नहीं होती । अब आप सब लोगों को भी मैंन कभी किसी चीज के लिए नहीं रोका, परन्तु मैं हैरान थी कि लंदन जैसे स्थान पर भी लोगों ने रातों-रात नशे त्याग दिए । जा रहा है जिन्हें हमारी सहायता की आवश्यकता है। अत: तुरन्त हमें इसके लिए भूमि और कार्यकर्ता मिल गए । मेरा चाहिए तो यहां आ जाइये । आप कल्पना कर सकते हैं कि गरीबों की सहायता के लिए मेंन कवल सोचा भर था । किए जा सकते हैं. क्योंकि प्रेम काय्य को करने के लिए विवक प्रदान करता है। आपमें यदि प्रेम है तो यह आपको समस्या समाधान के प्रति अन्तर्दृष्टि प्रदान करता है। मर लिए यह आश्चर्यचकित कर देने वाली बात है। यद्यपि में सदैव प्रेम के माध्यम से ही कार्य किया करती थी. परन्तु सहजयोग के पश्चात् भी मैन पाया कि प्रम ही समाधान है। लोगों के कई देश तो इस कार्य के लिए सेना का उपयोग करते हैं । हुदय में प्रवश करने का हमारे सम्मुख कवल यही एक मार्ग है। परन्तु सहजयोग में आने के पश्चात् लोगों ने स्वत: ही परन्तु इस प्रम के पौछे धन, उपलब्धयां, पुरस्कार आदि वेश्यावृत्ति और नशे त्याग दिए । नैराश्य तथा अकेलेपन के हमारा लक्ष्य नहीं हांने चाहिए । प्रेम तो केवल प्रेम के लिएदुख से अपनाए हुए सभी नशे उन्होंने त्याग दिए । सहज योग ही हाना चाहिए । आज यही भावना आपको लाभान्वित कर रही है। आप सबको लाभान्वित कर रही है। जिस प्रकार आप में आप कभी अकेले हो ही नहीं सकते । विश्व भर में आपके बहन भाई हैं। उन्हें यदि पता लगता है कि कोई आ रहा है तो उसे लेने के लिए वे सब हवाई अड्डे पर चलें जाते हैं। यह सामान्य जीवन का भाई-चारा नहीं है। बहुत गहन भाई चारा है। इसमें अत्यन्त सूझबूझ है। ये लोग अत्यन्त गहन सबका प्रम करते हैं. जिस प्रकार आपने इतना कार्य किया है. आप नहीं जानते कि मैं कितनी कृतज्ञ हूँ! अकल में यह सब बैनिन कार्य नहीं कर पाती । इतने दशों में मैं नहीं जा पाती। जैसे दूरदराज स्थान पर में न पहुंच पाती । यहां मुसलमान हैं। वे साधक थे और साधना करते हुए वे खलवली में फंस लाग रहते हैं और इन सबने सहजयोग अपनाया है और प्रम के सौन्दर्य को समझ रहे हैं। यह सारा कार्य फ्रांस के लोगों न किया है। क्या आप कल्पना कर सकते हैं कि फ्रांस के महिला ने लिखी है, आप इसे यढे लोग इतनी दूर जाकर एसा कार्य करंगे ! अंग्रेज भी भिन्न देशों है। अत्यन्त सुन्दर एवम् आनन्ददायी ढंग से उसने अपनी में गए, आस्ट्रिया, जमंनी तथा इटली के लोग भी बहुत ही अभिव्यक्ति इस पुस्तक में की है। वह मुसलमान नहीं है. उसने गए । उस स्थिति ने उन्हें गहन बना दिया । यह पुस्तक कुरान का प्रकाश (Light of Koran) गिलमेंट नामक एक । वह महिला बहुत गहन 15

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) कर्मकोण्डी लोग हैं। थाली में वे बताएंगे कि नमक एक तथाकथित मुसलमान से विवाह किया है क्योंकि वह सहजयोगी है और अत्यन्त सुन्दर ढंग से अपनी साधना का वर्णन किया है। सहजयोग में बहुत से महान् लेखक हैं जिन्होंने अच्छी-अच्छी पुस्तकें लिखी हैं। गिलमेट बहुत लजीली है वह प्राय: बात नहीं करती। मौन रहती है। परन्तु अपनी सत्य साध में बहुत कहां रखना है, सब्जी कहां रखनी है, ताकि एक अन्धा व्यक्ति भी अच्छी तरह से खाना खा सके । आपको केवल एक हाथ से खाना खाना है दूसरा हाथ नहीं लगाना है। वे अत्यन्त कमकाण्डी हैं। इन्हीं चीजों के कारण वे सहजयोग में बढ़ नहीं पाते । जो भी हो हमें यह समझना है कि यह चीजें अभी तक हमें जकड़े हुए हैं। में कहती हूँ कि उत्तर भारत में यदि कोई कर ना के कारण अन्तस में बह बहुत गहन है। इस विश्व में बहुत से लोग सत्य की खोज कर रहे हैं। लीजिए। किसी के विरूद्ध कहे तो आप अपने कान बन्द वे आधुनिक विश्व की मुर्खताओं को सहन नहीं कर सकते और अत्यन्त संवेदनशील हैं। इसी प्रकार आप सबको गांधी जी का यह नियम ठीक था । व्यर्थ की बात को कभी मत सुनो । समाचार पत्रों के कारण भी चुनावों से पूर्व अवांछित गप्पें सुनने को मिलती हैं। यह सब व्यर्थ की बातें आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त हुआ । इसमें मेरा कुछ नहीं है। ये कहना उचित न होगा कि मैंने यह कार्य किया है। आप यदि दीपक न होते तो मैं आपको प्रकाशित न कर पाती । मैं हमारे मस्तिष्क को प्रभावित करती हैं। अत: मैं सभी उत्तर भारतीय लोगों से अनुरोध करती हूँ कि कभी भी किसी की आलोचना न सुने । इसका क्या लाभ है? मस्तिष्क से सोचें। किसी की आलोचना सुनने का क्या लाभ है? इससे आपको क्या मिलता है? यही बात किसी अन्य को सुनाने का क्या लाभ है? सदैव एक प्रश्न करें कि इसका क्या लाभ है? किसी में दोष क्यों देखें? इस तरह से आप धोखा खा सकते हैं। परन्तु कोई बात नहीं। किसी भी प्रकार की गन्दगी अपने मस्तिष्क में न भरें। ऐसे बहुत से लोग हैं जो इधर उधर बातें करके समस्याएं पैदा करते हैं। इससे आपको कोई हानि नहीं पहुँच सकती क्योंकि आप आत्मा हैं और आत्मा को कोई आपके प्रति कृतज्ञ हूँ और जो भावनाएं आपके हृदय में सहजयोग के लिए हैं उससे मैं बहुत प्रसन्न हूँ । आपको सामूहिक रूप से पूरे विश्व में सहजयोग कार्यान्वित करना है। आपने एक दूसरे की सहायता करनी है और लोगों को बढ़ावा देना है। विश्व भर में एक ऐसे मस्तिष्क का विकास करना है जो आत्मा की ओर हो ! यह कार्य अत्यन्त महत्वपूर्ण है। तभी हम सभी समस्याओं का समाधान कर सकेंगे । में यदि कहूँ कि मैं गरीबों के लिए कोई योजना बना रहीं हूँ तो तुरन्त वे सब मुझे धन भेज देंगे, तुरन्त खोज निकालेंगे कि कौन इस कार्य को कर सकता है तथा कौन श्रीमाताजी की सहायता कर सकता है। उन्हें हम क्या कार्य दे सकते हैं? किस तरह से हानि नहीं पहुँचाई जा सकती । आत्मा का नाश नहीं किया जा हम इसे कार्यान्वित कर सकते हैं? यह तेजी से फैलता है। मुझे केवल कहना भर पड़ता है। धन के लिए मुझे कभी नहीं है। तो आत्मा पर चित्त की कमी है। आप कह सकते हैं कहना पड़ता । मैंने कभी नहीं कहा कि मुझे धन चाहिए। परन्तु अविलम्व वे सारी योजना बना लेते हैं और सभी कुछ लाकर कार्य को कार्यान्वित करते हैं । भारत में भी एंसा हो सकता । शस्त्र से इसे काटा नहीं जा सकता । आत्मा अमर आत्म-विमुख स्थिति । हमारी दृष्टि व हमारा चित्त आत्मा पर न होने के कारण सभी समस्याएं हैं। एक बार जब आपका तदात्मय आत्मा से हो जाएगा तो सभी कार्य हो जाएगा क्योंकि आत्मा सर्वशक्तिमान परमात्मा से सकता है। कहीं भी ऐसा हो सकता है। दिलचस्पी कंवल भारत में ही नहीं है, समस्याओं के समाधान में ही उनकी जुड़ी होती है। सभी कुछ कार्यान्वित करने वाली सर्वव्यापी शक्ति से इसका सम्बन्ध होता है। मैं इस सर्वव्यापी शक्ति को जानती हूँ। इसी में मेरे बहुत से चमत्कारिक फोटो दिखाए हैं। यद्यपि मैंने इसे यह सब करने के लिए नहीं कहा फिर भी यह ऐसा कर रही है। वास्तव में यह अत्यन्त चुस्त है और किसी भी सूक्ष्म एवं गहन व्यक्ति को जब यह दैखती है तो यह कार्य करती है। आपके व्यपार में, राजनीति में परिवार में, दिलचस्पी है। यह कोई दिखावा करना या धर्म-सम्प्रदाय बनाना नहीं है। यह अन्तर्जात है। सहजयोग के लिए कार्य करने में उन्हें आनन्द मिलता है। कभी-कभी तो मैं हैरान होती हूँ कि पूरे विश्व के लिए इतने प्रेम की भावना उनमें किस प्रकार है! किस प्रकार वे पूरे विश्व की चिन्ता करते हैं और किस प्रकार विश्व भर के सभी जगह इस प्रकाश को आप देख सकेंगे और अन्य लोगों लिए कार्य करने के लिए तैयार हैं! नि:सन्देह सभी देशों की की भावनाओं का सम्मान करेंगे अपनी-अपनी समस्याएं हैं, जैसे उत्तर भारतीय लोगों की करेंगे और उनका सम्मान करेंगे । दूसरे के अन्दर चमकती दिलचस्पी सदैव राजनीति में ही होती है क्योंकि दिल्ली हुई आत्मा का आप सम्मान करेंगे । आपकी आत्मा क्योंकि है जोकि अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म है. प्रभावशाली गुण । अन्य लोगों को आप प्रेम प्रकाशित है इसलिए आपने अन्य लोगों का सम्मान करना सीख लिया है। यह बात मैं स्पष्ट देख सकती हूँ। मेरे जन्मदिवस पर आप सबको यहां देख कर में बहुत प्रसन्न हूँ। समीप है। परन्तु अब यह दिलचस्पी कम हो गई है बहुत कम। अब वे किसी के विरुद्ध कुछ सुनना नहीं चाहते । यह अच्छी बात है। दक्षिण में, नर्मदा नदी से परे, महाराष्ट्र आदि 16

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) मैं नहीं जानती कि जन्मदिवस का क्या महत्व है। जो भी हो सम्पति है, आपके अन्तः स्थित है। मैं कहूँगी कि आत्मा बनना ही आपकी पूर्ण गरिमा है। मेरी समझ में नहीं आ रहा कि किस प्रकार में आप सबको धन्यवाद दें और किस प्रकार इतने अच्छे वक्ताओं को धन्यवाद दूं! मैं तो आध्यात्मिक जीवन में आपकी महान उन्नति की कामना करती हूँ। आध्यात्मिकता में आपकी आत्मोन्नति, ताकि विश्व के हर कोने पर यह छा जाए भविष्य के सुन्दर विश्व की सृष्टि करें। एक बात अवश्य है कि इस प्रकार यहां उपस्थित आप सभी सजहयोगियों से मैं मिल सकती हूँ। में बहुत प्रसन्न हूँ। यहां उपस्थित हमारे समाज के इन श्रेष्ठ लोगों की मैं धन्यवादी हूँ। ये बहुत महान लोग हैं। जनता द्वारा चुने हुए हैं कई बार इनको उच्च पद दिए गए और इनमें से कुछ सुप्रसिद्ध उद्यमी हैं। इन सबको आध्यात्मिक जीवन का मूल्य समझना है। इनके लिए यह महत्वपूर्ण है। इन्हें आत्मा से जुड़ना है। यह आपकी अपनी और परमात्मा आपको धन्य करें। 17

 MARATHI TRANSLATION (English Talk) Scanned from Marathi Chaitanya Lahari सर्वप्रथम म्हणजे तुम्हाला आरोग्य लाभते, प्रकृति सुधारली की बरेचसे प्रश्न सुटणारे असतात. एरवी मानसिक ताणतणाव, प्रदृषित अन्न इ. मुळे आज़ार वाढ़त असतात. सहजयीगात आल्यावर लोकांना समजून आले आहे की भीतिक सुख समृद्धीमधून माणसाला शांत-समाधान प्राप्त झालेले नाही. अमेरिकेत एवढा पैसा असूनही तिथल्या लोकांना अनेक अडचणीना तौड द्यावे लागत आहे आणि शांतिसाटी गुरुकडे जाण्याची संचय लागल्यामुळे गुरुंचे चांगलेच फावले आहे, पण हुदयातील आत्मी जोपर्यंत जाणला जात नाही तोपवंत शांति शक्य नाही कारण तोच शांतीचा स्त्रोत आहे. त्याचा पहिला गुण प्रेम व दुसरा शांति; तुम्ही त्यानंतर अल्वंत शांत होता, साक्षी बनता अणि जगात जे काही चालले आहे तो एक खेळ आहे असे तुम्हाला वाटू लागते; त्याची फार काळजी घेण्याची जरुर नाही, सर्व काही सुरळीतपणाणे पार पडणार आहे है हे जाणून घेण्यासाठी मानवाला आत्मा बनलें (become) पाहिमे तेच तुमचे शुद्ध स्व- स्वरुप आहे. तुमच्याच हृदयात आहे. तिसरी गोष्ट घटित होते ती ही की आत्मा आनंद-रुपच असल्यामुळे तुमच्या जीवनातही तो आनंद खळखळत राहतो, त्या आनंदाच्या सागरातच तुमही रमून जाना; त्याच्या लाटांबरीबरच तुम्ही जगात सगळीकडे जाता आणि तेच प्रेम वाटते राहता. आत्मा हृदयस्थ असल्यामुळे कुटल्याही मानसिक वा यौद्धिक कल्पना-विचारोमधून तो जाणणे अशक्य आहे: तुमचे चित्त जर त्याच्याकडेव वळले तर जागरण झाल्यावरच ते घडून येते, एरवी नाही. तुमच्या तुम्हाला मिळाला ते तुम्ही आत्मसन्मुख झाल्यावरचे मिळाला आहे. आता तुम्हाला पैशाचा विचार करण्याची जरुर नाहीं, तो आपणहून तुमच्याकडे चालत येणार आहे; आत्याची शक्ति ही सर्वात महान व धार्मिक आहे. म्हणून आता घरदार सोडून संन्यासी बनण्याचीही जरुर नाही: आजपर्यंतच्या जन्मांसध्ये तुम्ही ते सर्व करत आलात, आता या जन्मी तुम्हाला आत्याकडे वित्त ठेवायचे आहे. कुण्डलिनीचे जागरण झाल्यानंतर ती हळु-हळू वर वेते, वेताना मार्गातील सहा चक्रांना टीक करते. त्यांच्या कार्यात एकसूत्रीपणा आणते व शेवटी टाळूमध्ये प्रवेश करते आणि त्यातून बाहेर पडल्यावर सर्वव्यापी शक्तीबरोबर एकरूप होऊन तुमचा संपर्क त्या सर्वव्यापी परमेश्वरी प्रेमशक्तीबरोबर घटित होतो. ही सर्वव्यापी शक्ति प्रेम, शांति आणि आनंदयुक्त आहे, त्यांत अतुलनीय सूज्ञताही आहे. सामान्य माणसाला ही शक्ति फार सूक्ष्म असल्यामुळे, तिची जाणीव होणे व त्यातून आपले आत्मस्वरूप जाणणे जरा अवघड आहे हे मला माहित आहे, त्वाचा मला अनुभवही आहे. पण ही उच्रांतीवस्थेतील स्थिती आहे व आज मानवाला आत्मा बनण्याचा काळ आला आहे. या बहार समयाचे है आशिर्वाद आहेत. मानव जर आत्मा बनु शकला नाही. तर तो अवस्थेला जाऊन पोचेल मला सांगता येणार नाही. मानवाच्या उल्कांतीच्या प्रगतीमधील सत्याच्या शोधात असलेल्या सर्व साधकांना माझा नम्र प्रणाम याबद्दल तुम्ही सर्व लोक लांब-लांबहून माझ्यासाठी इये आलात, माझ्याबद्दल बन्याच जणांनी सुंदर भावना व्यक्त केल्या याबह्दल माझे दय भरुन आल आहे. सहजयोग समजण्यासाठी आपण या कलियुगात कुठे आहोत है माणसाला समजलै पाहिजे; आपले काव प्रशन आहेत, आजूबाजूला चालत असलेन प्रकार आपल्याला का अस्वस्थ करतात बाचा विचार केला पाहिजे. सगळीकडे, सर्व देशांमध्ये माणसांच्या जीवनांत मानसिक ताणतणाव, अशांति यांचा प्रभाव वाढ लीगल्यामुळे एकंदर मनुष्यप्राणी गोंधळून गेला आहे. सर्वत्र मानवसमाज हासाच्या दिशकडेच चालला तर नाही ना अशी भीतीही चाच्या मनात डोकावत आहे. या सर्वचि कारण काय? सगळीकडे धर्माचे नांव घेतले जाते, साधु-संन्यासी उपदेश करते असतात, ग्रंथ पारायणे होतात. म्हणून सत्याच्या शोधात असणार्या साधकाने है लक्षात घेतले पाहिजे की या परिस्थितीचे कारण कार्य व त्वासाठी लोकांना कशी मदत करता येईला याचा विचार झाला पाहिजे, खरे तर या सर्व प्रस्नवि मूळ मानवाच्या आतमव्ये आहे, आपण पशुयोनीमधून उन्तत होऊन मानवस्थितीला आलो आणि या उन्नत जीणीवेमधूनच माणसाला आपल्या हिताच्या व अवनृतिपासून रोखणाच्या गोष्टी समजू लागल्या. तसे नसेल तर तो माणूस संवेदनाशून्य म्हटला पाहिजे. तुम्हीं तसे नाही. राजकीय आर्थिक किंवा इतर कुटल्याही क्षेत्रामंध्ये माणसाला खरा प्रश्न (सूक्ष्म) कार्य आहे तो समजलेला नसल्यामुळे ही परिस्थिती आली आहे. मी जर म्हणाले की प्रत्येक मानवाच्या हृदयात आत्मा आहे, तो प्रकाशित आहे तर कुणाचा विश्वास बसणार नाही. हरकत नाहीं. पण आपले लक्षच (चित्त) मुळी आत्म्यापासून दूर आहे, "आत्माविमुख आहे. बाहेर आहे. म्हणून आपले चित्त आत्याकडे लागणे. आत्मिक विचारांकडे लागणे प्रथम जरूरीचे आहे. एरवी आपण बाहेरच्या गोष्टींचा- पैसा, सत्ता, स्पर्था, इ... खुप विचार व कार्य करतो. पण एकदां जर माणसाचे चित्त त्याच्यामधील आत्याकडे लागले की त्याला आल्याची शक्ति प्राप्त होते. ही फार फार मोठी शक्ति माणसाली प्राप्त होते. सर्व प्रथम आत्मा प्रेमस्वरुप आहे, त्याचे प्रेम निरपेक्ष आहे; अशा माणसाच्या जीवनांतून प्रेमच-प्रेम व्यक्त होत असते. जिये काही आहे; प्रश्न आहे त्या त्या ठिकाणी ते पोहोचते. ही क्षमता प्रत्येक माणसाच्या हृदयात आहे. पण दुर्दैवाची गोष्ट म्हणजे आपले चित्त आत्याकडे नसून आत्माविमुख आहे. माणसाच्या सर्व व्यवहारामध्ये ल्याचे लक्ष सतत बाहेर असते. म्हणून स्पर्था-चढ़ाओढ है प्रकार चालत राहतात. चित्त जेव्हा बाहेर असते तेव्हा त्यात शद्धता नसते आणि चित्त सतत स्वतःमध्येच गुंतले तर माणसांच्या प्रभ्नना अंत नाही. आता मला कुटे झोपते, काय खाते या गोष्टींचेही भान नसते है टीक आहे पण सहजयोगी पण आता तसे बनत आहेत हा फार मोठा चमत्कार धडून आला आहे. मानवाचे चित आत्याकडे लागल्यामुळे है शक्य झाले. कुटाल्याही तुम्हाला लक्षात येते, न्हणून जाणणे शक्य आहे; आणि कुण्डलिनीचे तो जीवनातील हा बदल आणि आनंद व शांतीचा अनुभव दुःख कुठन्या चित्त आत्मासन्मुख झाल्यावर कारय कारय होत असेल तर ही अत्यावश्यक पायरी आहे. सर्व ऋषी-मुनी, संत, प्रेषकांनी व 18

 MarathiTranslation (English Talk) शांति व प्रेमाचे साम्राज्य सुरु झाल्यांचे तुम्हाला जाणवेल माझ्याजबळ खुप शक्ती आहे असे तुम्ही म्हणता, पण मी एक गोष्ट खात्रीने सांगू शकेन की सहजयोगी माझ्या सर्व शविति मिळव शकतात. (टाळ्या पड़तात) आईला तेव हवे असते; तिच्यासारखेच तिच्या मुलांनी बनावे हीच तिची इच्छा असते व हेच तिचे समाधान असते. माझे मानवजातीवहलचे एक महान स्वप्न आहे व ते साकार होणार आहे असे आज मला दिसत आहे., मी एक साधारण गृहिणी होते, मला पैशाचे कसलेच व्यवहार समजत नाहीत, पण मला आर्थिक प्रश्न कधीच पडले नाहीत, खरे तर माणसाची लालसाच सर्व प्रश्न निर्माण करते असते. पण समाचानी रहायची कला साधली की सर्व हाव गलून पडते अणि तुम्ही निश्चितपणे जगता. याचा अर्थ प्रत्येकाने साधू संन्यासीच बनले पाहिजे असे नाही, तो काळ गेला, तुम्ही मागच्या खूय जन्मांत सर्व तपस्या केली; तुम्ही आत्याकडे चित्त बळवायचे एबडी एकच गोष्ट आता तुम्हाला करायची आहे; जितका प्रयत्न यासाठी कराल तितके तुमचे चित्त आंत स्थिरावणार आहे. आल्याच्या संपर्कात राहणार आहे. आत्मा हृदयातच असल्यामुळे तो तुमची वाटच पहात आहे; तुम्हाला त्याची जाणीव (Peeling) सममून ध्यायची आहे आणि यासाठीच कुण्डलिनीचे जागरण अवश्य आहे. मोहम्मदसा, खिल्त, अब्राहम ई. कोणालाही असे स्वप्नातही वाटले नसेल को लोक आपल्या नावाखाली निरनिराळे धर्म स्थापन करून एकमकाशी वैरमावनन भाड़ लागतील. पण अगदी तेच घइन आल्याचे तुम्ही पाहता. ही परिस्थिती बदलण्यासाठी लोकांना शुद्ध ज्ञान (Pure Knowiedge) झाले पाहिजे अणि या ज्ञानालाच सूज्ञता (Wisdom म्हणतात. या सूज्ञतेमधुनच मी है कार्य करत आले आहे. या सुज्ञतेमूधनच सला समजले को माणसाची स्थिति कशीही असो त्याचे जीवन करोहो असो त्याला अहंकार असो किंवा तो कण्डिशए्ड असो, त्याना एकदा को प्रेमाची जाणीव झाली की त्याचा आत्मा कार्य करु लागतो है प्रत्यक्ष घडून आले आहे; आ जमलेल लोक जगातील सहजवीग्यांच्या एक टक्काच आहेत. पण सहजयोग्याचीही मला सहजयीग्यांना, सहजयोगात आल्यानंतरच 'सत्य' म्हणजे काय है कळून आले आहे आणि 'तत् त्वम् असि नेव ते सत्य आहे. हे सत्य एकदा तुमच्यामव्ये प्रस्थापित झाले की कशानेही तुमचा नाश होणार नाही, कशापासूनही तुम्हाला धोका नाही, तुम्हाला"अमुक हवे आहे" ही इाच होणार नाही, तुम्ही कोण्णाचे दोष दाखचणार नाही; कशाच्या मांगे धावणार नाही. इतके शांत व समाधानी व्यक्तिमत्व तुमचे होणार आहे. वार- चीधांसारखेच जीवन आपण जगावे, उगीच हिमालयाएवढी महानता मिळवू नवे, अशीच माझी पहिल्यापासून प्रवृत्ति होती, आज आपल्याला सगळ्यांना बरोबर घेऊन जायचे आहे (a-mass एकटबा-दुकट्याने उन्नति साधून संशोधनांचा सर्वसामान्य लोकांना फायदा मिळाला तर त्याचे सार्थक असते आणि हे मला करायचे आहे हेहि मला माहीत होते. अगोदर मला खूप मेहनत करावी लागली पण आता मी स्वतः काही केले असे मला बाटतव नाही. मी जणू फक्त साक्षी होते प्रत्येक माणसांव्या आत वसत असलेल्या जीवाला उन्नत होण्याची, साक्षात्कार मिळण्याची इच्छा असते. ती फलदूप झाली की मग माणसाचे परिवर्तन होऊन इतरांसाठी काहीतरी करण्याची त्याला तळमळ लागते. इतकी वर्षे लोक तुम्ही दुसर्यांच्या हृदयात प्रवेश करू शकता. पण त्याच्यामागे पैसा सहजयोगात कसे बेतील होव मला काळजी बाटावची; त्यासाठी मिशननयासारखी किंवा सामाजिक संस्था उभारण्याची मला जरुर वाटली नव्हती. पूर्वी मी सामाजिक संस्थासारखे कार्य करायचे पण नेतर मला कळून आले की जोप्ंत माणुस आतमधून बदलत नाही, आत्मा बनत नाही तोपर्यंत सामाजिक कार्य करणारे एवदीच आपली भूमिका राहते, मग अधिकार, सत्ता या गोष्टी तिथेही चालू होतात. है सर्व बेकार असते: साध्या मुंगीलाही सामूहिकतेत कार्य करण्याची अक्कल असते. मनुष्यप्राणी नेहमी भलत्याच गोष्टीच्या मागे का धावायला वघतो मनला समजत नाही; पाण आत्मसादात्कार नसल्यामुळ है सर्व होत राहते: एरबी काहीही कार्य काले की आपण फार महान कार्य करत आहोत असे माणसाला का वाट लागते? म्हणजे स्वतःचा मोठेपणा मिळवण्याकडेच लक्ष माणसाची खरी वाढ त्वाच्या आत्याकडूनच होगार आहे. आल्मा हा सुक्ष्म असला तरी तुम्हा सर्वांच्या हृदयात प्रकाशासारखे त्याचे अस्तित्व आहे. आता कित्येक सहजयोगी देशोदेशी, ठिकटिकाणी जाऊन अनेकांना जाणगृति देत आहेत: जर्मनी व ऑस्ट्रियाचे सहजयोगी, मी रशियात प्रथम गेले तेव्हा माझ्या मदतीला रजियाला आल्याचे बांबतल्यावर मीच बक्क झाले. आणि त्याचे कारण त्यांनी सागितले की झमच्या पूर्वजांनी म्हणून!" माझे दूदय ते एकून भरुन आले. म नतर इस्वाईलमधील सहजवी्यांना ते ईजिप्तमध्ये बेऊन आने म्हणजे जी प्रेमाची भावना त्वांच्या हृदयामधून कार्यान्वित होऊ लागलो आण आपापसातले सारे तई, मतभेद, बगैरे त्यामव्ये वाहुन गले. आपल्या हृदयातील प्रेम कार्य करत असल्याचे पाहणे हा फार आनंददावी अनु व आहे. लहान महान तसेच मोट-मीट्या घटना प्रेमशक्तीमुळे यडून यतात. उदा. उद्योगयंद्यामध्ये मजूरांचा संप हा एक मोठाच प्रभ्न व अडवळा जसतो. पण जर लोकाना आत्मिक स्थिती समजली, त्यांची तो भूक भागवण्याची व्यवस्था केली तर है प्रकार पूर्णपणे बंद होतील. एक प्रकारे लोकशाही, समाजवाद, कम्युनिझम या सर्वामधील तत्त्वे एकत्रितपणे या योगामध्ये कार्यान्वित होतात. आंती या समारंभासाठी सर्वांनी हसतमुखाने, वादववाद न करता चर्चा न करता इतकी सुंदर व्यवस्था केली आहे है तुम्ही पहातच आहात. एरवी माणसे एकत्र आली की कामाच्या ऐवजी बड़बड करतील. अशा तहेने सर्व माणासेच एकत्रितपणे काम होईल असे वातावरण तयारे करतात. समाजवादी लोक गरीब, दरिद्री वर्गाताल लीकांसाटी कार्यपद्धति बनवतात. एकदा मी माझ्या वडिलोबरोबर बांदा जिल्ह्यात गेले होते वर तेथील लोक फक्त कमरेभोवती एक वस्तर गुंडाळून रहायचे है दिसले. नंतर सहजयोग्यांच्या मदतीने त्यांना कुंभार व्यवसाय जमवून दिला आणि आती त्यांचे जीवनमान खूप सुधारले आहे. म्हणजे प्रश्न समोर आला की सामूहिकतेमधून तो सोडवता येतो. तसेच बेवारशी, निराधार मुलांकरता काड़ी कार्य करावचे मी सुचवल्याबरोबर सहजयोग्यांनी एकत्र येऊन जमिन घेऊन सर्व जमवून आणले. अशा तन्हेने तुमचे चित्त शुद्ध गोष्ट करणे शक्य आहे; कारण या प्रेमामबूनच काय करायचे: कसे करायचे ही सुज्ञता माणसामध्ये वाढते; प्रेम शुद्ध असले की कसल्याही समस्येचे सर्वांगीण आकलन तुम्हाला होते. आज जगामध्ये कशाची जरुरु असेल नर ती प्रेमाची; प्रेमातूनच खिस्त इधले बरेच लोक मारले ंग ते इस्त्राईलमव्येही गेले. दुस्यावर आज इ्थे नसलेल्या आटवण येत आहे. आणि या सर्व उपयोग नाही. शास्त्रातील प्रेमाने व्यापून गेले की कितीतरी होते आणि म्हणूनच प्रेमातून कार्य , 19

 MarathiTranslation (English Talk) पुराणगरंधामध्येही याचेच वर्णन केले आहे. त्याच्यानंतर वेगवेगळे धर्म आले असतील. पण सर्वमान्य साधे तत्व हेच आहे की प्रत्येक मानव मूलतः आत्मा आहे आणि आपलेच आत्मस्वरुप जाणल्याशिवाय मानवाला शांति व आनंद आणि प्रेम मिळणार नाही. इथे जमलेल्या सहजयोग्यांनी ते मिळवले आहे. त्यांना आपण पाश्चात्य देशाचे आहोत, वेगळे आहोत ही भावना नाही. या कॅम्पमध्ये जेवणा-राहण्याची-झोपण्याची फारशी चांगली व्यवस्था नाही पण ते सर्वजण आनंदात आहेत. आपापल्या देशाचे वा संस्कृतीचे काही विशेष वेगळेपण सुरवातीला जाणवले तरी त्वाचे भान उरत नाही. फूल जेव्हा फळ बनते तेव्हा त्याच्या पाकळ्या गळुून पड़तात त्याप्रमाणेच है होत राहते. तुम्ही सहजयोगी आता ज्ञान, सूजञता व प्रेमाचे फळ बनले आहात. ज्ञान मिळचण्यासाठी पुस्तके-प्रंथ वाचण्याची तुम्हाला जरूर नाही उतलट फार ग्रंथ वाचणाच्यांना कुण्डलनी जागरण अवघड जाते. पण सत्य काब आहे है तुमचे तुम्हाला जाणायचे आहे. पण आत्मसाक्षात्कार मिळाल्याशिवाय है शक्य नाही; त्याशिवाय तुम्ही भ्रांति आहेत. इंग्लेडमध्यही, जेबून ईंग्रजांनी भारतावर तीनशे वर्षे राज्य केने, व प्रम यामध्येच हरवून जाण्याची शक्यता आहे. सहजयोगामच्ये घडून आले असेल तर ते हेच की उक्कांतीच्या सर्व हॉल भरून जाईल इतके लोक येतात. रशियामध्येही इतकी प्रगतीमध्ये मानवाला आत्मा जाणणे शक्य झाले आहे; त्याचे चित आत्मसन्मुख झाले आहे. आल्याची शक्ति प्राप्त झाल्यावर तुम्ही जे करान त्यात यशस्वी होत जाता. तुम्हाला ते मागायची इच्छा होत नाही. দ्हणून यश मिळाले नाही तरो तुम्ही दुःखी होत नाही. म्हणून स्याच्यासाठी धड़पड करायची तुम्हाला जरुर चाटत नाही. पुण या सर्वांसाठी एक गोष्ट तुम्ही लक्षात ठेवली पाहिजे की तुम्ही इतरांना सतत क्षमा करत राहिले पाहिजे. माणसे सर्वसाधारणपणे विचित्र वागतात, तर्काविरुद्ध वागतात. तुम्हाला जरी कुणी दुखापत करण्याचा प्रयत्न केला तरी क्षमा करा. म्हणजे त्याचा तुम्हला मन स्ताप होणार नाही, त्यासाठी त्यांना त्यांचा आत्मसन्मान मिळवून दिला पाहिजे. म्हणून नाही. खिस्तांनीसुद्धा हेच सांगितले. खिस्त म्हणा किंवा मोहम्पदसा लोकांना जर सहजयोग सांगत गेलो तर त्यांना आपोआप समजू लागेल म्हणा, त्यानी जे जे काही सांगितले त्याला लोकांनी विपरीत करुन टेवले. त्वा सर्व संतांनी हेच सांगितले की माणसाने आपले आत्मस्वरूप ओळखले पाहिजे. पण त्यांच्या शिकवणुकीमधून अनेक धर्म निर्माण झाले व घर्मा-धर्मात भांडणे, युद्ध वाढत गेली. आता सहजयोगात वेगवेगळ्या देशांतील, वेगवेगळ्या संस्कृतीमधील लोक आले, तरीही ते गरीब आहेत हणून दया करायला हवी असे चाँगले असतालच असे त्यांच्यात एक महत्त्वाचा गुण आहे की ते अतिशय शुद्ध आहेत; नाही असेही म्हटले जाते. म्हणून कार्य करायला हवे तर त्या सहजयोगात अ-नीतिमत्तेचा प्रॉब्लैम मुळीच नाही. जर कुणी तसा वागू लागला तर तो एकदम बाहेर फेकला जातो; कुणी लॉ्या-लबाङ्या करु लागला तर तो बाहेर फेकला जातो, म्रष्टाचारीही बाहेर फेकला जाती. एकदा आल्याचा प्रकाश मिळाल्यावर आपल्या हिताचे काय आहे ते प्रत्येकाने स्वतःच पहायचे असते. समजा तुम्हीं आंधळे असला अणि रस्त्यावरून एकटेच चालत असला तर खड्ड्यात पड़ण्याची भीति असते पण प्रकाश मिळाल्यावर लोक समजू लागले की आपण आपले नुकसान होणार नाही असे नीट योग्य तन्हेने कसे वागायचे रहायचे, तसे भी खड्ड्यात पडलेले लोक पाहिले आहेत पण माझ्या मनांति त्यांच्याबद्दलही प्रेमच आहे कारण ते अंधारात असल्वामुळे अज्ञानी असतात. माइयाबद्दल काहीही बोलेले तरी मला राग बेत नाही. त्यासाठी तुम्हाला केगळे असे करायचे काही नसते तर ते आपोआप तसेच तुम्हालाही कुणी इजा करण्याचा प्रयत्न केला तरी तुमचे नुकसान तुमच्याकडे येतात. तुम्हीं माझ्याकडें आलात, सहजयोगात आलात होणार नाही. कारण तुम्ही सत्याची कास चरलेली आहे. आत्मा हा सत्याचा स्त्रोत आहे. कृणी एखादा अगुरु भेटला तरी तुम्हाला खर कार्य ते व्हाय्ेशन्सवर आणि हाताच्या बोटांवर समजायला वेळ लागत नाही. मोहम्मदसा. म्हणालेच होते की उत्थानाच्या वळी तुमचे हात बोलू लागतील: आणि हेच आता घटित होत आहे. ते समजल्यावर तुम्ही त्या व्यक्तीप्रासून दूर राहू शकता किंवा त्याला समजाबून सुधारू शकता. पण सुरुवातीला अशा बादग्रस्त व्यव्तीची परीक्षा करण्याच्या फंदात आपण पड़ नवे. एकदा सहजयोग पचल्याबर तुम्ही है करू शकता. शिवाय सर्व पँचमहाभूते तुमच्यासाठीच कार्य करणार आहेत हेहि तुम्ही लक्षात घ्यायला हवे. जगात घडत असणार्या घटना चुकीच्या गोष्टी चुकच कशी आहेत हैे दाखवण्यासाठीचे घडत असतातं. तसेच योग्य गोष्टी बोग्यच आहेत हेहि ते दाखवतात, उदा. हिटलरने अनेक अत्याचार केले. अनेकांचा अंतोनात छळ केला. पण तो मेल्यावर आता जर्मनीमध्ये अनेक लोक आत्मसाक्षात्कारी झाले आहेत अणि त्यांना प्रेम व परमात्मा यांची खरी शक्ति कळून आली आहे. ते लोक आता आश्चर्यजनक कार्य करत तिथे आता खुप सहजवोगी झाले आहेत, तिथल्या माझ्या प्रोग्रॅम्सला हलाखीची परिस्थिति असूनही खूप चांगले सहजयोगी तथार झाले आहेत. लोकशाही म्हणा किवा कम्युनिझम म्हणा कशालाच यश असे सिळाले नाही. लोकशीहीमध्येही राक्षसी लोकानी कारमार हातात घेतला आहे: कम्बुनिझमलाही यश आले नाही. याचे कारण कुटलीच पद्धति आत्मिक अधिष्टानावर आधारलेलो नव्हती, त्यांचा आत्थाशी काही सबंध नव्हता न्हणून ते सारे प्रयत्न सीमित राहिले. अर्थव्यवस्थाही। सगळीकडे कोलमडली आहे अणि मंदीचे वातावरण निर्माण झाले आहे. लोक गरीबी दूर करायचे म्हणतात पण ती दान देऊन दूर होणार आणि कार्य जमून जाईल. लोक मला म्हणतात की लोक गरीब का बनतात? मी सांगते की पैशाने ते गरीब असले तरी अध्यात्मिक बाबतीत ते गरीब नसतात. ज्यांच्याजवळ खुप संपत्ती आहे ते सगळेच चांगले नसतात; ते काही चांगले कार्य करत नसतात: गरीब लोकांवर, दोघषांमध्येही परिवर्तन घडबले याहिजे; त्यांना जीवनाचा अर्थ समजला पाहिजे. श्रीमंत लोकांना आत्मसाक्षात्कार मिळाल्याबरोबर त्यांचा दृष्टिकोन बदलून ते गरीबी समजू लागल्याचे मी पाहिले आहे, ते मग मदतीचा हात पुढे करु लागतात. सहजयोगात लोक एकमेकाना कशी मदत करतात है पाहिलेत तर तुम्हाला आश्चर्य वाटेल, त्याचे कारण हेच की ही सुज्ञता त्यांना या परमचैतन्याकडून येते. या शक्तिला परमचैतन्य, निराकार, रुह, होली घोस्ट इ. काहीही नाव द्या. पण एकदा त्या शक्तिबरोबर तुमचा संपर्क जुळला की तुम्हाला सर्व आशिर्वाद प्राप्त होत असतात. साधारण माणूस म्हणून मिळत असलेल्या आशिर्वादापेक्षा हजारो पटीनी जास्त आशिर्वाद मिळतात. याच्यामागेही या दिव्य शक्तीचाच प्रभाव आहे. तुम्ही स्वतःव याचा विचार केलात तर तुम्हालाही ते समजून येईल, आणि तुमच्या हृदयांत े 20

 MarathiTranslation (English Talk) बक्षिस, अधिकाराचे पद अशी कसलीही लालसा नसावी. फक्त शुद्ध, निरलस प्रेम, आणि याचा प्रत्ययही आता तुम्हाला आली आहे. तुम्ही लोकांसाठी प्रयत्न करता, वेळ खर्च करता, कार्य करता या सर्वांद्दल ही चांगली गोष्ट आहे. दक्षिणेकडचे लोक मात्र फार कमकाण्ड पाळणारे मीच तुमची तणी आहे. मला एकट्याला है करणे शक्य नव्हते. एकट्याला जगभर हिंडणे शक्य नव्हते; काही पूर्णपणे मुस्लीम पाळावी लागते. एका हातानेच जेवायचे इ. अनेक नियमावद्ल लोकांच्या देशामध्येही मी आता जाऊन आले आहे आणि खूप मुसलमान लोक आता सहजयोगात आले आहेत: त्वासाठी प्रेंच, इंग्रज लोक त्यांच्या देशात गेले; ऑस्ट्रियन, इटालियन लोकही सहजयोगाव्या प्रचारासाठी खुप कार्य करत आहेत. त्यातही लोकांना "अमुक करू नका, अमुक सोडून द्या" बगैरे काही सांगावे लागत नाही, ते सर्व आपो आप घडून येते, सवयी सुटतात. मी तर कुणाला कधीच त्या बाबतीत सांगत नाही; या व्यसनांची सवय कशी सुटते मलाही कळत नाही... पण है धड़ते त्याचे कारण आत्म्याचा प्रकाश तुमच्यामध्ये पड़तो आणि त्या प्रकाशात तुम्ही तसले काही करतच नाही. आता शीख किंवा तरी त्याचा काय फायदा? नाही तरीं दुसयामध्ये काय वाइट आहे मुसलमानात दारु पिण्याला मनाई आहे पण कितीतरी शीख य मुसलमान लोक दारु पिणारे असतातः म्हाणजे ते खरे शीख किंवा मुसलमान नाहीच. म्हणून आत्मप्रकाश मिळाल्यावरच या अहितकारक गोष्टी गळून पड़त असतात. कधी कधी निराशा किंवा एकटेपणामुळे लोकंना अशा सबयी लागनात. पण सहजयोगात एकटेपणा नसतोच: कारण तुमचे भाऊ-बहिणा जगभर आहेत अणि है संबंध लौकिक व्यवहारासारखे नसून ते नाते खूप गहन असते. साधारणतः पाश्चात्य लोकांत कसल्या ना कसल्या साधना-मागात जाऊनही काही प्राप्त न झाल्यामुळे अस्वस्थता आलेली असते आणि सहजयोगात त्यांना ते प्राप्त झाल्यामुळे ते लवकर गहनतेत उतरू शकतात. आज जगात सत्याच्या शोधात असलेले अनेक साधक आहेत. त्यांना आजकालच्या परिस्थितीचा वीट आला आहे कारण ते फार संबेदनशील आहेत. म्हणूनच तुम्हाला आत्मसाक्षात्कार मिळाला आहे. ्यासाठी मला अस विशेष काही करावे लागले नाही. तुम्ही मेणवत्तीसारखे नसता तर मी तुमच्यामध्ये प्रकाश आणू शकले नसते. तुम्ही सहजयोगाबद्दल इतकी आत्मीयता बाळगता याचे मला फार समाधान आहे. तुम्हाला सामूहिकतेतून कार्य करायचे आहे, जगभर हा संदेश पसरवायचा आहे ही जाणीव आता आहे याचेही मला समाधान आहे. एकमेकांना मदते करून सा्या मानवजातीला वर आणण्यासाठी तुम्ही आता सिद्ध आहात. माणसाचे मन आत्मासन्मुख करायचे आहे. मग सारे प्रश्न संपणार आहेत. उदा. मी म्हटले की निराधार मुलांसाठी म्हणून मला फार आनंद झाला आहे. या निमित्ताने मला तुम्हा सर्वांची मला काहीतरी करायचे आहे तर ताबड़तोब सगळीकडून माझ्याकडे पैसे येतात. मग माताजींच्या या कार्यासाी योग्य ती काढतील, सर्व व्यवस्था कशी जमवायची इ. सर्व काही तयारीला लागतील. मला काही सांगावची जरुर नाही, पैसे तर मी कुणाकडेच राहणे हा तुमचा अधिकारच आहे आणि त्यांतच तुमचा मोठा गौरव मागत नाही. असे कार्य जर भारतात होऊ शकते तर जगात कुटेही आहे. सर्वचि आभार कसे मानवे है समजत नाही; मला हीच ते होऊ शकेल. कारण तो प्रश्न जगभर आहे म्हणून त्यांना ते कार्यही जगात सराळीकडे करण्याची उत्सुकता आहे. हे सर्व एखाद्या संप्रदायासारखें कार्य नाही. ते तुमच्या सूक्ष्म व अंगभूत शक्तीमुळे घडणारे कार्य आहे. त्यामुळेच या कार्याचा तुम्हाला आनंदही मिळत असती. कधी कधी सहजयोग्यांमधील मानवजातीवहलची तळमळ बघून मलाच आश्चर्य वाटते. आता प्रत्येक देशाचे काही ना काही विशिष्ट प्रश्न असतात. उदा. उत्तर भारतातील लोकांना राजकारणाबद्दल जास्त ईटरेस्ट असतो. आता ते फार कमी झाले आहे आणि त्यांना कुणाबद्दलही कुणी सांगितलेले आवडत नाही. आहेत. जेवायच्या थाळीमध्येही प्रत्येक पदार्थाची विशिष्ट जागा काटेकोरपणा पाळावा लागतो. या दोन गोष्टीमुळे त्यांची सहजयोगात प्रगति होत नाही. उदा उत्तर भारतात कुणी एखादा दुस्या कुणावद्दल बाईट सांगू लागला तर कानावर हात टेवतात. म, गांधीचे हेच तत्व होते; फालतु गप्या ऐक नये. पण लोकांना तेच आवडतेः आता निवडणुकीच्या आधी टी.वी. वर कार्यक्रम कखवतात ते सुद्धा सर्व gossip व. म्हणून उत्तर भारतीयांना माझे आग्रहाचे सांगणे आहे की असल्या गण्पागोष्टी कधीही ऐकू नका. कुणावर टिकाही करू नका. त्याचा काही उपयोग नाही. त्याच गपा तुम्ही दूसयांना सांगत बसला तिकडे कशाला बघायचे? हा, तो तुमची फसवणूक करेल वगैरे ठीक आहे पण त्यामुळे तुमचे काही नुकसान होणार नसने: शिवाव त्यामुळे तुमच्या डोक्यात तरी काही भलते-सलते विचार येणार नाहीत आणि तुम्ही आत्मा असल्यामुळे ल्याला कधी कोणी त्रास देऊ शकत नाही; आत्याचा कसल्याही शस्त्राने वात होऊ शकत नाही, तो सनातन आहे, अमेर आहे असे म्हटलेच आहे. म्हणून आत्माविमुखता आड येत असते. आपले चित आल्यापासून दूर होऊन बाहेरच्या गोष्टीकडे लागल्यामुळेच माणसाचे सर्व प्रश्न निरमाण झाले आहेत, एकदा तुम्ही आल्याशी एकरुप झालात की तोच सारे काही करते राहतो. कारण तो परमात्थाशी जोडलेला आहे, सर्वव्यापी शक्तीबरोबर जोड़लेला आहे अणि ती शक्तीच सर्व काही करत असते हचा सर्वव्यावी शक्तीने माझ्या फोटोमधूनहीं दाखक्ले आहेत. ते काही मी सांगितलेले नाही नर ती शक्तीच आपणहून करत आहे. ती फार कार्यक्षम आहे. जिथे गहनता आहे सूक्ष्मपणा आहे तिथे ती कार्य करणारच. तुमच्या कुटुंबात, व्यवसायात, राजकारणात सर्व क्षेत्रामध्ये हा प्रकाश तुम्हाला दिसेल आणि प्रत्येकाच्या हृदयस्थ आत्याबह्दल तुम्हाला आदर वाटेल, त्यांच्या प्रेमाचा आदर बाटेल मला है सर्व जाणवत आहे. तुम्ही इतक्या मोठ्या संख्येने माझ्या बाढूदिवसासाठी आलात अनेक बमत्कार म्हणूनच तुम्हा सर्वामिध्ये एकमेकांबद्दल आदरभाव आहे. भेट होत आहे. इथे इतर क्षेत्रातील काही मोट्या पदावरचे अधिकारी माणसे ते शोधून लोक राजकारणी, उद्योजक पण जमले आहेत. त्या सर्वांनीही जीवनांतील अध्यात्मिक मूल्य समजून घ्यावीत कारण आत्याबरोबर तुम्हा आशा आहे की तुम्ही तुमच्या आध्यात्मिक जीवनात खूप उन्नत व्हाल (आत्मोन्नति) म्हणजे तो प्रकाश संपूर्ण मानवजातीला मिळून या धरतीवर एक नवीन सुंदर जग निर्माण होईल. सर्वाना परमेश्वराचे अनंत आशिर्वाद. जगामधील सर्व 21



----------------------

19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page0.txt 
 75th Birthday Felicitation
ICI
Date
20th March 1998
:
Place
Delhi
:
Type
Other Event
English
Speech
Language
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 09
English
Hindi
Marathi
||
Translation
English
10 - 17
Hindi
18 - 21
Marathi
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
I bow to all the seekers of truth. So much has been said and really my heart is full of gratitude for
all of you to come here, all the way, and the way people have described about Sahaja Yoga. To
understand Sahaja Yoga, we should know where are we today in this Kali Yuga. What are we facing
today? It should really make you feel quite disturbed to see the way things are going on in every
country, everywhere. What's the problem? What is the, such a need for people to become so restless,
full of tensions. Collectively, country-wise, anywhere you go you find some sort of a confusion.
Terrible. The whole society seems to be boiling with a kind of a fear of destruction. What is the
reason?
There are so many religions, so many organized, disorganized, all kinds of things. There are so
many sadhus and saints. There are so many books written about what you should have. But the only
one who is a seeker of truth should see one point: Why, why there is so much problem in this world and
how can you help them? Where is the problem? It is inside the human being. As described, you see, we
have come out of a animal stage to a human stage. We have a human awareness, no doubt. In that
awareness, we start seeing all kinds of things that are not good, which are destructive, which are
disturbing. If it doesn't disturb you, that means you are not at all a sensitive person. But you are
sensitive as a human being.
So now what is the reason for this, is there. In every field of life, whether it is political, economic
or any field of life in which human beings are living, there's a very subtle problem which people don't
understand. Now if I say that, "There is spirit within us which shines in our heart," you need not
believe, need not believe. But our attention is not on the spirit. They call it "atma vimukh" - our
attention is outside. At this stage at the human awareness, our attention is outside, outside in various
things. Now where should our attention go? To evolve, for what? To achieve what? The firstly, our
attention has now go towards our spirit, towards spiritual understanding. This is one thing has to
happen to human beings to begin with. Otherwise our attention is outside. We are worried about
money, worried about power, worried about this, worried about that, in competition and all kinds of
things going on. But if your attention is turned somehow towards your spirit then what happens to you
is that you become a power of the spirit. And the power of the spirit is the highest power that you could
think of.
First of all, spirit is the one that loves. Loves without asking for anything, without expecting
anything, just loves. It's an unconditional type of a personality which just emits love. Anybody in
trouble, anybody having a problem, just it flows. This capacity to flow in the heart exists but on top of
that, is the closing point, is that our attention is not on our spirit. Even in political endeavors or your
economic endeavors, any endeavor, what happens is that attention is outside. So you go into
competition, you go into this thing, you go on becoming very competent and then suddenly you find
another one coming up. There are so many struggles when your attention is outside. Because in
attention outside, there is no purity. There is no purity. It's just attention to yourself and that too is so
limited. Very limited it is because if you pay attention to yourself, there's no end to your troubles and
woes. For a person, as they said, really is fact that: I don't mind sleeping anywhere. I don't mind eating
anything. I am not bothered about all these things, is a fact. Because, you see, it's not very important I
think. But without thinking, I am made like that. I am like that, all right. But Sahaja yogis have become
like this. This is the miracle that human beings have turned their attention to their spirit. Then you are
amazed how things work out. Without any competition, without any fights, without any quarrels, how
your attention becomes fixed on your spirit.
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
First, the first thing that happens to you is good health. Your health improves. Firstly, if your
health is all right, I mean so many problems are solved. This world, I think at least 30% people are
always sick. Because of the tensions, maybe because of bad food and this and that. This is first thing
that happens to you is your health improves. Today now in Sahaja Yoga, we have people who have
learned that by these modern ways of economics and all that, has not given any peace to anyone. We
think of America; I mean I've been to America, I know Americans: How terribly disturbed they are.
Their families are ruined. Their children are ruined. And all kinds of stupid things are happening. Our
Indian gurus are going and making a big money there. And they just want peace. They just want peace
of the heart. That's only possible when your attention goes to your heart because in the heart resides
the spirit and the spirit is the source of peace. First is the love and second as I told you just now is the
peace.
You become extremely peaceful. You become like a witness and you see the whole drama like a
joke. It's nothing so serious to be worried about. It all works out. And this is what one has to become is
to become the spirit which is your own, which is in your own heart and that is the source, as I told you,
of love and again I say of peace. And the third thing that happens to you, that the source of spirit being
joy, that joy bubbles in your life. It just bubbles in your life. You don't know how to get out of that great
ocean of joy. You start swimming in it, enjoying it, every bit ofit. You touch all the shores, going round
the whole world, their hearts and everything. It is in the heart that resides. Again I say, it is not in the
brain. No mental activity can take you to spirit. Spirit is only possible if your attention could be
somehow taken to the spirit. And that's possible only through Kundalini awakening.
This change of attitude towards life, this change of complete peace and joy has come to you all
because your attention is now on your spirit. Now you don't think of money, money walks your way.
You don't think of power, power walks your way. And the power of the spirit is the highest, the most
powerful and the most righteous thing. It is not necessary that you should become a sanyasi, sadhu
baba, do all kinds of things. No necessity of these rituals. The spirit is residing within you. Already all
you have done in last lives. Now this life only thing you have to do is to put attention to your spirit.
And that's only possible through the awakening of this Kundalini – the Primordial Mother. When She
starts, I mean that's also your own. When She starts rising, She passes through the centers and enriches
them, integrates them, and pierces through the last fontanel bone area and makes you connected to this
all pervading power of divine love. But this power of divine love is not only "the love," if you want to
say, it is also peace and joy and also it is the superior wisdom.
It is rather subtle for normal man to understand. I know that. I've gone through that. For persons to
understand that one can become the spirit, but this is in the evolutionary process. Today is the time for
people to become the spirit. This is the blessing of this blossom time as I call it and people have to
become the spirit. Otherwise what is left of them is like all other human beings who'll, I don't where
they'll end up. So this is an essential step today to become the spirit. All the saints, all the prophets,
the religions have talked about it. Not that they have not. Of course, we have twisted them. We have
made separate, separate things. But it's only one simple thing is that you are a spirit and that spirit,
unless and until you become, you cannot achieve any peace, any joy and no love.
all
The Sahaja yogis here are sitting have achieved it. They don't think they are from foreign
countries or from this country or that country. They don't want. Now here it is in this camp we don't
have very good arrangement for sleeping or eating or anything, no good bathrooms, nothing. They are
just enjoying themselves. Nobody minds it. Of course certain things of particular country may linger
on. But then it drops, it drops. Gradually it starts dropping out. Like a flower when it becomes the fruit.
All its petals and everything drops out and then it becomes the fruit. So you have now become the fruit
-fruit of knowledge, fruit of wisdom and of love. For knowledge, you don't have to read books. There's
no need to. People who have read too many are difficult to get Sahaja Yoga. But what you have to see
yourself: What is the reality? But that's only possible if you are a realized soul. Otherwise you get lost
in the illusions of the world. You live with the illusions all your life, struggling, fighting and I don't
want to say what's the end is.
3
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
So a simple thing that has happened with Sahaja Yoga, in your evolutionary process your
attention now has gone to spirit than to anything else. As soon as the power of the spirit comes, you
find yourself successful in everything. You don't want;. You don't ask for it and if you are not, you
don't mind. You don't mind because you think they don't understand. It's all right, forget it. So there's
no use fighting for it, asking for it. For this, one thing is important, first and foremost thing, you have
to forgive everyone.
Human beings, I don't know sometimes they're illogical. Supposing somebody tries to harm you.
All right, I forgive him. Forget it because I have no headache of that. What he is trying to do is to give
me a headache which I will not take. I just forgive. So that is a very important point, that Christ has
also said that, “You have to forgive." Mohammad Sahib has said so many things but I don't know how
people have twisted. Christ has said so many things, how I don't know how they are being twisted.
Every one of them has said one thing: that you have to become the Spirit. And how people have
twisted it and have formed so many religions and in that religion why should they quarrel? If there is
one God there should be no quarrel.
99
Now in Sahaja yoga, you find people have come from different race, different countries, different
ideologies, everything. One thing great about Sahaja yogis, they are very pure people. There's so
much of purity in them. There's no problem. I do not have that problem of immorality in Sahaja Yoga.
We don't find anybody being immoral. If somebody has been immoral, he just gets corrected. If
somebody has been cheating, he gets corrected. If somebody has been a corrupt person, he gets
corrected. Because spirit gives the light for you to see for yourself what is good for you. Supposing
you are going on a road and you are blind. You can walk into a ditch. But supposing you have the light
and the eyes open. You know how to go. And that's exactly what has happened in Sahaja Yoga, that
people have realized how to move, how to go about, how to walk, and not to fall in the ditch. I have
seen people who have fallen into ditch also. But I have nothing but love for them. Because they were
blind, you see, for a blind person you can just have love, isn't it? And I found that once I forgive them
completely and I ask them, all right, even if they have abused Me, said things against Me, it's all right.
Because they don't know what they are doing. They are blind people. So once you feel that way about
others, that doesn't matter. Whatever they have done, whatever they have so far, so called harmed you
also, is no harm to you because you are standing on a pedestal of truth.
So the second point is that the spirit is the source of truth, not of untruth. For example, there is
some false guru. Immediately you will know who is false. How? On your vibrations, on your
fingertips you know that this man is false. Is all said by Mohammad Sahib that, “Your hands will
speak at the time of resurrection." That exactly happens that you see: this is the trouble. Now if you
want you can avoid that person or if you want you can bring him round and put him right. But we
should not try on the complicated characters very much in the beginning, I said, because they will
complicate you. Now those people who have matured in Sahaja Yoga can easily manage that also.
And also we must know that all the elements are working for us. All the events of the world are just to
show how wrong things are wrong and how right things should be done.
Say for example, when Hitler came. He started destroying people. And he took nine years to build
himself up. And he did all kinds of things which cannot be forgiven by anyone. But he died and
suddenly you find in Germany, people are so enlightened. Now you heard some people, I was amazed
how they are so enlightened about love and about the divine. All these countries, I've seen are doing so
well
unexpectedly. Imagine in England, who came to India and ruled us for three hundred years, there
are so many Sahaja yogis. And also as you see today when I speak there, we have the whole hall filled
up with people, in England. I've seen also in the countries like Russia, where these people were on the
verge of collapsing after they started on democracy. Whether it is democracy or communism or
anything, these are all isms. You have to come out of it and see for yourself that so called democracy
has become demon-ocracy. So called communism has failed. Why? Basically what's wrong with
them? It was all based not on the spiritual level. There was no spirit involved in it. It was all based on, I
4
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page4.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
should
say, on the endeavors which are outside, which were very limited. And those limits, once they
break, you see you have a problem.
Now economics, the world economics if you see is collapsing. Everywhere there is recession. If
they are such experts then why there is recession? Why there are problems? Now the people say we
must remove the poverty. I agree but not by giving some sort of a beggar's gift but with self respect.
You can do it. You can do it because if you can approach people who need with Sahaja Yoga and enrich
them, you'll be amazed, they themselves will do better and work it out. All kinds of things, you see,
like in abroad people used to say, "Mother, You talk of spiritual life then why is it India is so poor?" I
said, “They are not so poor in spirituality." They may be poor in money. Those who have got lots of
money, are they also very good people? Are they also doing something very good? In the same way,
those who are poor are not doing something good that one should have compassion on them. Agreed.
Now what to do? If both sides are so miserable, what should we do? Is to change them. Change the
whole attitude towards life. Immediately I've seen people who are supposed to be rich start
understanding poverty. They start sharing. They start working it out.
In Sahaja Yoga, you'll be amazed how people help each other. How they work out everybody's
difficulties and problems into something very beautiful. You see, it's the wisdom that you get from this
all pervading divine power. This power has been described in every religion. You call it nirakar, you
call it ruuh, you can call it paramchaitanya; you can call by any name. But name is not the point.
Whatever it is, once you are connected with this power, you are blessed. Thousand times you are
blessed than you are as a normal human being. As a normal being, no blessings it has. It has nothing
but your own endeavors that the amount you push in, that's what you get. Here nobody pushes oneself.
Automatically you are pushed into that. This force, divine force brings you to that. And you have seen
that in your own lives how you came to Me, how you came to Sahaja Yoga. It was some sort of a divine
force which worked it out, which is Sahaja, which you may not realize but when you get your
realization, you just think about your own life: "How I came to Sahaja Yoga? How I got this?" And
then you see this peace, reigning over your hearts. The love, affection, everything. What is, as you
said, I have many powers, maybe I don't know, but one thing for definite, one thing that Sahaja yogis
can get all My powers.
As a Mother, Mother wants to give everything to Sahaja yogis. This greatest joy for a Mother is to
see Her son or daughter grow up like Her. I, I have a great vision of life. And I see the picture of that
here today. I was a ordinary housewife without much money. You know My interest in money is zero.
I don't understand even the bank and the somebody has to sign a cheque for Me. My husband has to
count My money, I am so bad. But still I've never had problem. Never had problem because it is the
greed in man, terrible greed in man that creates problems. But if he learns how to be satisfied,
automatically the greed drops out and you feel absolutely comfortable. But that doesn't mean that you
become a sadhu baba or you become a sanyasi or a something you give up. Those days are gone.
Those ordeals you have passed through. You've been to the Himalayas. You've stood on your heads
and did all kinds of things.
Now no more is needed. What is needed is that: you have to put your attention to your spirit, the
more you do it, the more you absorb all other attentions and put it to your spirit, which is there already
existing. There is nothing to be brought from outside or nothing to be learnt. It is inside every one of
you, is in the heart. Only thing you have to, you have to just feel it. Now that feeling can only come if
you are awakened in the Kundalini. I know that no one like Mohammad Sahib or Christ or Abraham or
Moses, who have created books or whatever history they have created, no where They would have
ever thought that people will form an organized religion and start in a way as if they are against each
other. But it has happened. It has happened. To remove that, you have to give them the knowledge, the
knowledge. Not the knowledge of the book but the pure knowledge. And the knowledge that is
pure
pure is wisdom. Through this wisdom only I've worked. This wisdom I had from My childhood.
Nobody has given Me. It's there. But this wisdom has taught Me one thing: that whatsoever maybe the
5
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page5.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
condition of a human being, whatsoever maybe his style, whatsoever may be his ego or his
conditioning ifhe can feel the love then his spirit gets [transformed?].
This transformation has taken place. Here we have only one percent of the people who have got
realization all over the world. But I know, I remember them all today who are not here, that they have
been seekers, madly seeking, seeking the truth. They went through horrible time seeking. They had
very bad gurus. They had all kinds of expenses, everything they did. But once they came to Sahaja
Yoga, they have found what was the truth is. And the truth is very simple: that you are the spirit. You
are not this body, this mind, but you are the spirit. This is the truth and they have found the spirit. That's
what is the truth that they have found. Once this truth is established within you, that you are the spirit,
nothing can destroy you, nothing can harm you. It cannot have any wants. It doesn't have. What wants
can you have when you have the spirit because such a satisfying thing? It doesn't condemn anyone. It
doesn't runs after anyone. Is satisfied with itself, absolutely satisfied.
You see, I was very anxious that I should lead a very normal life. I should not be like some
Himalaya fellow or something like that. Because this is needed for a common people. Today it's a aim
en mass, en mass awakening. It is not for one person.
This was the thing because once any discovery is made, supposing, and that discovery only is for
one individual, it has no meaning. It has to go to masses. And this is what I knew: I have to do it. And I
had to work - they say so but I don't think I ever worked. I was just witness to whole thing. I saw it just
like a witness enjoying all kinds of things as you sit on the shore of a ocean. You see waves coming,
going like that. But inside, inside that is a human being who wants to evolve, who wants to become the
spirit. Then he starts thinking what good he can do to others. So far I've been very anxious that people
should become Sahaja yogis. I didn't take to any missionary work or any social work. I used to do
when I was not in Sahaja Yoga, I should say, when I didn't start the Sahaja Yoga. But later on, I
discovered that unless and until you transform people, unless and until you become the spirit, you'll
become like any other social worker.
I was working in a, say, blind school. I was the chairman of the blind school, blind people. And I
was surprised, the people who were with Me were very funny type you know? The governor was to
come and they said, "Who will sit next to governor?" I said, "What is this?" So they said also, "I being
the president, I have to sit." I said, "Not necessary. I can sit anywhere." But they all started quarreling
on this point. So I said, “All right, we'll take a plank and put it on head of the - of the governor and you
all sit on that like sparrows." That humor helped a lot and they settled down. So this is the stupid thing
where you see it, what is your position, what do you get? I mean it's so stupid that even the ant knows
how to work out the collectivity. I don't know how human beings are dying after useless nonsensical
things. But the only thing is, he has not yet become the spirit. So he doesn't respect himself, no respect.
So he does all these things which are not very respectable I think. Then I thought that this kind of work
people are doing, they think no end of themselves.
99
66
Once you start doing something good, why should you think you are very great? I, I can't
understand, you see, My brain is that way useless. Because what I found with these people who were
working with Me, very anxious to take the credit for this. Somebody wanted to become the chairman,
vice-chairman. I said, “You become everything." So the attention being on your promotion, it's not a
real promotion, no promotion. Everybody used to laugh at them, it's a degradation. Your promotion is
not through your own being but through your own spirit. Being means a very big thing, I think, but
spirit is very subtle, very beautiful which is residing in all of you like a light. It's a light in you.
Now there are Sahaja, so many Sahaja yogis who are giving enlightenment to others. There are
people who are going all over the world. I was surprised that people from Germany and Austria came
to help Me when I first went to Russia. I said, "What are you doing here?" Said, "Mother we have to do
something because so many people were killed by our forefathers." Then My heart started really
thanking them. Look at this, what has come into them? Then they went, you'll be amazed, to Israel and
99
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page6.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
from Israel they brought lots of Sahaja yogis to Egypt. So I asked the Israelis, Sahaja yogis, “Why are
you here?" They said, "Mother it's our job now to make friends with these Sahaja yogis from Egypt."
Just see how love engulfs all these angularities, all these thorns of life and dissolves it completely. It's
so joy giving to see your love acting on others. Small, small things and very big things, all that works
out with love.
For example, in an industry now people have problems of strikes. Very common struggle, haves
and have not and this going on. But if you can raise the people to the spiritual height, to their spiritual
need which is the most important need today, you'll be amazed there will be no problem of any kind.
You see, it is a kind of a communism. It's a kind of a socialism. It's a kind of a democracy. It's all things
put together which works.
Democracy means we have Sahaja yogis who wanted to organize this. They said, “Mother what
should we do?" I said, "I am not going to say anything. You do what you like. You choose whatever
you like, whatever you want to do." And I was just busy arranging the flowers in the house because so
many flowers came and I am worried about the flowers. I was just arranging the flowers in the house.
And what I find, now see how they've done: no quarrel, no fight, no discussion, nothing. How have
they done? Otherwise you cannot make ten people sit together and talk the same way. One will talk,
another will talk, another will talk, will go on discussing, discussing this, reaching nowhere.
Otherwise only one man has to work it out, otherwise nothing can work. So you see, it changes the
whole atmosphere of every human being. Changes his attitude, changes his endeavors and everything
becomes so beautiful and joy giving.
99
You are a socialist also because you start thinking about the people who are down trodden, people
who have no money who are poor, and you try to work out something by which they get some money.
I used to go with My father for a case in a district called Chanda. And there I saw people just with
one cloth around them. What was shocking to Me: just one cloth, whether it is winter or summer. I
used to weep so My father would say, "Why to weep before them?" I said, "What can I do? I must try
to do something for them." Now when I got so many Sahaja yogis, I told them, "I want to help these
people somehow. And what they make is pottery." So they said, "Mother, all right. You can get the
pottery. We'll import here and we'll sell them." You'll be amazed now, these people have got houses,
they have got a good life to live and they are living very well. So in a way, it is a kind of a socialism.
That you see problems and you know collectively to solve it, collectively, not singularly but
collectively.
The all of the Sahaja yogis suggest, “Mother, this can be solved." So far I have not done anything
directly, I must say, like starting a organization of that kind. But now when there are so many Sahaja
yogis with their attention on their heart, now My attention is going to the people who need our help. So
first time, I have asked them to make an NGO for destitute women and for children who are being
deserted by their parents. And immediately, you'll be amazed, it all did. We got the land. We got the
people. I mean, I'm not doing anything and it's all done. Moreover, so many people have written,
"Mother if You want land, we can give You. You come here, do this, do that." Can you imagine? Once I
just thought of it: that we have to do something for the poor people. Also other so many things can be
done with your attention which is pure, full of love because the love, you see, is something that gives
the wisdom how to do it. If you have love, it gives you the complete insight into the problems and
6.
you
how it works.
See it's surprising for Me, I mean, I used to do that always but even after Sahaja Yoga I found that
is the love is the solution. Is this only way we can enter into the hearts of people. But for that love, we
should not try to do it for some money or for some achievements or for some sort of a reward, but just
the whim of the love and that is what is today paying all of you: The way you love all the people. The
way you have done so much work. You don't know what gratitude I have for you. Single-handed I
could not have done it. I could not have gone to so many countries. It's a like a place like Benin, where
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page7.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
there are only Muslims are there, I would never - I could never have thought of going to that farfetched
place where these people are there and imagine these people are Muslims and they have all taken to
Sahaja Yoga. And in that they are understanding the beauty of love. You, this is done by French. Can
you believe these French? Going down all the way to Benin and getting it done. Even English have
all the way to different countries; even the Austrians and also Germans and Italians are another
gone
quality of people who have a very rich heart, I must say. They have a very rich heart and the way they
are spreading Sahaja Yoga throughout Italy is really remarkable. I am amazed how these people are
approaching all these people who have never known what is spirit is and how they are getting them to
Mother.
Now with that, you see, we don't have to say "prohibition." We don't have to say "don't take
drugs," nothing. No don'ts in Sahaja Yoga. Automatically they drop. I don't have to say, "Don't do it."
Just automatically they drop.
99
66
99
I mean you'll be amazed, once we had a program and there was a light to be put in a one of the
deepas and nobody had a matchbox. Can you imagine? Nobody has a matchbox. Is such a problem
with thousands of people there, nobody has matchbox. So we had to send somebody to get the
matchbox. There's no need. So I never say, "Don't do this," never. I've never said it but it has worked
like that, it has worked. I don't know how, how you have dropped it but it's very simple when the light
of the spirit is there. In that light, you just don't.
99
Now all the people have said, “Don't drink." Say for example: Sikhs, Muslims but you see they all
drink because they are not really Muslims, they are not really Sikhs. If they were really that, they
would not have drunk. How is it possible then? They have to be the spirit. In the light of the spirit, we
just don't do anything that is destructive, just don't do it. You don't have to tell anybody. Now you are
all sitting here, you know that I've never told you anyone, “Don't do this." But I was amazed in
London that people overnight gave up drugs, overnight. People employ military, this, that drugs is
[INAUDIBLE]. They gave up prostitution. They gave (up) drugs, all kinds of destructive things to
which human being take sometimes out of frustration and sometimes because they feel very lonely.
But now in Sahaja Yoga, you can never be lonely. All over the world, you have brothers and
sisters. If they come to know somebody is there somebody is coming, they'll all go to the airport to
receive. It's not a brotherhood of a ordinary life. It's a very deep type of a brotherhood. It's a very deep
understanding. But they are very deep people, I must say, because they have been seekers and in that
seeking they have really got completely into a turmoil and that has made them very deep people.
This book is "Light of Quran" is written by a lady Gilmet. You read it. I would request you to read
it because she is so deep. I knew she was very deep but the way she has expressed is so beautiful, so joy
giving that she's not a Muslim, she married a Muslim, so called, because they were all Sahaja yogis
and the way she has narrated her seeking is so beautiful. We have so many big writers in Sahaja Yoga
who have given very, very nice books and things. But this Gilmet is very shy. She doesn't talk. She
keeps quiet. But inside, she's so deep because of her seeking.
So there are many people in this world who are seeking the truth because they cannot bear the
nonsense of modern world and they are very sensitive. They are not insensitive, very sensitive people.
That's how you all got your realization. It's nothing of Mine. To say that "I did it," is not proper. If you
were not like a candle, I could not have enlightened you. So I am very thankful to you. And I am so
much enamored by the way you people are feeling about Sahaja Yoga: that collectively you have to
work it out, globally you have to work it out.
You have to help each other and bring up the people. Most important thing is to create a mind
universally which is towards the spirit. Then we'll solve all the problems, no problem. Now ifI
I
say
am starting some sort of a project here for the poor. Immediately all of them will send Me money.
Immediately they'll all work. They'll find out who can work it out, who can come and help Mother.
What work can we give them? How to work it out, all over the world. I mean, it spreads so fast. I have
to just say that. I never asked for money. I never said, "I need money," but immediately they will plan
8.
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page8.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
out the whole thing, bring the whole thing here and work it out. It can work in India, it can work
anywhere. It's not just they are interested in India. But globally they are interested in the problems. It
is not for making some sort of a show or some sort of a, we can say, a cult. It is something which is very
innate, which is very subtle and that works, that gives them joy. That gives them joy to do something
for Sahaja Yoga. I am sometimes amazed how they feel for the whole world, how they care for the
whole world, how they are willing to do for [?].
Of course as I said, every country has some problems. Like, we can say that north Indians are
interested always in politics because Delhi is here. But is reduced now, very much reduced now.
There's not much going on. And they don't like to hear anything against anyone. That's a good thing.
And in the south, we can say in the beyond Narmada river, whatever we have, Maharashtra and all
that, they are very ritualistic, very ritualistic people. Even if they put the thali [thali MEANS PLATE
FOR DINING], you must put salt here, you must put vegetable here, you.. so that a blind man can also
eat food properly. You must use only one hand. You must keep another hand tied up. They're very, very
ritualistic because of these two things, you see, in Sahaja Yoga they do not grow.
Whatever it is, we have to understand that these are [lingering PROBABLY ?] still are behind us.
For example in north India, I would say if anybody speaks anything ill about anybody, just put your.
This principle of Gandhiji was correct. Never listen to any nonsensical gossip. Gossip is going on.
People like to listen to gossip because of this media also. They were showing nothing but gossip
before election. And the whole gossip goes into our mind and that's how we work out. So for this part, I
would request all the people from the north India to never to listen any criticism, never to criticize
anyone. What is the use? Just see logically: if you listen to somebody's criticism, what is the use?
What do you gain out of it? Now by repeating it to somebody else, what do you gain? What is the gain?
Simple thing, always ask the question: What is the gain? And why to see something wrong with
others? I know by that you can be cheated. Somebody can deceive you, is true. But doesn't matter. You
don't get anything into your head. You don't get any filth and any poison in your head. I know there are
people who create problem, talk from one to another, do this, do that. But that should not harm you in
anyway because you have the spirit and the spirit cannot be harmed. It cannot be destroyed. It is said
that, "It cannot be destroyed by any weapon. It lives and lives forever." So the attention towards the
atma is lacking, atma vimukta.
We, our eyes have gone, our attention is gone to something away from the spirit and that's why all
the problems are there. Once you are one with your spirit, it works. It works for you because it is in
connection with the God almighty. It is in connection with the all pervading power, which works out
everything. I know this all pervading power. It has showing so many miraculous photographs about
Me. And actually I, I didn't ask It but It is doing. Because very active, It is very active. And if It sees
anybody who is subtle and who is deep, It acts. In your business, in your politics, in your family in
everywhere you'll find this light will shine and you'll respect, respect the hearts of a person. You'll
respect the love of others. You will respect the spirit that is shining in others. This is the reason why
you have learned to respect each other, because your spirit is enlightened. I can see it so clearly.
I am so very happy to see so many of you here for My birthday. I don't know what is the
significance ofa birthday is but whatever it is, it is one of the things that I can meet you, all of you here,
so very happy. I am thankful to these people who are elites of our society. They are very great people
elected and sometimes given very high positions and also there are some very well known
industrialists. All of them have to understand the value of sprititual life. It's very important for them.
Not to avoid this point but to be one with your spirit is your own property, is in your own, I should say,
the complete glory that you have is to be the spirit. With all this, I don't know how to thank you all and
how to thank all these people who spoke so nicely. Only thing, I wish you all a great growth in your
spiritual life atmonnati, into your spirituality so that it covers all the corners of the world and create a
beautiful world of tomorrow.
May God bless you!
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page9.txt 
 HINDI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
Scanned from Hindi Chaitanya Lahari
जाना चाहिए, आत्म ज्ञान को ओर जाना चाहिए। आरम्भ में
आप सभी सत्य साधकों को हमारा प्राणाम । मेरे तथा
सहजयोग के विषय में आप लोगों ने इतना कुछ कह दिया है मानव के साथ यह घटित होना चाहिए अन्यथा हमारा चित्त
बाहर की आर है, हमें धन, सत्ता, प्रतिस्पर्धा तथा अन्य सभी
कि मेरा हृदय दूर-दूर से इस अवसर पर आए हुए आप सभी
लोगों के प्रति कृतज्ञता से भर गया है। सहजयोग समझने के प्रकार की चीजा की चिन्ता लगी रहती है। एक बार यदि
लिए यह आवश्यक है कि इस कलियुग में हमें अपनी स्थिति किसी प्रकार से आपका चित्त आत्मा की ओर चला जाए
का ज्ञान हो । हम किन परिस्थितियों का सामना कर रहे है? तो आप आत्मा की शक्ति बन जाते हैं । और आत्मशक्ति
हर जगह, हर देश में जिस प्रकार घटनाए घटित हो रही हैं सर्वोच्च शक्ति है। सर्वप्रथम आत्मा प्रेम करती है, विना
उनके विषय में सोच कर आप परेशान हो जाएंगे। समस्या
क्या है? इतना अशान्त एवं तनावग्रस्त होने की लोगा की क्या व्यक्तित्व है जोकि मात्र प्रेम प्रसारित करता है। किसी का
आवश्यकता है? सामूहिक रूप से एवं किसी देश विशेष में
जहां भी जाते हैं. आपको एक प्रकार की भ्रान्तिपूर्ण स्थिति
दिखाई पड़ती है। भयानक ! पूरा समाज ही विनाश के भय
कुछ आशा किए । बस प्रेम करती है। यह बन्धन मुक्त
कष्ट हो, किसी की समस्या हो, तुरन्त यह प्रेम प्रसारित होन
लगता है। हृदय में प्रम प्रसारण को यह शक्ति है। परन्तु हमारा
चित्त आत्मा पर न होने के कारण यह कार्यान्वित नहीं हो पाती।
राजनीतिक, आर्थिक तथा अन्प्य प्रकार के प्रयत्नां में भी चित्त
बाहर की ओर हाने के कारण आप प्रतिस्पर्धा में फसते चल
से चिन्तित नजर आता है। कारण क्या है?
आयोजित तथा अनायोजित सभी प्रकार के धर्म आदि
हैं। बहुत से साधुसन्त हैं, बहुत सी पुस्तकें लिखी गई हैं कि
आपमें कौन से गुण हाने चाहिए । परन्तु केवल सत्य साधक
(जिज्ञासु) ही दख सकता है कि इस विश्व में इतनी समस्याएं
क्यों हैं और आप किस प्रकार इनके समाधान में सहायक हो
सकते हैं। समस्या कहा है। समस्या मानव में है। जिस प्रकार हैं क्यांकि बाहर की ओर रहने वाले चित्त में पावित्र्य नही
वर्णन किया गया है हम पशु अवस्था से मानवावस्था में है और वह भी बहुत
विकसित हुए हैं।
नि:सन्देह हममें मानवीय चतना है। इस चतना में हम है तो आपके कष्टों एवं दु:खों का काई अन्त नहीं हागा। मुझे
जाते हैं। आप बहुत यांग्य बनते जाते हैं परन्तु अचानक काई
आपसे भी अधिक योग्य व्यक्ति खड़ा हो जाता है।
म
वहुत सं संघर्ष
आपका चित्त यदि बाहर की ओर है ता
हाता। यह चित्त केवल आप पर होता
सीमित अवस्था में । आप यदि कंवल अपने पर चित्त का रखते
सभी प्रकार की चीजें देखने लगते हैं जो अच्छी नहीं हैं
विध्वंसक हैं और परेशान करने वाली हैं। यदि ये आपका में इन चीजों की विल्कुल चिन्ता नहीं करती । यह सत्य है
परेशान नहीं करतीं तो इसका अभिप्राय है कि आप सर्वेदनशाल क्योंकि यह सब महत्वहीन है। परन्तु सम्भवत: मरी रचना हा
कहीं भी सांने में, कहीं भी खाता खाने में परंशानी नहीं होती।
नहीं हैं। परन्तु मानव रूप में आप संदेवदनशील हैं। इसका क्या
कारण है? जीवन के हर क्षेत्र में चाहे ये राजनैतिक हो
आर्थिक हो या कोई और एक सूक्ष्म समस्या है जिसे लोग नहीं
समझते । अब यदि में कहती हूँ कि हमारे अन्दर आत्मा है, यह
हमारे हृदय में चमकती है. तो आपको मुझ पर विश्वास करने
की कोई आवश्यकता नहीं है। परन्तु हमारा चित्त वाहर को आर
है। इसे आत्म-विमुख कहा जाता है, अर्थात हमारा चित्त बाहर
की ओर है। इस मानवास्था में हमारा चित्त बाहर है, भिन्न
बाह्य बस्तुओं पर । हमारे चित्त को क्या प्राप्त करने के लिए
और विकसित होने के लिए कहां होना चाहिए? किस चीज को
प्राप्त करने के लिए? सर्वप्रथम अब हमारे चित्त को आत्मा पर
एसी हुई है। ठीक है, परन्तु सहजयांगी भी ऐसे ही बन गए हैं
ं।
यह चमत्कार है कि मनुष्य अपना चित्त आत्मा पर ले गया है!
आत्मा पर चित्त ले जाने के पश्चात् आप हैरान होते हैं कि
किस प्रकार बिना किसी प्रतिस्पर्धा, बिना किसी लड़ाई-झगड़
के कार्य होते हैं। किस प्रकार आपका चित्त आत्मा पर स्थापित
हो सकता है? सर्वप्रथम आपका स्वास्थ्य सुधर जाता है, आप
सुस्वस्थ हो जाते हैं। और इस प्रकार बहुत सी समस्याओं का
समाधान हो जाता है। विश्व में मानसिक तनाव और गर्दै भांजन
आदि. के कारण 30 प्रतिशत लाग सदैव बीमार रहते
सर्वप्रथम आपका स्वास्थ्य सुधर जाता है।
10
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page10.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
के प्रेम की यह दिव्य शक्ति केवल प्रेम ही नहीं है यह
सहजयोग में लोगों ने समझ लिया है कि आधुनिक ,
आर्थिक गतिविधियां ने किसी का शान्ति प्रदान नहीं की । हम
अमेरिका का लें । मैं अमेरिका गई. बहुत से अमेरिकन लोगों
को जानती हैं । ते
बच्चे बर्बाद हो गए हैं। सभी बेवकूफी की बातें हो रही हैं।
हमारे भारतीय गुरु वहां जाकर धन बना रहे हैं । अमेरिका के
लोगों को कंवल शान्ति चाहिए, हार्दिक शान्ति । यह तभी
शान्ति आनन्द एवम् उच्च विवेक भी है। सामान्य मानव के
लिए इसे समझ पाना अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म कार्य है। यह सब में
जानती हूँ। लोग जानते हैं कि व्यक्ति आत्मा बन सकता है।
यह विकास प्रक्रिया है। आज आत्मा बनने का समय है।
कितन परेशान है! उनके परिवार, उनके
बसन्त ऋदु का यह वरदान है। लोगों को आत्मा बनना है नहीं
ता उनका अन्त न जाने क्या होगा । आज आत्मा बनना
अत्यन्तु आवश्यक है।
'सभी सन्तों, पैगम्बरों, धर्मपरायण लोंगों ने इसके विषय
में बताया परन्तु हमने उनकी बातं का तोड़-मरोड़ करके
भिन्न मत बना लिए । फिर भी एक सर्वसाधारण बात यह है
सम्भव है जब आपका चित्त आपके हृदय पर जाता है, क्योंकि
हृदय में आत्मा का निवास है और आत्मा ही शान्ति का सांत
है। तो पहला प्रेम है और दूसरी शान्ति है। आप अल्यन्त
शान्त हो जाते हैं। साक्षी भाव होकर सारे नाटक को आप एक
मेजाक की तरह से दंखते हैं। किसी चीज की चिन्ता करने
की कोई आवश्यकता नहीं । सभी कुछ हाता रहता है। तो और प्रम प्राप्त नहीं कर सकते । यहां उपस्थित सहजयोगियों
व्यक्ति को यही बनना है
जोकि आपकी अपनी है, जो आपके हृदय में है और जो
प्रेम का, तथा शान्ति का स्रोत है। तोसरो चीज जो आपके
মाथ घटित होती है वह यह है कि आनन्द क्याकि आत्मा का
सरांत है अत: आनन्द आपके जीवन में है। इस
प्रकार से यह उमड़ता है कि आपका समझ में नहीं आता कि जैसे फल बनने पर फूल झड़ जाता है। फूल को सभी
कि आप आत्मा है और आत्मा बने बगैर आप शान्ति, आनन्द
ने यह सब प्राप्त कर लिया है। वह नहीं सोचते कि वे विदेशी
हैं। इस देश के हैं या उस देश के । इस शिविर में सोने, खाने
नहानें आदि का अच्छा प्रबन्ध नहीं है फिर भी वे आनन्द ले
रहे हैं। असुविधाओं की चिन्ता किसी को नहीं। नि:सन्देह
किसी देश विशेष के कुछ संस्कार बचे हुए हों परन्तु वे भी
छूट जाते हैं। शनै: शनैे: ये कुसंस्कार उसी प्रकार झड़ने लगते
- आत्मा बनना है। आत्मा
उमड पड़ता
किस प्रकार आनन्द के इस महान सागर से बाहर आए । आप
द्वसम तेरन लगत है और इसका पूर्ण आनन्द लने लगने हैं। पखुड़िया झड़ जाता है और वह फल बन जाता है । अब
आप भी फल बन गए हैं। ज्ञान, विवेक एवम् प्रेम के फल।
ज्ञान के लिए पुस्तकं पढ़ने की आपका कोई आवश्यकता
अधिक पढ़े-लिखे
लोगों को सहज में लाना कठिन कार्य है। आपको स्वयं मात्र
इतना देखना है कि वास्तविकता क्या है? और यह साक्षात्कारी
व्यक्ति बन जाने पर ही संभव है। अन्यथा आप विश्व के भ्रम
में ही खो जाते हैं। भ्रमों में फंस कर संघर्ष करते हुए लड़त
विश्व भर में जाकर लागों के हृदय छूकर आप इस आनन्द
के सभी तट छु लेते हैं । मैं फिर कहती हूं कि आत्मा का
निवास हृदय
गतिविधियां आपको आत्मा तक नहीं पहुंचा सकती ।
नहीं, इसकी काई आवश्यकता नहीं ।
में है। यह मस्तिष्क में नहीं रहती । मानसिक
आत्मा पर चित्त रखने से ही आत्मा को प्राप्त किया जा
सकता है और यह बटित होना तभी सभव है जब कुण्डलिनी
जीवन के दृष्टिकाण का परिवर्तित हो
का जागृति हो जाए
जञाना पुर्ण शान्ति एवम् आनन्द का आपको प्राप्त हो जाना में नहीं कहना चाहती । सहजयाग में आकर आपकी विकास
।
हुए आप जीवन-यापन करते हैं और अन्त क्या होता है यह
आपके चिन के आत्मा पर स्थित होान के कारण है। अब आप
प्रक्रिया में एक विशेष चीज जो घटित हुई है वह है आपक
धन के विपय में नहीं सीचते । धन आपको सहेज हो में प्राप्त
चित्त का आत्मा पर चले जाना । आत्मा की शक्ति प्रापत होते
नहीं
ही जाता है। आप शक्ति के बारे में नहों साचते । सत्ता आपको
हो आप स्वयं को हर क्षेत्र में सफल पात हैं। आप कुछ
स्वतः ही मिल जाती है। और आत्मा को शक्ति हो सर्वांच्च चाहते, आप कुछ नहीं मांगते । फिर भी आपको सभी
कुछ
प्राप्त हो जाता है । कोई यदि आपके साथ ज्यादती कर दे ता
कि आप सन्यासी, साधुवाबा बन जाएं और सभी प्रकार के भी आप बुरा नहीं मानते । सोचते हैं ठीक है, इसे भूल जाओं।
कमंकाण्ड करें कमंकाणड अनावश्यक हैं। आत्मा का निवास तो छोटी-छोटी चीजों के लिए लड़ते रहने का, इनके लिए
आपमें है । पूर्व जन्मों में आप सभी कमंकाण्ड कर चुक है। याचना करने को कोई लाभ तहीं । परन्तु इस स्थिति को पान
इस जन्म में आपने केवल चित्त का आत्मा पर रखना है और के लिए सभी को क्षमा करना आवश्यक हैं। ही सकता है
कांई व्यक्ति असंगत हो, आपकी हानि पहुंचाने का प्रयत्न
करता हो, ठीक है मैं उसे क्षमा करता हूँ। बह मुझे सिरदर्द देने
की कोशिश कर रहा है परन्तु में वह सिर दर्द नहीं लंगा। मैं
उसे क्षमा करता हूँ। यही महत्वपूर्ण बात ईंसा ने कही थी कि
है अत्यन्त शक्तिशाली एवम् धर्मंपरायण । आवश्यक नहीं
आपकी अपनी ' आदि मां' की जागृति द्वारा
यह कुण्डलिनी
ही संभव है। जब यह उठने लगती है ता सभी चक्रों को
भदती हुई उनका पांपण करती है, उन्हें संघटित करती है और
सिर के तालू भाग (सहस्रार) का भदन कर परमात्मा के प्रम
की सर्वव्यापो शक्ति से आपका सम्बन्ध जाड़ती है। परमात्मा
आपको क्षमा करना होगा ।
11
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page11.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
भुलाया नहीं जा सकता । परन्तु उसकी मृत्यु हा गई और
आज अचानक, आप देखते हैं कि जर्मनी कंलोग कितन
साक्षात्कारी है। मैं आश्चर्य चकित थी कि किस प्रकार लोंग
े
मोहम्मद साहब ने भी बहुत कुछ बताया है । मेरी
समझ में नहीं आता कि लोगों ने उन्को वातों को किस प्रकार
तोड़ मरोड़ दिया !
ने अपने हिसाब से परिवर्तित कर लिया । सभी ने एक ही
बात कही कि. 'आपकी आत्मा बनना होगा । परन्तु उनके
कथनों को ताड़-मराड कर बहुत से धर्म बना लिए । धर्म में
लड़ने की क्या आवश्यकता है? यदि परमात्मा एक ही है तो
धर्म के नाम पर झगड़ा नहीं होना चाहिए। अब सहजयोग में
भिन्न स्थान, भिन्न देशों, भिन्न आदर्शां से लोग आते हैं। सहज
इसा ने बहुत कुछ बताया. उन्हें भी लोगों
प्रेम एवं परमात्मा कं विषय में ग्रबुद्ध हैं । ये सभी देश मैं
हैं। इतनी तो आशा भी
नहीं की जा सकती । आप इंग्लेण्ड की कल्पना कीजिए जो
भारत आया और बहां तीन सी बार्ष तक राज्य किगया
दखा है, बहुत अच्छी तरह चल रहे
आज
वहा बहुत से सहजयोगों हैं और जब में प्रवचन देती हैं ता
सभागार लागा से भर जात हैं। यही चीज मैंन रूस जैसे दशा
योगियों को एक महान बात यह है कि वे पावन हैं, उनमें में देखो है जो कि प्रजातन्त्र होने के पश्चात् पतन के कगार
पवित्रता है। सजह योग में चरित्रहीनता की समस्या नहीं पर थे । प्रजातन्त्र बा साम्यवाद आदि ता कंवल 'वाद' हो है
उनसे बाहर निकल कर आपको देखना होगा कि यह प्रजातन्त्र
बहुत
है कोई भी चरित्रहीन दिखाई नहीं पड़ता । चरित्रहीन, धोखबाज
भ्रष्ट यदि कोई हो तो वह सुधर जाता है। क्योंकि आत्मा
पत
राक्षसतन्त्र बन गया है और साम्यवाद भी असफल हो गया है।
आपको स्वयं को देखने के लिए प्रकाश देती है कि आपके क्यों? मूलतः उनमें क्या दाप है? आध्यात्मिकता उनका आधार
हित में क्या है। आप यदि चक्षुहीन हैं तो सड़क पर चलते हुए नहीं है। इनमें आध्यात्मिकता का कांई स्थान न था । यह सब
बाह्य प्रयत्नों पर आधारित थे और यह प्रयत्न वहुत हो
से देख सकते हैं तो आप जानते हैं कि आपको किस प्रकार सीमित थे एक बार जब यह सीमाएं टूट जाती है तो समस्या
चलना है। सहजयाग में यही घटित हो रहा है लाग जान गये खड़ी हो जाती है। अब आप दखें कि विश्व का आर्थिक
ढाचा चरमरा रहा है; हर जगह मन्दा है। वा यदि इतने विशेपज्ञ
हैं तो फिर ये मन्दा क्यों है, ये समस्यायं क्यों हैं? लाग कहते
हृदय में प्रम है, क्यांकि वे अन्धे थे । किसी भी अन्ध व्यक्ति हैं कि हमें गरीबी की दूर भगाना है, में सहमत हूँ। पर्तु
के लिए आपक हृदय में प्रेम के अतिरिक्त क्या ही सकता है? उपहार द कर नहीं, आत्म साक्षात्कार द्वारा आप यह कार्य कर
काई यदि मुझे गाली भी दे दे तो भी में उसे क्षमा कर देतीं सकते हैं। इच्छुक लागां के पास जा कर सहजवाग द्वारा आप
हूँ क्योंकि वे नहीं जानते कि वे क्या कर रहे हैं व चक्षुहीन उन्हें बैभवशाली वना सकत हैं। आप हैरान होंग कि वे स्वयं
हैं। आप सत्य मार्ग पर खड़े हैं अत: किसी ने यदि आपको बहतर कार्य करेंगे और गरीबी का दूर भगायंगे । विदेशों में
हानि भी पहुंचाई हो ता भी आप उसे क्षमा कर दें । ता दूसरी लांग पूछा करते थे कि श्री माताजी आप आध्यात्मिक जीवन
के विपय में बात करती हैं, परन्तु भारत निर्धन क्या है। मरा
उत्तर होता है कि आध्यात्मिकता में व निर्धन नहीं हैं। धन के
मामले में चाहे ब निर्धन हो। जिन लागों के पास बहुत धन है
क्या वं अच्छ लाग है? क्या व कुछ अच्छा का्य कर रहे है?
इसी प्रकार जो लोग निर्शन है क्या व काई अच्छाई नहीं कर
रहे ताकि उन पर करुणा की जा सके । जब दांनों ही तरह
के लोग दुःखो है ता उन्हें परिवर्तित करने के लिए हम क्या
करना चाहिए? जीवन के प्रति पूर्ण दृष्टिकोण ही परिवर्तित
आप खडड में गिर सकते हैं परन्तु यदि आप अपनी आंखो
हैं कि किस प्रकार चलना है और किस प्रकार पतन से बचना
है। मैंने पतित लोगों को भी देखा है परन्तु उनक लिए भी मंर
मैं
बात यह है कि आत्मा सत्य का सात है असत्य का नहीं ।
उदाहरणार्थ यदि कोई कुगुरु है तो आप तुरन्त जान जायंगे ।
कैसे? अपनी चैतन्य लहरियों से, अपनी अंगुलियों क्रे सिरों
पर कि यह व्यक्ति झुठा है। माहम्मद साहब ने बताया है कि
पुनर्डत्थान के समय आपके हाथ बोलेग किसी भी कष्ट के
समय वास्तव में एसा ही होता है। अतः यदि आप चाहे तो
उस व्यक्ति को टाल सकते हैं और चाहें तो उसे मार्ग पर ला
सकते हैं। परन्तु आरम्भ में हमें उलझे हुए चरित्र के लोगो को
सुधारने की कोशिश नहीं करनी चाहिए नहीं तो वह आपका
भी उलझा देंगे । लाग अब सहज योग में परिपक्व हो गये हैं
और सुगमता से इन समस्याओं का सुलझा सकते हैं। हम यह
भी जानते हैं कि सभी तत्व हमारे लिए कार्यरत हैं। विश्व की
सारी घटनायें केवल यह दर्शाने के लिए हैं कि गलत चीजें तो
गलत ही हैं और किस प्रकार अच्छे कार्य किये जाने चाहिए।
कर देना चाहिए
। आत्म साक्षात्कार के पश्चात मंन दखा है
कि धनी लाग एकदम निर्धनता का समझने लगते हैं। व
अपना धन दूसरे लीगां के साथ बांटन लगत हैं और इस तरह
से चीजें कार्यान्वित होने लगती हैं। सहज यांग में, आप हरान
होंगे, किस प्रकार लाग एक दूसरे की सहायता करते हैं ।
किसी की भी कठिनाई या समख्या कां किस सुन्दरता से व
दूर करने का प्रयत्न करते हैं ! परमात्मा की इस सर्वव्यापे
उदाहरण के रूप में जब हिटलर आया तो उसने लोगों का
वध करना शुरू करे दिया। अपनी सत्ता स्थापित करने के शक्ति से हमें यह विवेक प्राप्त करना है। सभी धुर्मा में इस
लिए उसने सभी प्रकार के उल्टे-सीधे कार्य किए जिन्हें शक्ति का वर्णन किया गया है इसे 'निराकार', 'रूह', परम
12
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page12.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
करना है। यह भावना तभी आ सकती है जब आपकी
कुण्डलिनी जागृत हो । मैं जानती हूँ कि मोहम्मद साहब, ईसा
मसीह, अब्राहम या मोजिज आदि, जिन्होंने धर्मग्रन्थों की सृष्टि
की है. ने कभी भी नहीं सोचा था कि लोग आयोजित रूप
से धर्म बना कर इस प्रकार चलने लगेंगे मानो वे एक दूसरे
चैतन्य, कहा गया है। आप इसे किसी भी नाम से बुला सकते
हैं, नाम ही सभी कुछ नहीं है। एक बार जब आप इस शक्ति
से जुड़ जाते हैं तो आशीवादित हो जाते हैं। हजारों बार
आशोवादित हाने के पश्चात आप एक सामान्य मानव बन
पाते हैं। सामान्य मानव को उसके प्रयत्नों के अनुकूल ही
फल प्राप्त होते हैं। परन्तु सहजयोगी को बहुत अधिक प्रयत्न के विरोधी हो। परन्तु ऐसा हुआ । यह विरोध दूर करने के
नहीं करना पड़ता, स्वतं: ही वह उस स्थिति में चला जाता है। लिए आपको उन्हें ज्ञान दना होगा, शुद्ध ज्ञान, पुस्तकों का ज्ञान
वह शक्ति, वह दिव्य शक्ति आपको वहा तक ले आती है नहीं. शुद्ध ज्ञान । शुद्ध ज्ञान ही विवेक है। इसी विवेक से मैंने
कार्य किया है। शैशव काल से ही मुझमें यह विवेक था
किसी ने मुझे यह ज्ञान दिया नहीं-यह विद्यमान था । इसी
विवेक ने मुझे सिखाया कि मानव की जो भी दशा हो, जो भी
और यह बात आपने अपने जीवन में देखी है। किस प्रकार
आप मेरे पास आय थे? किस प्रकार आप सहजयोग में आये?
इसी दिव्य शक्ति ने यह सब कार्य किया आप यह महसूस
करें या नहीं परन्तु यह (शक्ति) सहज है। आत्मसाक्षात्कार के उसकी शेली हो, जितने भी उसमें अहम् और बन्धन हों. यदि
बाद आप अपने जीवन के विषय में साचने मात्र से कि मैं
किस प्रकार सहजयाग में आया. किस प्रकार मुझे यह प्राप्त
हुआ, आपका लगेगा कि यह शक्ति आपके हृदय पर शान्ति,
प्रेम एवम् स्नेह की वरषा कर रही है। जैसा इन्हांने अभी कहा
कि मंर पास बहुत-सी शक्तियां हैं, हों सकता है, में नहीं लोग आज यहां नहीं हैं मैं उन्हें जानती हूँ. और वे लोग मुझे
जानती, परन्तु एक बात निश्चित है कि सहज यांगी मेरी सभी
शक्तियों का प्राप्त कर सकते हैं।
वह प्रम को महसूस कर सकता है तो उसकी आत्मा जागृत
हो जाती है । यह परिवर्तन घटित हो चुका
है।
विश्वभर में जिन लागों ने आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त किया
है उनकी कवल एक प्रतिशत यहां उपस्थित है, परन्तु जो
याद हैं। वे साधक हैं और पागलों की तरह से उन्होंने सत्य
को खोजा, इस साधना में उन्होंने बहुत से कष्ट सहे । उन्हें
कई कुगुरु मिले और बहुत-सा धन उन्हें बर्बाद करना पड़ा।
माँ सहजयोगियों का सभी कुछ दंना चाहती हैं। अपने
वंट-वेटीयों को अपनी हौ तरह से विकसित होते हुए देखना सभी कुछ उन्होने किया परन्तु सहजयांग में आ कर ही वो
मां के लिए महानतम आनन्द है। मेर जावन का एक महान्
स्वप्न है और आज में उसकी स्पष्ट तस्वीर दंख रही हूँ। मैं
एक सर्वसाधारण गृहणीं थी जिसके पास बहुत अधिक धन
भी न था । आप जानते हैं कि धन में मरी काई रुचि नहीं यही सत्य हैं और उन्होंने सत्य को पा लिया है। यह सत्य कि
सत्य की प्राप्त कर सके! सत्य बहुत सरल है कि आप
आत्मा हैं। आप यह शरीर या वुद्ध नहीं हैं, आप आत्मा हैं।
यही सत्य है। और उन्होंने आत्मा को प्राप्त कर लिया है।
आप आत्मा है, जब आपके अन्दर स्थापित हो जाता है तो
है। बैंक मरी समझ में नहीं आते, मरा चैक कोई और हस्ताक्षर
कुछ भी न तो आपको हानि पहुंचा सकता है और न ही
आपका नाश कर सकता है। आपकी कोई इच्छाएं भी नहीं रह
जाती। जब आप आत्मा बन गये तो फिर आपको क्या इच्छा
करता है और मेरे पति को मरे लिए रूपये गिनते पड़ते हैं। इस
मामले में मैें इतनी दुबंल हूं । फिर भी मुझे कभी भी समस्या
नहीं हुई -क्यांकि मानव के अन्तर्निहित लालच ही सभी
समस्याओं को जन्म दता है। एक बार यदि व्यक्ति सबूरी हा सकती है? आप में इतना सन्तोष आ जाता है! ऐसा व्यक्ति
सीख ले ता स्वत: ही लालच छूट जाता है और व्यक्ति पूर्णंत: न तो किसी की भर्तस्ना करता है न किसी के पीछे दौड़ता
सुखी हो जाता है। परन्तु इसका अभिप्राय यह भी नहीं है कि है। वह सन्तुष्ट होता है, पूर्णत: सन्तुष्ट । मेरी तीव्र इच्छा थी
आप लाग साधु-बाबा या सन्यासी वन जायें या सभी कुछ कि मैं अत्यन्त सामान्य जोवन गुजारू, हिमालयवासी सत्य
साधकों की तरह से न बनू क्योंकि आम लोगों के लिए
सामन्य जीवन ही आवश्यक है। आज यह सामूहिक जागृति
है। यह किसी व्यक्ति विशेष के लिए नहीं है। मान लो कोई
आविष्कार होता है और यह किसी एक व्यक्ति के लिए है
तो यह अर्थहीन है। यह जन जन तक पहुँचना चाहिए । में
जानती थी कि मुझे यह कार्य करना है। लोग कहते हैं कि
मुझे इसके लिए कार्य करना पड़ा. परन्तु में नहीं सोंचती मैंने
লाभान्वित होंगे । इसके लिए आपको वाहर से कुछ नहीं कुछ किया । में तो इसकी एक साक्षी मात्र थी । एक साक्षी
लाना पड़ता और न ही कुछ सोखना पड़ता है। यह आप सभी के रूप में हर चीज का आनन्द लेते हुए मैंने इसे देखा,
विल्कुल उसी तरह से जिस प्रकार समुद्र के तट पर वैठकर
त्याग द । ल्याग के वे दिन चले गये हैं,. वा सारं कष्ट आप
मह चुक है। आप हिमालय में रह चुक है. सिर के भार खड़े
रह चुक हैं और सभी प्रकार को तपस्याएं कर चुके हैं। अब
इसकी कोई आवश्यकता नहीं है। अब आवश्यकता इस बात
की है कि आप अपना चित आत्मा पर रखें। अपने अन्तःस्थित
1
आत्मा पर जितना अधिक से अधिक आप अपने चित्त को
रखगे, जितना बाहय चीजों से चित्त को हटायंगे उतना हो आप
में है। आपको इसे केवल महसूस
के अन्दर है, आपके हृदय
13
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page13.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
माताजी हमें कुछ तो करता ही चाहिए क्योंकि हमारे पूर्वजों ने
यहा के बहुत । मेरा हुृदय उन्हें
धन्यवाद देने लगा ।
आप लहरों को आतं जाते देखते हैं। परन्तु व्यक्ति के अन्दर
का मानव विकसित हाना चाहता है, आत्मा बनना चाहता है।
से लोगों को हत्या की थो
आप देखें कि उनमें क्या परिवर्तन आ
तब वह सोचने लगता है कि दूसरां का क्या हित कर सकता
है। अभी तक मैं बहुत उत्सुक थी कि लोग सहजयोगी बनें।
मैंने धर्मप्रचारकों या सामाजिक कार्यकर्ताओं का कार्य नहीं
गया है। तत्पश्चात् वे
सहजयोगी मिस्र आए । मैंने इज़राइल के सहजयांगियों से पूछा
कि आप यहां क्यों आए? तो वे कहने लगे कि श्रीमाताजी
मिस के सहजयोगियों को मित्र बनाना हमारा कार्य हे। आप
बहुत से
इज़राइल गए और वहा से
अपनाया । सहज योग शुरु करने से पूर्व में सामाजिक कार्य
किया करती थी परन्तु वाद में मैंने महसूस किया कि लोगो
को परिवर्तित किए बिना और आल्मा बन विना आप भी अन्य
सामाजिक कार्यकर्ताओं की तरह से हो जाएंगे । मैं एक अन्ध
विद्यालय में कार्य करती थी, अन्ध विद्यालय की मैं अध्यक्षा
थी । अपने साथ कें लोगों को देखकर मैं हैरान थी कि वे
किस प्रकार के अटपटे लोग हैं! गवर्नर आने वाले थे और वे
ध्यान से देखें कि किस प्रकार प्रेम जीवन के सभी भेद-भावों
तथा कांटा को निगल लता है तथा इन्हें पूर्णत: समाप्त कर
देता है। अपने प्रेम का दूसरों पर कार्यान्वित हाते हुए दंखना
बहुत आन्नददायी है। छोटी-छांटी और बड़ी-बड़ी चीजें, प्रम
से सभी कुछ कार्यान्वित हा जाता है। उदाहरणत:, कारखानों
में हड़तालां की समस्या है, एक सर्वसामान्य संघर्ष है कि एसा
होना चाहिए, ऐसा नहीं होना चाहिए । परन्तु यदि आप लोगो
की आध्यात्मिक आवश्यकता के अनुसार उन्हें अध्यात्मिक
बुलन्दियों तक उठा सके तो, आप हैरान हांगे. किसी भी
प्रकार की काई समस्या न रह जाएगी । इसकी आज अल्यन्त
ये
सब कहने लगे कि गवर्नर के पास कौन बैठेगा? मॅन
12
पूछा
क्या है? वे कहने लगे कि अध्यक्षा होने के नात आपको
गवर्नर के समीप बैठना चाहिए। मैंने कहा कि यह आवश्यक
नहीं है, मैं कहीं भी बैठ सकती हूँ। परन्तु इस बात को लेंकर
वे झगड़ने लगे मैंन कहा ठीक है हम एक पलंग गर्वनर के
सिर पर रख देगे और चिड़ियों की तरह से उस पर बैठ
जाएंगे । इस मजाक ने कार्य किया और वे सब शान्त हो गए।
पदवी का अहम् मात्र मूर्खता है। चौटियां भी जानती हैं कि
सामूहिकता में कार्य किस प्रकार करना है। मेरी समझ में नहीं
आता कि किस प्रकार मानव वेवकूफी भरी चीजों के प्रति
मरा जा रहा है! केवल एक हो कारण ही सकता है कि वह
अभी आत्मा नहीं बना । यही कारण है कि वह, अपना सम्मान
आवश्यकता है। यह एक प्रकार का साम्यवाद है, एक प्रकार
का समाजवाद है, एक प्रकार का प्रजातंत्र हैं। सारी चीजों के
ताल-मल से हो कार्य हाता है। कुछ सहजयागी इसका
आयोजन करना चाहते थे ।
क्या करना चाहिए? मैंन कहा, मैं कुछ नहीं कहुंगी. आपकी
जो इच्छा हा आप करें, जा आपको पसंद हा वा छांट लें और
जो करना चाहे कर और मैं घर में पुष्प सजानं में व्यस्त हो
गई. क्यांकि वहुत से फूल आए थे और मुझे इनकी चिन्ता
श्री। फलों को ठीक-ठाक करते हुए मुझे पता चला कि उन
सहजयोगियों ने सारा कार्य सुन्दरतापूर्वक कर दिया है। न कांई
लड़ाई हुई, न झगड़ा. न कोई बहस, कुछ भी नहीं । किस
प्रकार उन्होंने यह सब कर दिया? वैसे आप दस लोगों को
साथ बिठा दें तो व एकमत नहीं हो पात एक बोलेगा, दूसरा
उन्होंने पूछा कि श्रीमाताजी हमें
नहीं करता और सभी अपमान जनक कार्य किए चला जाता
है। मुझे लगा कि इस प्रकार का कार्य करने वाले लोग स्वयं
को अति महान मान वैठते हैं। कोई अच्छा कार्य जब आप
करने लगते हैं तो क्यों आप स्वयं को महान समझ लें? मेरी
इस मामले में मेरा मस्तिप्क बेकार है
समझ में नहीं आता ।
क्योंकि मुझे लगा कि मेरे साथ कार्य करने वाले ये लोंग श्रेय बालगा. बहस चलती रहेगी परन्तु परिणाम कुछ भी न हांगा
या फिर केवल एक ही व्यक्ति उस कार्य को करे अन्यथा
कार्य हो ही न पाएगा । ता सहजयोग मानव के सार वातावरण
का. उसके दृष्टिकांण को, उसके प्रयत्नों का परिवर्तित कर
देता है और सभी कुछ आनन्ददायी हो जाता है। यहीं प्रजातंत्र
है। आप समाजवादी भी हैं क्यांकि आप पिछड़े हुए धनहीन
दरिद्र लांगों के विषय में भी सांचते हैं और उनके लिए कुछ
एसा कार्य करना चाहते हैं जिससे उन्हें कुछ पैसा मिल सके।
अपने पिताजी के साथ एक मुकद्दमे के सिलसिल में मैं
चांदा ज़िले जाया करती थी । वहां मंने कंवल एक वस्त्र पहने
। मेरे लिए यह आघात था। सदो हा या
गर्मी, केवल एक वस्त्र! मैं राया करती थी, मेरे पिताजी कहते
पहली वार जब मैं रूस गई ता मरी सहायता करने के लिए उनके लिए तुम क्यों रोती हो? मैं कहती - और मैं क्या कर
सकती हूँ? उनकी बेहतरी के लिए मुझे कुछ करने का प्रयत्न
लन के लिए उत्सुक रहते थे। काई अध्यक्ष बनना चाहता था
तो कोई उपाध्यक्ष ।
चित्त का पदांन्नति पर बने रहना वास्तविक पदोन्नति नहीं है।
मैन कहा आप सभी कुछ बन जाइय ।
हर आदमी उन पर हंसा करता था। यह अवनति हैं । आपकी
उन्नति तो कंवल आपकी आत्मा के माध्यम से ही हो सकती
है। शारीरिक अस्तित्व बहुत बड़ी चवीज है परन्तु आत्मा
और
आपमें
सुन्दर है और प्रकाश की तरह
अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म
निवास करती है। यह आपके अन्तनिहित प्रकाश
से
औ
है।
बहुत से सहजयागी अन्य लोगों को साक्षात्कार दे
लोगों को दखा
हुए
सकते हैं। कुछ लोग पूरे विश्व में जा रहे हैं। मैं हैरान थी कि
वहा जमनी और ऑसट्रिया से बहुत से सहजयोगी आए । मैंनें
ता करना ही चाहिए ।
पृछा आप यहां क्या कर रहे हैं! तो उत्तर मिला कि श्री
14
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page14.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
अब जब इतने सहजयोगी हो गए तो मैंने उनसे बताया अच्छे किस्म के लोग हैं जिनके पास बहुत ही अच्छा हृदय है।
कि किसी पकार में इन लोगों की सहायता करना चाहती हूँ। उनके पास अत्यन्त विशाल हृदय है और जिस प्रकार वे
वे मिट्टी के वर्तन बनाते हैं । तो उन्होंने कहा, श्रीमाताजी,
ठीक है आप उनसे बर्तन मंगवाएं हम इन्हें बेचेंगे आप हैरान हैरान हूँ कि किस प्रकार वे उन लोगों तक पहुंच जाते हैं जिन्हें
होंगे कि अब इन लोगों के पास रहने के लिए घर हैं और आत्मा के विषय में कुछ भी ज्ञान नहीं और किस प्रकार वे
अब ये अच्छी तरह से अच्छा जीवन विता रहे हैं। तो, एक
प्रकार से, यह समाजवाद है. कि आप समस्या को देखते हैं कहना पड़ता, हम नशीले पदार्थ संवन के लिए मना नहीं
और सामूहिक रूप से इसका समाधान करना जानते हैं।
सामूहिक रूप से. अकले नहीं । सभी सहजयोगी इस बात की छूट जाती हैं, मुझे नहीं कहना पड़ता कि एंसा मत करा
सलाह दते हैं कि श्रीमाताजी इसी प्रकार इस समस्या का
समाधान हो सकता है। अभी तक मेंन स्वयं कोई संस्था आदि हैरानी होगी । एक बार एक कार्यक्रम में दीपक जलाने थे
बनाने का कार्य नहीं किया है । अब जबकि हृदय में ध्यान
करने वाले इतने सारे सहजयोगी हैं, मेरा चित्त उन लोगों पर
सहजयोग को पूरी इटली में फैला रहे हैं वह प्रशंसनीय है। मैं
करते हैं। हमें नशा बन्दी के लिए नहीं
उन लोगों को एकत्र
करते । सहजयोग में काई मनाही नहीं है। स्वत: सब बुराइया
स्वत: ही सारी बुराइयां छूट जाती हैं। इस बात पर आपको
। क्या आप सोच
परन्तु किसी के पास मानिस तक न थी
सकते हैं-किसी के पास माचिस न थी । हजारों लोग वहां थे
परन्तु किसी के पास माचिस न थी । मैंन कभी नहीं कहा
पहली वार मैंन उनसे आश्रय विहीन महिलाओं और बच्चों के 'ऐसा करो ऐसा मत करो' परन्तु सब कुछ हो गया। में नहीं
लिए, जिन्हें उनके माता-पिता ने त्याग दिया है, एक गैर-सरकारी जानती कंसे, किस प्रकार आपको सारी बुराइया छूट गई। यह
संस्था (NGO) बनाने के लिए कहा आप हैरान हांगे कि बड़ी सहज बात है। एक वार जब आप आत्मा कं प्रकाश में
आ जाते हैं तो आप कोई बुरा कार्य करते ही नहीं । सभी
कहने का अभिप्राय है कि मैं कुछ भी नहीं कर रही हूँ। बहुत गुरुओं और पैगम्बरों ने शराव पीनं को मना किया है |
से लोगों ते मुझे लिखा है कि श्रीमाताजी यदि आपका भूमि उदाहरणार्थ, सिखों और मुसलमानों को शराब न पीने की
आज्ञा है। परन्तु उनमें से अधिकतर शराब पीते हैं क्योंकि वे
सच्चे मुसलमान और सच्चे सिख नहीं हैं। यदि वे सच्च हाते
आपके पवित्र एवम् स्नहमय चित्त से और भी बहुत से कार्य तो शराब न पीते । तो यह किस प्रकार संभव है? व्यक्ति को
आत्मा वनना पड़ता है। आत्मा के प्रकाश में व्यक्ति काई भी
विनाशकारी कार्य नहीं करता । इसके लिए किसी को बताने
को आवश्यकता नहीं होती । अब आप सब लोगों को भी मैंन
कभी किसी चीज के लिए नहीं रोका, परन्तु मैं हैरान थी कि
लंदन जैसे स्थान पर भी लोगों ने रातों-रात नशे त्याग दिए ।
जा रहा है जिन्हें हमारी सहायता की आवश्यकता है। अत:
तुरन्त हमें इसके लिए भूमि और कार्यकर्ता मिल गए । मेरा
चाहिए तो यहां आ जाइये । आप कल्पना कर सकते हैं कि
गरीबों की सहायता के लिए मेंन कवल सोचा भर था ।
किए जा सकते हैं. क्योंकि प्रेम काय्य को करने के लिए
विवक प्रदान करता है। आपमें यदि प्रेम है तो यह आपको
समस्या समाधान के प्रति अन्तर्दृष्टि प्रदान करता है। मर लिए
यह आश्चर्यचकित कर देने वाली बात है। यद्यपि में सदैव
प्रेम के माध्यम से ही कार्य किया करती थी. परन्तु सहजयोग
के पश्चात् भी मैन पाया कि प्रम ही समाधान है। लोगों के कई देश तो इस कार्य के लिए सेना का उपयोग करते हैं ।
हुदय में प्रवश करने का हमारे सम्मुख कवल यही एक मार्ग
है।
परन्तु सहजयोग में आने के पश्चात् लोगों ने स्वत: ही
परन्तु इस प्रम के पौछे धन, उपलब्धयां, पुरस्कार आदि वेश्यावृत्ति और नशे त्याग दिए । नैराश्य तथा अकेलेपन के
हमारा लक्ष्य नहीं हांने चाहिए । प्रेम तो केवल प्रेम के लिएदुख से अपनाए हुए सभी नशे उन्होंने त्याग दिए । सहज योग
ही हाना चाहिए । आज यही भावना आपको लाभान्वित कर
रही है। आप सबको लाभान्वित कर रही है। जिस प्रकार आप
में आप कभी अकेले हो ही नहीं सकते । विश्व भर में
आपके बहन भाई हैं। उन्हें यदि पता लगता है कि कोई आ
रहा है तो उसे लेने के लिए वे सब हवाई अड्डे पर चलें
जाते हैं। यह सामान्य जीवन का भाई-चारा नहीं है। बहुत गहन
भाई चारा है। इसमें अत्यन्त सूझबूझ है। ये लोग अत्यन्त गहन
सबका प्रम करते हैं. जिस प्रकार आपने इतना कार्य किया है.
आप नहीं जानते कि मैं कितनी कृतज्ञ हूँ! अकल में यह सब
बैनिन
कार्य नहीं कर पाती । इतने दशों में मैं नहीं जा पाती।
जैसे दूरदराज स्थान पर में न पहुंच पाती । यहां मुसलमान हैं। वे साधक थे और साधना करते हुए वे खलवली में फंस
लाग रहते हैं और इन सबने सहजयोग अपनाया है और प्रम
के सौन्दर्य को समझ रहे हैं। यह सारा कार्य फ्रांस के लोगों
न किया है। क्या आप कल्पना कर सकते हैं कि फ्रांस के महिला ने लिखी है, आप इसे यढे
लोग इतनी दूर जाकर एसा कार्य करंगे ! अंग्रेज भी भिन्न देशों है। अत्यन्त सुन्दर एवम् आनन्ददायी ढंग से उसने अपनी
में गए, आस्ट्रिया, जमंनी तथा इटली के लोग भी बहुत ही अभिव्यक्ति इस पुस्तक में की है। वह मुसलमान नहीं है. उसने
गए । उस स्थिति ने उन्हें गहन बना दिया
। यह पुस्तक
कुरान का प्रकाश (Light of Koran) गिलमेंट नामक एक
। वह महिला बहुत गहन
15
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page15.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
कर्मकोण्डी लोग हैं। थाली में वे बताएंगे कि नमक
एक तथाकथित मुसलमान से विवाह किया है क्योंकि वह
सहजयोगी है और अत्यन्त सुन्दर ढंग से अपनी साधना का
वर्णन किया है। सहजयोग में बहुत से महान् लेखक हैं जिन्होंने
अच्छी-अच्छी पुस्तकें लिखी हैं। गिलमेट बहुत लजीली है वह
प्राय: बात नहीं करती। मौन रहती है। परन्तु अपनी सत्य साध
में
बहुत
कहां रखना है, सब्जी कहां रखनी है, ताकि एक अन्धा व्यक्ति
भी अच्छी तरह से खाना खा सके । आपको केवल एक हाथ
से खाना खाना है दूसरा हाथ नहीं लगाना है। वे अत्यन्त
कमकाण्डी हैं। इन्हीं चीजों के कारण वे सहजयोग में बढ़ नहीं
पाते । जो भी हो हमें यह समझना है कि यह चीजें अभी तक
हमें जकड़े हुए हैं। में कहती हूँ कि उत्तर भारत में यदि कोई
कर
ना के कारण अन्तस में बह बहुत गहन है।
इस विश्व में बहुत से लोग सत्य की खोज कर रहे हैं।
लीजिए।
किसी के विरूद्ध कहे तो आप अपने कान बन्द
वे
आधुनिक विश्व की मुर्खताओं को सहन नहीं कर सकते
और अत्यन्त संवेदनशील हैं। इसी प्रकार आप सबको गांधी जी का यह नियम ठीक था । व्यर्थ की बात को कभी
मत सुनो । समाचार पत्रों के कारण भी चुनावों से पूर्व
अवांछित गप्पें सुनने को मिलती हैं। यह सब व्यर्थ की बातें
आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त हुआ । इसमें मेरा कुछ नहीं है। ये
कहना उचित न होगा कि मैंने यह कार्य किया है। आप यदि
दीपक न होते तो मैं आपको प्रकाशित न कर पाती । मैं हमारे मस्तिष्क को प्रभावित करती हैं। अत: मैं सभी उत्तर
भारतीय लोगों से अनुरोध करती हूँ कि कभी भी किसी की
आलोचना न सुने । इसका क्या लाभ है? मस्तिष्क से सोचें।
किसी की आलोचना सुनने का क्या लाभ है? इससे आपको
क्या मिलता है? यही बात किसी अन्य को सुनाने का क्या
लाभ है? सदैव एक प्रश्न करें कि इसका क्या लाभ है?
किसी में दोष क्यों देखें? इस तरह से आप धोखा खा सकते
हैं। परन्तु कोई बात नहीं। किसी भी प्रकार की गन्दगी अपने
मस्तिष्क में न भरें। ऐसे बहुत से लोग हैं जो इधर उधर बातें
करके समस्याएं पैदा करते हैं। इससे आपको कोई हानि नहीं
पहुँच सकती क्योंकि आप आत्मा हैं और आत्मा को कोई
आपके प्रति कृतज्ञ हूँ और जो भावनाएं आपके हृदय में
सहजयोग के लिए हैं उससे मैं बहुत प्रसन्न हूँ । आपको
सामूहिक रूप से पूरे विश्व में सहजयोग कार्यान्वित करना है।
आपने एक दूसरे की सहायता करनी है और लोगों को बढ़ावा
देना है। विश्व भर में एक ऐसे मस्तिष्क का विकास करना
है जो आत्मा की ओर हो ! यह कार्य अत्यन्त महत्वपूर्ण है।
तभी हम सभी समस्याओं का समाधान कर सकेंगे । में यदि
कहूँ कि मैं गरीबों के लिए कोई योजना बना रहीं हूँ तो तुरन्त
वे सब मुझे धन भेज देंगे, तुरन्त खोज निकालेंगे कि कौन इस
कार्य को कर सकता है तथा कौन श्रीमाताजी की सहायता कर
सकता है। उन्हें हम क्या कार्य दे सकते हैं? किस तरह से हानि नहीं पहुँचाई जा सकती । आत्मा का नाश नहीं किया जा
हम इसे कार्यान्वित कर सकते हैं? यह तेजी से फैलता है।
मुझे केवल कहना भर पड़ता है। धन के लिए मुझे कभी नहीं है। तो आत्मा पर चित्त की कमी है। आप कह सकते हैं
कहना पड़ता । मैंने कभी नहीं कहा कि मुझे धन चाहिए।
परन्तु अविलम्व वे सारी योजना बना लेते हैं और सभी कुछ
लाकर कार्य को कार्यान्वित करते हैं । भारत में भी एंसा हो
सकता । शस्त्र से इसे काटा नहीं जा सकता । आत्मा अमर
आत्म-विमुख स्थिति । हमारी दृष्टि व हमारा चित्त आत्मा पर
न होने के कारण सभी समस्याएं हैं।
एक बार जब आपका तदात्मय आत्मा से हो जाएगा तो
सभी कार्य हो जाएगा क्योंकि आत्मा सर्वशक्तिमान परमात्मा से
सकता है। कहीं भी ऐसा हो सकता है। दिलचस्पी कंवल
भारत में ही नहीं है, समस्याओं के समाधान में ही उनकी जुड़ी होती है। सभी कुछ कार्यान्वित करने वाली सर्वव्यापी
शक्ति से इसका सम्बन्ध होता है। मैं इस सर्वव्यापी शक्ति को
जानती हूँ। इसी में मेरे बहुत से चमत्कारिक फोटो दिखाए हैं।
यद्यपि मैंने इसे यह सब करने के लिए नहीं कहा फिर भी
यह ऐसा कर रही है। वास्तव में यह अत्यन्त चुस्त है और
किसी भी सूक्ष्म एवं गहन व्यक्ति को जब यह दैखती है तो
यह कार्य करती है। आपके व्यपार में, राजनीति में परिवार में,
दिलचस्पी है। यह कोई दिखावा करना या धर्म-सम्प्रदाय
बनाना नहीं है।
यह अन्तर्जात
है। सहजयोग के लिए कार्य करने में उन्हें आनन्द मिलता है।
कभी-कभी तो मैं हैरान होती हूँ कि पूरे विश्व के लिए इतने
प्रेम की भावना उनमें किस प्रकार है! किस प्रकार वे पूरे
विश्व की चिन्ता करते हैं और किस प्रकार विश्व भर के सभी जगह इस प्रकाश को आप देख सकेंगे और अन्य लोगों
लिए कार्य करने के लिए तैयार हैं! नि:सन्देह सभी देशों की की भावनाओं का सम्मान करेंगे
अपनी-अपनी समस्याएं हैं, जैसे उत्तर भारतीय लोगों की करेंगे और उनका सम्मान करेंगे । दूसरे के अन्दर चमकती
दिलचस्पी सदैव राजनीति में ही होती है क्योंकि दिल्ली हुई आत्मा का आप सम्मान करेंगे । आपकी आत्मा क्योंकि
है जोकि अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म है. प्रभावशाली
गुण
। अन्य लोगों को आप प्रेम
प्रकाशित है इसलिए आपने अन्य लोगों का सम्मान करना
सीख लिया है। यह बात मैं स्पष्ट देख सकती हूँ। मेरे
जन्मदिवस पर आप सबको यहां देख कर में बहुत प्रसन्न हूँ।
समीप है। परन्तु अब यह दिलचस्पी कम हो गई है
बहुत
कम। अब वे किसी के विरुद्ध कुछ सुनना नहीं चाहते । यह
अच्छी बात है। दक्षिण में, नर्मदा नदी से परे, महाराष्ट्र आदि
16
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page16.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
मैं नहीं जानती कि जन्मदिवस का क्या महत्व है। जो भी हो
सम्पति है, आपके अन्तः स्थित है। मैं कहूँगी कि आत्मा बनना
ही आपकी पूर्ण गरिमा है। मेरी समझ में नहीं आ रहा कि किस
प्रकार में आप सबको धन्यवाद दें और किस प्रकार इतने अच्छे
वक्ताओं को धन्यवाद दूं! मैं तो आध्यात्मिक जीवन में आपकी
महान उन्नति की कामना करती हूँ। आध्यात्मिकता में आपकी
आत्मोन्नति, ताकि विश्व के हर कोने पर यह छा जाए
भविष्य के सुन्दर विश्व की सृष्टि करें।
एक बात अवश्य है कि इस प्रकार यहां उपस्थित आप सभी
सजहयोगियों से मैं मिल सकती हूँ। में बहुत प्रसन्न हूँ। यहां
उपस्थित हमारे समाज के इन श्रेष्ठ लोगों की मैं धन्यवादी हूँ।
ये
बहुत महान लोग हैं। जनता द्वारा चुने हुए हैं कई बार इनको
उच्च पद दिए गए और इनमें से कुछ सुप्रसिद्ध उद्यमी हैं। इन
सबको आध्यात्मिक जीवन का मूल्य समझना है। इनके लिए
यह महत्वपूर्ण है। इन्हें आत्मा से जुड़ना है। यह आपकी अपनी
और
परमात्मा आपको धन्य करें।
17
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page17.txt 
 MARATHI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
Scanned from Marathi Chaitanya Lahari
सर्वप्रथम म्हणजे तुम्हाला आरोग्य लाभते, प्रकृति सुधारली की बरेचसे
प्रश्न सुटणारे असतात. एरवी मानसिक ताणतणाव, प्रदृषित अन्न इ.
मुळे आज़ार वाढ़त असतात. सहजयीगात आल्यावर लोकांना समजून
आले आहे की भीतिक सुख समृद्धीमधून माणसाला शांत-समाधान
प्राप्त झालेले नाही. अमेरिकेत एवढा पैसा असूनही तिथल्या लोकांना
अनेक अडचणीना तौड द्यावे लागत आहे आणि शांतिसाटी
गुरुकडे जाण्याची संचय लागल्यामुळे गुरुंचे चांगलेच फावले आहे, पण
हुदयातील आत्मी जोपर्यंत जाणला जात नाही तोपवंत शांति शक्य
नाही कारण तोच शांतीचा स्त्रोत आहे. त्याचा पहिला गुण प्रेम व दुसरा
शांति; तुम्ही त्यानंतर अल्वंत शांत होता, साक्षी बनता अणि जगात जे
काही चालले आहे तो एक खेळ आहे असे तुम्हाला वाटू लागते; त्याची
फार काळजी घेण्याची जरुर नाही, सर्व काही सुरळीतपणाणे पार
पडणार आहे है हे जाणून घेण्यासाठी
मानवाला आत्मा बनलें (become) पाहिमे तेच तुमचे शुद्ध स्व-
स्वरुप आहे. तुमच्याच हृदयात आहे. तिसरी गोष्ट घटित होते ती ही
की आत्मा आनंद-रुपच असल्यामुळे तुमच्या जीवनातही तो आनंद
खळखळत राहतो, त्या आनंदाच्या सागरातच तुमही रमून जाना;
त्याच्या लाटांबरीबरच तुम्ही जगात सगळीकडे जाता आणि तेच प्रेम
वाटते राहता. आत्मा हृदयस्थ असल्यामुळे कुटल्याही मानसिक वा
यौद्धिक कल्पना-विचारोमधून तो जाणणे अशक्य आहे: तुमचे चित्त जर
त्याच्याकडेव वळले तर
जागरण झाल्यावरच ते घडून येते, एरवी नाही.
तुमच्या
तुम्हाला मिळाला ते तुम्ही आत्मसन्मुख झाल्यावरचे मिळाला आहे.
आता तुम्हाला पैशाचा विचार करण्याची जरुर नाहीं, तो आपणहून
तुमच्याकडे चालत येणार आहे; आत्याची शक्ति ही सर्वात महान व
धार्मिक आहे. म्हणून आता घरदार सोडून संन्यासी बनण्याचीही जरुर
नाही: आजपर्यंतच्या जन्मांसध्ये तुम्ही ते सर्व करत आलात, आता या
जन्मी तुम्हाला आत्याकडे वित्त ठेवायचे आहे. कुण्डलिनीचे जागरण
झाल्यानंतर ती हळु-हळू वर वेते, वेताना मार्गातील सहा चक्रांना टीक
करते. त्यांच्या कार्यात एकसूत्रीपणा आणते व शेवटी टाळूमध्ये प्रवेश
करते आणि त्यातून बाहेर पडल्यावर सर्वव्यापी शक्तीबरोबर एकरूप
होऊन तुमचा संपर्क त्या सर्वव्यापी परमेश्वरी प्रेमशक्तीबरोबर घटित
होतो. ही सर्वव्यापी शक्ति प्रेम, शांति आणि आनंदयुक्त आहे, त्यांत
अतुलनीय सूज्ञताही आहे. सामान्य माणसाला ही शक्ति फार सूक्ष्म
असल्यामुळे, तिची जाणीव होणे व त्यातून आपले आत्मस्वरूप जाणणे
जरा अवघड आहे हे मला माहित आहे, त्वाचा मला अनुभवही आहे.
पण ही उच्रांतीवस्थेतील स्थिती आहे व आज मानवाला आत्मा
बनण्याचा काळ आला आहे. या बहार समयाचे है आशिर्वाद आहेत.
मानव जर आत्मा बनु शकला नाही. तर तो अवस्थेला जाऊन
पोचेल मला सांगता येणार नाही. मानवाच्या उल्कांतीच्या प्रगतीमधील
सत्याच्या शोधात असलेल्या सर्व साधकांना माझा नम्र प्रणाम
याबद्दल तुम्ही सर्व लोक लांब-लांबहून माझ्यासाठी इये आलात,
माझ्याबद्दल बन्याच जणांनी सुंदर भावना व्यक्त केल्या याबह्दल माझे
दय भरुन आल आहे. सहजयोग समजण्यासाठी आपण या
कलियुगात कुठे आहोत है माणसाला समजलै पाहिजे; आपले काव
प्रशन आहेत, आजूबाजूला चालत असलेन प्रकार आपल्याला का
अस्वस्थ करतात बाचा विचार केला पाहिजे. सगळीकडे, सर्व देशांमध्ये
माणसांच्या जीवनांत मानसिक ताणतणाव, अशांति यांचा प्रभाव वाढ
लीगल्यामुळे एकंदर मनुष्यप्राणी गोंधळून गेला आहे. सर्वत्र
मानवसमाज हासाच्या दिशकडेच चालला तर नाही ना अशी भीतीही
चाच्या मनात डोकावत आहे. या सर्वचि कारण काय? सगळीकडे
धर्माचे नांव घेतले जाते, साधु-संन्यासी उपदेश करते असतात, ग्रंथ
पारायणे होतात. म्हणून सत्याच्या शोधात असणार्या साधकाने है
लक्षात घेतले पाहिजे की या परिस्थितीचे कारण कार्य व त्वासाठी
लोकांना कशी मदत करता येईला याचा विचार झाला पाहिजे, खरे तर
या सर्व प्रस्नवि मूळ मानवाच्या आतमव्ये आहे, आपण पशुयोनीमधून
उन्तत होऊन मानवस्थितीला आलो आणि या उन्नत जीणीवेमधूनच
माणसाला आपल्या हिताच्या व अवनृतिपासून रोखणाच्या गोष्टी समजू
लागल्या. तसे नसेल तर तो माणूस संवेदनाशून्य म्हटला पाहिजे. तुम्हीं
तसे नाही. राजकीय आर्थिक किंवा इतर कुटल्याही क्षेत्रामंध्ये
माणसाला खरा प्रश्न (सूक्ष्म) कार्य आहे तो समजलेला नसल्यामुळे ही
परिस्थिती आली आहे.
मी जर म्हणाले की प्रत्येक मानवाच्या हृदयात आत्मा आहे, तो
प्रकाशित आहे तर कुणाचा विश्वास बसणार नाही. हरकत नाहीं. पण
आपले लक्षच (चित्त) मुळी आत्म्यापासून दूर आहे, "आत्माविमुख
आहे. बाहेर आहे. म्हणून आपले चित्त आत्याकडे लागणे. आत्मिक
विचारांकडे लागणे प्रथम जरूरीचे आहे. एरवी आपण बाहेरच्या
गोष्टींचा- पैसा, सत्ता, स्पर्था, इ... खुप विचार व कार्य करतो. पण
एकदां जर माणसाचे चित्त त्याच्यामधील आत्याकडे लागले की त्याला
आल्याची शक्ति प्राप्त होते. ही फार फार मोठी शक्ति माणसाली प्राप्त
होते. सर्व प्रथम आत्मा प्रेमस्वरुप आहे, त्याचे प्रेम निरपेक्ष आहे; अशा
माणसाच्या जीवनांतून प्रेमच-प्रेम व्यक्त होत असते. जिये काही
आहे; प्रश्न आहे त्या त्या ठिकाणी ते पोहोचते. ही क्षमता प्रत्येक
माणसाच्या हृदयात आहे. पण दुर्दैवाची गोष्ट म्हणजे आपले चित्त
आत्याकडे नसून आत्माविमुख आहे. माणसाच्या सर्व व्यवहारामध्ये
ल्याचे लक्ष सतत बाहेर असते. म्हणून स्पर्था-चढ़ाओढ है प्रकार चालत
राहतात. चित्त जेव्हा बाहेर असते तेव्हा त्यात शद्धता नसते आणि चित्त
सतत स्वतःमध्येच गुंतले तर माणसांच्या प्रभ्नना अंत नाही. आता मला
कुटे झोपते, काय खाते या गोष्टींचेही भान नसते है टीक आहे पण
सहजयोगी पण आता तसे बनत आहेत हा फार मोठा चमत्कार धडून
आला आहे. मानवाचे चित आत्याकडे लागल्यामुळे है शक्य झाले.
कुटाल्याही
तुम्हाला लक्षात येते, न्हणून
जाणणे शक्य आहे; आणि कुण्डलिनीचे
तो
जीवनातील हा बदल आणि आनंद व शांतीचा अनुभव
दुःख
कुठन्या
चित्त आत्मासन्मुख झाल्यावर कारय कारय होत असेल तर ही अत्यावश्यक पायरी आहे. सर्व ऋषी-मुनी, संत, प्रेषकांनी व
18
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page18.txt 
 MarathiTranslation (English Talk)
शांति व प्रेमाचे साम्राज्य सुरु झाल्यांचे तुम्हाला जाणवेल
माझ्याजबळ खुप शक्ती आहे असे तुम्ही म्हणता, पण मी एक
गोष्ट खात्रीने सांगू शकेन की सहजयोगी माझ्या सर्व शविति मिळव
शकतात. (टाळ्या पड़तात) आईला तेव हवे असते; तिच्यासारखेच
तिच्या मुलांनी बनावे हीच तिची इच्छा असते व हेच तिचे समाधान
असते. माझे मानवजातीवहलचे एक महान स्वप्न आहे व ते साकार
होणार आहे असे आज मला दिसत आहे., मी एक साधारण गृहिणी
होते, मला पैशाचे कसलेच व्यवहार समजत नाहीत, पण मला आर्थिक
प्रश्न कधीच पडले नाहीत, खरे तर माणसाची लालसाच सर्व प्रश्न
निर्माण करते असते. पण समाचानी रहायची कला साधली की सर्व
हाव गलून पडते अणि तुम्ही निश्चितपणे जगता. याचा अर्थ प्रत्येकाने
साधू संन्यासीच बनले पाहिजे असे नाही, तो काळ गेला, तुम्ही मागच्या
खूय जन्मांत सर्व तपस्या केली; तुम्ही आत्याकडे चित्त बळवायचे एबडी
एकच गोष्ट आता तुम्हाला करायची आहे; जितका प्रयत्न यासाठी
कराल तितके तुमचे चित्त आंत स्थिरावणार आहे. आल्याच्या संपर्कात
राहणार आहे. आत्मा हृदयातच असल्यामुळे तो तुमची वाटच पहात
आहे; तुम्हाला त्याची जाणीव (Peeling) सममून ध्यायची आहे आणि
यासाठीच कुण्डलिनीचे जागरण अवश्य आहे. मोहम्मदसा, खिल्त,
अब्राहम ई. कोणालाही असे स्वप्नातही वाटले नसेल को लोक आपल्या
नावाखाली निरनिराळे धर्म स्थापन करून एकमकाशी वैरमावनन भाड़
लागतील. पण अगदी तेच घइन आल्याचे तुम्ही पाहता. ही परिस्थिती
बदलण्यासाठी लोकांना शुद्ध ज्ञान (Pure Knowiedge) झाले
पाहिजे अणि या ज्ञानालाच सूज्ञता (Wisdom म्हणतात. या
सूज्ञतेमधुनच मी है कार्य करत आले आहे. या सुज्ञतेमूधनच सला
समजले को माणसाची स्थिति कशीही असो त्याचे जीवन करोहो असो
त्याला अहंकार असो किंवा तो कण्डिशए्ड असो, त्याना एकदा को
प्रेमाची जाणीव झाली की त्याचा आत्मा कार्य करु लागतो है
प्रत्यक्ष घडून आले आहे; आ जमलेल लोक जगातील
सहजवीग्यांच्या एक टक्काच आहेत. पण
सहजयोग्याचीही मला
सहजयीग्यांना, सहजयोगात आल्यानंतरच 'सत्य' म्हणजे काय है कळून
आले आहे आणि 'तत् त्वम् असि नेव ते सत्य आहे. हे सत्य एकदा
तुमच्यामव्ये प्रस्थापित झाले की कशानेही तुमचा नाश होणार नाही,
कशापासूनही तुम्हाला धोका नाही, तुम्हाला"अमुक हवे आहे" ही
इाच होणार नाही, तुम्ही कोण्णाचे दोष दाखचणार नाही; कशाच्या
मांगे धावणार नाही. इतके शांत व समाधानी व्यक्तिमत्व तुमचे होणार
आहे. वार- चीधांसारखेच जीवन आपण जगावे, उगीच हिमालयाएवढी
महानता मिळवू नवे, अशीच माझी पहिल्यापासून प्रवृत्ति होती, आज
आपल्याला सगळ्यांना बरोबर घेऊन जायचे आहे (a-mass
एकटबा-दुकट्याने उन्नति साधून
संशोधनांचा सर्वसामान्य लोकांना फायदा मिळाला तर त्याचे सार्थक
असते आणि हे मला करायचे आहे हेहि मला माहीत होते. अगोदर
मला खूप मेहनत करावी लागली पण आता मी स्वतः काही केले असे
मला बाटतव नाही. मी जणू फक्त साक्षी होते प्रत्येक माणसांव्या आत
वसत असलेल्या जीवाला उन्नत होण्याची, साक्षात्कार मिळण्याची इच्छा
असते. ती फलदूप झाली की मग माणसाचे परिवर्तन होऊन इतरांसाठी
काहीतरी करण्याची त्याला तळमळ लागते. इतकी वर्षे लोक तुम्ही दुसर्यांच्या हृदयात प्रवेश करू शकता. पण त्याच्यामागे पैसा
सहजयोगात कसे बेतील होव मला काळजी बाटावची; त्यासाठी
मिशननयासारखी किंवा सामाजिक संस्था उभारण्याची मला जरुर
वाटली नव्हती. पूर्वी मी सामाजिक संस्थासारखे कार्य करायचे पण
नेतर मला कळून आले की जोप्ंत माणुस आतमधून बदलत नाही,
आत्मा बनत नाही तोपर्यंत सामाजिक कार्य करणारे एवदीच आपली
भूमिका राहते, मग अधिकार, सत्ता या गोष्टी तिथेही चालू होतात. है
सर्व बेकार असते: साध्या मुंगीलाही सामूहिकतेत कार्य करण्याची
अक्कल असते. मनुष्यप्राणी नेहमी भलत्याच गोष्टीच्या मागे का
धावायला वघतो मनला समजत नाही; पाण आत्मसादात्कार नसल्यामुळ
है सर्व होत राहते: एरबी काहीही कार्य काले की आपण फार महान
कार्य करत आहोत असे माणसाला का वाट लागते? म्हणजे स्वतःचा
मोठेपणा मिळवण्याकडेच लक्ष माणसाची खरी वाढ त्वाच्या
आत्याकडूनच होगार आहे. आल्मा हा सुक्ष्म असला तरी तुम्हा सर्वांच्या
हृदयात प्रकाशासारखे त्याचे अस्तित्व आहे. आता कित्येक सहजयोगी
देशोदेशी, ठिकटिकाणी जाऊन अनेकांना जाणगृति देत आहेत: जर्मनी
व ऑस्ट्रियाचे सहजयोगी, मी रशियात प्रथम गेले तेव्हा माझ्या मदतीला
रजियाला आल्याचे बांबतल्यावर मीच बक्क झाले. आणि त्याचे कारण
त्यांनी सागितले की झमच्या पूर्वजांनी
म्हणून!" माझे दूदय ते एकून भरुन आले. म
नतर इस्वाईलमधील सहजवी्यांना ते ईजिप्तमध्ये बेऊन आने म्हणजे
जी प्रेमाची भावना त्वांच्या हृदयामधून कार्यान्वित होऊ लागलो आण
आपापसातले सारे तई, मतभेद, बगैरे त्यामव्ये वाहुन गले.
आपल्या हृदयातील प्रेम कार्य करत असल्याचे पाहणे
हा फार आनंददावी अनु व आहे. लहान महान तसेच मोट-मीट्या
घटना प्रेमशक्तीमुळे यडून यतात. उदा. उद्योगयंद्यामध्ये मजूरांचा संप
हा एक मोठाच प्रभ्न व अडवळा जसतो. पण जर लोकाना आत्मिक
स्थिती समजली, त्यांची तो भूक भागवण्याची व्यवस्था केली तर है
प्रकार पूर्णपणे बंद होतील. एक प्रकारे लोकशाही, समाजवाद,
कम्युनिझम या सर्वामधील तत्त्वे एकत्रितपणे या योगामध्ये कार्यान्वित
होतात. आंती या समारंभासाठी सर्वांनी हसतमुखाने, वादववाद न
करता चर्चा न करता इतकी सुंदर व्यवस्था केली आहे है तुम्ही पहातच
आहात. एरवी माणसे एकत्र आली की कामाच्या ऐवजी बड़बड
करतील. अशा तहेने सर्व माणासेच एकत्रितपणे काम होईल असे
वातावरण तयारे करतात. समाजवादी लोक गरीब, दरिद्री वर्गाताल
लीकांसाटी कार्यपद्धति बनवतात. एकदा मी माझ्या वडिलोबरोबर बांदा
जिल्ह्यात गेले होते वर तेथील लोक फक्त कमरेभोवती एक वस्तर
गुंडाळून रहायचे है दिसले. नंतर सहजयोग्यांच्या मदतीने त्यांना कुंभार
व्यवसाय जमवून दिला आणि आती त्यांचे जीवनमान खूप सुधारले
आहे. म्हणजे प्रश्न समोर आला की सामूहिकतेमधून तो सोडवता येतो.
तसेच बेवारशी, निराधार मुलांकरता काड़ी कार्य करावचे मी
सुचवल्याबरोबर सहजयोग्यांनी एकत्र येऊन जमिन घेऊन सर्व जमवून
आणले. अशा तन्हेने तुमचे चित्त शुद्ध
गोष्ट करणे शक्य आहे; कारण या प्रेमामबूनच काय करायचे: कसे
करायचे ही सुज्ञता माणसामध्ये वाढते; प्रेम शुद्ध असले की कसल्याही
समस्येचे सर्वांगीण आकलन तुम्हाला
होते. आज जगामध्ये कशाची जरुरु असेल नर ती प्रेमाची; प्रेमातूनच
खिस्त
इधले बरेच लोक मारले
ंग ते इस्त्राईलमव्येही गेले.
दुस्यावर
आज इ्थे नसलेल्या
आटवण येत आहे. आणि या सर्व
उपयोग नाही. शास्त्रातील
प्रेमाने व्यापून गेले की कितीतरी
होते आणि म्हणूनच प्रेमातून कार्य
,
19
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page19.txt 
 MarathiTranslation (English Talk)
पुराणगरंधामध्येही याचेच वर्णन केले आहे. त्याच्यानंतर वेगवेगळे धर्म
आले असतील. पण सर्वमान्य साधे तत्व हेच आहे की प्रत्येक मानव
मूलतः आत्मा आहे आणि आपलेच आत्मस्वरुप जाणल्याशिवाय
मानवाला शांति व आनंद आणि प्रेम मिळणार नाही.
इथे जमलेल्या सहजयोग्यांनी ते मिळवले आहे. त्यांना आपण
पाश्चात्य देशाचे आहोत, वेगळे आहोत ही भावना नाही. या कॅम्पमध्ये
जेवणा-राहण्याची-झोपण्याची फारशी चांगली व्यवस्था नाही पण ते
सर्वजण आनंदात आहेत. आपापल्या देशाचे वा संस्कृतीचे काही विशेष
वेगळेपण सुरवातीला जाणवले तरी त्वाचे भान उरत नाही. फूल जेव्हा
फळ बनते तेव्हा त्याच्या पाकळ्या गळुून पड़तात त्याप्रमाणेच है होत
राहते. तुम्ही सहजयोगी आता ज्ञान, सूजञता व प्रेमाचे फळ बनले
आहात. ज्ञान मिळचण्यासाठी पुस्तके-प्रंथ वाचण्याची तुम्हाला जरूर
नाही उतलट फार ग्रंथ वाचणाच्यांना कुण्डलनी जागरण अवघड जाते.
पण सत्य काब आहे है तुमचे तुम्हाला जाणायचे आहे. पण
आत्मसाक्षात्कार मिळाल्याशिवाय है शक्य नाही; त्याशिवाय तुम्ही भ्रांति आहेत. इंग्लेडमध्यही, जेबून ईंग्रजांनी भारतावर तीनशे वर्षे राज्य केने,
व प्रम यामध्येच हरवून जाण्याची शक्यता आहे.
सहजयोगामच्ये घडून आले असेल तर ते हेच की उक्कांतीच्या सर्व हॉल भरून जाईल इतके लोक येतात. रशियामध्येही इतकी
प्रगतीमध्ये मानवाला आत्मा जाणणे शक्य झाले आहे; त्याचे चित
आत्मसन्मुख झाले आहे. आल्याची शक्ति प्राप्त झाल्यावर तुम्ही जे
करान त्यात यशस्वी होत जाता. तुम्हाला ते मागायची इच्छा होत नाही.
দ्हणून यश मिळाले नाही तरो तुम्ही दुःखी होत नाही. म्हणून
स्याच्यासाठी धड़पड करायची तुम्हाला जरुर चाटत नाही. पुण या
सर्वांसाठी एक गोष्ट तुम्ही लक्षात ठेवली पाहिजे की तुम्ही इतरांना
सतत क्षमा करत राहिले पाहिजे. माणसे सर्वसाधारणपणे विचित्र
वागतात, तर्काविरुद्ध वागतात. तुम्हाला जरी कुणी दुखापत करण्याचा
प्रयत्न केला तरी क्षमा करा. म्हणजे त्याचा तुम्हला मन स्ताप होणार नाही, त्यासाठी त्यांना त्यांचा आत्मसन्मान मिळवून दिला पाहिजे. म्हणून
नाही. खिस्तांनीसुद्धा हेच सांगितले. खिस्त म्हणा किंवा मोहम्पदसा लोकांना जर सहजयोग सांगत गेलो तर त्यांना आपोआप समजू लागेल
म्हणा, त्यानी जे जे काही सांगितले त्याला लोकांनी विपरीत करुन
टेवले. त्वा सर्व संतांनी हेच सांगितले की माणसाने आपले आत्मस्वरूप
ओळखले पाहिजे. पण त्यांच्या शिकवणुकीमधून अनेक धर्म निर्माण
झाले व घर्मा-धर्मात भांडणे, युद्ध वाढत गेली. आता सहजयोगात
वेगवेगळ्या देशांतील, वेगवेगळ्या संस्कृतीमधील लोक आले, तरीही ते गरीब आहेत हणून दया करायला हवी असे चाँगले असतालच असे
त्यांच्यात एक महत्त्वाचा गुण आहे की ते अतिशय शुद्ध आहेत; नाही असेही म्हटले जाते. म्हणून कार्य करायला हवे तर त्या
सहजयोगात अ-नीतिमत्तेचा प्रॉब्लैम मुळीच नाही. जर कुणी तसा वागू
लागला तर तो एकदम बाहेर फेकला जातो; कुणी लॉ्या-लबाङ्या
करु लागला तर तो बाहेर फेकला जातो, म्रष्टाचारीही बाहेर फेकला
जाती. एकदा आल्याचा प्रकाश मिळाल्यावर आपल्या हिताचे काय
आहे ते प्रत्येकाने स्वतःच पहायचे असते. समजा तुम्हीं आंधळे असला
अणि रस्त्यावरून एकटेच चालत असला तर खड्ड्यात पड़ण्याची
भीति असते पण प्रकाश मिळाल्यावर लोक समजू लागले की आपण
आपले नुकसान होणार नाही असे नीट योग्य तन्हेने कसे वागायचे
रहायचे, तसे भी खड्ड्यात पडलेले लोक पाहिले आहेत पण माझ्या
मनांति त्यांच्याबद्दलही प्रेमच आहे कारण ते अंधारात असल्वामुळे
अज्ञानी असतात. माइयाबद्दल काहीही बोलेले तरी मला राग बेत नाही. त्यासाठी तुम्हाला केगळे असे करायचे काही नसते तर ते आपोआप
तसेच तुम्हालाही कुणी इजा करण्याचा प्रयत्न केला तरी तुमचे नुकसान तुमच्याकडे येतात. तुम्हीं माझ्याकडें आलात, सहजयोगात आलात
होणार नाही. कारण तुम्ही सत्याची कास चरलेली आहे.
आत्मा हा सत्याचा स्त्रोत आहे. कृणी एखादा अगुरु भेटला तरी
तुम्हाला खर कार्य ते व्हाय्ेशन्सवर आणि हाताच्या बोटांवर
समजायला वेळ लागत नाही. मोहम्मदसा. म्हणालेच होते की
उत्थानाच्या वळी तुमचे हात बोलू लागतील: आणि हेच आता घटित
होत आहे. ते समजल्यावर तुम्ही त्या व्यक्तीप्रासून दूर राहू शकता
किंवा त्याला समजाबून सुधारू शकता. पण सुरुवातीला अशा बादग्रस्त
व्यव्तीची परीक्षा करण्याच्या फंदात आपण पड़ नवे. एकदा सहजयोग
पचल्याबर तुम्ही है करू शकता. शिवाय सर्व पँचमहाभूते तुमच्यासाठीच
कार्य करणार आहेत हेहि तुम्ही लक्षात घ्यायला हवे. जगात घडत
असणार्या घटना चुकीच्या गोष्टी चुकच कशी आहेत हैे
दाखवण्यासाठीचे घडत असतातं. तसेच योग्य गोष्टी बोग्यच आहेत
हेहि ते दाखवतात, उदा. हिटलरने अनेक अत्याचार केले. अनेकांचा
अंतोनात छळ केला. पण तो मेल्यावर आता जर्मनीमध्ये अनेक लोक
आत्मसाक्षात्कारी झाले आहेत अणि त्यांना प्रेम व परमात्मा यांची खरी
शक्ति कळून आली आहे. ते लोक आता आश्चर्यजनक कार्य करत
तिथे आता खुप सहजवोगी झाले आहेत, तिथल्या माझ्या प्रोग्रॅम्सला
हलाखीची परिस्थिति असूनही खूप चांगले सहजयोगी तथार झाले
आहेत. लोकशाही म्हणा किवा कम्युनिझम म्हणा कशालाच यश असे
सिळाले नाही. लोकशीहीमध्येही राक्षसी लोकानी कारमार हातात घेतला
आहे: कम्बुनिझमलाही यश आले नाही. याचे कारण कुटलीच पद्धति
आत्मिक अधिष्टानावर आधारलेलो नव्हती, त्यांचा आत्थाशी काही
सबंध नव्हता न्हणून ते सारे प्रयत्न सीमित राहिले. अर्थव्यवस्थाही।
सगळीकडे कोलमडली आहे अणि मंदीचे वातावरण निर्माण झाले
आहे. लोक गरीबी दूर करायचे म्हणतात पण ती दान देऊन दूर होणार
आणि कार्य जमून जाईल. लोक मला म्हणतात की लोक गरीब का
बनतात? मी सांगते की पैशाने ते गरीब असले तरी अध्यात्मिक
बाबतीत ते गरीब नसतात. ज्यांच्याजवळ खुप संपत्ती आहे ते सगळेच
चांगले नसतात; ते काही चांगले कार्य करत नसतात: गरीब लोकांवर,
दोघषांमध्येही परिवर्तन घडबले याहिजे; त्यांना जीवनाचा अर्थ समजला
पाहिजे. श्रीमंत लोकांना आत्मसाक्षात्कार मिळाल्याबरोबर त्यांचा
दृष्टिकोन बदलून ते गरीबी समजू लागल्याचे मी पाहिले आहे, ते मग
मदतीचा हात पुढे करु लागतात. सहजयोगात लोक एकमेकाना कशी
मदत करतात है पाहिलेत तर तुम्हाला आश्चर्य वाटेल, त्याचे कारण
हेच की ही सुज्ञता त्यांना या परमचैतन्याकडून येते. या शक्तिला
परमचैतन्य, निराकार, रुह, होली घोस्ट इ. काहीही नाव द्या. पण
एकदा त्या शक्तिबरोबर तुमचा संपर्क जुळला की तुम्हाला सर्व
आशिर्वाद प्राप्त होत असतात. साधारण माणूस म्हणून मिळत
असलेल्या आशिर्वादापेक्षा हजारो पटीनी जास्त आशिर्वाद मिळतात.
याच्यामागेही या दिव्य शक्तीचाच प्रभाव आहे. तुम्ही स्वतःव याचा
विचार केलात तर तुम्हालाही ते समजून येईल, आणि तुमच्या हृदयांत
े
20
 19980320_75th Birthday Felicitation_Delhi.pdf-page20.txt 
 MarathiTranslation (English Talk)
बक्षिस, अधिकाराचे पद अशी कसलीही लालसा नसावी. फक्त शुद्ध,
निरलस प्रेम, आणि याचा प्रत्ययही आता तुम्हाला आली आहे. तुम्ही
लोकांसाठी प्रयत्न करता, वेळ खर्च करता, कार्य करता या सर्वांद्दल ही चांगली गोष्ट आहे. दक्षिणेकडचे लोक मात्र फार कमकाण्ड पाळणारे
मीच तुमची तणी आहे. मला एकट्याला है करणे शक्य नव्हते.
एकट्याला जगभर हिंडणे शक्य नव्हते; काही पूर्णपणे मुस्लीम पाळावी लागते. एका हातानेच जेवायचे इ. अनेक नियमावद्ल
लोकांच्या देशामध्येही मी आता जाऊन आले आहे आणि खूप
मुसलमान लोक आता सहजयोगात आले आहेत: त्वासाठी प्रेंच, इंग्रज
लोक त्यांच्या देशात गेले; ऑस्ट्रियन, इटालियन लोकही सहजयोगाव्या
प्रचारासाठी खुप कार्य करत आहेत. त्यातही लोकांना "अमुक करू
नका, अमुक सोडून द्या" बगैरे काही सांगावे लागत नाही, ते सर्व
आपो आप घडून येते, सवयी सुटतात. मी तर कुणाला कधीच त्या
बाबतीत सांगत नाही; या व्यसनांची सवय कशी सुटते मलाही कळत
नाही... पण है धड़ते त्याचे कारण आत्म्याचा प्रकाश तुमच्यामध्ये पड़तो
आणि त्या प्रकाशात तुम्ही तसले काही करतच नाही. आता शीख किंवा तरी त्याचा काय फायदा? नाही तरीं दुसयामध्ये काय वाइट आहे
मुसलमानात दारु पिण्याला मनाई आहे पण कितीतरी शीख य
मुसलमान लोक दारु पिणारे असतातः म्हाणजे ते खरे शीख किंवा
मुसलमान नाहीच. म्हणून आत्मप्रकाश मिळाल्यावरच या अहितकारक
गोष्टी गळून पड़त असतात. कधी कधी निराशा किंवा एकटेपणामुळे
लोकंना अशा सबयी लागनात. पण सहजयोगात एकटेपणा नसतोच:
कारण तुमचे भाऊ-बहिणा जगभर आहेत अणि है संबंध लौकिक
व्यवहारासारखे नसून ते नाते खूप गहन असते. साधारणतः पाश्चात्य
लोकांत कसल्या ना कसल्या साधना-मागात जाऊनही काही प्राप्त न
झाल्यामुळे अस्वस्थता आलेली असते आणि सहजयोगात त्यांना ते प्राप्त
झाल्यामुळे ते लवकर गहनतेत उतरू शकतात.
आज जगात सत्याच्या शोधात असलेले अनेक साधक आहेत.
त्यांना आजकालच्या परिस्थितीचा वीट आला आहे कारण ते फार
संबेदनशील आहेत. म्हणूनच तुम्हाला आत्मसाक्षात्कार मिळाला आहे.
्यासाठी मला अस विशेष काही करावे लागले नाही. तुम्ही
मेणवत्तीसारखे नसता तर मी तुमच्यामध्ये प्रकाश आणू शकले नसते.
तुम्ही सहजयोगाबद्दल इतकी आत्मीयता बाळगता याचे मला फार
समाधान आहे. तुम्हाला सामूहिकतेतून कार्य करायचे आहे, जगभर हा
संदेश पसरवायचा आहे ही जाणीव आता आहे याचेही मला समाधान
आहे. एकमेकांना मदते करून सा्या मानवजातीला वर आणण्यासाठी
तुम्ही आता सिद्ध आहात. माणसाचे मन आत्मासन्मुख करायचे आहे.
मग सारे प्रश्न संपणार आहेत. उदा. मी म्हटले की निराधार मुलांसाठी म्हणून मला फार आनंद झाला आहे. या निमित्ताने मला तुम्हा सर्वांची
मला काहीतरी करायचे आहे तर ताबड़तोब सगळीकडून माझ्याकडे पैसे
येतात. मग माताजींच्या या कार्यासाी योग्य ती
काढतील, सर्व व्यवस्था कशी जमवायची इ. सर्व काही तयारीला
लागतील. मला काही सांगावची जरुर नाही, पैसे तर मी कुणाकडेच राहणे हा तुमचा अधिकारच आहे आणि त्यांतच तुमचा मोठा गौरव
मागत नाही. असे कार्य जर भारतात होऊ शकते तर जगात कुटेही आहे. सर्वचि आभार कसे मानवे है समजत नाही; मला हीच
ते होऊ शकेल. कारण तो प्रश्न जगभर आहे म्हणून त्यांना ते कार्यही
जगात सराळीकडे करण्याची उत्सुकता आहे. हे सर्व एखाद्या
संप्रदायासारखें कार्य नाही. ते तुमच्या सूक्ष्म व अंगभूत शक्तीमुळे
घडणारे कार्य आहे. त्यामुळेच या कार्याचा तुम्हाला आनंदही मिळत
असती. कधी कधी सहजयोग्यांमधील
मानवजातीवहलची तळमळ बघून मलाच आश्चर्य वाटते. आता प्रत्येक
देशाचे काही ना काही विशिष्ट प्रश्न असतात. उदा. उत्तर भारतातील
लोकांना राजकारणाबद्दल जास्त ईटरेस्ट असतो. आता ते फार कमी
झाले आहे आणि त्यांना कुणाबद्दलही कुणी सांगितलेले आवडत नाही.
आहेत. जेवायच्या थाळीमध्येही प्रत्येक पदार्थाची विशिष्ट जागा
काटेकोरपणा पाळावा लागतो. या दोन गोष्टीमुळे त्यांची सहजयोगात
प्रगति होत नाही. उदा उत्तर भारतात कुणी एखादा दुस्या कुणावद्दल
बाईट सांगू लागला तर कानावर हात टेवतात. म, गांधीचे हेच तत्व
होते; फालतु गप्या ऐक नये. पण लोकांना तेच आवडतेः आता
निवडणुकीच्या आधी टी.वी. वर कार्यक्रम कखवतात ते सुद्धा सर्व
gossip व. म्हणून उत्तर भारतीयांना माझे आग्रहाचे सांगणे आहे की
असल्या गण्पागोष्टी कधीही ऐकू नका. कुणावर टिकाही करू नका.
त्याचा काही उपयोग नाही. त्याच गपा तुम्ही दूसयांना सांगत बसला
तिकडे कशाला बघायचे? हा, तो तुमची फसवणूक करेल वगैरे ठीक
आहे पण त्यामुळे तुमचे काही नुकसान होणार नसने: शिवाव त्यामुळे
तुमच्या डोक्यात तरी काही भलते-सलते विचार येणार नाहीत आणि
तुम्ही आत्मा असल्यामुळे ल्याला कधी कोणी त्रास देऊ शकत नाही;
आत्याचा कसल्याही शस्त्राने वात होऊ शकत नाही, तो सनातन आहे,
अमेर आहे असे म्हटलेच आहे. म्हणून आत्माविमुखता आड येत
असते. आपले चित आल्यापासून दूर होऊन बाहेरच्या गोष्टीकडे
लागल्यामुळेच माणसाचे सर्व प्रश्न निरमाण झाले आहेत, एकदा तुम्ही
आल्याशी एकरुप झालात की तोच सारे काही करते राहतो. कारण
तो परमात्थाशी जोडलेला आहे, सर्वव्यापी शक्तीबरोबर जोड़लेला आहे
अणि ती शक्तीच सर्व काही करत असते
हचा सर्वव्यावी शक्तीने माझ्या फोटोमधूनहीं
दाखक्ले आहेत. ते काही मी सांगितलेले नाही नर ती शक्तीच
आपणहून करत आहे. ती फार कार्यक्षम आहे. जिथे गहनता आहे
सूक्ष्मपणा आहे तिथे ती कार्य करणारच. तुमच्या कुटुंबात, व्यवसायात,
राजकारणात सर्व क्षेत्रामध्ये हा प्रकाश तुम्हाला दिसेल आणि
प्रत्येकाच्या हृदयस्थ आत्याबह्दल तुम्हाला आदर वाटेल, त्यांच्या प्रेमाचा
आदर बाटेल
मला है सर्व जाणवत आहे.
तुम्ही इतक्या मोठ्या संख्येने माझ्या बाढूदिवसासाठी आलात
अनेक बमत्कार
म्हणूनच तुम्हा सर्वामिध्ये एकमेकांबद्दल आदरभाव आहे.
भेट होत आहे. इथे इतर क्षेत्रातील काही मोट्या पदावरचे अधिकारी
माणसे ते शोधून लोक राजकारणी, उद्योजक पण जमले आहेत. त्या सर्वांनीही
जीवनांतील अध्यात्मिक मूल्य समजून घ्यावीत कारण आत्याबरोबर
तुम्हा
आशा आहे की तुम्ही तुमच्या आध्यात्मिक जीवनात खूप उन्नत व्हाल
(आत्मोन्नति) म्हणजे तो प्रकाश संपूर्ण मानवजातीला मिळून या
धरतीवर एक नवीन सुंदर जग निर्माण होईल.
सर्वाना परमेश्वराचे अनंत आशिर्वाद.
जगामधील सर्व
21
