The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI Issue :9& 10 September- October, 1999 "t you could somehow or other see your ego working, thim you can get rid of if-and that s the Thing one has to do, Hol to hight Ihe ego: I naver say ight the ego, but surender it Her Holinss ate i timals Devi

 In this Issue: Editorial 1 Shri Matají Talks on Meditation (1983–84) Sahasrara Day Puja (9-5-1999 Cabella) 8. Shri Fatima Bi Puja (1998) 17 32 Bombay Public Programme (1988) Edited by: Yogi Mahajan : V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar Published by New Delhi-110 067

 : 9 & 10 1999 Sep Oct Volume: XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze Editorial answer them. It is the nature of right side movement to shoot questions. They may be out of context or of no pertinence but when the ego identifies with the questions then they attain absolute importance, a prestige issue. It is my question'. Does every question has to be answered? The heated intellect bubbles with questions: Initially these questions may arise from curiosity. However when the intellect starts steaming as in the case of right sided people then these questions become a medium for fanning the ego. After one public program, the speaker invited questions in context of his speech. For instance we often hear a remark, "See, he could not answer my question A However, the questioning prone audience Inversely, I am smarter because I know asked every other question except those related to his speech. Infact, they went " the answer but he does not. so far as to allege him, of saying things, which he never said. This is not surprising *I asked him, What is God? But he could not even answer because imagination is the sister of the intellect, they take flight together. The How can anyone define God. It is possible to define a person, place or a thing but how to define the infinite. Any definition would limit it. The question is too absurd more the intellect bounces the wilder the imagination runs and excites the right side. An intellect that dances on illusions can never be quenched. The thirst of a horse can be quenched but how to quench for an answer. Also every question may not have an answer. the thirst in the eyes of a drunkard The intellect is hollow within and like an The ego also thinks itself to be very smart when it asks impossible questions. It could be a trick to thwart an adversary empty vessel it makes the most noise asking the most questions. or simply a show off exercise. But as a matter of fact no one is under any At another public program. one compulsion to answer questions. The gentleman went into such a question freedom of speech certainly gives a birth shooting spree that before even one right to ask questions but it does not question could be answered he would impose any compulsion on any one to shoot the next question. Infact he was

 Volume : XI Issue 9 & 10 Oct 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 2. Sep Oct there is no questioning bug. The inner silence takes us deep into the realms of the Spirit beyond questions and doubts. only anxious to ask questions but not at all interested to know their answers. He was like a madman who went on firing at the target without even taking an aim. Such right sided people are so obsessed with themselves that either they go on What is there to ask when one is lost in inner joy? The Spirit itself informs us of everything talking about themselves or they go on we need to know. We truly become our questioning, 'Who telephoned, what did what was his shoe size etc. etc.' own guru. We have to know that we are he say, under the protection of our Divine Mother, She takes care of everything, so why should we disturb our attention by unnecessary questions. Let us also remember that if there are any queries still lurking for our ascent, our Divine Mother will inform us through Her many miraculous plays and wondrous talks. But we can only absorb them if we read them from the Sahasrara with rapt attention. One right sided person went into such a frenzy of asking questions that he kept repeating his questions like a vintage gramophone needle that was stuck. The speaker was answering his questions but his attention was so glued to his questions that he was not able to register what the speaker said. Similarly, linear movement in the left side leads people to repeat their Then we will spontaneously find all the past like a tape recorder. They become such bores as all their friends know their answers that are conducive to our ascent. So let us behold Her miraculous talks. stories by heart. After self realisation one comes into bow you, O Devi to balance and gets off the hook of the Mahasaraswati, in deep gratitude for intellect. In thoughtless awareness, one the treasure of knowledge, You have enjoys an inner state of silence where blessed us with."

 Sep Oct Oct 1999 Volume XI Issue 9& 10 The Divine Cool Broeze Shri Mataji's talk on Meditation (1983-84, are coming or"I have to take tea", "What shall I do?", "Now what have I to do?", "Who's this and Who's that", all this will In the morning you get up, have your bath, sit dowTI, take some tea, don't talk. Don't talk in the morning . sit down . meditate. because at that time the Divine be there. rays come in, the sun comes afterwards. So first you become thoughtlessly aware, That's how the birds get up. That's how the flowers get up. They're all awakened then the growth of spirituality starts, after by that, and if you are sensitive you will feel that by getting up in the morning vou should know that. On rational plane you will look at least ten years younger. thoughtless awareness, not before. One cannot grow in Sahaja Yoga So, first thing is to establish your thoughtless awareness: still you might feel little chakra Really, it's such a good thing to get up in the morning and then, automatically you sleep early. This is for getting up. For blockages here and there, forget it. Just sleeping I need not tell because that you'll manage yourself Then, in the morning time you should just meditate. forget it. Now, start your surrendering. Now if a chakra is catching, you should say: "Mother, I surrender this to you". Instead of doing any of these things you In meditation try to stop your thoughts. Watch my photograph with open eyes and see that you stop your thoughts. You should stop your can just say that. But, that surrendering should not be rationalised. If you're still rationalising and worrying-why should I thoughts, then you go into meditation. The simple thing to stop your thoughts is the Lord's Prayer, because that's the say this?", it will never work out. If there's pure love and purity in your heart that's the best thing: that to do Agnya state. So in the morning you remember the Lord's Prayer or so is to surrender. Leave all the worries to your Mother. Everything to your Ganesha's mantra. It's just the same. Mother. Or you can even say, "I forgive". It works out. Then you are in thoughtless awareness. Now you meditate. Before that there's no meditation. When thoughts But surrendering is one point that is very difficult in ego-oriented societies. Even talking about that, I feel a little bit

 Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10 Sep Oct 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze worried. But if there's any thoughts hurdle. First the thought... now for the coming in to you or any chakra catching, just surrender. thought you have to say the mantra of Nirvichara: Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Nirvichara And you'll see that the chakras are cleared up. In the morning time you do not go on, putting this way, that way, nothing, don't move your hands too much Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah in the morning, You'll find most of Now come to the hurdle of our ego. You your chakras will clear out in see the thought has stopped now, no doubt, but there is still a pressure on the meditation. Try to put love in your heart. Just try in your heart, and there, try to put your Guru, in the core of it. After establishing head. So if it is ego you have to say: "Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Mahat Ahamkara Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti in the heart, we must bow to that with Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah" full devotion and dedication. Now whatever you do with your mind, after realisation it is not imagination because now your mind, your imagination, is itself you find that ego is still there, then you enlightened. Mahat means the great, Ahamkara means the ego. You say it thrice. Now, even now, have to put left hand towards the So project yourself in such a way that photograph, push the left side higher and you humble down at the feet of your the right side lower so that the ego and Guru, your Mother. And now ask for the super-ego get the balance. Do it seven the necessary temperament needed for times. Try to see how you are feeling meditation. Meditation is when you are inside. One with the Divine. So once you have given yourself a balance, then, the best thing is to pay Specific Problems On Meditation: attention to your emotions, to Manas Shakti. Watch them. You can enlighten your emotions by thinking of your Mother. Right? Just enlighten them. This solves all the problems. Whatever are the problems in the Mana. So, once you are Now if there are thoughts coming in, first you have to say the first mantra, of course, and then watch inside. You must say the mantra of Ganesha, will help some people, and then you should watch inside connected to those emotions and and see for yourself which is the biggest you start

 Sep - Oct 9 & 1o 1999 Volume XI ssue The Divine Cool Breeze you'll find that for a while you will not looking at them in your meditation, you breath. Good See, you're settled now. will see these emotions are rising within you, and if you try to put these emotions on your Mother, (as they say at the Lotus feet of your Mother) - then, those The Laya takes place between your Prana and your Mana. Both the Shaktis become on. emotions, will start dissolving and they'll become sort of, expanded. Expanse, you see You will extend them in such a way Now at the Sahasrara you should say the mantra-thrice: that you will feel you are in control of them and by controlling those emotions "Om Twameva Sakshat, Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Sahasrara Swamini, your emotions are expanded, enlightened and powerful. Moksha Pradayini Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah Now what you do is to watch your breathing. See now, try to reduce your breathing; reduce it, in the sense that you Some people start feeling the awareness of that unbounding love as soon as they get their realisation. have breathed out, wait for a while, then But, in some people they have some more breath in for a long time. Then you breath go-trip left to be finished. So, they come to me. I find they are flying in the air like out. So during one minute your breathing will be less than normal, Alright? Try that, bubbles and as if blown by the nourishing keep the attention on the emotions you see? So that the connection is established. Mother, blown out like the bubbles the surface of the sea. And there are many Better? See the Kundalini rises. Now when you are breathing, you find that who are suffering from super-ego. They there is a space in-between which you just get mixed up with the sand and become leave vacant Breath in, keep it there very heavy and all the time weeping and Now breath out and keep breathing out. the thing clicks they become one with the Now breath in. Now start breathing in crying about personal things. But, once spirit of the ocean. such a way that you really reduce your breathing-but no exertion about it. Your Then they feel that deep, joyous force of attention should be on your heart or it the sea which nourishes them, guides could be on your emotion Its better to keep the breath inside for a while. Hold them, and elevates them every moment. Like deep down in the sea they go and it. Bring it out. Hold out. Then keep it there they find the beautiful pearls of outside for a while. Then again. Then eternal experiences. And when they find

 Oct 1999 Volume : XI lIssue : 9 & 10 Sep Oct The Divine Cool Breeze these pearls they bring to me as poems, credit to you-that you have achieved this as dances, as smiles, as laughter, as enlightenment to see yourself, your true enjoyment. Self which is so joy giving. These are all within you, and they lie there Actually, I should compose poem in away from your consciousness. Though praise of you. And I do my best to show your consciousness is enlightened by self- by my own methods how the Divine is realisation, it is not yet enlightened by joy. pleased. And you see that everywhere, That is, something happens to all of you every time, every moment. So, tonight gradually, as I told you, and should we all should say one thing in our happen to all of you as soon as possible. heart-that this bountiful nature of Motherhood should be brought into What is there to surrender-the force our consciousness, which I have told that itself is flowing towards you and you is called Ritambhara Pragnya. Means your consciousness gets nourishing. Do we say the lotus has surrendered itself enlightened to that nature of this Mother to its fragrance? Do we say the sun has Earth-which fills it up with different surrendered itself to its coolness? It would seasons - that is Pragnya. be absurd to say like that. The word That happens to everyone I said, but it "surrender" sometimes can mean only, at happens more to people who try to be the most, in the context of Sahaja Yoga, in the centre and don't go on ego-trips. that we surrendered our egos, our Now it is high time to jump from that little limitations, our shallowness-what we area to the vast area which has no bounds. have achieved, as our own. We have surrendered all that is useless for And once that happens you will be surprised all these petty little problems will drop out in the ocean of greatness. something that is great and eternal. This weight of the ignorance has to drop out. I don't think I do anything, because l'm Don't indulge into them, and leave them in the hands of the tree. So that all your really doing nothing. Sometimes I think this is not my due, to be praised like this because whatever is my nature that is small petty problems will be looked after by that nourishing force. Because you belong to a tree of great what I am, and I haven't achieved wisdom, tree of great sustenance and anything-I just exist with my nature, because I can't do anything else. While you have achieved. Its a great religion, and tree of great mastery that you can never know how great it is.

 Oct Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10 7. Sep 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze You belong to a tree that has complete the ground. Try to become identified security for you, and you belong to a very great tree which gives you complete Like the meaning of the word, is witnessing of the drama, and which gives identified with the word, like the you understanding that the whole is a part moonlight is identified with the moon, and parcel of you, and you are part and sunlight is identified with the sun. with that power that is what you are. parcel of the whole. Let that identification be that oneness, that integration, so that you become the light of God's love, that people know God through your depths and your fruits. It's the most fulfilling job, highest paid in every way, the most satisfying, energy- giving and dynamic. So, you belong to the great ocean of love and generosity. So this great tree of life has everything integrated within itself. This is the tree of life that has been described in the Bible, the tree of fire, they call it. Now you have become One with it. You are blessed with it. You are loved by it. You are gently guided by it. It's so You don't have to give up anything- gentle that you do not even feel the just be organised in the light of your guidance like a leaf, when it falls on Spirit yourself.

 Sep Oct 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XI Issue 9 & 10 SAHASRARA DAY PUJA 9-5-99, Cabella Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi We have gathered here to do the and until this Sahasrara, this brain is Sahasrara Puja Sahasrara, the word opened out and the Kundalini becomes one with the Parama Chaitanya. Before one thousand, and there are one thousand that you are in complete ignorance about what is good and what is bad, Whatever you think, with this brain, is good, you do it. But whatever is really good, you Sahasrara" in Sanskrit language means petals in our brain which get enlightened Of course the doctors are quarrelling on that point but forget about that do not know because you don't know the Now these petals are kept ready for our enlightenment and these are really the reality. nerves, one thousand nerves, which are Now we have to understand the have. consciousness that there for the enlightenment of the brain. So, when the Kundalini rises. She Consciousness of being alive, we enlightens those one thousand nerves consciousness of so many things we have which become like the shape of these and the so called knowledge we have flames, like a petal. That is why it is called about everything. All that consciousness is stored near the liver for your as Sahasrara, the centre of Sahasrara information, by this diaphragm. In the human beings, it is a very important centre because this is the only centre by But then this consciousness starts rising which we think and we try to stop higher and higher. Then you become aware. In the evolutionary process you whatever we do not like. This is the centre which reacts, reacts in such a manner that without any discretion you start saying. No to this, No to that. On small things become aware. How? Not by thinking also. like somebody might say, I do not not by understanding or seeing but you like this carpet, I don't like this house, 1 become aware because your brain has don't like that. This language itself shows now started working in a manner that is become aware, aware of things. Without going through your brain, you just that who are you? First find out, very very sensitive. So, you just become aware of some sort of a fear, or may be But you cannot become yourself unless

 1999 Sep Oct Volume XI issue 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze see everybody, everybody is sitting You know how far you are, where you are But it goes even further. The growth of sitting, If you want to go out, you know consciousness which becomes aware, how to walk out but when in the darkness some sort of a goodness or anything. zoes further where you start liking a person or disliking a person but still it is nothing definite or sure. It is like liking a person because he has a particular type of a face, may be eyes or may be anything you are there, you just do not understand and you go on behaving in a manner which eannot be explained otherwise. except that because you are a human being. or may be because you have known somebody who has been very nice. So, Animals do not do that Animals have you start transferring that image on to limitations. The animals, if they find others With this transferred image you something wrong, something absolutely ean hate or love someone. Then you start saying. I hate this, I hate that, which has run away. But they do not carry a kind of harmful for them, then they will attack or actually no substantial meaning You hate it because perhaps, may be, such and such the impression of fear, could be of some person looks like somebody. Now you go sort of a harm done to them. further with it and then you see that such a hatred or anything but they can carry But human beings are not like that. Human beings do not have any particular reason, as such, to hate some one but why it works out because they are involved in and such person, I am not talking about things hut about persons, such and such person has done this harm to me. So, you start feeling that you should hate that their ego. Egoistical person feels that he has a right to do what he wants to do. He person. Now you start hating that person. With that hatred you develop new can kill anybody, he can harm anyone, he can do whatever he likes but a person who faculties. how to harm that person? Then you start thinking how to destroy that person, how to make his life miserable? is not doing that is the other way round, he is frightened, he is afraid of some one. Then you may meet that person, you may shout at that person, you may try to kill that person. You can do anything. Now the avwareness moves on. This is a subtler awareness, because if you are afraid of somebody, you would not like to go ta his house, you will avoid him in the street, all things you can do. So, this kind of knowledge about other human So, now the awareness is going towards several directions which is darkness, which is not light because in the light you would not do such things. In the light you

 10 1999 : 9 & 10 Sep - Oct Volume: XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze awareness is enlightened and when She pierces through Sahasrara, She joins you to this All Pervading Power which is knowledge, which is love, which is truth. So, after that you immediately know, some people do not know immediately, but some people know, that what we have been thinking so far or separating ourselves from others by thinking they mind. beings also accumulates in your Then this thing starts working on a collective level because you think this group is very bad, that group is bad, they are excellent, like that it works. In your own mind you think that somebody has a group and the other group is better, that group is better, and collectively then you start working out temperament, your awareness. Like once people decide, say for example, that black people are to be finished. So, all the white people can join together or like at the time of Hitler, he decided that all other human being but Germans were useless. So, he gathered people around his thought and ideas and this collective awareness just are not alright, they are wrong, this disappears. This disappears completely and then you realise that your awareness itself is dominated by so many other circumstances. For example, where you were born, what your parents taught you, what experiences you have had and then you realise that it was all wrong because its not reality. Whatever feelings you have, whatever ideas you have about your whole comes to, I do not know how, but it enters into the minds of men. They never another person or about other nations, all of them are not correct because now challenge, they never ask whether it is your Sahasrara is awakened, that it is connected now to the All Pervading Power. So, this starts flowing into you. correct or not. So, this grows more and more and more and then it becomes like a country wise, you can say, an awareness of this kind of a feeling. But whether it is This, I should say, enlightened awareness, it starts flowing down into correct or not, is not understood, is not your being, in your brain and then on known. your nerves, you can feel that awareness. Now once you want to know about something whether it is right or wrong, absolute right or wrong, it is not a question of relative, So, what is important is that you should know reality. You should know exactly what is right and what is wrong. For that, as I told you, there is this great power of Kundalini within you. She is the one, She passes through all these (chakras) Centres, enlightens them first. So, your you just have to put your hands towards that person or towards that thing or whatever it is, immediately

 1999 11 Sep - Oct Volume: XT issue 9.& 10 The Divine Cool Breeze Once you know the reality, most of the problems can be finished because this brain itself is creating problems. First of all it commits all kinds of atrocities, violence, everything Then it also justifies itself and then it does even worse. All this they used to call it as sin. on these vibrations you will know. So, what are these vibrations? This Parama Chaitanya, we call it Brahma Chaitanya, it starts flowing through your fingér tips. Now you start feeling what Chakras they are catching, whether they are right or wrong and your discretion improves immensely. The brain which was But now is Sahaja Yoga, that is finished. putting you in delusions and wrong type Whatever your brain was contaminated of life, immediately corrects this. For with, it is now cleansed, It has got the example, I am walking in a place with my knowledge and through the knowledge eyes closed and there is a big ditch, I you can make out what is right and what cannot see it. I am just walking and suddenly I open my eyes and see the ditch. But then you must have full understanding Immediately I know it is wrong that whatever right is right and whatever Immediately I give up and come out. In is wrong and you should not do IS wrong. Upto this point it is alright. wrong the same way it happens to you. anything that is wrong. Always do the When your Sahasrara is enlightened, right. You have to decide on that point. whatever knowledge, you had gathered. Now we have to do the right only, never whatever you think was right, whatever the wrong. This when it comes to your was your dream and your aims of life, all mind then what starts is your these aspirations melt away and then you determination, what we call a devotion. take to reality and you start seeing the dedication, surrendering. With that you reality of everything. Unless and until you give up all your false ideas and your false pride, all other things that you have been doing so far and immediately you become see that reality you will be going with other crowd These people are saying so. a different person, a beautiful person. so let us do that They are saying so, so let us do that but you cannot see whether it is correct or not, is good for you or not or whether it is going to help you. This kind of thing is so common in the whole world, and that is why there is so much Now the third thing that happens to you, which never happened to you before, that you feel that unless and until I give the same state to other people, it would not be alright, it would not be alright for me to talk to them. So you start talking to problem because they do not know the your brothers, to your sisters and then reality TELLLE

 Oct 12 Sep Oct Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 1o 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze you complete sense and complete understanding as to how you should you start talking to other people and then you start talking to whole nation. You talk about Sahaja Yoga that I have gained so move, how you should live and what you should do. This is what is self realisation, much, I have got these things, so now they say. why don't you take it? But to expect that by talking, by But I would say that self realisation is discussions, by arguments, by much further than that. Even if your brain is enriched by the knowledge, the real knowledge, still the other things which sermonising., they will never take it, because their brain, as I told you, is just the same, still full of ignorance. So, what you should have and the most important we have to do is to raise their Kundalini. thing is that you have to be completely Once you raise their Kundalini and their brain opens, then they are on the same line as yourself. They do not have to worry about what is good and what is bad. They know themselves. Now that is aware. I again say the word aware of where you stand in this big plan of World's global transformation, what is your position, where do you stand, what is the work for you to be done? what is very important. Now you have got this compulsion on you that I have to do something. When this To correct this world it is very important compulsion starts working on you which is not dreadful, which is not annoying but that you all should know what is right and what is wrong, and you have a vehicle of Parama Chaitanya to know what is wrong very peaceful and joyous which says that and what is right. Now this trend starts I have to see that others also know moving and, as you see, there are so many themselves, so to know themselves is first people today with their opened Sahasrara. of all you must know your own Chakras. Just many people get their realisation, I opening Sahasrara was the most So, important part of the evolutionary know, very quickly but they do not settle process. All the evolutionary process brought human beings to what level? They had wars, they had all kinds of silly problems on your Chakras. They will programmes by which we really ruined know that they have problems but they down with their Chakras. They have to see to their Chakras, why you have still go on without paying attention or so many countries, so many people. Now without looking at it. To them, it is kind of a 'by the way', you can say that these are the problems with me, does not when you are one with that all pervading power, it is a pure power, it is a Nirmal Power, absolutely pure power that gives

 19 Sep - Oct 1999 9 & 10 Volume XI issue The Divine Cool Breeze how many people are getting transformed, but after transformation you must settle down First of all you should matter. But what does it matter as long as I am working out Sahaja Yoga? It is not only for others but for yourself first see if you are a peaceful person. Is there peace in your heart? If you have no It is important that you should get your Chakras corrected. That is the most important thing for you and then you will Sahaja Yogi. If you get excited and if have self knowledge in the sense you you start shouting at people and all know what is the defect, where is the that, it means you are not a Sahaja peace in your heart then you are not a defect, what wrong am I doing. what should I do? And then when you correct Yogi. You have to have a very very peaceful temperament. That is very those Centres, then your awareness. I important. would say, will be really fiully enlightened about all the work. That is a tremendous thing It is very tremendous because if you Now with that peace what should be their pure compassion? What you are doing is not for your benefit as such but because you are compelled by this force to do good for others, to transform them This have to transform this mad world into something very sane and if you have to give them all self realisation. is the greatest good you can do to others that their brains are put right, they get rid Imagine the task how great it is. How many people we need to do it? But if your will power is strong about it and you see you feel compelled to do it But normally you see, you are not compelled because of their diseases, they get rid of their problems. It is all there, but the first and the most important thing that happens that they get the power to transform others we have to run our houses. we have to When you have that power to transform others, you should not waste it. You should not use it for yourself That means earn money, wve have to do this, we have to do that. That you can do. But main object of your life is to transform people and to work it out, this transformation for the global peace. the growth is not complete You must talk about it. You must tell about it and you must work it out. Wherever it is possible you have to work it out. This is the way I do not know, it has been predicted or not that complete transformation will take place but they have talked about who can get complete transformation. you can spread people on a global level transformation I do not know that part All our problems, whether in India or and I just do not bother my head as to

 Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10 14 1999 Sep Oct The Divine Cool Breeze anywhere, are because of human beings. Because they have not been enlightened. going like that. What is there to feel upset See, if you are enlightened you will about it? So many things, small, big, have no problem of any quarrelling or happen in your life for which you get any fighting and all that. If you are upset; but now with this blessing of enlightened, then you will think about Sahasrara, you will be amazed, there is others as if they are your own, bother your help from Parama Chaitanya, and that have to go that way. That is why I am heads about them. You will not think means a tremendous help, because it acts about yourself any more. If you are globally, it acts individually, it acts on enlightened then no question of any communities, it acts on nations, because violence in your head. Now in the name there is Divine, what you call Divine. There is a Divine play going on and this Divine play. plays tremendous beautiful things by which people start correcting themselves. So, you should never be of religion, in the name of every thing, there is so much of violence. This violence can be easily corrected if they all become Sahaja Yogis. Think if all people become Sahaja Yogis, how will they quarrel, for what? So, this religion is there, but above all these religions, is the religion of Sahaja nervous, you should never be upset because you have the Divine Power within and it will correct. It can you Yoga, where you become one, and there all these quarrels of religions will disappear. 1 correct anyone. I mean, recently we have a case of one boy who was hit by a truck and they said his lungs were smashed. Now with the lungs smashed, no body This is not the only problem we have as human beings. We have some other has heard that they become normal. Not problems also, very serious;ie. we have only he became normal but he started a hankering. They are very greedy. You breathing normally and all this is done cannot adjust yourself to any other only by Parama Chaitanya. You do not circumstances. You want to live in have to do anything. Any problem comes complete comfort and this and that. But before you, before it really touches you, after this you can sleep anywhere, you it is solved by the Parama Chaitanya. can eat anywhere. you need not eat. You But you must have full faith in yourself become a person who is above all these and in Parama Chaitanya, and believe needs, all these demands, absolutely. Then that you are a realised soul. do not worry. This worry for what? you Supposing I get lost somewhere and the car is going in a wrong way. Alright, I No body can harm you. If they try to harm you for the time being, alright,

 Sep Oct 15 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XI Issue: 9 & 10 1999 you may suffer, but you do not also feel the sufferings and you get out of it. Such a security. such a proper to have any conscious effort. Accept life as it is. As it is whatever life is there, accept it. Do not retaliate, guidance is there. Also you are saved from all kinds of attacks and all kinds do not get angry, do not get upset. Just accept and you will enjoy the same life of mistakes that you commit. It is all Which was irritating you. You will see the enjoying part of that and it would such a big, I will say, a knowledge. It knows. It knows what computer of be so beautiful. The way you will see you are doing, what you should not do; that you will get over all your where vou are going and what you should do, what should not be your way. It knows everything, knows everything problems, you will get over all your enemies, and a kind of very fresh beautiful existence you will have. about you. So, now as you are all Sahaja Yogis, it is So, when you have to become aware of it. now this is the state where, I would very great position. With that if you sav, that vouu have to be aware that you will be amazed to see that you are humble down, humble down, then you are realised souls. you are different. very ahsolutely in contact with this Parama unique You are realised souls, you are Chaitanya. Not only that, but you have not ordinary people and that you are protected by this Parama Chaitanya. become Parama Chaitanya. With this Parama Chaitanyä you can do anything. I Nothing can change, nothing can trouble you, nothing can overpower. need not tell you what you can do because some of you may not believe; but that is my own experience that if you are the Because you are not aware also of this Parama Chaitanya that is why you Parama Chaitanya then it keeps your little bit get worried, and people write dignity, it keeps your position, it keeps to me. Mother, something is wrong your word and looks after you and with my daughter, something is worng. Everything can be corrected by Parama Chaitanya if you know how to leave it to that. If you understand how you are one with that Parama Chaitanya, you are a part and parcel of Parama Chaitanya and that Parama Chaitanya is looking after you You don't have to do whatever you just said or desire, you just get it Your desires also change Your desires are not for stupid things but for something that is very noble Like you want to transform people. You want to do Sahaja Yoga work. All these desires are fulfilled fully when you want to do it, you like it very conscuus etfort There is no need a

 Sep - Oct 16 Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Sep and you think of it. You see something is not right. and that is done by that. Immediately Like today, we had a discussion on this Parama Chaitanya will take over and you point about the economic position and the will have no problems, no problems because the way we react to all these economics of modern times. I said it is difficulties and to so called odds in life all wrong, because it is self-destructive, becomes a play, just a play. You are it destroys the nations. If not your nation, amazed, you looked at it, and finished, other nations. Then it also destroys your family life. It destroys your value system. It completely destroys you. So what sort looked at that and finished. That is how it is the light which goes into the darkness and finishes the darkness. The darkness of economics is this? It is just a show, just like a, you can say, a balloon which can burst any moment. I have seen people is finished and our problems are finished also. who are very rich. They became bankrupt, So, this is what our awareness has to and, many bankrupt became rich. This become. Awareness has to become kind of a turmoil in which they are Parama Chaitanya. Then you get all the jumping from one shore to another shore, ideas, everything that are Divine. But not but you are not. You watch that drama. only that but also the help of the Divine You see all that drama and with your or the solutions of the Divine. Everything peace, you can see everything very calmly. It is not difficult for you to create more settles down and you are amazed people of this type. It is not difficult to transform this World. The time has come. watching all this that you are the centre of doing all these things. You are not aware that you are doing and you are Just try, try. Like when the proper time doing. That ego part is missing. But you comes, blossom time comes, so many see-it is all happening around you and flowers become fruits. So, like that you then you are amazed how it is happening. all have become. The whole life style changes, the whole understanding changes and you Now it is for you to create seeds to spread become a great sources of happiness. Sahaja Yoga. You are at that level of joy and knowledge to others. You do not have to study anything, you don't awareness now where Parama Chaitanya is with you, absolutely part and parcel of you, absolutely with you to give you all have to know much but you will know necessary help, all necessary prestige and also the personality. about everything, what is right and what Is wrong and then only you can tell the things with complete authority that this is May God Bless You All.

 Sep Oct The Divine Cool Breeze 17 Volume XI Issue 9 & 10 9&10 1999 Shri Fatima Bi Puja, 1998 Today we have gathered to do the Puja so much towards the ascent of the person. of Fatima Bi, who was the symbol of Even Mohammed Saheb has described his Gruha Laxmi So we are going to have son in law in many ways and he is the the Puja of Gruha Laxmi principle within only one, the another incarnation of us. As the house wife has to finish every Brahmadeva who.came on this earth, Ali, work, every thing in the house hold and then she goes for a bath, in the same way this morning I had to do lots of things incarnation was Sopandeva. You can go and then I could come for your Puja, to Pune and see the temple of Sopandeva because today the house wife's jobs are there. many. So I had to finish them like a good So we have Ali and his wife Fatima who came on this earth. He was the incarnation of Brahmadeva and his another house wife. incarnated on the Principle of the Left Now the Principle of Gruha Laxmi has Nabhi. She stayed in her house, in her been evolved and developed by the house hold and she observed what you divine, its not a human being's creation call a kind of a Parda or nakab as they and as you know it resides in the left Nabhi The Gruha Laxmi is the one that call it, to cover her face. It is a symbol that a woman who is a house wife has to is represented in the life of Fatima who save her chastity by covering her face was the daughter of Mohammed Saheb. Now She is always born in a relationship they were born in a country which was to a Guru which is of Virginity, of Purity. very-very violent and she would have So She comes as sister or She comes as been definitely attacked in case she had a daughter. Now the beauty of Fatima's not lived in that kind of fashion. life is that after the death of Mohammed As you know, in the time of Christ, Saheb, as usual, there were fanatic people though Mary was Mahalaxmi's who thought they can take the religion incarnation, had to be very very potential into their hands and can make it a very personality and Christ did not want fanatie thing. The attention was not paid because she was a beautiful woman and anybody to know what she was. But

 18 Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10 Sep - Oct 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze as Hindus were concerned, his saintliness, though she was in the house she was but the muslims did not accept it. There Shakti, so she allowed her sons or actually is another one who is called Haji Malang, ordered them to fight those fanatics who were trying to deny the authority of her husband, and you know. Hasan and Hussain, they were killed there. Its a very beautiful thing how the Mahalaxmi Tatva of Sita took a form of Vishnu Maya just to establish the beautiful principle of a house wife. She was very powerful, no who is very near Bombay, who was a realised soul. He too realised the fanaticism of the Shiyas. 'Shiya' word comes from Siya; in U.P. Sita is called as Siya. Sitaji is called as 'Siya'. They also did not realise that they are saints who are not, so called, Muslims but they are saints. So they could not get out of it. So doubt, and she knew that her children will we have another one called Haji Malang be killed. But these people are never who was worshipped by Hindus. Some killed, they never die nor do they suffer. drama they had to play to show Muslims also go there, no doubt. This Haji Malang was quite worried about the fanaticism of the Shiyas. So he appointed some Hindus to worship him, just to Its people how stupid they are. As a result of that another system started where they respected saints, like in India Shiya people respect Auliyas or we can call them the people who are realized souls like things. Nizamuddin Saheb. Then we have got "Chisti". We have got, in Ajmer, Hajrat Chisti. All. these great Saints were counter balance. They did all kinds of There are many saints like that. I went to Bhopal. There is another big saint who was buried. But all his disciples were just respected by Shiyas. But still they could not transcend the limits of religiosity, so depending on the earnings of that place, which was very bad. Even Hajrat Nizamuddin's disciples do the same way they also became extremely fanatic. Firstly they would not see to another religion where they had saints. They would not respect the saints who belonged to another religion and even as the Hindus do. They all make an earning, I mean it's a kind of commercial business. So this saint died and was buried there. There were many people depending on it. When I went there, I just, by the way, asked them, what is your religion? So they said we are Muslims. I said what when we had a great saint like Sai Nath of Shirdi, who was a Muslim to begin with, and it is said that Fatima herself was the religion of that saint who died? They said saints have no religions. So I brought him as a child in her lap and gave him to some lady. We didn't deny, as far

 Volume XI issue: 9& 10 Sep Oct 19 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze said then why do you want to follow whole thing is, that one part which hates religion. Why don't you follow his thinks the other part is the worst of all religion. They had no religion. Even the and the another part thinks that the first Sanyasis have no religions. They are "Dharmatita". They go beyond the law or logic they decide, that is their own religion. Butasit has happened with every incarnation, it has happened even with the Why this principle of the Gruha Laxmi Shiya people, with the Sunnis, with the was specially created? To overcome that Hindus, with the Muslims and every one, hatred, to subdue that icy stuff called that they made a fanatic group. Now hatred, to remove hatred from the minds fanaticism itself is ahsolutely against of the people, this Gruha Laxmi principle religion, against your innate religion with- was created. In the family when you have in your-self because it creates poison It's a venomous thing. It makes you hate has to subdue the hatred between the others. When you start hating others, children, between the husband and the then it reacts in you as horrible poison children. But if she herself enjoys her part is the worst of all. Under what rule, lookout. So they club together like that. a housewife, the Gruha Laxmi principle which eats up all that is beautiful with in hatred then how can she subdue it? She you Hating any one is the worst thing is the source of that peace which subdues that human beings can do, but they can hatred. Now in India we have joint do it They can do whatever they like. Animals do not hate any one. Can you uncles, aunties, this that But the house- imagine? They do not know how to hate, wife's job is to smooth out all angularities they bite some one because that is their of people which create friction. Now the nature, they cut some one because that's man has to worship a house wife. It is families, you too have relations like their nature They never hate some oone, They may not like some one but this Ramante Devta- wherever the house- hatred, which is a poison, is a speciality wife is respected, there only the Gods of human conception and human absorption Only human beings can hate. must go to the housewives because we and this horrible thing hatred was settled said so, "Yatra Narya Pujyante. Tatra reside. In our country. I must say, credit are no good for economics, no good for between even the Muslims. politics, administration. Hopeless. Men folk are useless, they do not know any house hold work or anything, women This Karbala was not created for hatred, but for love, Everything that was done have kept it to themselves. But our for love was converted into hatred, in society is first class, It is maintained by every religion. Now the worst part of the

 Sep - Oct 20 1999 Volume : XI issue 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze All right, but this woman, the housewife, the women of the house. So the man has to respect the housewife, that's very important. If he does not respect his housewife, then there is no possibility of any Gruha Laxmi tatva being maintained. It's like the preservation of that principle has to know that she is not docile. She is obedient to her own righteousness, to her own virtues, to her own qualities. If the husband is stupid, alright, he is stupid like a child, finished. But the husband has to know that he must respect, otherwise he of a housewife, but some men, I mean is a lost case, He is finished, he is good for nothing. First thing is that he must many of themn, think that it is their birth right to ill-treat their wives, to torture them, to say all kinds of things, to be see that the woman in the household is respected as a Gruha Laxmi. Then the blessings flow. But in no way he should angry, even if she is a good woman. But if she is a nagger, if she is a bhoot, then they are subdued completely, subdued by her. If the wife is a bhoot then husband insult her or be unkind to her and raise his voice or say things to her. But the wife has to be the one who is to be respected. I have so many times said, your wife is dominating, give her two slaps on the always, sort of, tries to please her and be extremely kind to her. He knows she is a bhoot, after all, be careful. Don't know what time the bhoot will come like a snake face, of course. No doubt, she has not to on you, and if she knows how to nag or to argue, then also they are afraid. There is no love. They have no love or respect be dominating, she has to remove the dominating forces of others. She is the source of peace, she is the source of joy for each other but they have an awe or and she is the peace maker. If she is the fear and they are afraid of such a woman. one who creates problems, then you can slap her nicely, bring her to her shape, it's alright. So this Gruha Laxmi Tatva is mutual, it doesn't depend only on the wife or husband but both of them. So once if Now some women think if they become flirtish then the husbands are better controlled. But there basic principle they lose, the basic shakti that they have, they lose and land up in difficulties. you are making your wife suffer, your left So the basic principle of a Gruha Laxmi Nabhi can never improve; or if you are a is to respect her chastity, to respect her bad wife your left Nabhi cannot improve, chastity outside, inside. That is the Now in the west the problem with women steadiness of her. Of course most of the is this that they don't realise as to what is men take advantage of it. If the wife is their power. An eighty year old woman docile or obedient, they make it a point also would like to look like a bride. They that they just rule the wife left and right. do not feel their dignity and enjoy their

 Sep - Oct 1999 21 Volume XI Issue 9& 10 The Divine Cool Breeze dignity with-in themself. They are the separately, nobody should come in the house. Even a rat won't enter that house queen of the house but they want to behave like the cheepish, childish young Even to say, oh, these are my children, frivolous girls. They do not feel the my husband, myself, is the negative of dignity of their being, they talk too much, Sahaja Yoga It's the negative form of they behave in a manner that does not understanding. These are absolutely absurd things. they do not look like, of any Sahaja Yogi or any Sahaja Yogini. All this kind of selfishness, all this kind of behove a housewife. Like they take out their hands, talk like the fisherwomen do, when they sell their fish to someone or seclusion is against Sahaja Yoga. But a when they have to fight or they shout . I mean, I thing of a house wife is, oh, now how much should I prepare, for example, there will bes0 persons coming So the husband says but only 10 are coming. Why do you want to have for 50 persons? But may be they would like to eat more. But then why do you have 50 plates. May be they might bring there friends. So she thinks of her sometimes They shout also. heard they shout and some times they beat their husband, that's the limit. They start always comparing themselves with the husband to begin with. Like I am such a rich man's daughter. I am from such and such family, my husband is from such a low family, he has no money, nothing He is not educated, so ill-treat him Treat him generosity. She enjoys her generosity. She enjoys her generosity. I have known many like that. Though they are not even Sahaja in a manner that shows no respect. Such a woman will lose all her powers. Also in her own ways she will feel guilty She will YoginIs. They will say, will you come, feel guilty, because first of all, no Sister in law, will you come for dinner. has right to look down upon any one Oh, I am not coming, you cook too many whatsoever in Sahaja Yoga specially. Then, to look down upon your husbands, Not coming. No! No! I'll cook very few is some thing unbelievable. He may not things but please come. Then she just start be a Sahaja Yogi Alright He may not be thinking immediately. What vegetables upto the point but by your belhaviour, by are available in the market? What should your strength, by every thing you can save I get, what is the best I mean. I am not him But why are you losing yourself by their Guru, I am not their mother. I am dominating others. by strangling others, just a relation, but they want to express by making your husband a very, sort of a, their love through the food, they are the frog in the well telling him, oh. we both giver of food. They are the Annapurnas should enjoy. Lets have our house and this is the one quality – the body по things.

 22 Oct 1999 Sep Oct Volume : XI issue : 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze generosity, if the woman doesn't have she is not a Sahaja Yogini, by any chance. Take it from me. Husband may be a little miserly, doesn't matter. But the wife has on the horse, I must also sit on the horse and fall down. If he goes for sking I'll also go for sking. If he develops his muscles I'll also develop my muscles. It I mean women is coming to that point. to be very generous and sometimes, she start looking like nothing on earth. You don't know what sort of women these are with big-big muscles without any mustaches. So this kind of stupid ideas secretly gives money, not to her own children but to others. Such beautiful women have to be there in Sahaja Yoga. But I feel so sorry, sometinmes the attack comes from the women of Sahaja Yoga, we have. But there is no subordination of any kind. You are subordinated to your not from the men, on me. I am a woman myself I feel shocked that women should own dignity, to your own chastity, to your own sense of honour and above all to your attack me like this, for what. righteousness because you are incharge In Sahaja Yoga there is no domination of of that. The man who is in charge, has to any kind but all these so called ideas of look after that side. How many quarrels servility or domination comes from the false ideas you have, about your own dignity, about your own understanding, peacemaker. Supposing we send two you create. How can you be quarrelsome when you are supposed to become the you are not aware of yourself. You do peacemakers to some country to make peace and they cut each other's throat, not know that you are the Queen, no body can dominate you. Who can dominate the what will you say to such a thing. lady, who rules the house hold. If supposing the husband says, I don't like this colour, alright, leave it for a while. Then somebody will come and say what bring such expression of love, such sweet a nice colour. He says, ah, such a nice things, that the family itself feels rested colour, oh, don't change it. The women in you, secured in you because you are You are the one who has to smooth down every thing, you are the one who has to must understand the men. They have big the mother. The family must feel secured eyes. They are not microscopic. They see with in you and this love is your power. everything in a big way, you see. So today This is your power that you can give, live they will say something, tomorrow they and giving love you will find, you will will forget about it and they don't have always enrich yourself. I mean imagine microscopic eyes. They are too above these things. They are above these things. get. I don't know I'll You must under stand that But if he sits another house. I am telling them don't what presents I give compared to what I have to build

 Sep Oct 23 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze same, you see, so he said, you see, she doesn't understand she has kept these three persons here. God knows, what they give me individual present. I will not take any individual presents. Now still despite that. I don't know, just with love if I get are, saying refugees, this thing. doesn't know, he is a Muslim, he is a She some thing with care, that love, you know, itself manifests and comes back to you Hindu. God knows, she has two like a poetry. You are some times husbands, one husband, like that. All kind of things. Next morning they forgot about that. I said all right. Let them be there for one night. Is alright? I can't drag them out today, one night. Next morning they forgot that they where living there. That's like men. First day, such a blasting, such a blasting, I said all right, one night. Now don't shout. They will feel hurt. Next surprised. I'll give you one simple example of my own life which will tell you how love can work it out. I was a housewife to begin with and to end with, I think. And once I was in Delhi, my daughter was to be born. So I was knitting something for her, sitting out side in the lawn, when three persons walked into the house, one lady and two men and they came and said, see now we are... I am a morning they went away for their work. They had no time. It was, you see, only on a week day they become active in the house hold, otherwise they are inactive. So they went away. It so happened that these people stayed with me for one month. Then this lady got a job and she went away with her husband and this Muslim. But in the meanwhile there was housewife and these two are, one is my husband and he is the friend of my husband and he is a Muslim, and we have come to you for shelter because we are refugees. I looked at them. They looked very good to me, they were quite all right. I said, alright you please settle down in my house. So I gave them the outside a big riot in Delhi, very big riot because room which had a kitchen and a many Hindus and Sikh people were killed in Punjab. It had a reflection in Delhi and bathroom, and for the gentleman, I said, there is another spare room, you can stay they started killing all the Muslims there. So, three four Sikh people and one or two there, and husband wife can stay here. In the evening my brother came in. He Hindus came to my house and they said, started shouting at the top of his voice. we are told that you have a Muslim He said what is this. You don't know staying with you. I said, no. How can I these people. They may be thieves, they may do this, and then my husband came have. in and joined him because you see they They said, there is a Muslim and we have were friends. So he told. all men just the to kill him. 1 said see I am wearing such a

 24 Sep - Oct 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze big et1. Can you believe it that I could have a muslim in the house. They thought me Sari. You'll have to give so much money. This thing. I must be a real Hindu fanatic, you see. They said alright come to the Mahurat at So they believed me. I said, see now if you have to go in my house, you will go least. Come to the mahurat, the beginning. on my dead body. I will not allow you. Mahurat is the one where you start it. So So they felt quite frightened. They went she came and I was there. She looked at away. So this fellow heard my things and he came and he said, I am surprised. How me and just she couldn't believe that she is seeing me after 12 years. The tears did you risk your life. I said, there is Sstarting rolling from her eyes, absolutely. nothing. His life was saved. Now this She couldn't say anything, just she came gentleman, this muslim gentleman, and fell into my arms and she said where were you lost all these days. I have been trying to trace you and she started describing me and allI. Then Sahir Ludhianvi was there and he said, how this Lady is here. They said, it is Her work. Oh God, why didn't you tell us, you see, we'll give our lives for Her and they were became a great poet called Sahir Ludhianvi, and this lady became a great actress.. the one who used to act as a mother, Achla Sachdeva. I knew it, that they had become one day and all that. But I didn't tell any body about it. I said now supposing they come to know, I am in Bombay, they will just go mad about me, and I said I have no time for all that. all amazed, how they were changed. No money, nothing, I am going to give money for this project. Nothing doing. See now, I was a housewife just an ordinary house wife. I didn't have so many rights on my So, we started a film centre for the young people, to give them, some good films. But it all made into a farce, later on. They husband's property, on any thing, and my brother another dominating fellow, both of them put together, just were about to kill me that night, with their temper and never listen to me, but whatever it is. So they said, we should get this Achala Sachdeva to act as a mother. I said all right but don't tell her I have said, I have anger. I soothed them down and then you anything to do with it. So years had know when I told my husband and my passed, about I think 12 years or so. So brother, they were amazed. I said, they they went and told her. So she was fusing are the ones who have become like this like an actress. No, No. how much are and see the change, how much they have you going to pay me? I cannot act free. So everybody will ask for free. Then how going to say no to any charitable can I give you free. You will have to give institution. This is the last mistake we changed, and they said, No more, we are

 25 1999 Volume : XI issue 9 & 10 Sep Oct The Divine Cool Breeze We had many great women in India because of these institutions Padmini we have committed and the whole idea of a earning and money just dropped down and she has acted in many films for charity and this Ludhianvi also wrote many things for charity. So a woman can make a man had. Chand Bibi. there are so many women we can mention who were great women, who were housewives. So the woman's qualities are like the potential of the mother earth or potential of any energy, like electricity has its potential somewhere else. You see the lights here, makes no difference, one light or two lights. But the potential is important. So a charitable personality because she herself is charitable She is an artist and she can create beauty around her, in her household, in her family, in her society Everywhere. But no, women want to fight like men They will have associations. They will have unions to fight for their rights. I agree that some of the men have been extremely cruel Some of the laws one has to understand that we are potential and to preserve our potentil we must have the sense of dignity, honour and righteousness within ourself. Now have heen extremely cruel This thing, that thing and that they have to be told. But this is not the way. There is another way men must respect their women who are like this. But men are another stupid stuff of improving these men, who try to because they will not respect a woman destroy the women, because women have who loves them, who îs chaste, who is one very great quality that Ganas are with them and Shree Ganapati is with them. He will never side with men if they are chaste and do not try to show off their body and show off their beauty and want to make sort of a capital out of it. Such women are extremely powerful, extremely powerful and they show their valour when it comes to anything like we had Jhansi ki Rani. She was an ordinary housewife. She fought the British, and the British also were surprised at her valour good, who wants them to become collective, who wants them to give. who be charitable, who wants that Sahaja Yoga should be promoted and the one who wants that her husband should be happy and joyous and that he should come to Sahaja Yoga as well. Instead of that they run after some funny, stupid women. What is there to be so attractive towards bhootish women, must be some bhoots in them, I don't know, that the way they get attracted. As a result of all this and they said that we had got Jhansi, alright, but the glory goes to the Queen very insecure and they get insecured. As of Jhansi Like that we had many, a results, the man suffer and women Noorjahan we had, we had Ahilya Bai. misbehaviour of men, women become suffer. A man who neglects his wife, and

 1999 26 Volume XI Issue 9& 10 Sep - Oct The Divine Cool Breeze the housewife, but she is a maid servant. treats like that. will consequently get There is a saying that there was a lady blood cancer And the woman who who was a maid servant, and then she was behaves like this, in this manner and if made a housewife but she couldn't stop she ill-treats her husband, will get asthma or a very serious type of cirrhosis, could be brain damage, could be paralysis, could be complete dehydration of the body because left nabhi is so important. If the left nabhi is made hectic, as you know by her running about because she was a maid servant. She doesn't settle in the household Now for whom is the household, is not only for herself, No, not for her husband, No, not for her your running about and by jumping about children but for others to welcome. and by being hectic, then left nabhi becomes hectic and you develop blood Like this Mother Earth has spread all cancer I have always seen that the women who are thin, their husbands as jittery. and sit and enjoy. But there is a very why? Because the wife is all the time common thing, also that in Sahaja Yoga, making him run up and down. Do this, these beautifiul things for you, to come we find that people, after marriage do that, you didn't bring this thing for become absolutely engrossed into each me. I had asked you to bring the Coca-other and lose Sahaja Yoga. Then their Cola-you didn't bring, you didn't do that. children suffer. Their children become fussy, funny and disobedient, tortuos. They have some physical problems also. Its a punishment. Not that I punish this as if he is the sinner all the time. And the man becomes Jumpy all the time, Jumpy. He gets something for the jumping and she gets something for her torturing. There is no love, there is no joy, there is Supposing you put your hand in the fire, no happiness. This so called figure it will burn. I mean who is punishing. You madness, which is now subsiding Thank are punishing yourself. Then children God. It's coming from America. This become funny. Just for your family, just figure madness makes you funny. but it is your own nature that punishes. for your food, just for your house hold, this selfishness, if it crawls up into man, then God save that family. Ifits a woman, Women have to be settled down women. its all right, atleast a little bit but if the man is a gone case, that I should have a house, I should have a job, I should look They have to be Grahasthis. that is, one who settles in the house hold. said to be satistied within the household. If she is after my children, its for my family. Our all the time running about, she doesn't family is not of one man one woman but want to stay in the house then she is not

 Volume: XI ISsue 9 & 10 27 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Sep/-Oct the whole universe is our family. We are than this. If you ask a saint to become a not on our own, and if you become king. He will say. What? you want to put arbitrary, and if you become secluded, I the ocean into a cup? Is the minimal of must tell you one thing and warn you minimal. Is the lowest of lowest. today that those people who will try to seclude themselves, a day will come, Those who think their life is service are when they will have horried diseases on another stupid people. Their life is enjoyment, not service. But that service itself is enjoyment. But if you just keep to service Oh, I am sacrificing, this is my tapasya, finished. Then you end up like a tapasvi, like a bean stalk thing, which can be used for a cross. So, in Sahaja Yoga it them: don't blame Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga has it's own beautifiul realm of But in the God's God's kingdeom kingdom, you have to be collective. But a bad wife can create problems She will form a group of people. group of women. She will go on rolling down with her bhoots to everyone or may be she is very conscious of her education or of her is enjoyment but unless and until you have that essence of enjoyment into every thing, it cannot be an enjoyment. If you take out the essence from the cane sugar position or of her money and all that. Then also she will try to keep the husband aloot. or what you call the sugar cane bamboo, Such people have to pay for what they then what is left? In the same way, all the have done not because it is a punishment so called service and tra and tapasya and for them. So Grahalaxmi tatva in Sahaja all that has not sweetness, finished. All Yoga is very important. Those people this is sweetness and that is generated by who have got problems after coming to Sahaja Yoga, most of them have spoil this. Keep this nice, keep that nice neglected their grahalaxmi principle The husband comes home like as if he is because grahalaxmi if it goes out, then women. But they are very strict. Don't a criminal. He has to be like a bull in a centre heart catches. Those women who china shop. He has to be It's a good thing have tried such tricks, should give up in a way. Is nice, how he doesn't know immediately because this is very anything, is even better for you. But to indignified, nobody respects such a make him all the time slave, do this. you woman It's a very true with the leaders didn't do this for me, do that for me, is wives and the leaders The leader's wife not the job of a housewife. Her job is like or the leadership is a minimal of a minimal the Mother Earth. Does She complain? ng So Nothing. She gives you everyth of a minimal of a so called position, most much is the sustenance in her. So much insignificant What you got is much higher

 Sep Oct 28 & 10 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XI IsSUE 9 & 10 of them adores me. IfI go somewhere in the dignity. Such powers She has. What Lucknow, all of them will come from all does She care for anybody giving her any thing. You will be amazed if I tell you over to see me but my husband goes, today, till today. till yesterday, I never nobody comes to see him. He always asked my husband to buy me anything complains. He is the relation, and I am For the first time I asked him to buy me a not the relation, and they come and see camera, and you see the result, in the me, not him. IfI had not given them love, evening what he said. Least expected. if I had not given them whatever they Never in life-time. He used to say, tell wanted they would have not come to me. So they are the preservers, preservers of me what you want First time. I said something and see the effect becasue 1 others. They don't have to preserve things for themselves. We have many stupid women with us, I tell you, many stupid have never said him. So such a woman has to be self satisfied, satisfied in her self women. We call them Buddhu in Hindi because she has to give. The person who has to give, how ean she demand She language. The Buddhus, because they has to give love because she is love. She don't know what power they have got. has to give all the services. She has to They don't know what responsibility they give all the possessions, she has to sooth have. I am an example before them and down What a responsibility. I tell you, this is the very big problem with me that what a responsibility More than a Prime practically I think 60% leaders have Minister, more than any king or any one, horrible wives. I must say, horrible, and Sahaja Yoga goes 'dhup' like that with them. They can't live in an ashram. The is the responsibility of a woman, and she should feel proud of it, that such a will have their food. The husband must see that they had their food. It is they who responsibility has come to me. A house- wife has much more responsibility than a have to feed everyone. Everybody has to leader of Sahaja Yoga But the wives of leaders can be horrid becasue they think thev have become leaders. This is the be looked after and at the end they should eat. Everybody must get a bed. They must minimal of minimum. I mean its like, I see everybody is sleeping now. They must said, the ocean coming into a little cup. cover all the children. Then they must And their behaviour becomes so funny sleep. But No, they sit down, they become and absurd, I am surprised mini Mataji or greater than Mataji. Get me this thing, get me that, just do that, do this. They don't know how to cook, most of them. Every wife of a leader has I was married in a family where we had 100 people living together and each one

 29 1999 Sep Oct Volume : XI Issum : 9& 10 The Divine Cool Breeze to cook and learn cooking It is compulsory now, They have to cook and with heart. They should be able to cook and give with love to others. That's the num of Annapurnas, and the husband shouldn't find faults with them In the housewife. Supposing if you stand with a military band you will be fed up. left right, left right, left right. But a beautiful melody that's a melodious thing and this melody itself is suggestive of a beauty beginning they might make mistakes, The way the housewife decorates the encourage them Encourage their house. She smoothes down every one. qualities, encourage their goodness; makes them feel happy. Then she is encourage their niceness. Also I have looking after everyone. Everybody knows seen, some very good ladies who were she is standing there Imagine, like a taking very active life in Sahaja Yoga modern style would be, you call some After marriage they are lost. Husbands people for birthday cake of your child and are also supposed to be Sahaja Yogis, you cut the cake first because you are the lost. Some timmes they appear, some times housewife. How will it look? It is that if I am there they come, otherwise they ridiculous, I tell you. The way the house are not there. Today I was asking Arnald, wife always puts forward before he told me so many of them are like that everybody else. They have to be on the here. That means there is something back because you have to look after. Look after all of them, and this is what a Raga is. It caters to all your angularities. Supposing a person is very upset and wrong with the husbands because before marriage they were better So how much it is important, a Graha Laxmi Principle with in us, for us to be together, to us to worried, comes from office, puts on a Raga. Soothes-you down. It makes you settle down like people come home for grow together. To feel the togetherness. All the time, the oneness that is within five days, live like I don't know, what to us So yesterday, as I told you that I'll tell you the Ragas we have Ra is energy. Ga is in Sanskrit language itadt rat call, not even hotels, and live in a tent like thing and the sixth day they are out at the sea or they go and stay in a hotel. means which penetrates, which moves Nobody wants to stay in the house because there is no Graha Laxmi Principle between the two. But Raga needs , sitting down, settling down Unless and into everything, it is the ethereal qualities. You put anything into ether, you can receive it any where. So the Raga, is the energy which goes into ether and touches your spirit. That is the Raga and these Ragas, I would say are something like a until you settle down, you cannot enjoy Raga. Imagine somebody listening to a

 Oct 30 Sep Oct Volume XI Issue 9 & 10 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze know-why. my son got up and he said I when he is a jumpy. So, one has to raga settle down and that settling down is what love my father very much. He said! is the work of a woman who is a housewife, and the man has to act, is to husband knows she is telling lies also, but settle down. As 1 have told you many a you see all nice things. You see, and I times how your left nabhi goes out in think your mother is much better now I modern times, much more, and many think I'll go and look after your mother, children are also born of the women who and your sister is coming. So I think you are hectic. Normally in India before. you are buying a Sari for her All such nice see, the husband used to get up, have his nice thing she will talk to him. So he eats bath, all the time his wife is not with him. his food nicely then he goes washes his Really! Yes, yes: He said, he said so, and She is cooking for him She is looking hands and goes in a bullock cart, not after his children. All the time sticking on car where there is a jam, always. Alright. to husband also is a sign of boredom. Husband gets bored, wife gets bored over. You have to be very fast. Life is Then they have a divorce So she must fast now. In this fast thing, as I have told have other interests like looking after the you, that on the periphery of the wheel children, house hold, Sahaja Yoga, things you have the speed but at the axis it is like that. Then he comes from the bath, he sits on the ground, in India. Now we now the bullock eart is over, the fan is not So the Sahaja Yogis have to be at the axis, and so the husband and the wife, the left and the right side of a chariot have to be on the axis and the left is left and the right is right. Now the women always take more time to get ready. Not me: I take less then my husband, much less than him. So, that is thier habit. Forget it. Now are sitting on the tables, all right, at least sit on the tables, not on the table, but on the chair. Then she doesn't tell him at this time why did you do like this or this lady was quarrelling or I met another lady she was telling me you were this and you were that No, she said let him eat his food. That's why in India if husband has to show women have their own habits. They are women. Women will remain women, men will remain men Man must see their his temper he doesn't eat his food in the watches ten times Women might see once or may be their watches are lost or house or he will wash his underclothes himself. That is how, they show their out of order if they are real women. The temper. are not jumpy like men, they are differen! So then she fans the husband slowly and But they are women and you are men, and God has made men and women. If it tells him good things, you see, today you

 31 Oct Sep 1999 9 & 10 Volume: XI Issue: The Divine Cool Breeze woman is very smart, talks well and you know she knows how to talk and impress was to make a unisex, He would have made unisex, He did not. people; doesn't mean that she is very So one must accept the sex IS which you intelligent. I call that person the most are born, with grace and beauty and intelligent who sees the benevolence, the dignity. Both. In India we have this thing ascent and the ultimate goal. That person like, you know, I was married in a family, is the most sensitive, is the most very orthodox where they used to even intelligent. All other intelligence is afan, cover the face and all that. So one day is useless. Now, on this subject I think I the collector who is the friend of my can write a book, so, it is better leave it husband, so, he told my elder brother-in- to the book, and today let us have the law why not the wife of my friend come puja. and see me. So he said, of course, of course. So just to make it easy for him he took leave from his office and disappeared May God Bless You. Any questions?.. This means, I'll be into another town and told his wife that see, She goes and sees the collector. See spending some money? 1 don't know. how beautiful it was, how beautiful it was, there's no chance. I don't know where I and I never felt that he was dominating will spend. I love to spend, I mean, every me because after all that was the system body should love to spend. That's why of that family, alright, its alright. But for this what you need is pure intelligence. If the husband is a dullard he will bring give to others. Just enjoy giving others. down his wife. If the wife is a dullard she So enjoyable, to give something to others. will bring down her hushband. If the the money is for. Must give to others, you see. Why the matter is there? Matter is to

 32 Volume XI Issue 9 & 10 Sep - Oct 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Bombay Public Programme, 1988 Talk By Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi I bow to all the seckers of truth. The truth people who have propounded any spir- itual ideology of truth. But. today what we find that the religions that are estah- lished to propound these theories of your ascent and your self realisation are ex- tremely cruel or demonic or stupid. It's impossible to understand how can these that we understand as truth is known to us on our central nervOLIS system. und whatever we see. whatever we hear. whatever we Smell. we say this is the truth. That's what we know about. hut the truth is much more than that, is much more than the sense organs, is much much mone than your mental projections. and much higher than your imagination. It has heen said in our own shastras. and great incarnations who came on this carth, who have created such great things and have said of such fundamental facts of life and have promised that you have to feel that all pervading power of God. in all the great hooks of religion that there is an all pervading power of God which looks after hunman heings, which has cre- ated human heings, which has monitored all this beautiful Universe. Every inch has been looked after and programmed prop- that Brahmachaitanya, one day. The fol- lowers of all the religions are going to the extremes and doing all kinds of quar- relling. fighting or they have heen very stupid. Human awareness can only go on to the left or to the right side. As in Sahaja erly. That there is a force which exists. Yoga we say towards the "Ida" or towards of which these human heings are not the "Pingla'. These are the two channels aware. They may have to he aware one of sympathetic nervous system which look after ourefforts on the left side, that day. For that. all the great prophets. all the incarnations have said that you are to is towards the past. and the right side, it is the future. The left side will be indul- he horn again. that you have to get you 'Atmasakshatkara". your Self Realisa- gence. There are religions which allow you to indulge into anything that you want to do. For example. in Christianity they started catholicism, this was a right tion'. Whatever you may call it. whatever name you may give. hut it is said by all the

 Sep Oct Volume : XI Issue 9 & 10 Oct 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze ting these women enticed into some sort sided religion in the sense there is a lot of restrietions, there are nuns and they have priests, they are not supposed to do this. they are not supposed to marry, they are not supposed to divorce. All kinds of rules and regulations they have. Then the of a. you can say, possessed by some sort of devilish things and telling them the number of race horses. God has nothing to do with horses and races, but these things are happening and people take lot of interest in such stupid stipulations and sSuch modifications of God's work. movement started. Martin Luther was on the right hand side. From the right hand side to the left hand side. It tok people by saying that Giod has not asked us to This is just anti-God activity and that's do all this. We have to have lot of free- why when people start seeing these things dom and all this kind of disciplining and happening in the religion, the way we this kind of blind following is not alright. have in our country. ill treat the women, And we are not going to follow this Pope. the way we have started this all kinds of who himself is indulging into all kinds "sati' business, Like recently, I heard that of things which are not religious. In the in the shastras they say that 'sati' is the same way in India we have Hindu reli- right of a woman but she has no right to gion hased into two types of varieties. read shastras. It is all nonsense, absolute The first one that we see of is on the left nonsense, because if you see that when hand side. where people started saying Ravana died. this was eight thousand that it's alright. in religion everything is years hack, Shri Rama married his wife allowed. We can do whatever we like, to Vibhishana. That time He married a after all there is nothing wrong in drink- widow to Vibhishana. We have example ing, there is othing wrong in doing any of Shri Rama hefore us that he did not kind of thing. even prostitution is all care for this caste system. We are the people, who are now trying to find faults with Shri Rama, because we have be- right. They went to that extreme saying that when there was 'Amritmanthan' the come so egoistical. we don't understand how great he was. Now Shri Rama, they say. was a man, who discarded his wife prostitutes came. And that's why we should have prostitution. They went to another religion that is still persisting in and ill-treated her. This was all a drama. our temples. I have seen it, that people started worshipping all kinds of bhoot vidya. prait vidya, shamshan vidya. In our temples, now. even in Bombay we see people going to the temples and get- They had to play particular type of drama at that time to show what a benevolent king he is. As described by Socrates that the henevolent king. you see in Shri

 34 Volume XI Issue 9 & 10 1999 Sep Oct The Divine Cool Breeze Shri Rama's life was a very serious life Rama. There is no such personality like of a great saint. So Shri Krishna wanted Shri Rama in the West. In India we are now busy trying to find faults with Shri Rama with our narrow headedness. Now lutionary stage to that religious life by Shri Rama, the one who came on this saying it is a 'Leela' (play). And that's earth, first and foremost thing he did was why he had to do many things to make to make somebody to write his the life much more easier and bubbling. Ramayana. That was a 'Shudra'. he was not sufferings and not feeling sorry for a fisherman. Valmiki was an ordinary being born on this earth. Rama suffered fisherman who wrote Ramayana. That to give a proper shape and a proper evo- for us. We don't have to suffer any more proves Shri Rama thought that he should show to the world that a person who gets now. He suffered for us, and he never suffered. It's a drama, they play a drama only for us. Now those who have no in- sight, can say, whatever they like, because self realization. the one who is *Atamsakshatkari' is the real 'Vidvana', is the real 'Pandita' is the real 'Brahmin' they have no depth, and that's why they start criticising Shri Krishna just as if, he is in their pockets. Such a great incar- nation was criticised and said all things about him. It is really surprising. He was and not those people who just say we are *Brahmins'. Then people talk about Shri Krishna as if every body's tongue has become so loose, they want to talk eve- the one who came to this earth as a man rything. I can't understand how can you take up all these things with such audac- ity, and with such courage. They are not and you know how a man's life is at the earth. Now, I have so many Sahaja Yogis as my children. I call them as my chil- afraid of God to talk like this, about all dren but if a man says he is my child or these great incarnations. he is my daughter, no body is going to accept it. Now, Shri Krishna wanted all About Shri Krishna people are talking his powers to be born on this earth. He has sixteen thousand powers because in Sahaja Yoga you will know how you have sixteen thousand powers as he has got. In the Vishuddhi Chakra where he resides these days that Shri Krishna had too many wives and he was a wayward per- sonality. I mean this is really too much of a courage. to say such a thing about Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna and Shri Rama, hoth of them, were great person- he has got sixteen sub-plexuses and these alities and Shri Vishnu himself incarnated sixteen sub-plexuses multiplied by the on this earth to establish religion. At the one thousand nerves of the brain become time of Shri Krishna the problem was that sixteen thousand powers of Shri Krishna.

 35 : 9 & 10 Oct 1999 Sep & 10 Volume XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze anti-Christ. First of all Thomas had said But he could not get them as Sahaja Yo- that you have to become a realised soul. gis at that time. So what he had to do to and this experience you have to have. Not bring them on this earth was as women? only that, but Christianity, the way they preach it, you must suffer, you must carry These sixteen thousand women were made to marry a king and then he was defeated by Shri Krishna. Then he mar- ried them. They were his powers. He had five wives; they are the five elements he had to have as powers around him. But those, who do not understand this great the cross of Christ. All this is nonsense. Christ has carried the cross for you and we don't have to carry another cross. Has he left something undone that we have to do. He has said that you have to be a happy person and know that your Father. the God Almighty loves you and He incarnation of Shri Krishna, they just start talking. they go to the extent that the one who played in Gokul and in Vrindavan doesn't want you to suffer and go on the street crying that you are suffering. On the contrary if you see those people who follow Christianity, everybody has suf- fered at their hands. They have never suf-- fered so far. They say we are suffering, a was not the same Shri Krishna who wrote Gita. These intellectuals have gone off their heads, and I think their intelli- gence needs little more understanding of the great incarnations that were on hig sort of a drama is going on. We are suffering, we must suffer. In Hindu reli- gion also we have another class of peo- this earth to improve your awareness and to give you a right direction in your evolution. ple. I don't want to name them. you know them very well who have tried to These are not the only two points on which we can say that people have done wrong. Even Christ. the way Christ has heen completely misrepresented by the churches, it is to he seen now because tell you that you must lead a very aus- tere life. Even in Jainism this nonsense has been going on. No where they would have said that you should go to these extremes. kind of unnecessary starvation. As it is in our country people are starv- ing. Are they all going to heaven, those who are starving? That if you starve you there is a book which was written by St. Thomas. When he was coming to India, it was left in Egypt and when people saw that hook they were surprised. Recently it was discovered after forty-cight years. They were surprised when they tried to make it legible in English language, that all Christian principles are absolutely are going to help them by your starva- tion. and this starving husiness has been told in such a wrong way that at the time when Shri Ganesha is to be born, you

 36 Volume XI Issue : 9 & 10 1999 Oct Sep The Divine Cool Breeze What are they doing. cutting each oth- er's throats? Is that religion? Is that God's path? It is not. But, why it has happened? Because human awareness goes to the ex- treme of left and right and, thank God, it must starve. I mean when a child is born in your family then you observe 'subabs' (celebrations). Do you starve that day or you distribute modakas and be happy about it that Shri Ganesha is born in your family? Shri Rama is to he bom you must has gone because you can see now the fast. if Shri Krishna is to be born you stupidity and the absurdity of these so called religions that were established in must fast. It is something so surprising! How people have interpreted all these great incarnations into very very wrong the name of these great incarnations. Sahaja Yoga is your own religion. Within yourself you have a Kundalini: this power within yourself which is to directions? There is another thing which I have seen new. I have seen in England, I was surprised that if somebody dies in the family then they must have cham- you have be awakened. About which even Saint Thomas has said, about which pagne, if there is Christmas they must have champagne. For everything that is auspicious they must have champagne. I just don't understand what sort of primi- has said, about which of course, Shri Mohammed Saheb has said, about which Zoroaster has said, about which Christ Krishna has said, in a way. But the tive religion it is that calls itself Christi- anity. Same is about all the religions. greatest is Gyaneshwara. He has clearly Now you see that Sikhs are starting a said it, Nanak Saheb has said it. Everyone has talked about this Kundalini, that this *Khalistan'. Khalis' means 'nirmal', great power of Kundalini has to be means pure. We have started a 'Khalistan here. What are they doing awakened within you and that must give you your realisation. No body is ascent- there. what sort of Khalistan are they oriented. Everyhody is doing some sort of a money business or sSome sort of a going to give with all the filth and dirt in their minds and all kinds of funny things power business where they try other in the name of religion. Or. they to kill each about getting that Punjab. Is this the way Nanak has talked? Nanak has said. "find try to dominate in the name of religion. This is no religion. This has nothing to it, within yourself. that resides". Kabira has said the same thing. Mohammed Saheb has said, when the time of do with the incarnations. They are all anti-God people and are spoiling the *Kayama' will come, when the resurrec- name of God. Now there are so many tion time will come, your hands will Gurus also, as you know, the false gurus. speak. And where are these muslims?

 The Divine Cool Breeze Oct 1999 Volume XI İssue Sep Oct 37 9 & 10 they are teaching all kinds of falsehood This is your democracy. which is demonocracy, creating hecause they want to make money. God's great, great demonic giants and we will have to face them tomorrow when they will come up. people can never make money out of you because it is love which you can to this country. Also to sell their hyhrids not sell in the market. Who are the and all that, we will he all sold out to incarnations who made moey at the cost of others? We should see their lives. their them. models and then go for our gurus. There is a saying in Marathi Gurucheti kale aafher". This Chaos of today's Kaliyuga Now, we have the another side where there is complete stupidity, complete controlling authorities. like you have in is of course by our extreme movement communism. There the individual is not to the left and right and because we have important. the collective is important. You must look after the collective, for false people teaching the wrong things that an individual must be killed, must not ascended. Not only that. hut also these and you are running after them. You have he finished, must he imprisoned. Must no personality, you have no roots, that every thing he done that is possible to you should run after these stupid people keep the collective alive. These are only who are trying to befool you. mental projections of human beings and ideologies which are not related to the t life at all. Because if you start starving or keeping the individual in such a blocked condition, tomorrow he will go In the polities, same thing happens. that we move to the let and to the right. 1Like we have left sided movement where there is no control, remove the control. remove to some place where he can find some freedom, he will immediately start the discipline. let people form their own opinions. let them he individuals. the individual becomes very important. The come from Arah countries, they don't collective is not important. Every drink there but once they come to individual must rise, then he puts himself England. I mean you don't know where mishehaving. I have seen people who into a competition against another person. There is a fight going on hetween is no change within them. But what two persons, the fight going on hetween happens is that they live in their own organisations. there is competition. and paradise, thinking we have achieved it all kinds of horrendous behaviour on part of all these so called people who are they go! There is no transformation, there now. Collective cannot be achieved without trying to develop their individual image.

 Sep Oct 38 1999 Volume XI Issue 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze all, and that is what is the all pervading By individuals, and individuals cannot gain power of God. First feel the reality. feeling the reality. once you reach that stage of reality then you start feeling on your finger tips what's wrong with you. what's wrong with others. what's wrong with the society, what's wrong with the collective, what's wrong with the anything without the collective. that is the point. So these two movements of left and right side can be hrought in a proper check only by understanding that we have to he in the centre. But centre for what. Centre for your ascent, for your transformation. You have to be transformed out of this rigidity and this mental projection. Because mental projection is linear. It moves in one line and recoils back and gives you trouhle. individual. You have no absolute knowledge to know what's wrong with you. How can you correct? Just by, one person has done something so I must do that. Another person has done something like your science. It produced an Atom homb and you didn't know what to do. so I must overpower that. This is not the Dampord way you are going to solve problems. But you are going to add violence to violence. Tomorrow if you are going to produce all sorts of computers. and the computers will start controlling you. you will not untruth to untruth and unreal to unreal. know what to do! Machinery you have For that you must all get your realisation. produced. they are creating prohlems, the This is a very important thing but as a reason is. you have to be in the centre result of realisation, one thing I feel. people will and they can really vow for for your ascent. and onee you come to is that they have all gained. the centre you develop that halance which is required hetween the individual and the collective. hetween the machinery and your society. hetween morality and religion. That halance has to be brought ficed? Of course these people are gone in. And once that halance comes within now, we see some other people at the yourself, it's not without it is not lecturing, it's not just saying. "Oh. I am sacrificed. In Sahaja Yoga you don't very much batanced. Many people certify have to sacrifice any thing, you don't themselves. I am very balanced. I am Like I knew when the time.of independ- ence was there how much people sacri- helm of affairs, hut that time people just have to give up anything. You just get, perfectly all right. I don't helieve in that. good health, you get good bank bal- Who are you to helieve or not to hclieve? ance because Lakshmi Tatva' im- Have you seen the reality! What reality proves, you get complete satisfaction is? You have tw feel the reality first of in your life. You become peaceful. You

 Sep Oct 1999 39 Volume XI issue 10 The Divine Cool Breeze here. I am very happy to see them. All these people are also working relentlessly in all those areas from where they come. become witness of everything. You be- come aesthetically rich. You become a complete integrated personality and such dynamism within you comes in There are many centres, even in Bom- that you are not afraid of anyone. But hay, all over the world we have eentres. And I remember all Sahaja Yogis who if this was the only thing you might are working day and night. In Australia in Sydney we have twelve centres, twelve ashrams where they are working. They live in the ashrams in a collective way. say "Mother how can individual work." You also get collective con- sciousness by whiich you feel the col- lective. Not only that but yoHi get the power to correct the collective e.g. the Sahaja Yogis haNe, they can create peace. They can hring in all kinds of auspicious- ness. It has worked. it is working out all over the world. But the trouble is people have no time to see the reality. they are so. say. self satisfied, with whatever they have. Now, in Sahaja Yoga we do not say don't do this. I never say you don't do this. because half of the people will run iway hut once you get your realisation Also there are individuals. We don't say wear this dress or do this nonsense, noth- ing of the kind. More sensible. wise. dig- nified. people have hecome very com- passionate, affectionate, and kindly peo- ple they become. Not only that but they are really the race of tomorrow which is deseribed in Nadi (iranth. They are the ones who are the chosen ones and they are the ones who are going to decide the destiny of this world. This is also writ- in your heart and when you see you are ten in Nadi Granth. But one has to un- catching a big snake in your hand, you just drop it by yourself. I don't have to tell you. What I say you have to hecome derstand that unless and until human be- ings accept Sahaja Yoga in a large way. it is not going to work out. Sahaja Yoga is not meant for one individual, it is in a your own master. you have to become mass operation. In the villages 1 have seen 8000-10,000 people get realisation because they are very simple people. Not they are extremely religious your own guru. It's your own power. which is tw be awakened. which you get. this is your.own "sampatti", is your own property which you have to have. I have nothing to do. I am just a catalyst. only that hut in the real sense of the word. Now here in the city also as you know, there are Lam very thankful to all the people from many centres we have got. Actually, the all the centres they have come here all programme was decided so suddenly that we could not inform all the people, they the way. just to greet me on my birthday. and to say that they are very happy to be

 Sep Oct 40 Volume XI Isue 9 & 10 1999 Sep The Divine Coal Breeze So this is the achievement of Sahaja Yoga couldn't know that the programme is that you arrange everything so sponta- neously and so beautifully. Thank you very much that you all have come here here. So many are out of station. But doesn't matter. Whatever has happened in the short time has heen wonderfully done. I must congratulate the people, who have organised it. the organisers who bave done all this in such a short time. It to wish me on my birthday. In my life- time I would like to see this whole world changed and transformed into a beauti- is spontaneous, it is not possible to do this in such a short time. The whole pro- ful world. gramme was suddenly decided, that we have this programme, here. May God Bless You All.



----------------------

1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI Issue :9& 10
September- October, 1999
"t you could somehow or other see your ego working, thim you can get rid of
if-and that s the Thing one has to do, Hol to hight Ihe ego: I naver say ight
the ego, but surender it
Her Holinss ate i timals Devi
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Editorial
1
Shri Matají Talks on Meditation (1983–84)
Sahasrara Day Puja (9-5-1999 Cabella)
8.
Shri Fatima Bi Puja (1998)
17
32
Bombay Public Programme (1988)
Edited by: Yogi Mahajan
: V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
Published by
New Delhi-110 067
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 : 9 & 10
1999
Sep Oct
Volume: XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
Editorial
answer them. It is the nature of right side
movement to shoot questions. They may
be out of context or of no pertinence but
when the ego identifies with the questions
then they attain absolute importance, a
prestige issue. It is my question'.
Does every question has to be answered?
The heated intellect bubbles with
questions: Initially these questions may
arise from curiosity. However when the
intellect starts steaming as in the case of
right sided people then these questions
become a medium for fanning the ego.
After one public program, the speaker
invited questions in context of his speech.
For instance we often hear a remark, "See,
he could not answer my question
A However, the questioning prone audience
Inversely, I am smarter because I know asked every other question except those
related to his speech. Infact, they went
"
the answer but he does not.
so far as to allege him, of saying things,
which he never said. This is not surprising
*I asked him, What is God? But he could
not even answer
because imagination is the sister of the
intellect, they take flight together. The
How can anyone define God. It is possible
to define a person, place or a thing but
how to define the infinite. Any definition
would limit it. The question is too absurd
more the intellect bounces the wilder the
imagination runs and excites the right
side. An intellect that dances on illusions
can never be quenched. The thirst of a
horse can be quenched but how to quench
for an answer. Also every question may
not have an answer.
the thirst in the eyes of a drunkard The
intellect is hollow within and like an
The ego also thinks itself to be very smart
when it asks impossible questions. It
could be a trick to thwart an adversary
empty vessel it makes the most noise
asking the most questions.
or simply a show off exercise. But as a
matter of fact no one is under any At another public program. one
compulsion to answer questions. The gentleman went into such a question
freedom of speech certainly gives a birth shooting spree that before even one
right to ask questions but it does not question could be answered he would
impose any compulsion on any one to
shoot the next question. Infact he was
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue 9 & 10
Oct
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
2.
Sep Oct
there is no questioning bug. The inner
silence takes us deep into the realms of
the Spirit beyond questions and doubts.
only anxious to ask questions but not at
all interested to know their answers. He
was like a madman who went on firing at
the target without even taking an aim.
Such right sided people are so obsessed
with themselves that either they go on
What is there to ask when one is lost in
inner joy?
The Spirit itself informs us of everything
talking about themselves or they go on
we need to know. We truly become our
questioning, 'Who telephoned, what did
what was his shoe size etc. etc.'
own guru. We have to know that we are
he
say,
under the protection of our Divine
Mother, She takes care of everything, so
why should we disturb our attention by
unnecessary questions. Let us also
remember that if there are any queries still
lurking for our ascent, our Divine Mother
will inform us through Her many
miraculous plays and wondrous talks. But
we can only absorb them if we read them
from the Sahasrara with rapt attention.
One right sided person went into such a
frenzy of asking questions that he kept
repeating his questions like a vintage
gramophone needle that was stuck. The
speaker was answering his questions but
his attention was so glued to his questions
that he was not able to register what the
speaker said. Similarly, linear movement
in the left side leads people to repeat their
Then we will spontaneously find all the
past like a tape recorder. They become
such bores as all their friends know their
answers that are conducive to our ascent.
So let us behold Her miraculous talks.
stories by heart.
After self realisation one comes into
bow
you, O Devi
to
balance and gets off the hook of the Mahasaraswati, in deep gratitude for
intellect. In thoughtless awareness, one
the treasure of knowledge, You have
enjoys an inner state of silence where
blessed us with."
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Sep Oct
Oct
1999
Volume XI Issue 9& 10
The Divine Cool Broeze
Shri Mataji's talk on Meditation (1983-84,
are coming or"I have to take tea", "What
shall I do?", "Now what have I to do?",
"Who's this and Who's that", all this will
In the morning you get up, have your
bath, sit dowTI, take some tea, don't talk.
Don't talk in the morning . sit down .
meditate. because at that time the Divine
be there.
rays come in, the sun comes afterwards.
So first you become thoughtlessly aware,
That's how the birds get up. That's how
the flowers get up. They're all awakened then the growth of spirituality starts, after
by that, and if you are sensitive you will
feel that by getting up in the morning vou should know that. On rational plane you
will look at least ten years younger.
thoughtless awareness, not before. One
cannot grow in Sahaja Yoga So, first
thing is to establish your thoughtless
awareness: still you might feel little chakra
Really, it's such a good thing to get up in
the morning and then, automatically you
sleep early. This is for getting up. For blockages here and there, forget it. Just
sleeping I need not tell because that you'll
manage yourself Then, in the morning
time you should just meditate.
forget it.
Now, start your surrendering. Now if
a chakra is catching, you should say:
"Mother, I surrender this to you".
Instead of doing any of these things you
In meditation try to stop your
thoughts. Watch my photograph with
open eyes and see that you stop your
thoughts. You should stop your
can just say that. But, that surrendering
should not be rationalised. If you're still
rationalising and worrying-why should I
thoughts, then you go into meditation.
The simple thing to stop your thoughts
is the Lord's Prayer, because that's the
say this?", it will never work out. If
there's pure love and purity in your
heart that's the best thing: that to do
Agnya state. So in the morning you
remember the Lord's Prayer or
so is to surrender. Leave all the worries
to your Mother. Everything to your
Ganesha's mantra. It's just the same.
Mother.
Or you can even say, "I forgive". It
works out. Then you are in thoughtless
awareness. Now you meditate. Before
that there's no meditation. When thoughts
But surrendering is one point that is very
difficult in ego-oriented societies. Even
talking about that, I feel a little bit
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10
Sep Oct
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
worried. But if there's any thoughts
hurdle. First the thought... now for the
coming in to you or any chakra catching,
just surrender.
thought you have to say the mantra of
Nirvichara:
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Nirvichara
And you'll see that the chakras are cleared
up. In the morning time you do not go
on, putting this way, that way, nothing,
don't move your hands too much
Sakshat
Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Namo Namah
in the morning, You'll find most of
Now come to the hurdle of our ego. You
your chakras will clear out in
see the thought has stopped now, no
doubt, but there is still a pressure on the
meditation.
Try to put love in your heart. Just try in
your heart, and there, try to put your
Guru, in the core of it. After establishing
head. So if it is ego you have to say:
"Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Mahat
Ahamkara Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti
in the heart, we must bow to that with
Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah"
full devotion and dedication. Now
whatever you do with your mind, after
realisation it is not imagination because
now your mind, your imagination, is itself you find that ego is still there, then you
enlightened.
Mahat means the great, Ahamkara means
the ego. You say it thrice. Now, even now,
have to put left hand towards the
So project yourself in such a way that photograph, push the left side higher and
you humble down at the feet of your the right side lower so that the ego and
Guru, your Mother. And now ask for the super-ego get the balance. Do it seven
the necessary temperament needed for times. Try to see how you are feeling
meditation. Meditation is when you are
inside.
One with the Divine.
So once you have given yourself a
balance, then, the best thing is to pay
Specific Problems On Meditation:
attention to your emotions, to Manas
Shakti. Watch them. You can enlighten
your emotions by thinking of your
Mother. Right? Just enlighten them. This
solves all the problems. Whatever are the
problems in the Mana. So, once you are
Now if there are thoughts coming in, first
you have to say the first mantra, of course,
and then watch inside. You must say the
mantra of Ganesha, will help some
people, and then you should watch inside
connected to those emotions and
and see for yourself which is the biggest
you start
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Sep - Oct
9 & 1o
1999
Volume XI ssue
The Divine Cool Breeze
you'll find that for a while you will not
looking at them in your meditation, you
breath. Good See, you're settled now.
will see these emotions are rising within
you, and if you try to put these emotions
on your Mother, (as they say at the Lotus
feet of your Mother) - then, those
The Laya takes place between your Prana
and your Mana.
Both the Shaktis become on.
emotions, will start dissolving and they'll
become sort of, expanded. Expanse, you
see You will extend them in such a way
Now at the Sahasrara you should say the
mantra-thrice:
that you will feel you are in control of
them and by controlling those emotions
"Om Twameva Sakshat, Shri Kalki
Sakshat, Shri Sahasrara Swamini,
your emotions are expanded, enlightened
and powerful.
Moksha Pradayini Mataji, Shri Nirmala
Devi Namo Namah
Now what you do is to watch your
breathing. See now, try to reduce your
breathing; reduce it, in the sense that you
Some people start feeling the awareness
of that unbounding love as soon as they
get their realisation.
have breathed out, wait for a while, then
But, in some people they have some more
breath in for a long time. Then you breath
go-trip left to be finished. So, they come
to me. I find they are flying in the air like
out. So during one minute your breathing
will be less than normal, Alright? Try that,
bubbles and as if blown by the nourishing
keep the attention on the emotions you
see? So that the connection is established.
Mother, blown out like the bubbles
the surface of the sea. And there are many
Better? See the Kundalini rises. Now
when you are breathing, you find that who are suffering from super-ego. They
there is a space in-between which you just get mixed up with the sand and become
leave vacant Breath in, keep it there very heavy and all the time weeping and
Now breath out and keep breathing out. the thing clicks they become one with the
Now breath in. Now start breathing in
crying about personal things. But, once
spirit of the ocean.
such a way that you really reduce your
breathing-but no exertion about it. Your
Then they feel that deep, joyous force of
attention should be on your heart or it the sea which nourishes them, guides
could be on your emotion Its better to
keep the breath inside for a while. Hold
them, and elevates them every moment.
Like deep down in the sea they go and
it. Bring it out. Hold out. Then keep it there they find the beautiful pearls of
outside for a while. Then again. Then eternal experiences. And when they find
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Oct
1999
Volume : XI lIssue : 9 & 10
Sep Oct
The Divine Cool Breeze
these pearls they bring to me as poems,
credit to you-that you have achieved this
as dances, as smiles, as laughter, as enlightenment to see yourself, your true
enjoyment.
Self which is so joy giving.
These are all within you, and they lie there Actually, I should compose poem in
away from your consciousness. Though praise of you. And I do my best to show
your consciousness is enlightened by self- by my own methods how the Divine is
realisation, it is not yet enlightened by joy. pleased. And you see that everywhere,
That is, something happens to all of you every time, every moment. So, tonight
gradually, as I told you, and should we all should say one thing in our
happen to all of you as soon as possible. heart-that this bountiful nature of
Motherhood should be brought into
What is there to surrender-the force
our consciousness, which I have told
that itself is flowing towards you and
you is called Ritambhara Pragnya.
Means your consciousness gets
nourishing.
Do we say the lotus has surrendered itself enlightened to that nature of this Mother
to its fragrance? Do we say the sun has Earth-which fills it up with different
surrendered itself to its coolness? It would seasons - that is Pragnya.
be absurd to say like that. The word That happens to everyone I said, but it
"surrender" sometimes can mean only, at happens more to people who try to be
the most, in the context of Sahaja Yoga, in the centre and don't go on ego-trips.
that we surrendered our egos, our
Now it is high time to jump from that little
limitations, our shallowness-what we
area to the vast area which has no bounds.
have achieved, as our own. We have
surrendered all that is useless for And once that happens you will be
surprised all these petty little problems
will drop out in the ocean of greatness.
something that is great and eternal. This
weight of the ignorance has to drop out.
I don't think I do anything, because l'm
Don't indulge into them, and leave them
in the hands of the tree. So that all your
really doing nothing. Sometimes I think
this is not my due, to be praised like this
because whatever is my nature that is
small petty problems will be looked after
by that nourishing force.
Because you belong to a tree of great
what I am, and I haven't achieved
wisdom, tree of great sustenance and
anything-I just exist with my nature,
because I can't do anything else.
While you have achieved. Its a great
religion, and tree of great mastery that
you can never know how great it is.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Oct
Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10
7.
Sep
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
You belong to a tree that has complete the ground. Try to become identified
security for you, and you belong to a very
great tree which gives you complete Like the meaning of the word, is
witnessing of the drama, and which gives identified with the word, like the
you understanding that the whole is a part moonlight is identified with the moon,
and parcel of you, and you are part and sunlight is identified with the sun.
with that power that is what you are.
parcel of the whole.
Let that identification be that oneness,
that integration, so that you become the
light of God's love, that people know God
through your depths and your fruits. It's
the most fulfilling job, highest paid in
every way, the most satisfying, energy-
giving and dynamic.
So, you belong to the great ocean of love
and generosity. So this great tree of life
has everything integrated within itself.
This is the tree of life that has been
described in the Bible, the tree of fire, they
call it. Now you have become One with
it. You are blessed with it. You are loved
by it. You are gently guided by it. It's so You don't have to give up anything-
gentle that you do not even feel the just be organised in the light of your
guidance like a leaf, when it falls on
Spirit yourself.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Sep Oct
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume XI Issue 9 & 10
SAHASRARA DAY PUJA
9-5-99, Cabella
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
We have gathered here to do the and until this Sahasrara, this brain is
Sahasrara Puja Sahasrara, the word opened out and the Kundalini becomes
one with the Parama Chaitanya. Before
one thousand, and there are one thousand that you are in complete ignorance about
what is good and what is bad, Whatever
you think, with this brain, is good, you
do it. But whatever is really good, you
Sahasrara" in Sanskrit language means
petals in our brain which get enlightened
Of course the doctors are quarrelling on
that point but forget about that
do not know because you don't know the
Now these petals are kept ready for our
enlightenment and these are really the
reality.
nerves, one thousand nerves, which are Now we have to understand the
have.
consciousness that
there for the enlightenment of the brain.
So, when the Kundalini rises. She Consciousness of being alive,
we
enlightens those one thousand nerves consciousness of so many things we have
which become like the shape of these and the so called knowledge we have
flames, like a petal. That is why it is called about everything. All that consciousness
is stored near the liver for your
as Sahasrara, the centre of Sahasrara
information, by this diaphragm.
In the human beings, it is a very important
centre because this is the only centre by
But then this consciousness starts rising
which we think and we try to stop
higher and higher. Then you become
aware. In the evolutionary process you
whatever we do not like. This is the centre
which reacts, reacts in such a manner that
without any discretion you start saying.
No to this, No to that. On small things become aware. How? Not by thinking
also. like somebody might say, I do not not by understanding or seeing but you
like this carpet, I don't like this house, 1 become aware because your brain has
don't like that. This language itself shows now started working in a manner that is
become aware, aware of things. Without
going through your brain, you just
that who are you? First find out,
very very sensitive. So, you just become
aware of some sort of a fear, or may be
But you cannot become yourself unless
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 1999
Sep Oct
Volume XI issue 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
see everybody, everybody is sitting You
know how far you are, where you are
But it goes even further. The growth of sitting, If you want to go out, you know
consciousness which becomes aware, how to walk out but when in the darkness
some sort of a goodness or anything.
zoes further where you start liking a
person or disliking a person but still it is
nothing definite or sure. It is like liking a
person because he has a particular type
of a face, may be eyes or may be anything
you are there, you just do not understand
and you go on behaving in a manner
which eannot be explained otherwise.
except that because you are a human
being.
or may be because you have known
somebody who has been very nice. So, Animals do not do that Animals have
you start transferring that image on to limitations. The animals, if they find
others With this transferred image you something wrong, something absolutely
ean hate or love someone. Then you start
saying. I hate this, I hate that, which has run away. But they do not carry a kind of
harmful for them, then they will attack or
actually no substantial meaning You hate
it because perhaps, may be, such and such the impression of fear, could be of some
person looks like somebody. Now you go sort of a harm done to them.
further with it and then you see that such
a hatred or anything but they can carry
But human beings are not like that.
Human beings do not have any particular
reason, as such, to hate some one but why
it works out because they are involved in
and such person, I am not talking about
things hut about persons, such and such
person has done this harm to me. So, you
start feeling that you should hate that
their ego. Egoistical person feels that he
has a right to do what he wants to do. He
person. Now you start hating that person.
With that hatred you develop new
can kill anybody, he can harm anyone, he
can do whatever he likes but a person who
faculties. how to harm that person? Then
you start thinking how to destroy that
person, how to make his life miserable?
is not doing that is the other way round,
he is frightened, he is afraid of some one.
Then you may meet that person, you may
shout at that person, you may try to kill
that person. You can do anything.
Now the avwareness moves on. This is a
subtler awareness, because if you are
afraid of somebody, you would not like
to go ta his house, you will avoid him in
the street, all things you can do. So,
this kind of knowledge about other human
So, now the awareness is going towards
several directions which is darkness,
which is not light because in the light you
would not do such things. In the light you
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
1999
: 9 & 10
Sep - Oct
Volume: XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
awareness is enlightened and when She
pierces through Sahasrara, She joins you
to this All Pervading Power which is
knowledge, which is love, which is truth.
So, after that you immediately know,
some people do not know immediately,
but some people know, that what we
have been thinking so far or separating
ourselves from others by thinking they
mind.
beings also accumulates in your
Then this thing starts working on a
collective level because you think this
group is very bad, that group is bad, they
are excellent, like that it works. In your
own mind you think that somebody has a
group and the other group is better, that
group is better, and collectively then you
start working out
temperament, your awareness. Like once
people decide, say for example, that black
people are to be finished. So, all the white
people can join together or like at the time
of Hitler, he decided that all other human
being but Germans were useless. So, he
gathered people around his thought and
ideas and this collective awareness just
are not alright, they are wrong, this
disappears. This disappears completely
and then you realise that your awareness
itself is dominated by so many other
circumstances. For example, where you
were born, what your parents taught you,
what experiences you have had and then
you realise that it was all wrong because
its not reality. Whatever feelings you
have, whatever ideas you have about
your whole
comes to, I do not know how, but it enters
into the minds of men. They never
another person or about other nations,
all of them are not correct because now
challenge, they never ask whether it is
your Sahasrara is awakened, that it is
connected now to the All Pervading
Power. So, this starts flowing into you.
correct or not. So, this grows more and
more and more and then it becomes like
a country wise, you can say, an awareness
of this kind of a feeling. But whether it is
This, I should say, enlightened
awareness, it starts flowing down into
correct or not, is not understood, is not
your being, in your brain and then on
known.
your nerves, you can feel that
awareness. Now once you want to
know about something whether it is
right or wrong, absolute right or
wrong, it is not a question of relative,
So, what is important is that you should
know reality. You should know exactly
what is right and what is wrong. For that,
as I told you, there is this great power of
Kundalini within you. She is the one, She
passes through all these (chakras)
Centres, enlightens them first. So, your
you just have to put your hands
towards that person or towards that
thing or whatever it is, immediately
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 1999
11
Sep - Oct
Volume: XT issue 9.& 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
Once you know the reality, most of the
problems can be finished because this
brain itself is creating problems. First
of all it commits all kinds of atrocities,
violence, everything Then it also justifies
itself and then it does even worse. All this
they used to call it as sin.
on these vibrations you will know.
So, what are these vibrations? This
Parama Chaitanya, we call it Brahma
Chaitanya, it starts flowing through your
fingér tips. Now you start feeling what
Chakras they are catching, whether they
are right or wrong and your discretion
improves immensely. The brain which was But now is Sahaja Yoga, that is finished.
putting you in delusions and wrong type Whatever your brain was contaminated
of life, immediately corrects this. For with, it is now cleansed, It has got the
example, I am walking in a place with my knowledge and through the knowledge
eyes closed and there is a big ditch, I you can make out what is right and what
cannot see it. I am just walking and
suddenly I open my eyes and see the ditch. But then you must have full understanding
Immediately I know it is wrong that whatever right is right and whatever
Immediately I give up and come out. In is wrong and you should not do
IS wrong. Upto this point it is alright.
wrong
the same way it happens to you.
anything that is wrong. Always do the
When your Sahasrara is enlightened, right. You have to decide on that point.
whatever knowledge, you had gathered. Now we have to do the right only, never
whatever you think was right, whatever the wrong. This when it comes to your
was your dream and your aims of life, all mind then what starts is your
these aspirations melt away and then you determination, what we call a devotion.
take to reality and you start seeing the dedication, surrendering. With that you
reality of everything. Unless and until you
give up all your false ideas and your false
pride, all other things that you have been
doing so far and immediately you become
see that reality you will be going with
other crowd These people are saying so.
a different person, a beautiful person.
so let us do that They are saying so, so
let us do that but you cannot see whether
it is correct or not, is good for you or not
or whether it is going to help you. This
kind of thing is so common in the whole
world, and that is why there is so much
Now the third thing that happens to you,
which never happened to you before, that
you feel that unless and until I give the
same state to other people, it would not
be alright, it would not be alright for me
to talk to them. So you start talking to
problem because they do not know the
your brothers, to your sisters and then
reality
TELLLE
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Oct
12
Sep Oct
Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 1o
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
you complete sense and complete
understanding as to how you should
you start talking to other people and then
you start talking to whole nation. You talk
about Sahaja Yoga that I have gained so
move, how you should live and what you
should do. This is what is self realisation,
much, I have got these things, so now
they say.
why don't you take it?
But to expect that by talking, by
But I would say that self realisation is
discussions, by arguments, by much further than that. Even if your brain
is enriched by the knowledge, the real
knowledge, still the other things which
sermonising., they will never take it,
because their brain, as I told you, is just
the same, still full of ignorance. So, what
you should have and the most important
we have to do is to raise their Kundalini.
thing is that you have to be completely
Once you raise their Kundalini and their
brain opens, then they are on the same
line as yourself. They do not have to
worry about what is good and what is
bad. They know themselves. Now that is
aware. I again say the word aware of
where you stand in this big plan of World's
global transformation, what is your
position, where do you stand, what is the
work for you to be done?
what is very important.
Now you have got this compulsion on you
that I have to do something. When this
To correct this world it is very important
compulsion starts working on you which
is not dreadful, which is not annoying but
that you all should know what is right and
what is wrong, and you have a vehicle of
Parama Chaitanya to know what is wrong
very peaceful and joyous which says that
and what is right. Now this trend starts
I have to see that others also know
moving and, as you see, there are so many
themselves, so to know themselves is first
people today with their opened Sahasrara.
of all you must know your own Chakras.
Just many people get their realisation, I
opening Sahasrara was the most
So,
important part of the evolutionary know, very quickly but they do not settle
process. All the evolutionary process
brought human beings to what level?
They had wars, they had all kinds of silly problems on your Chakras. They will
programmes by which we really ruined know that they have problems but they
down with their Chakras. They have to
see to their Chakras, why you have
still go on without paying attention or
so many countries, so many people. Now
without looking at it. To them, it is kind
of a 'by the way', you can say that these
are the problems with me, does not
when you are one with that all pervading
power, it is a pure power, it is a Nirmal
Power, absolutely pure power that gives
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 19
Sep - Oct
1999
9 & 10
Volume XI issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
how many people are getting
transformed, but after transformation you
must settle down First of all you should
matter. But what does it matter as long
as I am working out Sahaja Yoga? It is
not only for others but for yourself first
see if you are a peaceful person. Is there
peace in your heart? If you have no
It is important that you should get your
Chakras corrected. That is the most
important thing for you and then you will Sahaja Yogi. If you get excited and if
have self knowledge in the sense you you start shouting at people and all
know what is the defect, where is the that, it means you are not a Sahaja
peace in your heart then you are not a
defect, what wrong am I doing. what
should I do? And then when you correct
Yogi. You have to have a very very
peaceful temperament. That is very
those Centres, then your awareness. I
important.
would say, will be really fiully enlightened
about all the work. That is a tremendous
thing It is very tremendous because if you
Now with that peace what should be their
pure compassion? What you are doing is
not for your benefit as such but because
you are compelled by this force to do
good for others, to transform them This
have to transform this mad world into
something very sane and if you have to
give them all self realisation.
is the greatest good you can do to others
that their brains are put right, they get rid
Imagine the task how great it is. How
many people we need to do it? But if your
will power is strong about it and you see
you feel compelled to do it But normally
you see, you are not compelled because
of their diseases, they get rid of their
problems. It is all there, but the first and
the most important thing that happens that
they get the power to transform others
we have to run our houses. we have to
When you have that power to transform
others, you should not waste it. You
should not use it for yourself That means
earn money, wve have to do this, we have
to do that. That you can do. But main
object of your life is to transform
people and to work it out, this
transformation for the global peace.
the growth is not complete You must talk
about it. You must tell about it and you
must work it out. Wherever it is possible
you have to work it out. This is the way
I do not know, it has been predicted or
not that complete transformation will
take place but they have talked about who can get complete transformation.
you can spread people on a global level
transformation I do not know that
part
All our problems, whether in India or
and I just do not bother my head as to
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10
14
1999
Sep Oct
The Divine Cool Breeze
anywhere, are because of human beings.
Because they have not been enlightened. going like that. What is there to feel upset
See, if you are enlightened you will about it? So many things, small, big,
have no problem of any quarrelling or happen in your life for which you get
any fighting and all that. If you are upset; but now with this blessing of
enlightened, then you will think about Sahasrara, you will be amazed, there is
others as if they are your own, bother your help from Parama Chaitanya, and that
have to go that way. That is why I am
heads about them. You will not think
means a tremendous help, because it acts
about yourself any more. If you are globally, it acts individually, it acts on
enlightened then no question of any communities, it acts on nations, because
violence in your head. Now in the name
there is Divine, what you call Divine.
There is a Divine play going on and this
Divine play. plays tremendous beautiful
things by which people start correcting
themselves. So, you should never be
of religion, in the name of every thing,
there is so much of violence. This violence
can be easily corrected if they all become
Sahaja Yogis. Think if all people become
Sahaja Yogis, how will they quarrel, for
what? So, this religion is there, but above
all these religions, is the religion of Sahaja
nervous, you should never be upset
because you have the Divine Power
within
and it will correct. It can
you
Yoga, where you become one, and there
all these quarrels of religions will
disappear.
1
correct anyone. I mean, recently we have
a case of one boy who was hit by a truck
and they said his lungs were smashed.
Now with the lungs smashed, no body
This is not the only problem we have as
human beings. We have some other
has heard that they become normal. Not
problems also, very serious;ie. we have only he became normal but he started
a hankering. They are very greedy. You breathing normally and all this is done
cannot adjust yourself to any other only by Parama Chaitanya. You do not
circumstances. You want to live in have to do anything. Any problem comes
complete comfort and this and that. But before you, before it really touches you,
after this you can sleep anywhere, you it is solved by the Parama Chaitanya.
can eat anywhere. you need not eat. You But you must have full faith in yourself
become a person who is above all these and in Parama Chaitanya, and believe
needs, all these demands, absolutely. Then that you are a realised soul.
do not worry. This worry for what?
you
Supposing I get lost somewhere and the
car is going in a wrong way. Alright, I
No body can harm you. If they try to
harm you for the time being, alright,
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Sep Oct
15
The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume XI Issue: 9 & 10
1999
you may suffer, but you do not also feel
the sufferings and you get out of it.
Such a security. such a proper
to have any conscious effort.
Accept life as it is. As it is whatever
life is there, accept it. Do not retaliate,
guidance is there. Also you are saved
from all kinds of attacks and all kinds
do not get angry, do not get upset. Just
accept and you will enjoy the same life
of mistakes that you commit. It is all
Which was irritating you. You will see
the enjoying part of that and it would
such a big, I will say, a
knowledge. It knows. It knows what
computer of
be so beautiful. The way you will see
you are doing, what you should not do;
that you will get over all your
where vou are going and what you should
do, what should not be your way. It
knows everything, knows everything
problems, you will get over all your
enemies, and a kind of very fresh
beautiful existence you will have.
about you.
So, now as you are all Sahaja Yogis, it is
So, when you have to become aware of
it. now this is the state where, I would very great position. With that if you
sav, that vouu have to be aware that you will be amazed to see that you are
humble down, humble down, then you
are realised souls. you are different. very
ahsolutely in contact with this Parama
unique You are realised souls, you are
Chaitanya. Not only that, but you have
not ordinary people and that you are
protected by this Parama Chaitanya.
become Parama Chaitanya. With this
Parama Chaitanyä you can do anything. I
Nothing can change, nothing can
trouble you, nothing can overpower.
need not tell you what you can do because
some of you may not believe; but that is
my own experience that if you are the
Because you are not aware also of this
Parama Chaitanya that is why you Parama Chaitanya then it keeps your
little bit get worried, and people write dignity, it keeps your position, it keeps
to me. Mother, something is wrong your word and looks after you and
with my daughter, something is worng.
Everything can be corrected by
Parama Chaitanya if you know how
to leave it to that. If you understand how
you are one with that Parama Chaitanya,
you are a part and parcel of Parama
Chaitanya and that Parama Chaitanya is
looking after you You don't have to do
whatever you just said or desire, you just
get it
Your desires also change Your desires
are not for stupid things but for something
that is very noble Like you want to
transform people. You want to do Sahaja
Yoga work. All these desires are fulfilled
fully when you want to do it, you like it
very conscuus etfort There is no need
a
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Sep - Oct
16
Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Sep
and you think of it. You see something is not right.
and that is done by that. Immediately Like today, we had a discussion on this
Parama Chaitanya will take over and you point about the economic position and the
will have no problems, no problems
because the way we react to all these economics of modern times. I said it is
difficulties and to so called odds in life all wrong, because it is self-destructive,
becomes a play, just a play. You are
it destroys the nations. If not your nation,
amazed, you looked at it, and finished, other nations. Then it also destroys your
family life. It destroys your value system.
It completely destroys you. So what sort
looked at that and finished. That is how
it is the light which goes into the darkness
and finishes the darkness. The darkness of economics is this? It is just a show,
just like a, you can say, a balloon which
can burst any moment. I have seen people
is finished and our problems are finished
also.
who are very rich. They became bankrupt,
So, this is what our awareness has to and, many bankrupt became rich. This
become. Awareness has to become kind of a turmoil in which they are
Parama Chaitanya. Then you get all the jumping from one shore to another shore,
ideas, everything that are Divine. But not but you are not. You watch that drama.
only that but also the help of the Divine You see all that drama and with your
or the solutions of the Divine. Everything peace, you can see everything very calmly.
It is not difficult for you to create more
settles down and you are amazed
people of this type. It is not difficult to
transform this World. The time has come.
watching all this that you are the centre
of doing all these things. You are not
aware that you are doing and you are Just try, try. Like when the proper time
doing. That ego part is missing. But you comes, blossom time comes, so many
see-it is all happening around you and flowers become fruits. So, like that you
then you are amazed how it is happening. all have become.
The whole life style changes, the whole
understanding changes and you
Now it is for you to create seeds to spread
become a great sources of happiness. Sahaja Yoga. You are at that level of
joy and knowledge to others. You do
not have to study anything, you don't
awareness now where Parama Chaitanya
is with you, absolutely part and parcel of
you, absolutely with you to give you all
have to know much but you will know
necessary help, all necessary prestige and
also the personality.
about everything, what is right and what
Is wrong and then only you can tell the
things with complete authority that this
is
May God Bless You All.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Sep Oct
The Divine Cool Breeze
17
Volume XI Issue 9 & 10
9&10
1999
Shri Fatima Bi Puja, 1998
Today we have gathered to do the Puja so much towards the ascent of the person.
of Fatima Bi, who was the symbol of Even Mohammed Saheb has described his
Gruha Laxmi So we are going to have
son in law in many ways and he is the
the Puja of Gruha Laxmi principle within only one, the another incarnation of
us. As the house wife has to finish every Brahmadeva who.came on this earth, Ali,
work, every thing in the house hold and
then she goes for a bath, in the same way
this morning I had to do lots of things incarnation was Sopandeva. You can go
and then I could come for your Puja, to Pune and see the temple of Sopandeva
because today the house wife's jobs are there.
many. So I had to finish them like a good So we have Ali and his wife Fatima who
came on this earth. He was the incarnation
of Brahmadeva and his another
house wife.
incarnated on the Principle of the Left
Now the Principle of Gruha Laxmi has Nabhi. She stayed in her house, in her
been evolved and developed by the house hold and she observed what you
divine, its not a human being's creation call a kind of a Parda or nakab as they
and as you know it resides in the left
Nabhi The Gruha Laxmi is the one that
call it, to cover her face. It is a symbol
that a woman who is a house wife has to
is represented in the life of Fatima who save her chastity by covering her face
was the daughter of Mohammed Saheb.
Now She is always born in a relationship they were born in a country which was
to a Guru which is of Virginity, of Purity. very-very violent and she would have
So She comes as sister or She comes as been definitely attacked in case she had
a daughter. Now the beauty of Fatima's not lived in that kind of fashion.
life is that after the death of Mohammed As you know, in the time of Christ,
Saheb, as usual, there were fanatic people though Mary was Mahalaxmi's
who thought they can take the religion incarnation, had to be very very potential
into their hands and can make it a very personality and Christ did not want
fanatie thing. The attention was not paid
because she was a beautiful woman and
anybody to know what she was. But
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 18
Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10
Sep - Oct
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
as Hindus were concerned, his saintliness,
though she was in the house she was
but the muslims did not accept it. There
Shakti, so she allowed her sons or actually
is another one who is called Haji Malang,
ordered them to fight those fanatics who
were trying to deny the authority of her
husband, and you know. Hasan and
Hussain, they were killed there. Its a very
beautiful thing how the Mahalaxmi Tatva
of Sita took a form of Vishnu Maya just
to establish the beautiful principle of a
house wife. She was very powerful, no
who is very near Bombay, who was a
realised soul. He too realised the
fanaticism of the Shiyas. 'Shiya' word
comes from Siya; in U.P. Sita is called as
Siya. Sitaji is called as 'Siya'. They also
did not realise that they are saints who
are not, so called, Muslims but they are
saints. So they could not get out of it. So
doubt, and she knew that her children will
we have another one called Haji Malang
be killed. But these people are never
who was worshipped by Hindus. Some
killed, they never die nor do they suffer.
drama they had to play to show Muslims also go there, no doubt. This
Haji Malang was quite worried about the
fanaticism of the Shiyas. So he appointed
some Hindus to worship him, just to
Its
people how stupid they are. As a result
of that another system started where they
respected saints, like in India Shiya people
respect Auliyas or we can call them the
people who are realized souls like things.
Nizamuddin Saheb. Then we have got
"Chisti". We have got, in Ajmer, Hajrat
Chisti. All. these great Saints were
counter balance. They did all kinds of
There are many saints like that. I went to
Bhopal. There is another big saint who
was buried. But all his disciples were just
respected by Shiyas. But still they could
not transcend the limits of religiosity, so
depending on the earnings of that place,
which was very bad. Even Hajrat
Nizamuddin's disciples do the same way
they also became extremely fanatic.
Firstly they would not see to another
religion where they had saints. They
would not respect the saints who
belonged to another religion and even
as the Hindus do. They all make an
earning, I mean it's a kind of commercial
business. So this saint died and was buried
there. There were many people depending
on it. When I went there, I just, by the
way, asked them, what is your religion?
So they said we are Muslims. I said what
when we had a great saint like Sai Nath
of Shirdi, who was a Muslim to begin
with, and it is said that Fatima herself
was the religion of that saint who died?
They said saints have no religions. So I
brought him as a child in her lap and gave
him to some lady. We didn't deny, as far
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Volume XI issue: 9& 10
Sep Oct
19
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
said then why do you want to follow whole thing is, that one part which hates
religion. Why don't you follow his thinks the other part is the worst of all
religion. They had no religion. Even the and the another part thinks that the first
Sanyasis have no religions. They are
"Dharmatita". They go beyond the law or logic they decide, that is their own
religion. Butasit has happened with every
incarnation, it has happened even with the Why this principle of the Gruha Laxmi
Shiya people, with the Sunnis, with the was specially created? To overcome that
Hindus, with the Muslims and every one, hatred, to subdue that icy stuff called
that they made a fanatic group. Now hatred, to remove hatred from the minds
fanaticism itself is ahsolutely against of the people, this Gruha Laxmi principle
religion, against your innate religion with- was created. In the family when you have
in your-self because it creates poison It's
a venomous thing. It makes you hate has to subdue the hatred between the
others. When you start hating others, children, between the husband and the
then it reacts in you as horrible poison children. But if she herself enjoys her
part is the worst of all. Under what rule,
lookout. So they club together like that.
a housewife, the Gruha Laxmi principle
which eats up all that is beautiful with in
hatred then how can she subdue it? She
you Hating any one is the worst thing is the source of that peace which subdues
that human beings can do, but they can hatred. Now in India we have joint
do it They can do whatever they like.
Animals do not hate any one. Can you uncles, aunties, this that But the house-
imagine? They do not know how to hate, wife's job is to smooth out all angularities
they bite some one because that is their of people which create friction. Now the
nature, they cut some one because that's man has to worship a house wife. It is
families, you too have relations like
their nature They never hate some oone,
They may not like some one but this Ramante Devta- wherever the house-
hatred, which is a poison, is a speciality wife is respected, there only the Gods
of human conception and human
absorption Only human beings can hate. must go to the housewives because we
and this horrible thing hatred was settled
said so, "Yatra Narya Pujyante. Tatra
reside. In our country. I must say, credit
are no good for economics, no good for
between even the Muslims.
politics, administration. Hopeless. Men
folk are useless, they do not know any
house hold work or anything, women
This Karbala was not created for hatred,
but for love, Everything that was done
have kept it to themselves. But our
for love was converted into hatred, in
society is first class, It is maintained by
every religion. Now the worst part of the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Sep - Oct
20
1999
Volume : XI issue 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
All right, but this woman, the housewife,
the women of the house. So the man has
to respect the housewife, that's very
important. If he does not respect his
housewife, then there is no possibility of
any Gruha Laxmi tatva being maintained.
It's like the preservation of that principle
has to know that she is not docile. She is
obedient to her own righteousness, to her
own virtues, to her own qualities. If the
husband is stupid, alright, he is stupid like
a child, finished. But the husband has to
know that he must respect, otherwise he
of a housewife, but some men, I mean
is a lost case, He is finished, he is good
for nothing. First thing is that he must
many of themn, think that it is their birth
right to ill-treat their wives, to torture
them, to say all kinds of things, to be
see that the woman in the household is
respected as a Gruha Laxmi. Then the
blessings flow. But in no way he should
angry, even if she is a good woman. But
if she is a nagger, if she is a bhoot, then
they are subdued completely, subdued by
her. If the wife is a bhoot then husband
insult her or be unkind to her and raise
his voice or say things to her. But the wife
has to be the one who is to be respected.
I have so many times said, your wife is
dominating, give her two slaps on the
always, sort of, tries to please her and be
extremely kind to her. He knows she is a
bhoot, after all, be careful. Don't know
what time the bhoot will come like a snake
face, of course. No doubt, she has not to
on you, and if she knows how to nag or
to argue, then also they are afraid. There
is no love. They have no love or respect
be dominating, she has to remove the
dominating forces of others. She is the
source of peace, she is the source of joy
for each other but they have an awe or
and she is the peace maker. If she is the
fear and they are afraid of such a woman.
one who creates problems, then you can
slap her nicely, bring her to her shape,
it's alright. So this Gruha Laxmi Tatva is
mutual, it doesn't depend only on the wife
or husband but both of them. So once if
Now some women think if they become
flirtish then the husbands are better
controlled. But there basic principle they
lose, the basic shakti that they have, they
lose and land up in difficulties.
you are making your wife suffer, your left
So the basic principle of a Gruha Laxmi Nabhi can never improve; or if you are a
is to respect her chastity, to respect her bad wife your left Nabhi cannot improve,
chastity outside, inside. That is the Now in the west the problem with women
steadiness of her. Of course most of the is this that they don't realise as to what is
men take advantage of it. If the wife is their power. An eighty year old woman
docile or obedient, they make it a point also would like to look like a bride. They
that they just rule the wife left and right.
do not feel their dignity and enjoy their
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Sep - Oct
1999
21
Volume XI Issue 9& 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
dignity with-in themself. They are the separately, nobody should come in the
house. Even a rat won't enter that house
queen of the house but they want to
behave like the cheepish, childish young Even to say, oh, these are my children,
frivolous girls. They do not feel the my husband, myself, is the negative of
dignity of their being, they talk too much, Sahaja Yoga It's the negative form of
they behave in a manner that does not understanding. These are absolutely
absurd things. they do not look like, of
any Sahaja Yogi or any Sahaja Yogini. All
this kind of selfishness, all this kind of
behove a housewife. Like they take out
their hands, talk like the fisherwomen do,
when they sell their fish to someone or
seclusion is against Sahaja Yoga. But a
when they have to fight or they shout
. I mean, I
thing of a house wife is, oh, now how
much should I prepare, for example, there
will bes0 persons coming So the husband
says but only 10 are coming. Why do you
want to have for 50 persons? But may be
they would like to eat more. But then why
do you have 50 plates. May be they might
bring there friends. So she thinks of her
sometimes They shout also.
heard they shout and some times they beat
their husband, that's the limit. They start
always comparing themselves with the
husband to begin with. Like I am such a
rich man's daughter. I am from such and
such family, my husband is from such a
low family, he has no money, nothing He
is not educated, so ill-treat him Treat him
generosity. She enjoys her generosity. She
enjoys her generosity. I have known many
like that. Though they are not even Sahaja
in a manner that shows no respect. Such
a woman will lose all her powers. Also in
her own ways she will feel guilty She will
YoginIs. They will say, will you come,
feel guilty, because first of all, no Sister in law, will you come for dinner.
has right to look down upon any one Oh, I am not coming, you cook too many
whatsoever in Sahaja Yoga specially.
Then, to look down upon your husbands, Not coming. No! No! I'll cook very few
is some thing unbelievable. He may not things but please come. Then she just start
be a Sahaja Yogi Alright He may not be thinking immediately. What vegetables
upto the point but by your belhaviour, by are available in the market? What should
your strength, by every thing you can save I get, what is the best I mean. I am not
him But why are you losing yourself by their Guru, I am not their mother. I am
dominating others. by strangling others, just a relation, but they want to express
by making your husband a very, sort of a, their love through the food, they are the
frog in the well telling him, oh. we both giver of food. They are the Annapurnas
should enjoy. Lets have our house and this is the one quality – the
body
по
things.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
Oct
1999
Sep Oct
Volume : XI issue : 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
generosity, if the woman doesn't have she
is not a Sahaja Yogini, by any chance.
Take it from me. Husband may be a little
miserly, doesn't matter. But the wife has
on the horse, I must also sit on the horse
and fall down. If he goes for sking I'll
also go for sking. If he develops his
muscles I'll also develop my muscles. It
I mean women
is coming to that point.
to be very generous and sometimes, she
start looking like nothing on earth. You
don't know what sort of women these are
with big-big muscles without any
mustaches. So this kind of stupid ideas
secretly gives money, not to her own
children but to others. Such beautiful
women have to be there in Sahaja Yoga.
But I feel so sorry, sometinmes the attack
comes from the women of Sahaja Yoga,
we have. But there is no subordination
of any kind. You are subordinated to your
not from the men, on me. I am a woman
myself I feel shocked that women should
own dignity, to your own chastity, to your
own sense of honour and above all to your
attack me like this, for what.
righteousness because you are incharge
In Sahaja Yoga there is no domination of of that. The man who is in charge, has to
any kind but all these so called ideas of look after that side. How many quarrels
servility or domination comes from the
false ideas you have, about your own
dignity, about your own understanding, peacemaker. Supposing we send two
you create. How can you be quarrelsome
when you are supposed to become the
you are not aware of yourself. You do
peacemakers to some country to make
peace and they cut each other's throat,
not know that you are the Queen, no body
can dominate you. Who can dominate the
what will you say to such a thing.
lady, who rules the house hold. If
supposing the husband says, I don't like
this colour, alright, leave it for a while.
Then somebody will come and say what bring such expression of love, such sweet
a nice colour. He says, ah, such a nice things, that the family itself feels rested
colour, oh, don't change it. The women in you, secured in you because you are
You are the one who has to smooth down
every thing, you are the one who has to
must understand the men. They have big the mother. The family must feel secured
eyes. They are not microscopic. They see with in you and this love is your power.
everything in a big way, you see. So today This is your power that you can give, live
they will say something, tomorrow they and giving love you will find, you will
will forget about it and they don't have always enrich yourself. I mean imagine
microscopic eyes. They are too above
these things. They are above these things. get. I don't know I'll
You must under stand that But if he sits another house. I am telling them don't
what presents I give compared to what I
have to build
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Sep Oct
23
1999
Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
same, you see, so he said, you see, she
doesn't understand she has kept these
three persons here. God knows, what they
give me individual present. I will not take
any individual presents. Now still despite
that. I don't know, just with love if I get
are, saying refugees, this thing.
doesn't know, he is a Muslim, he is a
She
some thing with care, that love, you know,
itself manifests and comes back to you
Hindu. God knows, she has two
like a poetry. You are some times
husbands, one husband, like that. All kind
of things. Next morning they forgot about
that. I said all right. Let them be there for
one night. Is alright? I can't drag them
out today, one night. Next morning they
forgot that they where living there. That's
like men. First day, such a blasting, such
a blasting, I said all right, one night. Now
don't shout. They will feel hurt. Next
surprised. I'll give you one simple
example of my own life which will tell
you how love can work it out. I was a
housewife to begin with and to end with,
I think. And once I was in Delhi, my
daughter was to be born. So I was knitting
something for her, sitting out side in the
lawn, when three persons walked into the
house, one lady and two men and they
came and said, see now we are... I am a
morning they went away for their work.
They had no time. It was, you see, only
on a week day they become active in the
house hold, otherwise they are inactive.
So they went away. It so happened that
these people stayed with me for one
month. Then this lady got a job and she
went away with her husband and this
Muslim. But in the meanwhile there was
housewife and these two are, one is my
husband and he is the friend of my
husband and he is a Muslim, and we have
come to you for shelter because we are
refugees. I looked at them. They looked
very good to me, they were quite all right.
I said, alright you please settle down in
my house. So I gave them the outside
a big riot in Delhi, very big riot because
room which had a kitchen and a
many Hindus and Sikh people were killed
in Punjab. It had a reflection in Delhi and
bathroom, and for the gentleman, I said,
there is another spare room, you can stay
they started killing all the Muslims there.
So, three four Sikh people and one or two
there, and husband wife can stay here. In
the evening my brother came in. He
Hindus came to my house and they said,
started shouting at the top of his voice.
we are told that you have a Muslim
He said what is this. You don't know
staying with you. I said, no. How can I
these people. They may be thieves, they
may do this, and then my husband came
have.
in and joined him because you see they
They said, there is a Muslim and we have
were friends. So he told. all men just the
to kill him. 1 said see I am wearing such a
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
Sep - Oct
1999
Volume : XI Issue : 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
big et1. Can you believe it that I could
have a muslim in the house. They thought
me Sari. You'll have to give so much
money. This thing.
I must be a real Hindu fanatic, you see.
They said alright come to the Mahurat at
So they believed me. I said, see now if
you have to go in my house, you will go least. Come to the mahurat, the beginning.
on my dead body. I will not allow you. Mahurat is the one where you start it. So
So they felt quite frightened. They went she came and I was there. She looked at
away. So this fellow heard my things and
he came and he said, I am surprised. How
me and just she couldn't believe that she
is seeing me after 12 years. The tears
did you risk your life. I said, there is Sstarting rolling from her eyes, absolutely.
nothing. His life was saved. Now this She couldn't say anything, just she came
gentleman, this muslim gentleman, and fell into my arms and she said where
were you lost all these days. I have been
trying to trace you and she started
describing me and allI. Then Sahir
Ludhianvi was there and he said, how this
Lady is here. They said, it is Her work.
Oh God, why didn't you tell us, you see,
we'll give our lives for Her and they were
became a great poet called Sahir
Ludhianvi, and this lady became a great
actress.. the one who used to act as a
mother, Achla Sachdeva. I knew it, that
they had become one day and all that. But
I didn't tell any body about it. I said now
supposing they come to know, I am in
Bombay, they will just go mad about me,
and I said I have no time for all that.
all amazed, how they were changed. No
money, nothing, I am going to give money
for this project. Nothing doing. See now,
I was a housewife just an ordinary house
wife. I didn't have so many rights on my
So, we started a film centre for the young
people, to give them, some good films.
But it all made into a farce, later on. They
husband's property, on any thing, and my
brother another dominating fellow, both
of them put together, just were about to
kill me that night, with their temper and
never listen to me, but whatever it is. So
they said, we should get this Achala
Sachdeva to act as a mother. I said all
right but don't tell her I have said, I have anger. I soothed them down and then you
anything to do with it. So years had know when I told my husband and my
passed, about I think 12 years or so. So brother, they were amazed. I said, they
they went and told her. So she was fusing are the ones who have become like this
like an actress. No, No. how much are and see the change, how much they have
you going to pay me? I cannot act free.
So everybody will ask for free. Then how going to say no to any charitable
can I give you free. You will have to give institution. This is the last mistake we
changed, and they said, No more, we are
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 25
1999
Volume : XI issue 9 & 10
Sep Oct
The Divine Cool Breeze
We had many great women in India
because of these institutions Padmini we
have committed and the whole idea of a
earning and money just dropped down
and she has acted in many films for charity
and this Ludhianvi also wrote many things
for charity. So a woman can make a man
had. Chand Bibi. there are so many
women we can mention who were great
women, who were housewives. So the
woman's qualities are like the potential
of the mother earth or potential of any
energy, like electricity has its potential
somewhere else. You see the lights here,
makes no difference, one light or two
lights. But the potential is important. So
a charitable personality because she
herself is charitable She is an artist and
she can create beauty around her, in her
household, in her family, in her society
Everywhere. But no, women want to fight
like men They will have associations.
They will have unions to fight for their
rights. I agree that some of the men have
been extremely cruel Some of the laws
one has to understand that we are
potential and to preserve our potentil we
must have the sense of dignity, honour
and righteousness within ourself. Now
have heen extremely cruel This thing, that
thing and that they have to be told. But
this is not the way. There is another way
men must respect their women who are
like this. But men are another stupid stuff
of improving these men, who try to because they will not respect a woman
destroy the women, because women have who loves them, who îs chaste, who is
one very great quality that Ganas are with
them and Shree Ganapati is with them.
He will never side with men if they are
chaste and do not try to show off their
body and show off their beauty and want
to make sort of a capital out of it. Such
women are extremely powerful,
extremely powerful and they show their
valour when it comes to anything like we
had Jhansi ki Rani. She was an ordinary
housewife. She fought the British, and the
British also were surprised at her valour
good, who wants them to become
collective, who wants them to give. who
be charitable, who wants that Sahaja Yoga
should be promoted and the one who
wants that her husband should be happy
and joyous and that he should come to
Sahaja Yoga as well. Instead of that they
run after some funny, stupid women.
What is there to be so attractive towards
bhootish women, must be some bhoots
in them, I don't know, that the way they
get attracted. As a result of all this
and they said that we had got Jhansi,
alright, but the glory goes to the Queen very insecure and they get insecured. As
of Jhansi Like that we had many, a results, the man suffer and women
Noorjahan we had, we had Ahilya Bai.
misbehaviour of men, women become
suffer. A man who neglects his wife, and
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 1999
26
Volume XI Issue 9& 10
Sep - Oct
The Divine Cool Breeze
the housewife, but she is a maid servant.
treats like that. will consequently get
There is a saying that there was a lady
blood cancer And the woman who
who was a maid servant, and then she was
behaves like this, in this manner and if
made a housewife but she couldn't stop
she ill-treats her husband, will get asthma
or a very serious type of cirrhosis, could
be brain damage, could be paralysis, could
be complete dehydration of the body
because left nabhi is so important. If the
left nabhi is made hectic, as you know by
her running about because she was a maid
servant. She doesn't settle in the
household Now for whom is the
household, is not only for herself, No,
not for her husband, No, not for her
your running about and by jumping about children but for others to welcome.
and by being hectic, then left nabhi
becomes hectic and you develop blood Like this Mother Earth has spread all
cancer I have always seen that the women
who are thin, their husbands as jittery. and sit and enjoy. But there is a very
why? Because the wife is all the time common thing, also that in Sahaja Yoga,
making him run up and down. Do this,
these beautifiul things for you, to come
we find that people, after marriage
do that, you didn't bring this thing for become absolutely engrossed into each
me. I had asked you to bring the Coca-other and lose Sahaja Yoga. Then their
Cola-you didn't bring, you didn't do that. children suffer. Their children become
fussy, funny and disobedient, tortuos.
They have some physical problems also.
Its a punishment. Not that I punish this
as if he is the sinner all the time. And the
man becomes Jumpy all the time, Jumpy.
He gets something for the jumping and
she gets something for her torturing.
There is no love, there is no joy, there is Supposing you put your hand in the fire,
no happiness. This so called figure it will burn. I mean who is punishing. You
madness, which is now subsiding Thank are punishing yourself. Then children
God. It's coming from America. This become funny. Just for your family, just
figure madness makes you funny.
but it is your own nature that punishes.
for your food, just for your house hold,
this selfishness, if it crawls up into man,
then God save that family. Ifits a woman,
Women have to be settled down women.
its all right, atleast a little bit but if the
man is a gone case, that I should have a
house, I should have a job, I should look
They have to be Grahasthis. that is, one
who settles in the house hold. said to be
satistied within the household. If she is
after my children, its for my family. Our
all the time running about, she doesn't
family is not of one man one woman but
want to stay in the house then she is not
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Volume: XI ISsue 9 & 10
27
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Sep/-Oct
the whole universe is our family. We are than this. If you ask a saint to become a
not on our own, and if you become king. He will say. What? you want to put
arbitrary, and if you become secluded, I the ocean into a cup? Is the minimal of
must tell you one thing and warn you minimal. Is the lowest of lowest.
today that those people who will try to
seclude themselves, a day will come, Those who think their life is service are
when they will have horried diseases on
another stupid people. Their life is
enjoyment, not service. But that service
itself is enjoyment. But if you just keep
to service Oh, I am sacrificing, this is my
tapasya, finished. Then you end up like a
tapasvi, like a bean stalk thing, which can
be used for a cross. So, in Sahaja Yoga it
them: don't blame Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja
Yoga has it's own beautifiul realm of
But in the God's
God's kingdeom
kingdom, you have to be collective. But
a bad wife can create problems She will
form a group of people. group of women.
She will go on rolling down with her
bhoots to everyone or may be she is very
conscious of her education or of her
is enjoyment but unless and until you have
that essence of enjoyment into every
thing, it cannot be an enjoyment. If you
take out the essence from the cane sugar
position or of her money and all that. Then
also she will try to keep the husband aloot.
or what you call the sugar cane bamboo,
Such people have to pay for what they then what is left? In the same way, all the
have done not because it is a punishment so called service and tra and tapasya and
for them. So Grahalaxmi tatva in Sahaja all that has not sweetness, finished. All
Yoga is very important. Those people this is sweetness and that is generated by
who have got problems after coming to
Sahaja Yoga, most of them have spoil this. Keep this nice, keep that nice
neglected their grahalaxmi principle The husband comes home like as if he is
because grahalaxmi if it goes out, then
women. But they are very strict. Don't
a criminal. He has to be like a bull in a
centre heart catches. Those women who china shop. He has to be It's a good thing
have tried such tricks, should give up in a way. Is nice, how he doesn't know
immediately because this is very anything, is even better for you. But to
indignified, nobody respects such a make him all the time slave, do this. you
woman It's a very true with the leaders didn't do this for me, do that for me, is
wives and the leaders The leader's wife not the job of a housewife. Her job is like
or the leadership is a minimal of a minimal the Mother Earth. Does She complain?
ng So
Nothing. She gives you everyth
of a minimal of a so called position, most
much is the sustenance in her. So much
insignificant What you got is much higher
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Sep Oct
28
& 10
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume XI IsSUE 9 & 10
of them adores me. IfI go somewhere in
the dignity. Such powers She has. What
Lucknow, all of them will come from all
does She care for anybody giving her any
thing. You will be amazed if I tell you over to see me but my husband goes,
today, till today. till yesterday, I never nobody comes to see him. He always
asked my husband to buy me anything complains. He is the relation, and I am
For the first time I asked him to buy me a not the relation, and they come and see
camera, and you see the result, in the me, not him. IfI had not given them love,
evening what he said. Least expected. if I had not given them whatever they
Never in life-time. He used to say, tell wanted they would have not come to me.
So they are the preservers, preservers of
me what you want First time. I said
something and see the effect becasue 1 others. They don't have to preserve things
for themselves. We have many stupid
women with us, I tell you, many stupid
have never said him. So such a woman
has to be self satisfied, satisfied in her self
women. We call them Buddhu in Hindi
because she has to give. The person who
has to give, how ean she demand She language. The Buddhus, because they
has to give love because she is love. She don't know what power they have got.
has to give all the services. She has to They don't know what responsibility they
give all the possessions, she has to sooth have. I am an example before them and
down What a responsibility. I tell you, this is the very big problem with me that
what a responsibility More than a Prime practically I think 60% leaders have
Minister, more than any king or any one,
horrible wives. I must say, horrible, and
Sahaja Yoga goes 'dhup' like that with
them. They can't live in an ashram. The
is the responsibility of a woman, and she
should feel proud of it, that such a
will have their food. The husband must
see that they had their food. It is they who
responsibility has come to me. A house-
wife has much more responsibility than a
have to feed everyone. Everybody has to
leader of Sahaja Yoga But the wives of
leaders can be horrid becasue they think
thev have become leaders. This is the
be looked after and at the end they should
eat. Everybody must get a bed. They must
minimal of minimum. I mean its like, I see everybody is sleeping now. They must
said, the ocean coming into a little cup. cover all the children. Then they must
And their behaviour becomes so funny sleep. But No, they sit down, they become
and absurd, I am surprised
mini Mataji or greater than Mataji. Get
me this thing, get me that, just do that,
do this. They don't know how to cook,
most of them. Every wife of a leader has
I was married in a family where we had
100 people living together and each one
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 29
1999
Sep Oct
Volume : XI Issum : 9& 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
to cook and learn cooking It is
compulsory now, They have to cook and
with heart. They should be able to cook
and give with love to others. That's the
num of Annapurnas, and the husband
shouldn't find faults with them In the
housewife. Supposing if you stand with
a military band you will be fed up. left
right, left right, left right. But a beautiful
melody that's a melodious thing and this
melody itself is suggestive of a beauty
beginning they might make mistakes, The way the housewife decorates the
encourage them Encourage their house. She smoothes down every one.
qualities, encourage their goodness; makes them feel happy. Then she is
encourage their niceness. Also I have looking after everyone. Everybody knows
seen, some very good ladies who were she is standing there Imagine, like a
taking very active life in Sahaja Yoga modern style would be, you call some
After marriage they are lost. Husbands people for birthday cake of your child and
are also supposed to be Sahaja Yogis, you cut the cake first because you are the
lost. Some timmes they appear, some times housewife. How will it look? It is that
if I am there they come, otherwise they ridiculous, I tell you. The way the house
are not there. Today I was asking Arnald, wife always puts forward before
he told me so many of them are like that everybody else. They have to be on the
here. That means there is something
back because you have to look after. Look
after all of them, and this is what a Raga
is. It caters to all your angularities.
Supposing a person is very upset and
wrong with the husbands because before
marriage they were better So how much
it is important, a Graha Laxmi Principle
with in us, for us to be together, to us to
worried, comes from office, puts on a
Raga. Soothes-you down. It makes you
settle down like people come home for
grow together. To feel the togetherness.
All the time, the oneness that is within
five days, live like I don't know, what to
us So yesterday, as I told you that I'll
tell you the Ragas we have Ra is energy.
Ga is in Sanskrit language itadt rat
call, not even hotels, and live in a tent
like thing and the sixth day they are out
at the sea or they go and stay in a hotel.
means which penetrates, which moves
Nobody wants to stay in the house
because there is no Graha Laxmi Principle
between the two. But Raga needs ,
sitting down, settling down Unless and
into everything, it is the ethereal qualities.
You put anything into ether, you can
receive it any where. So the Raga, is the
energy which goes into ether and touches
your spirit. That is the Raga and these
Ragas, I would say are something like a
until you settle down, you cannot enjoy
Raga. Imagine somebody listening to a
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Oct
30
Sep Oct
Volume XI Issue 9 & 10
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
know-why. my son got up and he said I
when he is a jumpy. So, one has to
raga
settle down and that settling down is what love my father very much. He said!
is the work of a woman who is a
housewife, and the man has to act, is to husband knows she is telling lies also, but
settle down. As 1 have told you many a you see all nice things. You see, and I
times how your left nabhi goes out in think your mother is much better now I
modern times, much more, and many think I'll go and look after your mother,
children are also born of the women who and your sister is coming. So I think you
are hectic. Normally in India before. you are buying a Sari for her All such nice
see, the husband used to get up, have his nice thing she will talk to him. So he eats
bath, all the time his wife is not with him. his food nicely then he goes washes his
Really! Yes, yes: He said, he said so, and
She is cooking for him She is looking hands and goes in a bullock cart, not
after his children. All the time sticking on car where there is a jam, always. Alright.
to husband also is a sign of boredom.
Husband gets bored, wife gets bored over. You have to be very fast. Life is
Then they have a divorce So she must fast now. In this fast thing, as I have told
have other interests like looking after the you, that on the periphery of the wheel
children, house hold, Sahaja Yoga, things you have the speed but at the axis it is
like that. Then he comes from the bath,
he sits on the ground, in India. Now we
now the bullock eart is over, the fan is
not So the Sahaja Yogis have to be at
the axis, and so the husband and the wife,
the left and the right side of a chariot have
to be on the axis and the left is left and
the right is right. Now the women always
take more time to get ready. Not me: I
take less then my husband, much less than
him. So, that is thier habit. Forget it. Now
are sitting on the tables, all right, at least
sit on the tables, not on the table, but on
the chair. Then she doesn't tell him at this
time why did you do like this or this lady
was quarrelling or I met another lady she
was telling me you were this and you were
that No, she said let him eat his food.
That's why in India if husband has to show
women have their own habits. They are
women. Women will remain women, men
will remain men Man must see their
his temper he doesn't eat his food in the
watches ten times Women might see
once or may be their watches are lost or
house or he will wash his underclothes
himself. That is how, they show their
out of order if they are real women. The
temper.
are not jumpy like men, they are differen!
So then she fans the husband slowly and
But they are women and you are men,
and God has made men and women. If it
tells him good things, you see, today you
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 31
Oct
Sep
1999
9 & 10
Volume: XI Issue:
The Divine Cool Breeze
woman is very smart, talks well and you
know she knows how to talk and impress
was to make a unisex, He would have
made unisex, He did not.
people; doesn't mean that she is very
So one must accept the sex IS which you intelligent. I call that person the most
are born, with grace and beauty and intelligent who sees the benevolence, the
dignity. Both. In India we have this thing ascent and the ultimate goal. That person
like, you know, I was married in a family, is the most sensitive, is the most
very orthodox where they used to even intelligent. All other intelligence is afan,
cover the face and all that. So one day is useless. Now, on this subject I think I
the collector who is the friend of my can write a book, so, it is better leave it
husband, so, he told my elder brother-in- to the book, and today let us have the
law why not the wife of my friend come
puja.
and see me. So he said, of course, of
course. So just to make it easy for him he
took leave from his office and disappeared
May God Bless You.
Any questions?.. This means, I'll be
into another town and told his wife that
see, She goes and sees the collector. See spending some money? 1 don't know.
how beautiful it was, how beautiful it was, there's no chance. I don't know where I
and I never felt that he was dominating will spend. I love to spend, I mean, every
me because after all that was the system body should love to spend. That's why
of that family, alright, its alright. But for
this what you need is pure intelligence. If
the husband is a dullard he will bring give to others. Just enjoy giving others.
down his wife. If the wife is a dullard she So enjoyable, to give something to others.
will bring down her hushband. If the
the money is for. Must give to others, you
see. Why the matter is there? Matter is to
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 32
Volume XI Issue 9 & 10
Sep - Oct
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Bombay Public Programme, 1988
Talk By Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
I bow to all the seckers of truth. The truth
people who have propounded any spir-
itual ideology of truth. But. today what
we find that the religions that are estah-
lished to propound these theories of your
ascent and your self realisation are ex-
tremely cruel or demonic or stupid. It's
impossible to understand how can these
that we understand as truth is known to
us on our central nervOLIS system. und
whatever we see. whatever we hear.
whatever we Smell. we say this is the
truth. That's what we know about. hut
the truth is much more than that, is much
more than the sense organs, is much
much mone than your mental projections.
and much higher than your imagination.
It has heen said in our own shastras. and
great incarnations who came on this
carth, who have created such great things
and have said of such fundamental facts
of life and have promised that you have
to feel that all pervading power of God.
in all the great hooks of religion that there
is an all pervading power of God which
looks after hunman heings, which has cre-
ated human heings, which has monitored
all this beautiful Universe. Every inch has
been looked after and programmed prop-
that Brahmachaitanya, one day. The fol-
lowers of all the religions are going to
the extremes and doing all kinds of quar-
relling. fighting or they have heen very
stupid. Human awareness can only go on
to the left or to the right side. As in Sahaja
erly. That there is a force which exists.
Yoga we say towards the "Ida" or towards
of which these human heings are not
the "Pingla'. These are the two channels
aware. They may have to he aware one
of sympathetic nervous system which
look after ourefforts on the left side, that
day. For that. all the great prophets. all
the incarnations have said that you are to
is towards the past. and the right side, it
is the future. The left side will be indul-
he horn again. that you have to get you
'Atmasakshatkara". your Self Realisa-
gence. There are religions which allow
you to indulge into anything that you
want to do. For example. in Christianity
they started catholicism, this was a right
tion'.
Whatever you may call it. whatever name
you may give. hut it is said by all the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Sep Oct
Volume : XI Issue 9 & 10
Oct
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
ting these women enticed into some sort
sided religion in the sense there is a lot
of restrietions, there are nuns and they
have priests, they are not supposed to do
this. they are not supposed to marry, they
are not supposed to divorce. All kinds of
rules and regulations they have. Then the
of a. you can say, possessed by some sort
of devilish things and telling them the
number of race horses. God has nothing
to do with horses and races, but these
things are happening and people take lot
of interest in such stupid stipulations and
sSuch modifications of God's work.
movement started. Martin Luther was on
the right hand side. From the right hand
side to the left hand side. It tok people
by saying that Giod has not asked us to This is just anti-God activity and that's
do all this. We have to have lot of free- why when people start seeing these things
dom and all this kind of disciplining and happening in the religion, the way we
this kind of blind following is not alright. have in our country. ill treat the women,
And we are not going to follow this Pope. the way we have started this all kinds of
who himself is indulging into all kinds "sati' business, Like recently, I heard that
of things which are not religious. In the in the shastras they say that 'sati' is the
same way in India we have Hindu reli- right of a woman but she has no right to
gion hased into two types of varieties. read shastras. It is all nonsense, absolute
The first one that we see of is on the left nonsense, because if you see that when
hand side. where people started saying Ravana died. this was eight thousand
that it's alright. in religion everything is years hack, Shri Rama married his wife
allowed. We can do whatever we like, to Vibhishana. That time He married a
after all there is nothing wrong in drink-
widow to Vibhishana. We have example
ing, there is othing wrong in doing any of Shri Rama hefore us that he did not
kind of thing. even prostitution is all
care for this caste system. We are the
people, who are now trying to find faults
with Shri Rama, because we have be-
right. They went to that extreme saying
that when there was 'Amritmanthan' the
come so egoistical. we don't understand
how great he was. Now Shri Rama, they
say. was a man, who discarded his wife
prostitutes came. And that's why we
should have prostitution. They went to
another religion that is still persisting in
and ill-treated her. This was all a drama.
our temples. I have seen it, that people
started worshipping all kinds of bhoot
vidya. prait vidya, shamshan vidya. In
our temples, now. even in Bombay we
see people going to the temples and get-
They had to play particular type of drama
at that time to show what a benevolent
king he is. As described by Socrates that
the henevolent king. you see in Shri
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 34
Volume XI Issue 9 & 10
1999
Sep
Oct
The Divine Cool Breeze
Shri Rama's life was a very serious life
Rama. There is no such personality like
of a great saint. So Shri Krishna wanted
Shri Rama in the West. In India we are
now busy trying to find faults with Shri
Rama with our narrow headedness. Now lutionary stage to that religious life by
Shri Rama, the one who came on this saying it is a 'Leela' (play). And that's
earth, first and foremost thing he did was why he had to do many things to make
to make somebody to write his the life much more easier and bubbling.
Ramayana. That was a 'Shudra'. he was not sufferings and not feeling sorry for
a fisherman. Valmiki was an ordinary being born on this earth. Rama suffered
fisherman who wrote Ramayana. That
to give a proper shape and a proper evo-
for us. We don't have to suffer any more
proves Shri Rama thought that he should
show to the world that a person who gets
now. He suffered for us, and he never
suffered. It's a drama, they play a drama
only for us. Now those who have no in-
sight, can say, whatever they like, because
self realization. the one who is
*Atamsakshatkari' is the real 'Vidvana',
is the real 'Pandita' is the real 'Brahmin'
they have no depth, and that's why they
start criticising Shri Krishna just as if,
he is in their pockets. Such a great incar-
nation was criticised and said all things
about him. It is really surprising. He was
and not those people who just say we are
*Brahmins'. Then people talk about Shri
Krishna as if every body's tongue has
become so loose, they want to talk eve-
the one who came to this earth as a man
rything. I can't understand how can you
take up all these things with such audac-
ity, and with such courage. They are not
and you know how a man's life is at the
earth. Now, I have so many Sahaja Yogis
as my children. I call them as my chil-
afraid of God to talk like this, about all
dren but if a man says he is my child or
these great incarnations.
he is my daughter, no body is going to
accept it. Now, Shri Krishna wanted all
About Shri Krishna people are talking
his powers to be born on this earth. He
has sixteen thousand powers because in
Sahaja Yoga you will know how you have
sixteen thousand powers as he has got.
In the Vishuddhi Chakra where he resides
these days that Shri Krishna had too
many wives and he was a wayward per-
sonality. I mean this is really too much
of a courage. to say such a thing about
Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna and Shri
Rama, hoth of them, were great person-
he has got sixteen sub-plexuses and these
alities and Shri Vishnu himself incarnated
sixteen sub-plexuses multiplied by the
on this earth to establish religion. At the
one thousand nerves of the brain become
time of Shri Krishna the problem was that
sixteen thousand powers of Shri Krishna.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-36.txt 
 35
: 9 & 10
Oct
1999
Sep
& 10
Volume XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
anti-Christ. First of all Thomas had said
But he could not get them as Sahaja Yo-
that you have to become a realised soul.
gis at that time. So what he had to do to
and this experience you have to have. Not
bring them on this earth was as women?
only that, but Christianity, the way they
preach it, you must suffer, you must carry
These sixteen thousand women were
made to marry a king and then he was
defeated by Shri Krishna. Then he mar-
ried them. They were his powers. He had
five wives; they are the five elements he
had to have as powers around him. But
those, who do not understand this great
the cross of Christ. All this is nonsense.
Christ has carried the cross for you and
we don't have to carry another cross. Has
he left something undone that we have
to do. He has said that you have to be a
happy person and know that your Father.
the God Almighty loves you and He
incarnation of Shri Krishna, they just start
talking. they go to the extent that the one
who played in Gokul and in Vrindavan
doesn't want you to suffer and go on the
street crying that you are suffering. On
the contrary if you see those people who
follow Christianity, everybody has suf-
fered at their hands. They have never suf--
fered so far. They say we are suffering, a
was not the same Shri Krishna who wrote
Gita. These intellectuals have gone off
their heads, and I think their intelli-
gence needs little more understanding
of the great incarnations that were on
hig sort of a drama is going on. We are
suffering, we must suffer. In Hindu reli-
gion also we have another class of peo-
this earth to improve your awareness
and to give you a right direction in
your evolution.
ple. I don't want to name them. you
know them very well who have tried to
These are not the only two points on
which we can say that people have done
wrong. Even Christ. the way Christ has
heen completely misrepresented by the
churches, it is to he seen now because
tell you that you must lead
a very aus-
tere life. Even in Jainism this nonsense
has been going on. No where they would
have said that you should go to these
extremes. kind of unnecessary starvation.
As it is in our country people are starv-
ing. Are they all going to heaven, those
who are starving? That if you starve you
there is a book which was written by St.
Thomas. When he was coming to India,
it was left in Egypt and when people saw
that hook they were surprised. Recently
it was discovered after forty-cight years.
They were surprised when they tried to
make it legible in English language, that
all Christian principles are absolutely
are going to help them by your starva-
tion. and this starving husiness has been
told in such a wrong way that at the time
when Shri Ganesha is to be born, you
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-37.txt 
 36
Volume XI Issue : 9 & 10
1999
Oct
Sep
The Divine Cool Breeze
What are they doing. cutting each oth-
er's throats? Is that religion? Is that God's
path? It is not. But, why it has happened?
Because human awareness goes to the ex-
treme of left and right and, thank God, it
must starve. I mean when a child is born
in your family then you observe 'subabs'
(celebrations). Do you starve that day or
you distribute modakas and be happy
about it that Shri Ganesha is born in your
family? Shri Rama is to he bom you must
has gone because you can see now the
fast. if Shri Krishna is to be born you stupidity and the absurdity of these so
called religions that were established in
must fast. It is something so surprising!
How people have interpreted all these
great incarnations into very very wrong
the name of these great incarnations.
Sahaja Yoga is your own religion. Within
yourself you have a Kundalini:
this power within yourself which is to
directions? There is another thing which
I have seen new. I have seen in England,
I was surprised that if somebody dies in
the family then they must have cham-
you have
be awakened. About which even Saint
Thomas has said, about which
pagne, if there is Christmas they must
have champagne. For everything that is
auspicious they must have champagne. I
just don't understand what sort of primi- has said, about which of course, Shri
Mohammed Saheb has said, about which
Zoroaster has said, about which Christ
Krishna has said, in a way. But the
tive religion it is that calls itself Christi-
anity. Same is about all the religions. greatest is Gyaneshwara. He has clearly
Now you see that Sikhs are starting a
said it, Nanak Saheb has said it. Everyone
has talked about this Kundalini, that this
*Khalistan'. Khalis' means 'nirmal',
great power of Kundalini has to be
means pure. We have started a
'Khalistan here. What are they doing awakened within you and that must give
you your realisation. No body is ascent-
there. what sort of Khalistan are they
oriented. Everyhody is doing some sort
of a money business or sSome sort of a
going to give with all the filth and dirt in
their minds and all kinds of funny things
power business where they try
other in the name of religion. Or. they
to kill each
about getting that Punjab. Is this the way
Nanak has talked? Nanak has said. "find
try to dominate in the name of religion.
This is no religion. This has nothing to
it, within yourself. that resides". Kabira
has said the same thing. Mohammed
Saheb has said, when the time of do with the incarnations. They are all
anti-God people and are spoiling the
*Kayama' will come, when the resurrec-
name of God. Now there are so many
tion time will come, your hands will
Gurus also, as you know, the false gurus.
speak. And where are these muslims?
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Oct
1999
Volume XI İssue
Sep Oct
37
9 & 10
they are teaching all kinds of falsehood This is your democracy. which is
demonocracy, creating
hecause they want to make money. God's
great, great
demonic giants and we will have to face
them tomorrow when they will come up.
people can never make money out of
you because it is love which you can
to this country. Also to sell their hyhrids
not sell in the market. Who are the
and all that, we will he all sold out to
incarnations who made moey at the cost
of others? We should see their lives. their
them.
models and then go for our gurus. There
is a saying in Marathi Gurucheti kale
aafher". This Chaos of today's Kaliyuga
Now, we have the another side where
there is complete stupidity, complete
controlling authorities. like you have in
is of course by our extreme movement
communism. There the individual is not
to the left and right and because we have
important. the collective is important.
You must look after the collective, for
false people teaching the wrong things that an individual must be killed, must
not ascended. Not only that. hut also these
and you are running after them. You have
he finished, must he imprisoned. Must
no personality, you have no roots, that every thing he done that is possible to
you should run after these stupid people keep the collective alive. These are only
who are trying to befool you.
mental projections of human beings and
ideologies which are not related to the
t
life at all. Because if you start starving
or keeping the individual in such a
blocked condition, tomorrow he will go
In the polities, same thing happens. that
we move to the let and to the right. 1Like
we have left sided movement where there
is no control, remove the control. remove
to some place where he can find some
freedom, he will immediately start
the discipline. let people form their own
opinions. let them he individuals. the
individual becomes very important. The come from Arah countries, they don't
collective is not important. Every drink there but once they come to
individual must rise, then he puts himself England. I mean you don't know where
mishehaving. I have seen people who
into a competition against another
person. There is a fight going on hetween is no change within them. But what
two persons, the fight going on hetween happens is that they live in their own
organisations. there is competition. and paradise, thinking we have achieved it
all kinds of horrendous behaviour on part
of all these so called people who are
they go! There is no transformation, there
now.
Collective cannot be achieved without
trying to develop their individual image.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Sep Oct
38
1999
Volume XI Issue 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
all, and that is what is the all pervading
By
individuals, and individuals cannot gain
power of God. First feel the reality.
feeling the reality. once you reach that
stage of reality then you start feeling on
your finger tips what's wrong with you.
what's wrong with others. what's wrong
with the society, what's wrong with the
collective, what's wrong with the
anything without the collective. that is
the point. So these two movements of left
and right side can be hrought in a proper
check only by understanding that we have
to he in the centre. But centre for what.
Centre for your ascent, for your
transformation. You have to be
transformed out of this rigidity and this
mental projection. Because mental
projection is linear. It moves in one line
and recoils back and gives you trouhle.
individual. You have no absolute
knowledge to know what's wrong with
you. How can you correct? Just by, one
person has done something so I must do
that. Another person has done something
like your science. It produced an Atom
homb and you didn't know what to do.
so I must overpower that. This is not the
Dampord
way you are going to solve problems. But
you are going to add violence to violence.
Tomorrow if you are going to produce
all sorts of computers. and the computers
will start controlling you. you will not untruth to untruth and unreal to unreal.
know what to do! Machinery you have For that you must all get your realisation.
produced. they are creating prohlems, the This is a very important thing but as a
reason is. you have to be in the centre result of realisation, one thing I feel.
people will and they can really vow for
for your ascent. and onee you come to
is that they have all gained.
the centre you develop that halance which
is required hetween the individual and
the collective. hetween the machinery
and your society. hetween morality and
religion. That halance has to be brought ficed? Of course these people are gone
in. And once that halance comes within now, we see some other people at the
yourself, it's not without it is not
lecturing, it's not just saying. "Oh. I am sacrificed. In Sahaja Yoga you don't
very much batanced. Many people certify have to sacrifice any thing, you don't
themselves. I am very balanced. I am
Like I knew when the time.of independ-
ence was there how much people sacri-
helm of affairs, hut that time people just
have to give up anything. You just get,
perfectly all right. I don't helieve in that. good health, you get good bank bal-
Who are you to helieve or not to hclieve? ance because Lakshmi Tatva' im-
Have you seen the reality! What reality proves, you get complete satisfaction
is? You have tw feel the reality first of in your life. You become peaceful. You
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-40.txt 
 Sep Oct
1999
39
Volume XI issue
10
The Divine Cool Breeze
here. I am very happy to see them. All
these people are also working relentlessly
in all those areas from where they come.
become witness of everything. You be-
come aesthetically rich. You become a
complete integrated personality and
such dynamism within you comes in
There are many centres, even in Bom-
that you are not afraid of anyone. But hay, all over the world we have eentres.
And I remember all Sahaja Yogis who
if this was the only thing you might
are working day and night. In Australia
in Sydney we have twelve centres, twelve
ashrams where they are working. They
live in the ashrams in a collective way.
say "Mother how can individual
work." You also get collective con-
sciousness by whiich you feel the col-
lective. Not only that but yoHi get the
power to correct the collective e.g. the
Sahaja Yogis haNe, they can create peace.
They can hring in all kinds of auspicious-
ness. It has worked. it is working out all
over the world. But the trouble is people
have no time to see the reality. they are
so. say. self satisfied, with whatever they
have. Now, in Sahaja Yoga we do not say
don't do this. I never say you don't do
this. because half of the people will run
iway hut once you get your realisation
Also there are individuals. We don't say
wear this dress or do this nonsense, noth-
ing of the kind. More sensible. wise. dig-
nified. people have hecome very com-
passionate, affectionate, and kindly peo-
ple they become. Not only that but they
are really the race of tomorrow which is
deseribed in Nadi (iranth. They are the
ones who are the chosen ones and they
are the ones who are going to decide the
destiny of this world. This is also writ-
in your heart and when you see you are
ten in Nadi Granth. But one has to un-
catching a big snake in your hand, you
just drop it by yourself. I don't have to
tell you. What I say you have to hecome
derstand that unless and until human be-
ings accept Sahaja Yoga in a large way.
it is not going to work out. Sahaja Yoga
is not meant for one individual, it is in a
your own master. you have to become
mass operation. In the villages 1 have
seen 8000-10,000 people get realisation
because they are very simple people. Not
they are extremely religious
your own guru. It's your own power.
which is tw be awakened. which you get.
this is your.own "sampatti", is your own
property which you have to have. I have
nothing to do. I am just a catalyst.
only that hut
in the real sense of the word. Now here
in the city also as you know, there are
Lam very thankful to all the people from
many centres we have got. Actually, the
all the centres they have come here all
programme was decided so suddenly that
we could not inform all the people, they
the way. just to greet me on my birthday.
and to say that they are very happy to be
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Sep Oct
40
Volume XI Isue 9 & 10
1999
Sep
The Divine Coal Breeze
So this is the achievement of Sahaja Yoga
couldn't know that the programme is
that you arrange everything so sponta-
neously and so beautifully. Thank you
very much that you all have come here
here. So many are out of station. But
doesn't matter. Whatever has happened
in the short time has heen wonderfully
done. I must congratulate the people, who
have organised it. the organisers who
bave done all this in such a short time. It
to wish me on my birthday. In my life-
time I would like to see this whole world
changed and transformed into a beauti-
is spontaneous, it is not possible to do
this in such a short time. The whole pro-
ful world.
gramme was suddenly decided, that we
have this programme, here.
May God Bless You All.
