The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12 November- December, 1999 Talking with love costs nothing. By loving others you will imbibe the good qualities of others', but by hating them, you will absorb their evil qualities. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 In this Issue: Editorial 1 3. Dhyana, Dhaarna and Samadhi 6. Sahasrara Puja (4-5-1986) 15 Guru Puja (1999) An Internet Message Shri Shiva Puja 14-2-99 (Delhi) 18 Shri Hanumana Puja 31-3-99 (Pune) 31 An Interview with Shri Mataji 41 Edited by : Yogi Mahajan Published by :V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Nov - Dec. Volume :XI Issue : 11 & 12 & 12 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Editorial and then corrects it. There is nothing to "How TO IGNITE A FLAME" feel bad or mind the correction. With the blessings of our divine mother Supposing a person was negative. After the impossible has happened. What could not have occurred in a lifetime has self-realisation he could see the negativity and with the power of new consciousness happened in the course of one afternoon. We have been able to cross our agnya. he could remove the negativity. In this way the new consciousness changes our attitude and also overcomes our negative fruits. However, it is upto us to use it. If we don't apply it then it is like we got that is we have been able to jump our ego. It does not mean that our ego has vanished but it means that our consciousness has come out of the grip new clothes but we do not wear them, of the ego. Earlier whatever we did was directed by the ego. We did not know any better, there was no other way to gauge We have riches but we do not take them out to enjoy them. The fish is in the water but it is thirsty. it. After self realisation, the Kundalini pierces the Sahasrara and connects us Before we treat others with the new with a new consciousness. Through the consciousness, we have to treat ourselves. new consciousness we are able see our The treatment should change our attitude and consequently our personality. Then we assume the personality of a true Sahaja Yogi. Now we can help others to change We can use the new consciousness to their personality. For instance if we do not treat ourselves first, we will not know consciousness has the power to act. For how to treat others. We learn its working instance, one can think anything. One can from self experience. There is an think one is superior to others. One can interesting story of a woman who went think others are bad. One can think like a to Gandhiji and complained that her son fundamentalist. One can think one is never does not keep a fast on Full Moon, please own ego. Not only see it but the new consciousness has the power to avert it. correct our thinking process hecause this wrong. The light of new consciousness exposes the error in our thinking. Like a wise man detects the fault in the telephone tell him to keep a fast. Gandhiji remained silent. The woman was unhappy at his silence. Gandhiji asked her to return after

 Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12 Nov - Dec. The Divine Cool Breeze 1999 a week. Gandhiji, first wanted to make touch others by lip service. It an experiment on himself of keeping a fast before ordering her son. After observing the fast Gandhiji called her son and instructed him how to keep a fast. communicates to others through our kundalini. But first we must obey our own kundalini, only then its love can ignite another Flame. Sahaja Yoga is a living force. It does not

 Volume : XI Isue: 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze Nov Dec. 3. 1999 DHYANA, DHAARNA AND SAMADHI By Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (January – 1984) I will tell you a few things about meditation. It is my immense joy to see all of you here from various parts of the world. When your heart is so full, the words are too poor to carry the intensity. I wish you could understand that intensity through your heart. It's all been arranged, I think, by the Divine, that we should meet here all of us in such a wonderful surrounding. in the Nature. that something great should happen to all of us. That we should achieve something really great this time. Now as time is short, I will tell you first of all a few things The first part of meditation is the Dhyana. First when you have seeking, you put your attention towards the object of your worship. That is called as Dhyana. And the Dhaarana is the one in which you put all your effort. Concentrate all your effort. But this is all drama for people who are not realised. For them it's just a sort of an acting that they do. But for a realised soul it is a reality. So the first, the Dhyana, you have to do. Some do it of the Form, another of the Formless. But you are so fortunate that the Formless has become a Form for you. No problem, you don't have to go from Form to Formless, from about meditation now. Formless to form; it's all there, in a Meditation is a very general word. It is bundle. So you concentrate, or think of nota word that explains all the three steps some Deity, or some point for Nirakar, one has to take for meditating. But in for the Formless, or of Nirakar itself. It's Sanskrit language they have very clearly all a mental projection as long as you are said, how you have to move in your not a realised soul. But, once you are meditation. realised, you have just to think of Dhyana, whom you are going to concentrate, or First is called as Dhyana, and seeond is you can say meditate on. But once you start meditating on a person you attention called as Dhaarna, and the third is called Samadhi. slarts moving. That is also possible after realisation, though it is in a bundle; but some people have it-'part of it,' part of Luckily Sahaja Yoga is such a thing that you get everything in a bundle. You avoided everything else and you got the it', like that. So when you meditate, still your attention Samadhi part. That's the beauty of it.

 Nov Dec. Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze 1999 your eyes, nose, and all these organs, all that, becomes a kind of manifestation of the Deity whom you worship, with can get disturbed every moment. It can happen, depending on the intensity of your concentration. So, there are some automatically. Sahaja Yogis, I've seen, they are cooking, and there's another one is meditating. The You don't have to think-now I must concentrate, alright, I will not have these meditating one will say: "Oh, I can smell it is burning". thoughts, I have to now think about this. It becomes, automatically there; you read a book, in that book immediately you find So there is no Dhaarna. Dhyana is there but not Dhaarna. The second part of it is what is good for Sahaja Yoga. If there is very important, that you have to put your attention continuously on to your deity. a book which is anti-God you discard it, the state that is awakened within you is a Then you develop a state which is called as Dhaarna in which your attention new state of mind, in Sanskrit language ithas a very beautiful name, Ritambhara becomes one, with the Deity. But when Pragnya, which is a very difficult name. these mature, the third stage, of Samadhi, Ritambhara is the name of the Nature, and comes in. that the whole Nature one feels is Now for people who think that without enlightened. realization they can reach Samadhi, I I'll give an example; when a child is to be born, the mothers start lactating. automatically. The nature itself works out think they are absolutely mistaken. But after realization also, when the Dhaarna is established you have to get for the birth of the child. to the position where you become Samadhi. Now, what is that state? When that state comes into your mind, then Pragnya starts expressing itself, only for whatever you do, the Deity that you Sahaja Yoga, nobody else, you are In the same way, when this Ritambhara worship, you see that Deity in your work; whatever you see, you see the Deity amazed how things work out suddenly. So the Ritambhara Pragnya has started giving you the show; you can put it like working in your favour. You all tell me this is a miracle, that has happened that. Whatever you hear, you find the Deity telling you the truth, Whatever you read, you find there what the Deity would tell Mother, and we don't know how it has happened. I'll give you an example; Yesterday, we were doing something with cement and the Italian boy said that we you. So, in that state, whatever you do

 Volume XI Issue 11 & Dec. Nov 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze you are the saints, you are chosen ones of God. But you accept that situation first; but if you behave like all other normal will need two bags of cement. I said, you carry on, it won't finish. Even before I was leaving, they were people-Oh God, shops are closed, and that man is so difficult, and I don't think it will happen. It'll never happen. But you carrying on, still not finished. Now cement, of all the things, imagine! must know you are saints, chosen, and So this special thing is your own state given birth by Me, the Form and the where you are feeling one with Nature Formless. and the Nature is feeling oneness with you. So the Divine itself is expressing through Nature, through various happenings, through various incidents-the love, the protection, the attention that the Divine is giving. And there's no end to it. So this Pragnya is going to manifest, is manifesting every moment. Be prepared, be happy, welcome it and accept that you are there. The level is different Now the time has come-for Sahaja Yoga to change It just happens, and people don't know it's level. how it happens. But that is what is the We have to change. state of Samadhi. But there could be We have to go higher. people if I tell them "Will you do this?" The level has to come up. "Oh no Mother, the shop will be closed, So those who are at the periphery are a "Oh, they won't do it, that is not all right". problem, definitely, for me. because in my They go on like that. compassion, I cannot throw them out. And there are people who say-(even if And we have to help them come out, by we think it is shut)-"No! Let's see, - if really now telling them that they have to Mother has said, may be". I mean there rise. How long are we to wait for them? are a thousand and one examples like that. Every-one has to see that the peripheral Today like some were trying to push the people are brought in properly, so that bed. The three of them were trying, it they don't go out of Sahaja Yoga. would not push. I said, "Alright, I'll push. Compassion is alright, But not at the cost I just put my Nabhi there", just, I didn't of keeping the level of Sahaja Yoga lower, push anything, it just got pushed! - never. because of the Ritambhara Pragnya. So everybody must try to settle down and come up to minimum standards at This help is not the Chamatkar or anything. It exists in the Divine, the least!Otherwise, I'm sorry, many will be seived out. capacity to manifest it's Love to show that

 Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze Nov - Dec. 1999 SAHASRARA PUJA MEDESIMO, ITALY 4-5-1986 Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi This lecture is a concern of your Mother. chimpanzy. That means you are rather Don't take it as anything ill. I could not have said this even two years back or one human beings we become aware in our year back. Now you are at a stage where consciousness of many things which were I can say these things to you. You can unconscious to the animals. So in their understand it but it has to become your brains they did not understand that they consciousness. The stage has reached to could put matter into their own use. understand, but it should become your As human beings you were all unaware close to them. So when we have become consciousness. Whatever has become of the Chakras that existed within you. should happen if you keep it there. So your conscious was still working half way through unconscious working of the Chakras and the conscious working of the Today is a great day for all of us because it is the 16th Sahasrara Day i.e. 16 beats mind. You also never felt your higher position in the poem. That it is complete. autonomous nervous system or your inner Shri Krishna is called a complete organs, how they are working. You did Incarnation because he has 16 petals. noteven feel how you are getting affected This completeness is called as Purana. by other influences. As a result of that So now we move into another dimension. with the freedom that human beings The first one was where you got your achieved or were granted, they gathered self realisation. In the evolutionary all kind of things into their brains, into or 16 movements to reach a process, if you see, the animals are not conscious of many things which human beings are conscious of. Like the matter their Sahasrara without being aware of it. They used their Sahasrara, their brain for all kinds of purposes which were fruitless. They were not aware again of the warning that Shri Krishna had given that if you use human awareness except cannot be used by animals for their own purpose. Also they are not conscious of themselves at all. If you show a mirror to animals they do not react to it as if for your ascent, you will go downward. They were told, not that they were not they were in the mirror. Except for I think

 7. Volume: XI Issue : 11 & 12 Nov - Dec. The Divine Cool Breeze 1999 All the organizations which you have formed also on collective understanding told, they knew about it. Whether it was East or West, everybody knew that you have to be born again and it so happened are artificial. Then a movement had started that we have to be natural. That is another copying of the artificial. Natural that in the West people thought that by using their brain power they can now master the matter, that they can use matter does not mean a primitive personality. Natural is to evolve. The whole purpose of creation is to evolve. So the another for their own purpose. If they had done that after their self realisation, it would have been a very different situation concept also, that you accepted very easily because you have brains and you accept everything that comes your way, and is that you became so artificial that you needed all the times some sensations to feel yourself. Now in every walk of because after self realisation you all have become aware of vibrations which is Chaitanya and also of your Chakras. With this new awareness you would have avoided all that was wrong but it is like a greedy person who gets a wee bit of life there is a conceptual, artificial money and he spends it off. Now this understanding. For example you see the problem has complicated your brains. You sex. It is such a natural, nomal thìng. have certain concepts which are very There is nothing so great about it. But much away from reality. The way we have that also you made so artificial that you started using machines we have become have now your sex in your brain. By that machines ourselves. So we have no not only you have silenced Ganesha in feelings and we cannot relate to others in the Mooladhaara but also Maha a natural way. In human awareness you Ganesha in your brain. had achieved how to relate yourself to In another aspect, say Art. Now the others and to the nature. But this ego concept is so stupid that it says that art oriented approach took you away from should be according to what is laid down. natural real life, and we became artificial. Like you will call somebody and go rock, The whole thing comes from a concept condemn it, Oh This That. Condemn of being artificial. Like they say that its fashionable to be the arrogant, to be every one. And ultimately you reach a conclusion that the most insignificant is snobish. art. As if like a sugarcane when you have taken out all the juice whatever remains will become art one day. So the brain which 'does not nourish the heart is It is just the opposite of your ascent and the evolutionary process because you have dodged the power to relate to others had gained as human beings. absolutely. an artificial brain just like

 Nov Dec. Volume : XI Issue: 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze 1999 robots. So people have become just like robots. Now this can be handled by anyone who has the master mind because programme and within two weeks all will disappear. Because when the ascent takes place, the Kundalini pushes out the ego and brings the person close to reality. But again that ego, which is being built up so fast in a speed, overpowers the speed of you do not have your own heart and the brain is controlled by somebody who has a greater brain of concepts. All these the Kundalini and covers the head. Then concepts are destructive. it suggests that how can you have godly life. You will mix all the alcohol, all the Hitler got the concept that he is an Aryan and he is of the superior race. I have to establish that he did not mind destroying the whole world. Same is the case in the religion field. There also every religion was put or poured into the cups of madness, all the fun of life. That they feel they will lose all the freedom to become mad. When you see from this position, the way people react, it is amazing. You have to do something extremely stupid concepts. to sell it in the market. The other day I heard that somebody had become rich, Now the worst concept that human beings have achieved is that money is everything. First they tried for political domination, selling the empty tins as lamps. All kinds of stupid things which are nowhere near natural beauty or natural joy are accepted thinking that political domination is everything. It affected their system. When I started my life I saw complicated as sophisticated. The other side of it is that the Asuri Vidya, Sahasraras. The more I tried to solve the the Black Vidya has taken over. Shri complications within my own awareness Krishna again had warned that, in the 15th the more it became complicated (more Chapter, that if Asuri Vidya takes over, difficult), because if you see my age, in then the Shudh Vidya cannot compete fifty years you can see how much with the speed of Asuri Viday. Like in complicated human beings have become. America there had been a big argument And after opening the Sahasrara when I amongst Sahaja Yogis, if my photograph came to the West, within these 16 years I should be in the drawing room or not? But if you ask them to paint their names found that they are now in horrible state. Now the stage for you is laid down to ascend higher. This is the background which I have described to you, and you black, their face black and black clothes likes witches, they will do that. That even at a stage we are Sahaja Yogis we are shy of our Godly Life. When they became hippies or when they became anything like can see how when you have a programme there will be 500 people for the

 Volume XI Issue: 11 & 12 Nov Dec. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze that stupid, they gave all their life, all their and the background is so dark. You are time, all their money too. They changed surrounded by people who are pouring their dresses, they changed their life out morning till evening destructive styles, they changed their family life, concepts. Now you are the people who everything they changed, went all out have to shoot out much faster than all of And even when Sahaja Yogis are them. But a kind of a lethargy, though convinced about the Godliness of Sahaja you understand that your awareness is very different from them, a kind of a lethargy which does not accept it the way Yoga, still they are shy. And you know your Mother does not take money from you. On the contrary she spends. You all have gained out of it. But when it comes to giving, everybody feels shy. it should accept Sahaja Yoga. Everyone of you must think everyday, what have I done for Sahaja Yoga today? But you are all feeling very busy with your jobs, making money, of our relations with, people who do not matter at all in Sahaja Yoga. We have to make an all out effort to rise to that point that whatever we know, we From that background you are coming to the light of God's grace. But you do not want to dash at it. You want to take your time gradually, so gradually that may be, you may lose your chance. So in the awareness of Sahaja Yogis where you u believe in, we act on that and become one with it. You can do that with know all your Chakras, you know about vibrations, you know how to relate to others, still all this knowledge is for concepts but not with reality. This is the problem. I will explain this point. Like personal advantages. So the shadow of the past still lingers on even when you have this new awareness. Animals can supposing a fanatic believes that he can do such and such thing in his own religion, he will do it. But the concept is not reality. swim automatically. They do not have to learn. But human beings have to learn how to swim. So they have forgotten the techniques which were known to the animals and have taken to the techniques of human beings. But in Sahaja Yoga you have got your realisation in one life time, and in this life time you have to grow. and in this life time you have to achieve It has given no benefit to anyone, had shown no performance of any substance. Still people do it! I see in my own country when they were fighting for freedom, my father himself gave up all his property, gave up his practice with 11 children in the family, we were living in palaces, started living in huts, for days together, for years together. For the gross freedom, we do the highest. So the time is so very short everything. But for the secular freedom

 Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze Dec. Nov 10 1999 the Sahaja Yogis have to do everything that is possible. subtler but in your consciousness, you are not yet subtle. There are so many things you know more than the people who are not realised, as absolutely realised. For example we do not even use vibrations. Whenever it is needed we do not use them or sometimes mechanically, just like a So the first thing is to realise, to be aware, to be in your conscious mind all the time, that you are Yogis. You are the ones who are very much higher than the rest of the humanity. That the machine, we start giving Bandhan. So you are still unconscious about your salvation of the whole of the humanity depends on you. The purpose of creation will be served by you. So first Chakras. Slightly conscious when you of all you have to be conscious in your put your mind to it otherwise in your consciousness that you are so central nervous system you are not yet so conscious. This is the reason why you important and that is why you were do not know, why you have to do a thing at a particular time. Unless and until you given realisation. How can you be living with your conditionings and with your ego? The conditionings are like this - Supposing you are coming from a Christian religion, then you must bring that little bit of that religion into raise yourself and try to achieve Nirvikalpa stage, you cannot go further. For example I know everything that I do. I can handle any power whenever I want. I can absorb any negativity I want to and need not absorb any negativity I do not want to. You may be thousands of miles Sahajayoga or if you are from Hindu religion you want to bring some out of that. We have all the essences of peace in Sahaja Yoga, the pure essences but away from me, I know about every one of you. I may not know your worldly we cannot have the groSs nonsense. All these things are like dirt over our names but I know you as part and Sahasrara which must be shaken off. parcel in my being. I also can behave like a human being, absolutely like you, aging like you, wearing, using spectacles, doing all the things that will make me a Though now you are aware and conscious of your Chakras you do not keep them clean. Ordinary human beings, if they have clothes, they have houses, they try to keep it clean. But you do not feel ashamed of them also when they are bad, because after complete human being, and I have accepted this growth consciously, not unconsciously. To me nothing is unconscious. sometime you also lose the awareness So if you have to be conscious of what of them. That means you have become

 Nov Dec. 1999 11 Volume XI Issue 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze you are doing you have to be alert about it. The first thing that you have we have got self knowledge but we have not got self consciousness. Now for example you take somebody's name, say, of some great saint, you feel the vibrations also. Also you know why, because he is a saint. But why not you the Sahajayogis, if your names are achieved is the peace. But even now I find that peace which should become joy becomes a quarrel. Truth is one. You cannot argue about truth. It is a whole genius. It does not quarrel with each taken why not the vibrations flow? And other. We are unconscious about our in this you have taken advantages because Adi Shakti herself is before you. They did fields but when we have to hold something, all of them come together to work it out. So the point of the brain not have anybody to tell them all these which is working this out, the things. But the disadvantage of that is this unconscious part of it, is to be made that you take it for granted. conscious. That is what evelution is. So Now in expression when we say now adherence to any concept is something, when we express, are we against evolution. You must learn to natural? Are we doing it from our heart? face the reality, to accept the reality The consciousness that I am doing it and act in real way. Now you may say, from my heart is what I want you to achieve. Like there are people who work very hard in Sahajayoga. Others will just happens this is a miracle. May be for the human beings, may be for Sahajayogis take it for granted. They don't want to also, but not for me. I know what it is. So, to rise above this half-baked consciousness, one has to see how one is help. They want everything to be ready made. That shows that they are not conscious of their own powers of enjoyment. If they do it from their heart then they will never feel what effort they have put in. They will only feel what they have been blessed with or what they have working it out. The whole system of relating to each other must change completely. That is very important at least for Western people, because atleast in India people know that human efforts lead achieved. The sense of fulfilment and satisfaction will overcome all your problems especially of your left you nowhere and you have to take to your ascent. I mean the real Indians. Some of them do take advantage of Sahajayoga Vishudhi. and then disappear. But most of them Now the second stage would be where know that you have to be conscious of you will be conscious of whatever you what you have got. So we can say that

 Nov - Dec. Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze 12 1999 are doing, where there will be no mistakes. Whatever you will do may You have to mature in your ascent. Now you may say what should we do? Face yourself everyday. In reality, see be alright. Nobody is so far like that, I how much time you spend about want to tell you because some people do mundane worries and how much about feel whatever I say of praising, I am saying your ascent. Have you left everything, it to them. Now for example, today I had all your worries to God Almighty? my watch, I wanted to set my watch, so I Have you completely jumped out of pulled the screw out, simple thing. Now your background? Have your come way out all the way leaving everything that appear to be mistake will turn out to this I did, I would say, in a unconsciously but quite consciously because watch stopped. As I knew what was nonsensical? And how do I relate to others? How do I talk to others, who are Sahaja Yogis? I am surprised sometimes, if one Sahaja Yogi is attacked by a non-Sahaja Yogi, that a Sahaja Yogi group should support a non-Sahaja Yogi! Or a Sahaja Yogi who has to come up pays more attention to the negative people than to the positive! He relates better to the people who are negative than to the people who are positive. He is more friendly and open with negative persons than with the positive. You have to cling on to the positive but it is always the other way round because, it is very subtle ego in that. All this subtle understanding, I have told you many a times. But with your complicated brain, which is like a machine, like a spoiled computer, you can reach some conclusion out of what I have said which is just contrary. Like supposing I said, you forget the past. That means time I have to be there. So consciously I have put myself against myself. If the watch had not stopped I would have come earlier, but that was not the time I had to come. So I had to pull the screw to keep it stopped. So whatever mischief you play you know and you can play it against yourself, and then you can make a drama, Oh I made a mistake and things like that, for nothing at all. But such a stage is far off, I must tell you. Just now the stage is fixed. We are still making lots of mistakes because we are not self conscious. In a gross way we understand self conscious- ness like this-that a person has to go for interview, he has to select a suit properly, he combs his hair properly before going, he clears his throat. But when it is the question of your ascent, are we alert? Or we take it for granted that Mother is just now going to give us a nice bath, put us in the cradle and take us there? This is being cherished. you forget everything that is good of the past? That is, as if I wish you should not understand why you are behaving like

 Nov Dec : 11 & 12 13 1999 Volume: XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze before, a cleverness. this? Forget the past, means do not allow the past to overpower. So you don't argue about it. Don't argue with A brain which is simple, which is about Sahajayoga. You don't argue straight forward, which has got love your leaders. You may be his wife but in it, can understand what I am saying don't argue. We are having a very bad straight forward. This complicated time from some of the wives of the leaders brain is to be put right and the best because they try to influence the way is to stop thinking, just stop husbands. As far as Sahajayoga is thinking. That is what you have to do. concerned they have nothing to do with that. Supposing you are working in an Now when you stop thinking you feel that nothing can be done but by office and the husband is some great official and you are a clerk, will you correct the husband? In this case the thinking only you do not do it. Now for example I have to give you a speech now if I start thinking about it, what will women have to nourish the organization, nourish the husband with love, from their you hear? Can you hear my thinking? You have to, say, enlighten these lamps. Alright, then you just start thinking about it, I have to enlighten. Will it get enlightened? This is to be understood that by thinking you do not do it. Thinking is lazy man's guard, as is used to avoid work. Once Iasked a lady. heart and not from their brain. I think it is so great to her, being born as a woman myself, because I can enjoy the heart, the emotions, the emotions of my love; the working and the play of my love. It is so great that no incarnation can enjoy that as I can. So the women should not feel I had in the house, that we are going out, will you be cooking something for us. When we came back, she had not cooked anything. She used to cook everyday but that day she did not cook anything. I said Why did not you cook something for us? "She said, "I thought you may eat outside." She was a Westerm lady. So my husband said, alright we are going to eat outside, you stay at home. I said it does not look nice. He said, "No, let her know what she thought is meant for herself." So this is the escape which you have learnt degraded if they have to look after the heart. But they are in a way in a higher aspect. You can do without thinking but you can't do without the heart. So the ladies should not argue with their husbands if they are leaders and also one should not argue otherwise also. Because I have seen if the women are very argumentative, the men become deaf. They just do not listen what women are talking. If they are very aggressive then the men become absolutely shut up. So in relationship with each other, you

 Dec. Nov 14 The Divine Cool Breeze 11 & 12 Volume: XI Issue 8661 Sanidhya from God, Salokya meaning must behave in a natural way that you to see God, Samipya closeness to God and Sanidhya is the companionship of God. But you have got Tadatmaya- are a man and you are a woman. You should become more a woman and more a man and then you will see the fun. the oneess with Him. It is not in the Imagine in this world if there were only men and if there were only women, what concept of any one of the Yogis and would have happened. So we have to the saints and the seers who have been. know that in our awareness we have to This Tadatmaya you have when you be conscious, how far we have achieved are outside my body, while they have the consciousness for our relationship this tadatmaya when they are inside with each other. That is the collective my body, they are no more. So you . should understand the time limit, you must understand your greatness, and consciousness of Virat, of the brain, i.e. of Sahasrara you must understand how you people are chosen for the highest work in this So, in principle Sahasrara is Vishnu Tatva. But the deity is Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. creation. So you can see how the beautiful So now there is no time for lethargy. Now you have to rise and awake. Today is the day when I hope you have to jump into Nirvikalpa. But only by effort you will stay there otherwise you will slip down. So go through this lecture again and again and do not think about it. Don't think that it is for somebody else. It is for you, for all of you, each one of you, and you must integration has taken place. The only powers of Shri Vishnu have to act according to the deity, surrendered at the Lotus feet of the deity. So the consciousness of Shri Vishnu is absolutely in the hands of the deity. I do not want to talk about this tremendous deity. It is too much, because it may fill you up with awe. So whatever is working out, allow it to know yourself, how far you are going every day. Today is a special day of Sahasrara. Actually if you see, according work out. They say surrender your Sahasrara to the deity and it is so simple for you because you have the deity, you have your own Sahasrara and it is only to the Sun Calendar, Sahasrara would have been tomorrow. It is Monday which is a Sahasrara. Just imagine that we are having it one day earlier. So one has to know that a Calendar of God has nothing you, the people who are the Sahajayogis today, in modern times, who have seen the deity. They say that you have to ask for three things for Salokya. Samipya and to do with the human calendar. According continued on page 17

 11 & 12 15 Nov- Dec: Volume: XI issue: 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze GURU PUJA (Internet Message) Sunday 30th July 1999 Shri Mataji began by saying this was the tenth anniversary of Sahaja Yogis coming to Cabella to worship Her as their Guru. Through Sahaja Yoga we have achieved absolute knowledge but we are yet to reach the stage where this absolute knowledge can be assimilated. We are yet seeking revenge against that anger. She said that love is the only way to solve problems. Shri Mataji then said that to be good Gurus we must keep a close watch over our animal inheritance and develop a to go deep into this knowledge. peaceful, loving, compassionate temperament. Then when we try to help another person they may feel our love and Shri Mataji defined one of the reasons that we have been unable to assimilate this improve. knowledge as due to a heritage we share with the animal kingdom which lingers within us still– aggressiveness, peevishness and fear are all part of our As Sahaja Gurus we should also forgive which means to forget completely the misdeeds of others. inheritance. Shri Mataji defined our first problem as Shri Mataji added to this the ability to being our animal inheritance, the second. think, to react, and to rationalise which which is worse, develops from thinking creates additional problems such as and ego. With the advent of Sahaja Yoga jealousy. This creates problems which are it is not necessary to physically or not seen in the animal kingdom. Thinking emotionally punish anyone, we must further perverts these inherited know that this will not help a person's tendencies, which lead to expanded spiritual ascent. reactions. Shri Mataji said that we must be kind and understanding which will help everyone's Shri Mataji said that as Gurus we should not react nor try to suppress others. adding that rather than getting angry, our methods should be of love and After receiving our realisation we have compassion. If we avoid anger, this will also received the power of love and prevent others also getting angry and compassion; it was because of our love spiritual ascent.

 Volume: XI Nov Dec. Issue: 11 & 12 1999 16 The Divine Cool Breeze worrying about a person, speaking to them, putting our attention to that person because we feel attached to them, then that we received our realisation. Shri Mataji explained that in all things we must be detached, which is more than just mere words, it is a state of mind that must he achieved. When it comes to helping attention will not work out. Being attached to a few people means that our attention becomes bound and useless and our someone then we must go all out. cannot be useful, there is so much to do, Thinking and worrying about people is there are so many people who want their attached attention, when we leave realisation. Our attention has to be everything to the Divine then this is absolutely free so when we put our detached attention. As Sahaja Yogis we attention it remains absolutely free, this iS spiritual attention; which is the same as love. should realise the extent of our problems, then slowly these should be dissolved: this does not happen by argument or discussion. but through love and about this mundane world, but another Shri Mataji said that She is not talking compassion. world, one which is higher, and where our attention works beautifully and is not Shri Mataji described how the majority of people the world over value love: this is the third quality of human beings. First bound by our attachments. This can all be achieved through introspection whereby we can face ourselves and all problems may be left to the Param-Chaitanya. Our problems is our animal inheritance, second is thinking, and the third is that we value love. cannot be solved by worrying and thinking, they must be left to this power Only Sahaja Yogis can achieve this state of mind and are capable of detached love, which can manage everything. where one is absolutely detached, and absolutely attached. If we know through Shri Mataji declared that Love is Truth vibrations that someone is alright then and Truth is Love. In all our dealings we there is no need to worry about them. If should endeavour to be extremely the vibrations indicate that there is a truthful, and to have pure love which is problem then we can apply full attention not directed towards some personal gain to that person, not through attached or reward. attention, but through detached attention. She remarked that the subject of pure love Shri Mataji remarked that if we are always could go on forever and forever. As

 Nov - Dec. Volume XI Issue 11 & 12 17 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Gurus we need to know the extent of our Following the conclusion of the Puja the duties which requires of us to be International gifts were presented to Shri meditative in order to improve our vision Mataji. Many of the gifts had been and to enable us to be clear of all purchased in America during the celebration of Adi Shakti Puja. Shri negativities. Mataji had explained how the Param- Shri Mataji ended her discourse by Chaitanya had worked it all out- a explaining the meditative state that emits liquidation sale was being conducted in a vibrations which bestows upon us the warehouse near to the site for the Puja where She had found enough gifts for two powers to do our work. There, then remains no need to fight or struggle. We attain a state where we are completely surrounded with love and compassion. Pujas. continued from page 15 know, that whate ver heights you are to certain Calendars, I should have come two thousand years later, and some say I brought to, it is you who have to maintain it with full with power and action. May should have come atleast two thousand years back, in this form. So the ealendar is alright. timing is alright, everything is alright. God Bless You. This lecture is a concern of your Mother. Don't take it as anything ill. I could not You are not robots. You are not machines. have said this even two years back or one You are evolved through evolutionary year back. Now you are at a stage where process, and through evolutionary I can say these things to you. You can process only you have to achieve the understand it but it has to become your higher state. So whatever we may do and consciousness. The stage has reached to whatever may be alright, it is you who understand, but it should become your have to show the results. We may take consciousness. Whatever has become your Sahasrara to a great enlightenment, should happen if you keep it there. out again it will collapse. So you have to b Again May God Bless You.

 Nov - Dec. 11& 12 Volume: XI Issue 18 The Divine Cool Breeze 1999 SHIV PUJA, DELHI 14-2-99 Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Today we have assembled here to do the puja of Shri Maha Deva – Shri Shiv Shankara. Because of Adi Shankaracharya's emphasis people have taken up the Puja of Shiva in a big way. In Southern India two sects have come up: one is Shaivites and the other is Vaishnavites. Shaivites are the worshippers of Lord Shiva and the Vaishnavites are those who worship Lord central path-is the path of Lord Vishnu. 1S Through this path we attain the Shiva Tattva. So Shiv Tattva is the destination and the path is made by Lord Vishnu. This central path is the creation of Lord Vishnu and the Adi Shakti; Lord Shiva has no role in it: He sits comfortably in his Seat, without bothering for any body; if someone wishes to come, may come. To attain Shiv Tattva we should go through this Vishnu Path (Sushumna Path) and Vishnu. In our country we are very expert in dividing ourselves. We divide Deities correct all the centres that are created on it When the centres are cleansed, the as well, and when we try to reunite them then things take a very bad (Vidrup) Vishnu path opens up and our ascent Shape. "Ayyappa' cult in the Southern begins. Many a times I have told about India is an example. According to them when Lord Vishnu assumed the form of Heart, which we call 'Left Heart'. This is "Mohini' then from Lord Shiva she got a not the centre of the heart, In a way it is child. Is it possible? Such nonsensical the reflection of Shri Maha Deva in the beliefs are generally spread in our heart. The abode of Shiva is above our country? Then they form different groups Minds and Thoughts. and find out excuses to fight with each To attain Shiv Tattva we have to see how all these centres. There is a centre in other? If Indians have nothing to fight pure our heart is? We give place to many over, then they create something from their own imaginations. evil thoughts in our hearts. e.g. jealousy. There is no use of becoming jealous: we should not feel jealous of any one. They might have harassed us or done harm to us, jealousy does no good to you. If your heart is pure then the mirror in which the reflection of Lord Shiva has to come u So these two things are connected with each other as Sun is with sun light, Moon with Moon light and word with its meaning. I mean to say that the 'Sopan

 Volume XI Issue 11 & 12 Dec. Nov 19 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze remain pure. But if you are full of jealousy leader and who is what? then the mirror will not remain clean and The Second thing with Indians is that they as such the reflection of Lord Shiva will feel jealous in money matters. Even in also not be perfect. Enemity and ill feelings for others are not to be fostered Sahaja Yoga people have jealously on in the heart. That is why Christ has said account of money matters. Someone has to forgive every one. Forgiving is very important. Many Saints, before and after doing Sahaja work people see how much Christ, have said the same thing, that money one earns and how much he gives "Forgive everyone'. The moment you forgive your enemy, immediately Lord Shiva takes over. The power of Shri got more money and some less. While for Sahaja Yoga. The person whose heart is obsessed with money is useless for Sahaja Yoga because materialism has caught his heart. If you are caught in the clutches of materialism then Mahadeva is the Subtlest and it punishes the evil doer in a nice way. This is the your ascent is very difficult. This is the work of Lord Shiva, its not your work. speciality of our country only. I have not seen it in foreign countries. In Russia and Eastern Block countries there is very little of wealth but they are not much bothered about money. Their heart is so much Therefore jealousy for any one is very bad. But I find that there is lot of jealousy even in Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yogis are jealous of each other. If one person is made trustee, the other one will feel jealous. possible only with the pure heart. This trusteeship etc. have absolutely no Before meditation, we wash our hands meaning in Sahaja Yoga. It is all false; and take bath. It will be better if we Drama of your Mother. Your mother has purify our heart and pray to the Divine spread a web of Maya (Maya jalam). Even to remove all the negativities that are then it disturbs the people; one person there within us. pure-very pure. Bhakti (Devotion) is gets disturbed and the others feel bad The third thing is the six enemies (Shad Ripus). Out of these Shri Krishna has laid emphasis on Krodha -The Anger about it! I do not understand what to do! Such a big work of Sahaja Yoga is going on in different countries all over the (krodha) is the worst of all the enemies; world. I need some one who could be a link between me and Sahaja Yogis. Of course things are getting sorted out now. all other negativities emanate from Krodha. Anger brings to us attachment and then the person repents over what he But you will be surprised that even now there is lot of discussion about who is the has said. But in the fit of anger he goes

 Now Dec. Volume: Xi isue: 11 & 12 20. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze protection at all? A seeker is always protected. Who could touch a person out of self-control and hlurts-out all the dirt that was hidden in his heart since long. in whose hearts resides Shri Maha That comes out of his mouth. We have to be beware of this krodha (Anger). Why Deva? Who could destroy such a do we get angry, we have to think over person? Whatever is done against them, no amount of troubles could it. destroy such seekers, but those who harass them will get destroyed particular person. There are others who themselves. You should have full faith are angry with some society. So people in it. Keep your heart absolutely pure. get angry for different causes. But we Only in a pure heart it could work out should think as to why we get angry. because the reflection of Shiva falls in our Some people said to me that Shri Mataji. heart and for that the heart should be pure. There are people who are angry with a "If some one speaks against you. we feel It is said that Shiva gets angry only once. Buu I have seen him getting angry many a times. It is his right. If some one works against Adi Shakti, then he has the right and he has very long hands. He finishes up such people because he knows that Adi Shakti will not do anything herself. She will not punish anyone. She will forgive all those who commit sins against Her. The powers of Shiva are limitless. When He wants to punish then no one very angry." But if some one speaks against me then I really feel like laughing at him, because there is no meaning at all in speaking against me. I am going to love all.even then if they speak against me then what could I do! But some people are insensible enough. They are to be pitied upon. We have to think that such a person is a big fool and we should look very compassionately at him. This outlook will pacify his anger. In our country there are different kinds of people and organisations who get angry. They will can stop Him. Who is there to check Him? He has got his own protocols, which could not be changed. So in their individual lives Sahaja Yogis have to follow Lord Shiva. If you do not follow Him then first thing will be that you will have heart problem. This is the first punishment. It works out in two ways. Firstly with excessive anger your heart catches and secondly as after effect of the be angry with some one, heat others and kill some others. This is becoming a social evil. This violence is very dangerous and for this they recruit army of their own. It IS very dangerous. If some one does so for his own protection then it is justified to some extent, but if a person is a seeker (A Bhakta) then why does he need

 Nov Deo, 21 1999 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume XI issue 11 & 12 Tattva is absent in you. You are unable to understand the feelings of love with which the poor fellow had given you that anger when a person repents he gets the disease of Angina'. Both, Anger and repentance are harmful. But one can not get rid of anger because like drinking present. anger also becomes a habit. Once one starts enjoying it the face of an angry In India we have the example of Sudama. Sudama went to meet Shri Krishna and twok along roasted rice to be presented person gets distorted and he goes in the state of delirium. No one can control such to Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna ate those a person. So, as a solution. I thought that if you sit before the mirror and get angry rice with great respect and love. Anything on yourself, rebuke yourself and say, 'I presented with the feelings of love is just am the most stupid fellow', then, may like paras' chemical which when put be. you get rid of your anger. I am saying behind the glass, makes it a mirror. Similarly, if you have feelings of love for someone, but for want of money you offer some small present then it should be received by him with the same love and respect. This feeling of love gives a subtle sight to the person. It is artistic, Art that it is possible to get rid of anger. But the problems are so complicated that it is difficult to find out solutions. Further it is seen that the more attention we pay to some thing, the more we react. There is reaction to everything and this reaction is much more in foreign countries. Here emanates from it So how much artistic is this art of love! By this you could see. there is a carpet, immediately they will how much love is there in this person? How much loving is he! How gentle and say. "I don't like it, I like it." Who are they to say all this? But it has become a fashion to say 'I like it, I don't like it', as nice is he? When you start seeing this quality in others then you will look within yourself also and think, "What am I ? 'Da I have that much of love?" Am I so gentle?" Do I have all this goodness in meor am I rendering lip service only and thus confusing the people! Matter-of-fact by our misdeeds we confuse ourselves and none else. By our wrongful thoughts and styles of life we can give comforts to none and to ourselves, not at all. So from the point of view of Swartha if everyone were a renowned doctor who says 'Ilike it', I don't like it'. This should not be said. This is the indication of your bad Agnya. What do you think about yourself that you say, 'I like it. I don't . like it You have no right to do that. Someone offers you a beautiful flower and you immediately say. "Idon't like this flower." You are unable to understand the fceling of love of that person because Shiv

 Dec.. 22 1999 Volume XI Issue 11 & 12 Nov The Divine Cool Breeze should purify our heart. (Selfishness)-The word Swartha is very beautiful. 'Swa' means self" (Atma). You So far I have talked to you, about three enemies. The fourth enemy present within must know the meaning of Self. For this purpose people do the puja of Lord Shiva. But I have seen that the worshippers of us is 'Ego". Ego-centric ladies behave like Shiva are hot tempered, miserly and what not! No deity is as generous and as loving as Lord Shiva. He is the source of love. men. They start walking like men, like ladies they can not walk. Ego comes to them for many reasons because of money, beauty, High Education etc. Whatever the cause, under the impact of The love that is flowing today is emanating from His Holi feet, It'is because of Him that human beings are ego, ladies start walking like men and ego-effected men start behaving like bathing in the ocean of love and all this work is getting done. After sef realization when you attain that state - The state women. I mean such a man makes himself up, for hours sits before the mirror, combes his hair again and again and all sort of stupidity. Such a person behaves of say Jeev Atma, then your attention gets established in the Holy feet of Lord Shiva like women. Its for the women to do the make up. He cannot walk straight. From behind, if you see him walking you will and the qualities of five elements (Pancha Tattva) become very subtle and manifest. Already I have told you about the four feel that it were some lady in male dress, elements but the fifth one, 'Ether', I didn't moving ahead with ego. They get intoxicated like elephants, In all their (Sky Element), When a seeker ascends. activities, ego is apparent. It is difficult to understand the cause of their ego. What for do they consider themselves. something special? All these things are stupid and meaningless. In Sahaja they have no meaning at all.So if you consider yourself something special, you are finished, there is nothing left in you. So its not wise to imagine yoursellf to be touch. In Hindi we call it "Aakash Tattva he attains subtle Aakasha. the Subtlety of Ether element. There is no need to activate this element. If a seeker has some problem. this element is omnipresent. It is present every where. Your attention immediately reaches where it is required It is just wonderful? It is like that: people may call it miracle, but it is not. In Sahaja a rich person (Raceszada) or some thing great. Now even the poor people sufer from ego element: dalits (Down Trodden) also suffer from it. Its beyond Yoga if your Shiva Tattva is awakened then all subtle- and the subtlest state that is within you, gets awakened. Therefore first of all we The subtlest-qualities

 Volume : XI tssue : 11 & 12 23 Dec. Nov 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze I am like this, I am like that. say it to understanding. People talk in such a way and think themselves to be something yourself, and when you start doing that, very great. What are you as an individual? then all the bhoots (evil spirits) will run Thinking of oneself like that is going away away because by our continuous thought from the state of joy (Ananda). because process, by our Agnya, we have gathered the power of Shiva takes the seeker to all these negativities. The excessive use the state of joy. The seeker does the bhakti of Agnya creates all the problems, every of Shiva, to have this bliss of joy, But I thing becomes mental projection and such have seen that most of the Shiv bhaktas person becomes very troublesome. are short tempered type. No one could He himself is always in fixes. By troubling talk to them, what is the use? Natraj Sakshat, from whom emanates all art and joy, who is joy incarnate, how could these so called pseudo devotees be called His bhaktas? They hang such a big linga in their neck that it could give heart attack. What is the need of it? you are yourself others one could not be happy. It will have its impact on you even if you are a stone. Il will have its impact and the person becomes miserable. Mother thinks of your comforts. She desires you to be comfortable, contented and peaceful. She wishes you to be loved. So that you the sakshat ling-swarupa. Without becoming that they say that they are Shiva bhaktas! On one side they will do Shiva become gentle. This is the method of the Mother. But Lord Shiva's method is quite different. He tolerates to a limit and then deals so severely that I get terrified about that person. What will happen to this man? Where shall he reach? What is He doing? But Lord Shiva doesn't think all these things. He doesn't forgive evil doers. He forgives only those who are worthy of His forgiveness. He blesses those who meditate upon Him continuously. But the person who does not basically want to get improved, Lord Shiva sets him right. bhakti and on the other, fight with each other. They have different marks, Shiv bhaktas have different style to put Sandal on their foreheads and Vishnu bhaktas have different style. What is the meaning of it? Vertical application of Sandal on the forehead means that we are ascending. Alright, if you are ascending then you should be peaceful. It should be applied both ways-Vertically and Horizontally. otherwise do not apply it. It should have Its true. That's why we should be scared some meaning. It is the central path of Him. "Bhayankara" (fearful, terrifying) is one of His name. Because in anger he forgives none. But the worst of his anger leading to the goal. By passing through it you leave behind all the negativities. Before eriticizing others criticise vourself.

 Nov - Dec. Volume : XI Issue 11 & 12 24 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze protection, now who could save him? So you should try to seek your protection in Lord Shiva. Of course, you are (Kopa) is at the time of pralaya, in the night of doom. At that time He destroys everything with his anger. I told you that it is the last judgement: which path you take to, where you go, whatever you do, it is fully recorded in you. According to protected by the Mother, yet you should seek protection in Lord Shiva, and for that I have told you about five your deeds, you go to hell or to heaven. It is Lord Shiva who sends people to hell; I do not do that. I have nothing to do with (Narka) Hell. But Shiva will take the elements. You have to attain the subtlety of these elements. To achieve that State its necessary to meditate regularly. Those who meditate could be person from his legs and throw him in distinguished from those who do not. the hell. You may keep on saying that I There is no doubt about it. Now those am the worshipper of the Mother, I am her follower, Why am I being punished? I am not instrumental in it. Once some who meditate but whose attention is not there in meditation, those who do not have understanding or expertise for meditation, who are lazy about one calls me Mother then I can not think ill of him. If I am the protocols meditation, their meditation also could (Maryadas) for Shiva then He is my not be successful. They can not get benefited by meditation. Meditation should be so deep that each of your cell gets filled with joy, and joy pours out of protocols too. But we both have altogether different natures. So you have to be very careful. them. Lord Shiva is the eleven Rudras of Jesus The first and foremost blessing of Lord Christ. These Rudras are the form of Lord Shiva. So you have to be very careful. I Shiva is that he gives you Joy, fills your being with joy. Only the chanting of his name makes one joyful, but people behave have to warn you because even in Sahaja Yoga people come to earn money, to do ill of others and to be unjust. Such persons are sieved out. But as soon as they are out, they get in opposite to it They do not behave in the expected munner. the people whom we think to be Shiva bhaktas (devotees), how could they be so dry? They could not be. There could Iam very surprised that to the orbit of Lord Shiva. Then I am told that they have gone bankrupt, also be one more reason for it. Those who they have this problem and that keep over busy all the time, they become right sided. Such people get disconnected problem. I said please don't tell it to me now. He himself ran out of his

 Dec. 25 Nov 1999 Volume : XI Issue: 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze moment we stop following these from Lord Shiva and then He shows His powers You know it already that goddess maryadas, we are finished All these Saraswati is the sister of Lord Shiva The maryadas are because of the grace of Lord worshippers of Saraswati, the people who Shiva. Whatever has been told to us so are busy in acquiring knowledge, those far. do not do this, do not do that, Shiva who are keen seekers of art, should know has created all these Maryadas'. He is that she is the sister of Lord Shiva, that so much concerned about His maryadas. Sister's relationship is very important. If The moment you disobey them, you get you try to go against her, create impure literature or bad books and thus misuse affected. People have created so many wrong in the name of Shiva Tattva. Many of them think that by taking Bhang (An intoxicating Herb) Shiv Tattva is awakened. Some others are of the opinion ideas your knowledge, then Lord Shiva punishes you with heavy hand. His sister is very important to Him and going against her is a terrible sin. For Adishakti too, Lord Shiva has very rigid rules and that drinking of Alcohol submerges you protocols. in Shiva Tattva! We have created such wrong ideas. Lord Shiva drank poison, would you also drink it? He drank poison to make the world free of it: He ate the Now Sahaja Yogis have to pay attention towards themselves first of all I do not mean to say that they should sit before the mirror for hours together Not at all. sitting before the mirror is considered to poisonous Dhatura. So that people don't have to eat these poisons. Similarly you be a disease. What I mean to say is that you should have attention towards your "self and see what is the problem in me?" "What wrong things I do The straight path, that is told in Indian culture, should be taken, Nowadays people think it might have heard that Sai Nath smoked tobacco. because in Maharashtra most of the people are addicted to take tobacco. so Sai Nath thought that why not consume the whole tobacco of Maharashtra? But people have taken it the other way They say Sai Nath used to smoke Chilam (faci) so why not we? Shri Sai Nath wanted them to get rid of appropriate to live as you like, Whats wrong? But it is not proper. In India, one has to live according to Indian culture. Your life style should remain connected this bad habit and that's why he wanted to finish up the whole tobacco. Now the to Indian culture because in it great the Bhoots of the whole importance is given to Shiv Tattva. Shiv Tattva has created all our maryadas. The goddess eats up world, would you also eat Bhoot? Devi

 Volume : XI issue 11 & 12 Nov Dac. 26 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze go and eat anywhere. Even in my own house I eat without salt and sugar. Right from my childhood I have made my self insensitive to the tastes of tongue. Whatever is available I enjoy myself of it. But our tongue is used to different takes up all the diseases that are there in you. Would you also absorb the diseases of others? Its not your work. So, what all these sadhus are doing? You have neither the powers to do that nor is it your duty. Your duty is to cleanse yourself, tastes. All Indians-whether from U.P.. correct yourself. First you attain that state then everything will be alright. Without Punjab or South-all are very expert in this regard. With tasty food they befool people. My husband likes this, my achieving that state its useless. There is absolutely no use of doing all these rituals. Many things could be justified in wrong manners, but if we go in the right direction, in right manner, then husband likes that. What to do? Women will be slaves to their husbands and day and night keep pleasing them. The one who talks about food all the times is first of all we should cleanse and purify not a Sahaja Yogi. our hearts. All these habits, we are addicted to, affeet our heart, In the olden In Milan, at the time of Guru Puja. times disciples were made to live in myself had to cook. What to do? For four jungles, amidst snakes, scorpians, other years I myself had been cooking because animals and insects, so that they were not no one else could prepare tasty food. addicted to luxurious life. At the most Sahaja Yogis (Indians Specially) would they could live in huts done with say Mother, it is just like plastic. Indians cowdung. They were made to sleep there and lead a very simple life. Very few who come their for Puja would like to see me. They have a special right on me. Also they are very critical of the food offered to them. Now one more thing has begun. Indian Sahaja Yogis need attached bathrooms! How their parents used to simple clothes were given to them so that they could not be crazy about clothes. shoes and special type of food. It is unnecessary to say all these things to live? Now they want British style attached bath rooms. I am mentioning because I am tired of it. In Ganapatipule I provided Western bathrooms for the foreigners and Indian for Indians. I thought Indian Sahaja Sahaja Yogis. You know that your Mother could live anywhere, could sleep anywhere, could eat any food. Indians are very fond of tasty food. Sahaja Yogis invite each other for dinner and lunch. Yogis would like the Indian style. But Ladies, specially, ask me to come to their houses to eat. I say, its difficult for me to Indian Sahaja Yogis demanded western

 Nov Dec. 27 1999 Volume XI issue 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze away of the attention in absurdities will make you just an ordinary person. bathrooms. I said, take tumblers and go to jungle, that is how you will improve. They have been going for years like that. But now they have become big Sahibs! Its a fashion, nowadays the ladies will go Then the poor foreigner Sahaja Yogis to beauty parlour, the face will remain the said, Shri Mataji we like Indian style same but they will throw away their bathrooms. There are very clean, please money. Brahmin ladies of Pune wear sleevless, black goggles and drive mopeds. I could not understand! Pune is give these bathrooms to us. Then I changed the arrangement and Hindustanis were very happy that they have got punaya patnam', but what is this punyai attached bathrooms. You should be (good deeds)? Thus we have adopted ashamed of it. Sahaja Yogis talking about shiy Tattya. Look at Shiva. He is not such things should be ashamed. Your bothered about clothes. Even in His forefathers used to go to jungle with marriage procession He sat upon Nandi, tumblers and now what are you the 'Ox. Why Nandi? Because Nandi is demanding? Have you got some disease His disciple. He obeys His commands. or any other problem? Unneccessarily and that is the reason that Nandi is Lord they put me in trouble. But some how it Shiva's most beloved disciple. Shiva sat struck me and things were managed. You upon Nandi and reached the place of western system without even thinking of will be surprised, Indians who come to Parvati. Of course Parvati had no Cabella, do not like to live together. objection but her brother. Lord Vishnu, Western Sahaja Yogis are very rich, they was surprised to see this strange have got cars and other facilities, but they bridegroom. I do not mean to say that you should dress up shabbily at the time of marriage. To accept every thing, all sort offoods is nice. Wisdom is your ornament. But these people will keep on criticizing their hosts for the food that they offer. What food did they prepare? If the food was good then they will ask their wives to prepare like that. So this taste of the tongue is in abundance in India. It should be reduced. These foreigner Sahaja Yogis sleep in Hanger. But Indians need a special place; they will stay in hotels. They cannot sacrifice their comforts. They have not learnt that this modernism is beyond me to understand. These foreigners have no servants. So they have only one bath.oom in their houses because they themselves have to clean it. Since you can afford to have servants, you keep many bathrooms but all these habits will take you away from your power. Your eat your Indian food, I have never heard attention will fritter away. Frittering any complaint. But none of you could

 Volume XI Isue 11 & 12 Nav Dec. 28 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze importance. If you sleep on the bed, then for ten days you should sleep on the earth. Without enslaving your body, you cannot achieve your ascent. Many people can not walk at all because they have the habit to travel by car. They keep on borrowing the cars. None of them will think to go by bus. In olden times there used to be take their Western food. Till you are caught in this temptation, you cannot have this deep joy. In olden days seekers were asked to renounce every thing to achieve the joy of Lord Shiva. First renounce, go to Himalyas, stand on one leg. You should not wear any clothes. Take a dip in the river and then meditate with wet clothes. They used to torture the body. Even these days Gurus beat their disciples. They do not give realization so easily. After lot of no bus at all. We used to walk five miles every day to reach the school though we had a car and every thing. But we were very fond of walking barefoot. Walking barefooted on the earth is good to torture and hard work a few seekers get it but such seekers get established in it. receive vibrations. You should also Sahaja Yogis are given realization make the habit of walking without without undergoing such penance. shoes. Its very important. You will be Their previous Sanskaras (habits) still linger on in then. What to do with that? benefited, Mother earth will have your vibration and you will feel nice. These sanskaras are to be pushed away, to be finished. There is no need to get in to extremities. No need to renounce home We have become slaves to the comforts just like Nawabs. What did the Nawabs achieve? Similarly our lives will be wasted if we do not come out of the clutches of the slavery. First we have to reduce the slavery and establish Shiv Tattva in our hearts. Nothing else is much important and everything: There is no need to do. Dravidi Pranyamas (controlling the breath). But one thing is a must, you have to reduce this temptation of taste. Temptations for the taste are to be gotten rid off. It is very necessary. Freedom from taste is a big achievement. People get enraged if they do not get food of their own choice. They throw away their plates, beat their servants and so on. If you make yourself insensitive to taste, then I think, many sweet shops will close down. However, what I mean to say is that the body should not be given much -beautiful and fashionable dresses etc. Whatever is available, wear it. You will lose nothing. On the contrary you will be happy that you are a contented person. Now a days the price of gas cylinders in India has been increased by Rupees Sixteen. The ladies opposed the price rise and had a procession. I saw their photographs in the news paper. All were

 Nov - Dec. Volume XI Issue 11 & 12 29 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze so well decorated that I said that each people should also learn to be above the tastes of the tongue. It will be better one of them might have applied powder worth Rupees fifteen. Why are they going on strike now? No one thinks of the if you take boiled food for a few days. No mother would suggest such a thing to her children, what do I do? It is damaging the Shiv Tattva in you. If you are much absorbed in tasty food then Shiva Tattva will disappear and all the labour will be lost. It is not good to be absorbed in eating all the times. People in olden days used to observe fasts and sacrifice some thing. If you are contented increased salary, We used to pay Rupees Twenty-Twenty five to our servant. Today he gets two thousand five hundred, clothes and other facilities, yet he is complaining. When salaries are increascd so much, would not the prices increase? Salaries and prices rise with the same speed. There is a story that in Sri Lanka labours were given one gold brick a day. One person received two bricks against one day's work. He went to a barber shop then there is no need to think of food all the time nor to invite people at your place. for shave. He asked from the barber, Cast system is another big problem in "What are the charges? Two bricks". India. Kayasth is separate, Brahmin is came the answer. As the income, so the separate. Even now it exists. Each one of expenses. Its unwise to keep complaining them forms a separate group. Now you about price rise. When your salaries are are all Sahaja Yogis, then why should you worry about these castes? If you were to so much increased then why to keep crying about the price rise? Its a very do all these things even now then why did you come to Sahaja Yoga? There is no Caste and creed in Sahaja Yoga. What is the caste of Lord Shiva? People with simple thing. If we learn it then socially also we could achieve Shiv Tattva. one eye blind, bare footed and Limb broken were taken in the marriage procession by Lord Shiva. So it is against I was with Gandhiji in his Ashram for some time. People staying in the Ashram used to run away because they were to Shiv Tattva to be concerned about castes clean the bathrooms of others. No sweeper was engaged in the Ashram. One had to wash ones own clothes, wash ones own plates. Every one had to take boiled food, at the most a little raw mustard oil and to think that different food should be prepared for different castes. I could never understand as to how the people draw pleasure out of it! Whats the reason Bangalis want Bangali food, Madrasis put on it. How many Hindustanis eat such a food? Most of the people ran away from the Ashram in twa-three days. You want South Indian food. Once I asked why there is no standard food in Airlines?

 Volume : XI issue : 11 & 12 Nev Dec. 30 The Divine Cool Breeze 1999 They replied, "Shri Mataji, which is the have to be caught in it. Lead simple life. standard food in our country?" That's In our country simple people have right. Every one has liking for the food attained heights. During pre- of his own state. One should have sweet independence days Gandhiji asked every tongue. One feels as if Ravana's are one to wear khaddar and thus he set the coming out of the smiles of certain people right. Now you have to control person's and when ladies speak, it appears yourself because you are enlightened to be like "Chandika'. Both men and beings. You are in the Holy feet of Lord women are very strange. Where is Shiv Shiva. Correct yourself, do not try to correctothers, correct yourself and feel blessed that you are a self realized Tattva in these strange habits? Lord Shiva is the ocean of love, He bestows boons person. How many realized souls were there in the olden times? Today you are in thousands. So start talking to each other very sweetly, from the depth of the heart. From heart if you talk to people even on Rakshasas. If we have to awaken Shiv Tattva with in us then how could we be caught in such stupidity? How could we do all that? Tell me. The way we criticise each other and call high and low, it is not like Lord Shiva. no one takes ill of it. Observe all the The streams of love are flowing in Lord Shiva, While bathing in this ocean of protocols (Maryadas) with your children and elders. This way you will make yourself and others happy. But without the blessings of Lord Shiva you cannot do that. So look within yourself and see love -you should not say such baseless things. There is no use of it. We should enjoy each others love and understanding. Of course, Sahaja Yogis do not fight with each other. With great love they meet each other. However, their small, small individual likings, eating and moving should be corrected a little bit. If that you are an enlightened person. Am I patient enough or not? Do I quarrel with others over small small things and find faults with them? Then definitely there is something wrong with me. Put your attention on that, only then you could be cleansed. Until we do that it will be wonderful. Your attention will go towards your heart. It you know your shortcomings, how could you cleanse them? This cleansing is much needed. Only by this cleansing you could visualise the Divine Father. The God Almighty within you and will not remain entangled in these things. Fashion and designing is much more rampant in foreign countries. They create different fashionable dresses and the wearer thinks very great of himself or other people could also have this bliss. May God Bless You. herself. Italian people are very much affected by these things. But you do not

 Nov Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12 31 The Divine Cool Breeze Dec. 1999 HANUMANA PUJA (PUNE 31-3-99) Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Today we are celebrating Hanumana's of Shri Hanumana, Jayanti. What to say about Hanumana? The more powerful and wise, he was The Second quality of Shri Hanumana is that he is half human and half monkey equally devoted and dedicated. Generally such a powerful person becomes right- sided and considers himself so high that A perfect combination of animal and human being. In the process of our he would not listen to anyone else But evolution, love and emotions that we had Hanumana is a special deity, a typical left behind, Shri Hanumana had taken up. deity full of qualities. There was a perfect A guru has many disciples who are balance between his devotion and power. supposed to be his slaves. Dogs also have How could he achieve this balance is a that loyalty. A dog is loyal to his master thing to be understood. In Sahaja Yoga, and for him it could sacrify its life. when we are enlightened, we get many Similarly a seeker has to be dedicated to powers. Then we have to keep balance. his Guru. The way in evolutionary process a creature, in the company of the human being, learns complete devotion and loyality, shows that devotion (Bhakti) is innate in us. The seed of Bhakti is already We love others and with the power of the love, we keep on doing our duties. Shri Hanumana was very powerful. He had many divine powers in him- Navdha, that is Garima, Laghuma etc. He could be as big as he wanted to be and as sown in us. In the beginning we were not in human state. With the awakening of Bhakti we came to this level. Let us take small as an atom. He had achieved all the example of an animal. You give it a little of your love and affection, it will close to you and will be these powers. Without attaining balance and coming to the central path. Such a powerful person, generally goes crazy. Each cell of Shri Hanumana's body was filled with power and devotion. Because of this speciality today we worship Shri Hanumana all over the world. Smail. small very come very loyal. Take the example of a horse. How it scarifies its life for the sake of its master! The loyality of the elephant is well known. It will never let the master suffer. If a tiger orany other animal attacks the master the elephant protects him even at the cost of its life. This relation of master and evolved foreign children, when they start painting, Iam surprised, first of all paint the picture

 Volume XI Issue : 11 & 12 1999 32 Nov Dec. The Divine Cool Breeze killed the Ravana when he came to it. animal is established in us. We have to Tulsi Dasa has described his bow very very beautifully. Shri Rama was aiming at Ravana's head with his arrow. Out of awaken it. The elephant has the power to fight and die for the master because it is devoted to him and loves him. We say ten head's of Ravana one will fall down. that Sahaja Yoga is the work of Divine Love. Its right, whether we know it or But again it will assume its place. Lakshamana suggested Shri Rama to shoot an arrow in the heart of Ravana, not, its power is innate. It is divine power. When a human being bows before without which he will not die. Hit him in someone and regards him higher, it is the the heart. Shri Rama was a very humble person. Though he was very powerful yet he said to Lakshmana that Ravana has expression of that divine power. But when a person is respectful to his Guru then he gets blessed with the grace and power of placed my Sita in his heart, therefore, I cannot hit him in the heart. Again and the Guru. So the devotion and the power (Bhakti and Shakti) are not different things. It is again when I chop off his heads, his attention will be diverted from the heart. Only then shall I shoot him in the heart. What an example of the love of a husband for his wife! Ocean of power, how he was one. We shall say that the right side is the source of power and the left of Bhakti. Shri Hanumana had in Him this harmony of Bhakti and Shakti. In Lanka when he full of love! went to Shri Sitaji and requested her to There are many stories about Shri Hanumana which prove that he was also accompany him back, Shri Sitaji said, "You are my son, I will not come with you. My husband has to come and kill the ocean of love and compassion. But this Rakshasa. Only then I will go with he had no hesitation in killing an evil him". Shri Hanumana bowed before Shri person who harassed and killed others. Sitaji. He was powerful enough to bring Shri Hanumana knew that Ravana is Sitaji back to Shri Rama. But he thought afraid of fire. So he went to Lanka and that when Mother is saying like that then burnt it with his power. He burnt Lanka its all right. After that a big war was but didn't kill anyone. Ravana was not burnt. But he was terrified. Every one in fought because it was needed. Lanka was afraid that Ravana has Shri Rama has many special qualities. He was very powerful and a perfect archer. You might have heard about what he did in Sita Swayamvara. The same Shri Rama committed sins. Before that the people of Lanka accepted whatever Ravana did and bowed before his desire. Nobody dared stop him. But when Lanka was

 11 & 12 Volume XI Issue Nov Dec. The Divine Cool Breeze 1999 33 judge and understand everything with burnt, the people were terrified. We could love. Shri Ganesha and Shri Hanumana have been burnt down! But none was are the incarnations of this divine wisdom. burnt. To make them conscious about Shri Hanumana was very powerful and Ravana's henious sins, Shri Hanumana fast and Shri Ganesha is cool-natured. But burnt Lanka. How wise and halanced was when required, both are very big hitters. They remain with you every moment. Whenever anyone troubles you, your protectors are there. Often you see that security moves with the ministers and V.L.Ps. The security of Sahaja Yogis also moves with them; that is, the security of Ganas. Ganas have many things to do. Ganapati-Shri Ganesha keeps them Bajarangbali? In history we find that the most of the powerful people were full of love. Shivaji is an example. The more power he had, the more wise, systematic and balanced he was. When you could achieve this balance, only then you are Sahaja Yogis. Achieving power does not mean that you should say good bye to love and start misbehaving. informed about you as to where is the The dignity of your power lies in problem, from where you are getting becoming the guardians of poor and down attacked and troubled. You do not know trodden. You have no need to fight with that if anybody wants to attack you those who harass them and put them to secretly, even then these god's ganas trouble. Only bandhan will do the whole work for you. The power that you have achieved should be used to finish the stand by you. When Shri Ganapati informs about it, Shri Hanumana sets them right. So Sahaja Yogis have no need negativity. But like Hanumana you do not have to take Sword and Gada in your hands. Your power is with in you. By your to be frightened. No need at all to be frightened. experiences you could see that anyone harassing you is automatically finished, wheather you take up weapons or not. Thus you are protected and with you other Sahaja Yogis will also be protected. In it Shri Hanumana has an important role. You do not know that he is with you. I tell you a story which is very surprising. America bombarded certain areas of Africa where they thought terrorists had hideouts. I am telling you the story of a place where some Sahaja Yogis used to live. One of the bombs exploded there and most of the people died. But there was absolutely no damage done to Sahaja Yogis. They were flabbergasted. Even the dust particles did not fall on them. They had never come to Cabella, not even His nature is as pure and innocent as that of a child. But he is very disereet and full of all the qualities. He was blessed with divine-discretion with which he could

 Volume XI issue 11 & 12 Nɔv - Dec. 1999 34 Nov The Divine Cool Breeze before you. You are no saint'. Lot of hue and cry was made. On the day the king was to cut the neck of Hazarat thought of it. But after this incident they came to Cabella and told, "Shri Mataji we do not know who protected us? But we all Sahaja Yogis were saved. All other Nizamuddin, some one chopped off the neck of the king. No one knew how it people have died. Now this is one incident You are protected because you was done! If this protection was not there then all the saints and religious people have accepted the God Almighty and Sahaja Yoga made yourself spiritually conscious. By this transformation you would have been finished. The rulers of the nation were so violent that they would have finished these people. But God is have become such devoted and powerful persons. Now no one dare touch you. I can give you thousands of such examples that once you get your self-realization in Sahaja Yoga then no one could harm you. there with these saints and God is made of the power of Shri Ganesha and Shri Hanumana. They look to this protection. When Maha Rana Pratap, the ruler of Mewar, went to fight with the Mughals, his soldiers requested him to go back because it was difficult to defeat the formidable enemy. Maharana Pratap asked the soldiers to go back. He said that I will not budge and keep fighting because Ganas are with me. He was also a Sahaja Yogi. He told his soldiers to go avway if they wished to do so but. "I will fight with the enemy because Ganas are with me." So understand that you are protected from all sides. What should happen to a Sahaja Yogi when he gets this protection? He should become In olden times also there used to be saints and Sadhus. All were troubled and cheated. But despite all these troubles and difficulties they stuck fimly to their faith. They were also protected. They said such things that angered the rulers. They didn't hesitate to speak against the rulers and evil doers but because of the power of Shri Hanumana no one could touch them, no one could kill them. There is a beautiful story about Khawaza Nizamuddin Sahib. The emperor ordered him to come and bow before him. Hazarat Nizamuddin very patient, discreet and a fearless person. He will not be afraid of stick to his place and face the evil people. He need not do anything. Now that age has gone. You just stand boldly and the negative people will run away. Many flatly refused to do that. The king was furious and warned him that within three enemy, days if he doesn't come and bow down before him then his neck will be chopped off. Hazarat Nizamuddin said, Do whatever you like, I will not bow down

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI Issue: 11 & 12 Dec. Nov 1999 35 Sahaja Yogies write to me their need to strengthen your body. You are interesting experiences. Otherwise it was not an casy already strong. There is job to spread Sahaja Yoga in Western Chinese story. Chinese people like cock countries. Now Muslims are also fighting. Once a Chinese King thought very accepting Sahaja Yoga. So you can that it would be better if his cock could understand how powerful this Divine be trained by some saint. A Saint fights Power-The power of love is and how with none yet none touches him. People much it could perform! But that doesn't are afraid of him and bow before him. mean that in the name of Shri Hanumana What is their speciality that they live comfortably in this evil world? He took you should create some big institution. Not at all. The way people are doing now a days, they will take the name of Shri his cock to the saint who asked him to leave the cock there. After one month the king took away his cock and on the day of cock fighting, he put the cock in the arena. All the cocks were fighting with each other but this one was standing by itself. One after one all these cocks ran away. It was the only one standing in the arena. All the cocks got frightened of it because it stood undaunted. Hanumana, or of Shri Ganesha or of Lord Shiva. You need not create such organizations. You yourself are an organisation. No one could touch you, no one could destroy you. Only you have to know Thy Self. Its mentioned in all the scriptures that Self Realization means Knowing Oneself. What do you mean by Knowing Today we are worshipping Shri ourselves'? It means that we should be Hanumana. So we should think that He aware of the fact as to who stand resides within us. He controls our right side-The Pingla channel-and gives us zeal. As a result heat is generated. But his path is such that the heat (power) and devotion should go side by side. So the heat, the energy acts on right side but around us, who are our protectors, and how will you give your love and affection to the people? As some one said yesterday that I will comfort every one and fill the whole world with joy', when this feeling without the balance of Shri Hanumana comes to you then you think that there is this heat gives birth to many diseases in us, such as liver problem, bronchial no one to harm you. No oe dare do that. For this you have to do nothing at all. You need not take a sword or any other asthma and heart attacks. When this heat weapon. All these things are already with you. They are innate in you. You have no goes downward, Shri Hanumana tries to control it, but when the heat goes out of

 Nov Dec. Volume: XI Issue 11 & 12 36 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze his control then many incurable diseases emanate from it. It could cause blood cancer, intestine problem etc. Hot Liver is the cause of many diseases and liver problem comes because we do not follow Shri Hanumana. Sometimes we get angry. your heart. The one who doesn't respect him could get heart attack, or many other diseases even after coming to Sahaja Yoga. You should understand that Shri Hanumana is the ideal before you. Lord Ganesha is also there. He was innocence incarnate. He is as innocent as a small There is no need of getting angry. But in the fit of anger we create lot of problems, beat others and so on. child. But he is very wise and discreet. Shri Hanumana is balanced and full of love and joy. At the same time he is power Anger is not the power of Shri Hanumana. There is absolutely no need to get incarnate. Sahaja Yogi should understand all these things and his life and character should angry with others. If you respect Shri Hanumana you have no need to get be well balanced. When angry, you should watch silently. I think I never get angry. angry. Shri Hanumana never gets angry with any one. But we human beings are Without getting angry every thing works infuriated over silly things. Ego plagues us. Shri Hanumana had no ego at all. out. But people could not control their Generally right sided people are ego anger. In the fit of anger they start oriented. Human beings have so much of abusing, Excessive anger is a serious thing, resulting in a serious disease called Ego that I can not understand! When I Alzheimer. Anger is the cause of Alzheimer-Anger which has no cause try to see through them, there appears to be no cause for this Ego. Even an ordinary at all. Suppose someone slaps your son. Its enough to make you angry. What is in it to get angry? What is in it to get angry? Actually you should think that your child might have made some mistake or you are spoiling him by your love. If this type person is full of Ego, whereas many kings have no Ego at all, Ego affects all those who do not follow Shri Hanumana. As you respect Shri Hanumana similarly you regard Shri Rama. Now tell me whether a right sided person should get the disease of asthma or not because Shri Rama is of balance is not achieved then this disease of Alzeimer is there, which makes madcap of a man. Such a person neither dies himself nor lets anyone else die. He always keeps abusing and shouting. Such a person could be cured in Sahaja Yoga, the ruling deity of the right heart. Because you do not respect Shri Hanumana, do not behave like him you are not balanced like him, therefore you fall victim to this disease of asthma. Lord Shiva resides in

 Volume XI Isue : 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze Dec. Nov 37 1999 but the treatment is very difficult because the reason drinking is prohibited in all such mad caps will abuse those who try religions. But these Christians find to cure them. So who will go to such a excuses to drink. Hindus and Muslims are person? If a patient abuses the Doctor, also no exception. Christians say that the doctor will say "Go to Hell what have Jesus Christ made wine to be served in a I to do? Same thing happens to such wedding feast. Its false. But people take people:; no Sahaja yogi likes to go near it as an excuse for drinking. In England, I them. was surprised, if some one dies people will drink, if a child is born, they will Drunkards are the worst enemies of Shri drink! Drinking, has become an addiction. Hanumana. He burns up the Lanka of Alcohol has become their culture. They those drunkards. No one likes to mix up have written books on Alcohol, when to with such people. They gather ten take which Alcohol! On what Occasion Alcohol addicts and drink. There is a particular type of glasses are to be used nothing in the house for the children to eat but the stupid people spend everything for drinking. When I see these drunkards, 1 think them to be half human. Half of on wine! Those who follow Shri Hanumana can not take Alcohol because drinking is disrespect to this deity. He would not allow it. But these days them are absolutely mad. Butdrinking has become their culture. France is the worst in it. You have nothing to learn from them. When they talk of Jesus Christ they are drinking is rampant. I am surprised. Once I went to the house of a friend of my absolutely wrong. In Hebrew, I have read wine that they drink is the juice of grapes husband who was a big officer. Both, (Draksha). Jesus Christ put his finger in the water and it was converted to juice husband and wife were used to drinking, It was winter and they asked me to stay of grapes. Without fermentation how there for the night. I agreed. Oh God'! could one make wines? The more there was only one blanket in the house. fermented it is, the more costly. Fifty year I said, does not matter, I will manage. But old wine is valuable and hundred year old is a rarity. These ideas have been formed by the drunkards. Drunkards are the they were very ashamed and upset. They had only one daughter. She was misled but they won'Laccept and kept boasting of her. So the girl was ruined of drinking. Of late, She came to me weeping. writers and they are the narrators. Many people are being befooled by their lectures. But you might have never seen The element of love disappears in a the statue of some heavy drunkard being drunkard. He is unable to love. That is put in any country! All such people are

 Volume : XI Issue 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze Dec, 1999 38 Nov not only against Shri Hanumana, but also and requested me to deliver a lecture. But I refused. They asked the reason for the they attäck him and then Shri Hanumana generates such heat in them that they fall victims to Abdominal Cancer and many other diseases. Yet people go on drinking. This System of drinking, which is ramphant, I am afraid of it. No one knows what Shri Hanumana may do! I control him, otherwise who knows, he may throw all the drunkards in the ocean one day! I refusal. I said you get drunk and sing dirty songs before Shri Hanumana. Do you know what this Maruti is? He will.strangle such people. Now they have told me that they do not allow drunkards there. See how bold they are! Before Hanumana they will do all that and such people think that they can have more money by drinking! Actually most of such drinking people are bankrupt. People ask the am really afraid of Him. He is full of compassion and devotion. But he does not spare those who stand against him. reason for it. Its the concern of Shri Shri Ganesha also punishes the immoral Hanumana, what reason could be people. Immorality affects the Muladhar assigned? You are going against Shri centre of a person. Alcohol damages the consciousness. When Shri Hanumana Hanumana. His power flows in you, in Use it in a balanced manner. the right side. On the contrary you take to drinking and damage your liver and the whole system. Naturally He will be annoyed. In a subtle way its the work of Shri Hanumana. He sees someone drinking, he is displeased. There is disharmony in the family of such person. There will be no peace and equanimity in the house. Husband and wife will.quarrel, quarrel with each other. Drunkards generally fight with each other and thus get bad name in the society. So after his life. Those who do not drink are Sahaja Yogis should not go to the houses called stupid and outdated. "Shri of the drunkards, nor keep any relation Hanumana is there to protect those who with them. Such relations are very does not care for the extemal reasons. If one opposes drinking then people will be are against drinking. Once he hits, you are finished. But Shri Hanumana generally doesn't harm, otherwise people would harmful for Sahaja Yogis. On the one side you follow Shri Hanumana and on the not have talked like mads. All the time other you maintain relations with the they talk of drinking. parties, this and that. In wedding parties they drink wine like mads. Human beings are very thoughtful and think of the future. But there is no drunkards! In Pune, particularly, their are many types of Hanumanas-Maruti, Dulya Maruti and many others. So Pune people should be beware of them. These followers of Hanumana once came to me love left in them

 Volume XI Issue : 11 & 12 Nov Dec. 1999 39 The Divine Cool Breeze The feelings of love for all are absent in human beings. Shri Hanumana is anguished by such an approach. You can not say about the Hanumana who is devotee of Shri Rama. You may be a great you did not allow me to stop the rain?" I said, there is nothing such as that. Actually you are a Sanyasi and you have bought a Sari for me. How could I accept something from a Sanyasi? I thought of getting drenched, so that I could accept Sari that you brought for me. Tears started rolling down his eyes and he fell on my feet. I said, what had I to do? To get wet worker, a fine person, everything. But if there is no love for all in your heart then it will not work out. One should have love for all. Jesus Christ a little! Otherwise How I could accept has said, "Forgive everyone." Who are that sari? So I thought it better to get you not to forgive? Over small-small drenched and have an excuse to accept things people get crazy and the joy of love vanishes. Every one should salute and it I told him that he has brought an orange coloured Nauwar Sari for me. It's good because my petticoat is also wet and this bow before Shri Hanumana, the devotee of Shri Rama. We should understand that Nauwar could be worn without it. He was powers of Sahaja Yoga, we are blessed with, we should keep them in balance. very much pleased. Love is a boon which melts the angriest of the angry persons. Whole night is notenough if I start telling such examples. It's happening every day. With love you can handle the most difficult people. I have to face very strange people, but I handle them with love. With love bring them round. Once I Talking with love costs nothing. By loving others you will imbibe the good qualities of others', but by hating them, you will absorb their evil went to meet a saint. He was known for his anger. I climbed the mountain to reach his cave. When I reached there, I found qualities. It is a practice with people that him twisting his neck in anger. He had the powers to control rain. But that day if some one comes to their house they will entertain him and keep praising on the face; the moment he goes they will stärt criticising him. It is very common it rained heavily and I got drenched. He was in the fit of anger. In his cave he was brought before me'. He asked, "Mother, why did not you allow me to stop the rain? Did you want to purge me of my Ego?" He was very proud of his powers to stop the rain. I said, "What happened if I am with ladies. On the face they praise and on the back criticise. This show of love will not do. The recipient also understands that you are just showing off. You are a Sahaja Yogi and you have wet?" He said, to humble down my ego the power to love by heart. When you

 Nav - Dec. Volume :XI Issue: 11 & 12 1999 40 The Divine Cool Breeze But I say that it is no miracle, it is the . So my imbibe this quality, then the tree of love blossoms, then you will give joy to blessing of Shri Hanumana blessings and love to you all. Love yourself, also love others. Do not confine others and be joyful with its fragrance. Nothing else will attract you but that your love to my son, my this, my that'. No! love means selfless love-Nirvajya Prem-love that expects no return. love ihat is not confined to relations only. You have been blessed with such unfathomable ocean of love. What we have to learn from Shri Hanumana is this devotion (Bhakti) and the power that he has given to you. If your devotion (Bhakti) is real, then no power of love. Use it. one dare touch you. No one could touch. There are thousands of examples in May God Bless You. Sahaja Yoga. People call them miracles.

 Volume XI Issue 11 & 12. 41 Nov Dec. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze AN INTERVIEW WITH SHRI MATAJI The following is an interview with Mataji I heard Shri Mataji before I saw her. Shri Nirmala Devi that appeared in a "How are you? How is America?" Then the lady appeared, short, plump, with long dark hair falling free, and a smile that chips magazine called Ziereus in May 1983 before a visit by Shri Mataji to the U.S. It is interesting in that the writer gets his self-realization during the interview. away all defences. Tea was ordered and I was asked to sit down. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi "And The Cool Breeze" Before I could get the first question into gear Shri Mataji asked, "Do you know by Stan Bostock what the chakras are?" The aim was to talk to Shri Mataji Nirmała Devi about her forthcoming Imumbled something about subtle energy North American tour. What happened centres along the spine "That's right," she was something that is only now, a week said, and tapped the base of her neck with her index finger. "This one is called the Vishuddhi. In the universe the Vishuddhi I telephoned the number Shri Mataji's is North America. Australia is the lower followers in New York had given me, and chakra, the mooladhara. India is the found myself, an hour later, knocking on kundalini, which can link all the chakras the carved door of a five storied terraced together," she traced a line from the base house in London's classy Knights bridge of the spine to the top of her head, "but later, starting to make sense. district. America is the Vishuddhi, isn't it? such an important chakra. The door was opened by a young Indian who ushered me into a reception room Shri Mataji then touched the red spot in as ornate and rich as a jewel box. her forehead. "This chakra," she said, "is Furniture covered with rose silk, tables the agnya, It is presided over by Lord Jesus Christ, isn't it? The agnya is forgIveness. It shows that the spirit cannot be destroyed. Just as Christ could not be inlaid with ivory, carved and gilded wooden sereens, pale pink crystal chandeliers.

 Volume XI Issue : 11 & 12 Nov - Dsc. The Divine Cool Breeze 42 1999 things, the land of sweetness turned destroyed, but rose again, didn't he?" bitter, then yes, perhaps Lord Krishna might withdraw the protection. Shri Mataji quietly contemplated the risen Christ for a moment, then jabbed her suddenly she laughed. "On my tour Ishall fingers towards the base of her neck tell everybody how to stop that from again. happening." "The vishuddhi, its presiding deity, you could say, is Lord Krishna. The Vishuddhi I asked Shri Mataji if she was visiting North America just to sound such a stands for diplomacy, sweetness, self- esteem, communication and collectivity warning. There are seekers of money, seckers after like your Abraham Lincoln. He stood for collectivity. Abraham Lincoln was a power, seekers of physical gratification," saint - did you know that?- a realized she replied, "and then there are people soul. You have had many great men. who have done all those things, and are Roosevelt now, he said. "poverty now seeking the truth, seeking their spirit, anywhere is a threat to prosperity seeking God. There are many, many everywhere. So clear. America is so seekers of truth in America. Great, great great. It is protected by Lord Krishna's seekers. Oh so great. I want to meet them. Show them how they can get what they have been looking for probably since discus." Shri mataji held up the index finger of ages. lifetimes even. Their self her right hand and twirled it, and I realization." swear I could see a bright glittering "What is that exactly?" Ihadn't yet asked one question from my carefully prepared disc whirling round. "As long as that discus is there," she list. said, "America can never be invaded." Tea arrived. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, the "Could that protection ever be spellbinding visionary, turned into withdrawn?" I asked. Mrs. C.P. Srivastava, the attentive hostess. Did I have the right amount of Shri Mataji shrugged expressively, and raised her eyebrows high. "Perhaps," she said. "If the land of diplomacy stopped being diplomatic, the land of sugar and milk? Would I have a biscuit? (Which turned out to be a cookie.) "Self realization," said Shri Mataji, is communications communicated bad the yoga, the union. The joining of the

 Volume : XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze : 11 & 12 Nov Dec. 431 1999 microcosm to the macrocosm, you Shri Mataji's face became serious. "As [I am the only each of us called kundalini. (There is one who can do it en-masse. Once, in no English word for it. You should invent India, 6000 villagers got it at the same one. There is a good job for you, invent a time. But if there is someone else who good English word for kundalini.) The can do it, then I am only too happy to linking of that energy with the all- retire. I am sixty years old." (At times pervading energy of God, that is what she looks half that.) "I am happily married. I have a heautiful house as you far as I know," she said, could say. The raising of the energy in self realization is." can see. It would be good to settle down and stop all this travelling around, all the "What exactly does it do?" I felt a fool at the naivety of the question. time. But until I find someone else who can do it, then it is up to me, isn't it, to "It brings about a change in awareness. You feel it as a cool breeze, cool vibrations, you could say, on the meet the seekers and let them know how to gain this gift that is their own, their top of the head and on the hands. It is right, this Union with God." an actual happening! Not self- "Could I receive this gift?" I asked, certification. Not saying I am born Shri Mataji's eyes danced, "Put your hand again!' or I am this or that!' You actually become! If you desire self above your head," she said. realization, and you get it, then you become collectively conscious, truly so faint coolness on my hand. I looked sweet and truly diplomatic. A true blue round to see if there could be a draft I did as I was told. There was a faint, oh American, you could say." And the joyous laugher flowed into every corner air conditioning and the windows were of the room. coming from anywhere, but there was no closed. I asked Shri mataji if she was the only "You feel it?" one who could grant this self realization. I nodded, tentatively. "Oh no." came the reply, "once you have it you can pass it on to others." "That is the beginning. Perhaps while you were drinking your tea you said to "But it all seems to start from you," I said, yourself, 'I'd like that experience. and Shri Mataji snapped her fingers, you got "Why you?"

 Volume : XI Issua : 11 & 12 The Divine Cool Breeze Nov -Dec: 1999 44 it. It can only happen if you desire it. Give me your hand." "It is a gift of love from God, who is the ocean of love, the ocean of compassion. How can you pay for that? God does not understand money. She took my hand and started tracing a cross over the palm. How can you pay for your evolution? Did you pay to stand up on two legs? Anyway, why would I want money? I come from a wealthy family. My husband is Secretary General of the United "You think too much," she said. "Your mind is busy, busy, busy, thinking away." From that moment on it wasn't. It was hardly thinking at all. Nations International Maritime organization here in London. I do not Too much thinking can give people need money. I do not accept money." diabetes. It is not sugar that causes diabetes, it's thinking. We can cure diabetes. After realization. And this new Shri Mataji let go of my hand and smiled. "Better now?"" she asked. thing AIDS, after realization we can eure that too. With realization you become I nodded. your own guru. You can diagnose your own problems and those ofothers, and you can cure them. Anybody with their realization and the desire to develop their "That is because your brain is not so active. You are more balanced, more centered, more relaxed. Have some more spirit, can cure and be cured." tea?" At this point a wave of most pleasant Iput my hand above my head again. The well-being swept over me. It wasn't a coolness was still there. Perhaps even trance or a hypnotic state (I've stronger. experienced those) - it was a feeling of "There are so many great seekers in North deep peace. America," she said. "I want to meet I regretted my next question. It caused them." the smile to fade from Shri Mataji's face. Now, almost a week later, when I sit "How much are you going to charge down quietly, that sense of peace and relaxed happiness returns. I am hoping it won't go away! Americans for this experience?" "It is part of evolution," she replied.



----------------------

1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12
November- December, 1999
Talking with love costs nothing. By loving others you will imbibe
the good qualities of others', but by hating them, you will absorb
their evil qualities.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Editorial
1
3.
Dhyana, Dhaarna and Samadhi
6.
Sahasrara Puja (4-5-1986)
15
Guru Puja (1999) An Internet Message
Shri Shiva Puja 14-2-99 (Delhi)
18
Shri Hanumana Puja 31-3-99 (Pune)
31
An Interview with Shri Mataji
41
Edited by : Yogi Mahajan
Published by :V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Nov - Dec.
Volume :XI Issue : 11 & 12
& 12
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Editorial
and then corrects it. There is nothing to
"How TO IGNITE A FLAME"
feel bad or mind the correction.
With the blessings of our divine mother
Supposing a person was negative. After
the impossible has happened. What could
not have occurred in a lifetime has
self-realisation he could see the negativity
and with the power of new consciousness
happened in the course of one afternoon.
We have been able to cross our agnya.
he could remove the negativity. In this
way the new consciousness changes our
attitude and also overcomes our negative
fruits. However, it is upto us to use it. If
we don't apply it then it is like we got
that is we have been able to jump our ego.
It does not mean that our ego has
vanished but it means that our
consciousness has come out of the grip
new clothes but we do not wear them,
of the ego. Earlier whatever we did was
directed by the ego. We did not know any
better, there was no other way to gauge
We have riches but we do not take them
out to enjoy them. The fish is in the water
but it is thirsty.
it. After self realisation, the Kundalini
pierces the Sahasrara and connects us Before we treat others with the new
with a new consciousness. Through the consciousness, we have to treat ourselves.
new consciousness we are able see our The treatment should change our attitude
and consequently our personality. Then
we assume the personality of a true Sahaja
Yogi. Now we can help others to change
We can use the new consciousness to their personality. For instance if we do
not treat ourselves first, we will not know
consciousness has the power to act. For how to treat others. We learn its working
instance, one can think anything. One can from self experience. There is an
think one is superior to others. One can interesting story of a woman who went
think others are bad. One can think like a to Gandhiji and complained that her son
fundamentalist. One can think one is never does not keep a fast on Full Moon, please
own ego. Not only see it but the new
consciousness has the power to avert it.
correct our thinking process hecause this
wrong. The light of new consciousness
exposes the error in our thinking. Like a
wise man detects the fault in the telephone
tell him to keep a fast. Gandhiji remained
silent. The woman was unhappy at his
silence. Gandhiji asked her to return after
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12
Nov - Dec.
The Divine Cool Breeze
1999
a week. Gandhiji, first wanted to make
touch others by lip service. It
an experiment on himself of keeping a fast
before ordering her son. After observing
the fast Gandhiji called her son and
instructed him how to keep a fast.
communicates to others through our
kundalini. But first we must obey our own
kundalini, only then its love can ignite
another Flame.
Sahaja Yoga is a living force. It does not
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Volume : XI Isue: 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
Nov Dec.
3.
1999
DHYANA, DHAARNA AND SAMADHI
By Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (January – 1984)
I will tell you a few things about
meditation. It is my immense joy to see
all of you here from various parts of the
world. When your heart is so full, the
words are too poor to carry the intensity.
I wish you could understand that intensity
through your heart. It's all been arranged,
I think, by the Divine, that we should meet
here all of us in such a wonderful
surrounding. in the Nature. that
something great should happen to all of
us. That we should achieve something
really great this time. Now as time is
short, I will tell you first of all a few things
The first part of meditation is the Dhyana.
First when you have seeking, you put your
attention towards the object of your
worship. That is called as Dhyana. And
the Dhaarana is the one in which you put
all your effort. Concentrate all your effort.
But this is all drama for people who are
not realised. For them it's just a sort of
an acting that they do. But for a realised
soul it is a reality. So the first, the Dhyana,
you have to do. Some do it of the Form,
another of the Formless. But you are so
fortunate that the Formless has become a
Form for you. No problem, you don't
have to go from Form to Formless, from
about meditation now.
Formless to form; it's all there, in a
Meditation is a very general word. It is bundle. So you concentrate, or think of
nota word that explains all the three steps
some Deity, or some point for Nirakar,
one has to take for meditating. But in for the Formless, or of Nirakar itself. It's
Sanskrit language they have very clearly all a mental projection as long as you are
said, how you have to move in your not a realised soul. But, once you are
meditation.
realised, you have just to think of Dhyana,
whom you are going to concentrate, or
First is called as Dhyana, and seeond is
you can say meditate on. But once you
start meditating on a person you attention
called as Dhaarna, and the third is called
Samadhi.
slarts moving. That is also possible after
realisation, though it is in a bundle; but
some people have it-'part of it,' part of
Luckily Sahaja Yoga is such a thing that
you get everything in a bundle. You
avoided everything else and you got the
it', like that.
So when you meditate, still your attention
Samadhi part. That's the beauty of it.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Nov Dec.
Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
1999
your eyes, nose, and all these organs,
all that, becomes a kind of manifestation
of the Deity whom you worship,
with
can get disturbed every moment.
It can happen, depending on the intensity
of your concentration. So, there are some
automatically.
Sahaja Yogis, I've seen, they are cooking,
and there's another one is meditating. The
You don't have to think-now I must
concentrate, alright, I will not have these
meditating one will say: "Oh, I can smell
it is burning".
thoughts, I have to now think about this.
It becomes, automatically there; you read
a book, in that book immediately you find
So there is no Dhaarna. Dhyana is there
but not Dhaarna. The second part of it is
what is good for Sahaja Yoga. If there is
very important, that you have to put your
attention continuously on to your deity.
a book which is anti-God you discard it,
the state that is awakened within you is a
Then you develop a state which is called
as Dhaarna in which your attention
new state of mind, in Sanskrit language
ithas a very beautiful name, Ritambhara
becomes one, with the Deity. But when
Pragnya, which is a very difficult name.
these mature, the third stage, of Samadhi,
Ritambhara is the name of the Nature, and
comes in.
that the whole Nature one feels is
Now for people who think that without enlightened.
realization they can reach Samadhi, I
I'll give an example; when a child is to be
born, the mothers start lactating.
automatically. The nature itself works out
think they are absolutely mistaken. But
after realization also, when the
Dhaarna is established you have to get
for the birth of the child.
to the position where you become
Samadhi. Now, what is that state? When
that state comes into your mind, then Pragnya starts expressing itself, only for
whatever you do, the Deity that you Sahaja Yoga, nobody else, you are
In the same way, when this Ritambhara
worship, you see that Deity in your work;
whatever you see, you see the Deity
amazed how things work out suddenly.
So the Ritambhara Pragnya has started
giving you the show; you can put it like
working in your favour. You all tell me
this is a miracle, that has happened
that.
Whatever you hear, you find the Deity
telling you the truth, Whatever you read,
you find there what the Deity would tell
Mother, and we don't know how it has
happened. I'll give you an example;
Yesterday, we were doing something with
cement and the Italian boy said that we
you. So, in that state, whatever you do
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Volume XI Issue 11 &
Dec.
Nov
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
you are the saints, you are chosen ones
of God. But you accept that situation first;
but if you behave like all other normal
will need two bags of cement. I said, you
carry on, it won't finish.
Even before I was leaving, they were
people-Oh God, shops are closed, and
that man is so difficult, and I don't think
it will happen. It'll never happen. But you
carrying on, still not finished.
Now cement, of all the things, imagine!
must know you are saints, chosen, and
So this special thing is your own state
given birth by Me, the Form and the
where you are feeling one with Nature
Formless.
and the Nature is feeling oneness with
you. So the Divine itself is expressing
through Nature, through various
happenings, through various incidents-the
love, the protection, the attention that the
Divine is giving. And there's no end to it.
So this Pragnya is going to manifest, is
manifesting every moment. Be prepared,
be happy, welcome it and accept that you
are there. The level is different Now the
time has come-for Sahaja Yoga to change
It just happens, and people don't know it's level.
how it happens. But that is what is the We have to change.
state of Samadhi. But there could be We have to go higher.
people if I tell them "Will you do this?" The level has to come up.
"Oh no Mother, the shop will be closed, So those who are at the periphery are a
"Oh, they won't do it, that is not all right". problem, definitely, for me. because in my
They go on like that.
compassion, I cannot throw them out.
And there are people who say-(even if And we have to help them come out, by
we think it is shut)-"No! Let's see, - if really now telling them that they have to
Mother has said, may be". I mean there rise. How long are we to wait for them?
are a thousand and one examples like that. Every-one has to see that the peripheral
Today like some were trying to push the people are brought in properly, so that
bed. The three of them were trying, it they don't go out of Sahaja Yoga.
would not push. I said, "Alright, I'll push. Compassion is alright, But not at the cost
I just put my Nabhi there", just, I didn't of keeping the level of Sahaja Yoga lower,
push anything, it just got pushed! - never.
because of the Ritambhara Pragnya.
So everybody must try to settle down and
come up to minimum standards at
This help is not the Chamatkar or
anything. It exists in the Divine, the least!Otherwise, I'm sorry, many will be
seived out.
capacity to manifest it's Love to show that
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
Nov - Dec.
1999
SAHASRARA PUJA
MEDESIMO, ITALY 4-5-1986
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
This lecture is a concern of your Mother. chimpanzy. That means you are rather
Don't take it as anything ill. I could not
have said this even two years back or one human beings we become aware in our
year back. Now you are at a stage where consciousness of many things which were
I can say these things to you. You can unconscious to the animals. So in their
understand it but it has to become your brains they did not understand that they
consciousness. The stage has reached to could put matter into their own use.
understand, but it should become your As human beings you were all unaware
close to them. So when we have become
consciousness. Whatever has become
of the Chakras that existed within you.
should happen if you keep it there.
So your conscious was still working half
way through unconscious working of the
Chakras and the conscious working of the
Today is a great day for all of us because
it is the 16th Sahasrara Day i.e. 16 beats
mind. You also never felt your
higher
position in the poem. That it is complete. autonomous nervous system or your inner
Shri Krishna is called a complete organs, how they are working. You did
Incarnation because he has 16 petals. noteven feel how you are getting affected
This completeness is called as Purana. by other influences. As a result of that
So now we move into another dimension. with the freedom that human beings
The first one was where you got your achieved or were granted, they gathered
self realisation. In the evolutionary all kind of things into their brains, into
or 16 movements to reach a
process, if you see, the animals are not
conscious of many things which human
beings are conscious of. Like the matter
their Sahasrara without being aware of
it. They used their Sahasrara, their brain
for all kinds of purposes which were
fruitless. They were not aware again of
the warning that Shri Krishna had given
that if you use human awareness except
cannot be used by animals for their own
purpose. Also they are not conscious of
themselves at all. If you show a mirror
to animals they do not react to it as if
for your ascent, you will go downward.
They were told, not that they were not
they were in the mirror. Except for I think
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 7.
Volume: XI Issue : 11 & 12
Nov - Dec.
The Divine Cool Breeze
1999
All the organizations which you have
formed also on collective understanding
told, they knew about it. Whether it was
East or West, everybody knew that you
have to be born again and it so happened
are artificial. Then a movement had
started that we have to be natural. That
is another copying of the artificial. Natural
that in the West people thought that by
using their brain power they can now
master the matter, that they can use matter
does not mean a primitive personality.
Natural is to evolve. The whole purpose
of creation is to evolve. So the another
for their own purpose. If they had done
that after their self realisation, it would
have been a very different situation
concept also, that you accepted very
easily because you have brains and you
accept everything that comes your way,
and is that you became so artificial that
you needed all the times some sensations
to feel yourself. Now in every walk of
because after self realisation you all have
become aware of vibrations which is
Chaitanya and also of your Chakras. With
this new awareness you would have
avoided all that was wrong but it is like a
greedy person who gets a wee bit of life there is a conceptual, artificial
money and he spends it off. Now this understanding. For example you see the
problem has complicated your brains. You sex. It is such a natural, nomal thìng.
have certain concepts which are very There is nothing so great about it. But
much away from reality. The way we have that also you made so artificial that you
started using machines we have become have now your sex in your brain. By that
machines ourselves. So we have no not only you have silenced Ganesha in
feelings and we cannot relate to others in the Mooladhaara but also Maha
a natural way. In human awareness you Ganesha in your brain.
had achieved how to relate yourself to In another aspect, say Art. Now the
others and to the nature. But this ego concept is so stupid that it says that art
oriented approach took you away from should be according to what is laid down.
natural real life, and we became artificial. Like you will call somebody and go rock,
The whole thing comes from a concept
condemn it, Oh This That. Condemn
of being artificial. Like they say that its
fashionable to be the arrogant, to be every one. And ultimately you reach a
conclusion that the most insignificant is
snobish.
art. As if like a sugarcane when you have
taken out all the juice whatever remains
will become art one day. So the brain
which 'does not nourish the heart is
It is just the opposite of your ascent and
the evolutionary process because you
have dodged the power to relate to others
had gained as human beings.
absolutely. an artificial brain just like
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Nov Dec.
Volume : XI Issue: 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
1999
robots. So people have become just like
robots. Now this can be handled by
anyone who has the master mind because
programme and within two weeks all will
disappear. Because when the ascent takes
place, the Kundalini pushes out the ego
and brings the person close to reality. But
again that ego, which is being built up so
fast in a speed, overpowers the speed of
you do not have your own heart and the
brain is controlled by somebody who has
a greater brain of concepts. All these
the Kundalini and covers the head. Then
concepts are destructive.
it suggests that how can you have godly
life. You will mix all the alcohol, all the
Hitler got the concept that he is an Aryan
and he is of the superior race. I have to
establish that he did not mind destroying
the whole world. Same is the case in the
religion field. There also every religion
was put or poured into the cups of
madness, all the fun of life. That they feel
they will lose all the freedom to become
mad. When you see from this position,
the way people react, it is amazing. You
have to do something extremely stupid
concepts.
to sell it in the market. The other day I
heard that somebody had become rich,
Now the worst concept that human beings
have achieved is that money is everything.
First they tried for political domination,
selling the empty tins as lamps. All kinds
of stupid things which are nowhere near
natural beauty or natural joy are accepted
thinking that political domination is
everything. It affected their system. When
I started my life I saw complicated
as sophisticated.
The other side of it is that the Asuri Vidya,
Sahasraras. The more I tried to solve the
the Black Vidya has taken over. Shri
complications within my own awareness Krishna again had warned that, in the 15th
the more it became complicated (more Chapter, that if Asuri Vidya takes over,
difficult), because if you see my age, in then the Shudh Vidya cannot compete
fifty years you can see how much with the speed of Asuri Viday. Like in
complicated human beings have become. America there had been a big argument
And after opening the Sahasrara when I amongst Sahaja Yogis, if my photograph
came to the West, within these 16 years I
should be in the drawing room or not?
But if you ask them to paint their names
found that they are now in horrible state.
Now the stage for you is laid down to
ascend higher. This is the background
which I have described to you, and you
black, their face black and black clothes
likes witches, they will do that. That even
at a stage we are Sahaja Yogis we are
shy of our Godly Life. When they became
hippies or when they became anything like
can see how when you have a programme
there will be 500 people for the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Volume XI Issue: 11 & 12
Nov Dec.
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
that stupid, they gave all their life, all their and the background is so dark. You are
time, all their money too. They changed surrounded by people who are pouring
their dresses, they changed their life out morning till evening destructive
styles, they changed their family life, concepts. Now you are the people who
everything they changed, went all out have to shoot out much faster than all of
And even when Sahaja Yogis are them. But a kind of a lethargy, though
convinced about the Godliness of Sahaja you understand that your awareness is
very different from them, a kind of a
lethargy which does not accept it the way
Yoga, still they are shy. And you know
your Mother does not take money from
you. On the contrary she spends. You all
have gained out of it. But when it comes
to giving, everybody feels shy.
it should accept Sahaja Yoga.
Everyone of you must think everyday,
what have I done for Sahaja Yoga
today? But you are all feeling very busy
with your jobs, making money, of our
relations with, people who do not
matter at all in Sahaja Yoga. We have
to make an all out effort to rise to that
point that whatever we know, we
From that background you are coming
to the light of God's grace. But you do
not want to dash at it. You want to take
your time gradually, so gradually that may
be, you may lose your chance. So in the
awareness of Sahaja Yogis where you
u
believe in, we act on that and become
one with it. You can do that with
know all your Chakras, you know about
vibrations, you know how to relate to
others, still all this knowledge is for concepts but not with reality. This is the
problem. I will explain this point. Like
personal advantages. So the shadow of
the past still lingers on even when you
have this new awareness. Animals can
supposing a fanatic believes that he can
do such and such thing in his own religion,
he will do it. But the concept is not reality.
swim automatically. They do not have to
learn. But human beings have to learn
how to swim. So they have forgotten the
techniques which were known to the
animals and have taken to the techniques
of human beings. But in Sahaja Yoga you
have got your realisation in one life time,
and in this life time you have to grow.
and in this life time you have to achieve
It has given no benefit to anyone, had
shown no performance of any substance.
Still people do it! I see in my own country
when they were fighting for freedom, my
father himself gave up all his property,
gave up his practice with 11 children in
the family, we were living in palaces, started
living in huts, for days together, for years
together. For the gross freedom, we do
the highest. So the time is so very short
everything. But for the secular freedom
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
Dec.
Nov
10
1999
the Sahaja Yogis have to do everything
that is possible.
subtler but in your consciousness, you are
not yet subtle. There are so many things
you know more than the people who are
not realised, as absolutely realised. For
example we do not even use vibrations.
Whenever it is needed we do not use them
or sometimes mechanically, just like a
So the first thing is to realise, to be
aware, to be in your conscious mind
all the time, that you are Yogis. You
are the ones who are very much higher
than the rest of the humanity. That the
machine, we start giving Bandhan. So you
are still unconscious about your
salvation of the whole of the humanity
depends on you. The purpose of
creation will be served by you. So first
Chakras. Slightly conscious when you
of all you have to be conscious in your put your mind to it otherwise in your
consciousness that you are so
central nervous system you are not yet
so conscious. This is the reason why you
important and that is why you were
do not know, why you have to do a thing
at a particular time. Unless and until you
given realisation. How can you be
living with your conditionings and
with your ego? The conditionings are
like this - Supposing you are coming from
a Christian religion, then you must bring
that little bit of that religion into
raise yourself and try to achieve
Nirvikalpa stage, you cannot go further.
For example I know everything that I do.
I can handle any power whenever I want.
I can absorb any negativity I want to and
need not absorb any negativity I do not
want to. You may be thousands of miles
Sahajayoga or if you are from Hindu
religion you want to bring some out of
that. We have all the essences of peace
in Sahaja Yoga, the pure essences but
away from me, I know about every one
of you. I may not know your worldly
we cannot have the groSs nonsense. All
these things are like dirt over our
names but I know you as part and
Sahasrara which must be shaken off.
parcel in my being. I also can behave
like a human being, absolutely like you,
aging like you, wearing, using spectacles,
doing all the things that will make me a
Though now you are aware and
conscious of your Chakras you do not
keep them clean. Ordinary human
beings, if they have clothes, they have
houses, they try to keep it clean. But
you do not feel ashamed of them also
when they are bad, because after
complete human being, and I have
accepted this growth consciously, not
unconsciously. To me nothing is
unconscious.
sometime you also lose the awareness
So if you have to be conscious of what
of them. That means you have become
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Nov Dec.
1999
11
Volume XI Issue 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
you are doing you have to be alert
about it. The first thing that you have
we have got self knowledge but we have
not got self consciousness. Now for
example you take somebody's name,
say, of some great saint, you feel the
vibrations also. Also you know why,
because he is a saint. But why not you
the Sahajayogis, if your names are
achieved is the peace. But even now I
find that peace which should become joy
becomes a quarrel. Truth is one. You
cannot argue about truth. It is a whole
genius. It does not quarrel with each
taken why not the vibrations flow? And
other. We are unconscious about our
in this you have taken advantages because
Adi Shakti herself is before you. They did
fields but when we have to hold
something, all of them come together to
work it out. So the point of the brain
not have anybody to tell them all these
which is working this out, the things. But the disadvantage of that is this
unconscious part of it, is to be made that you take it for granted.
conscious. That is what evelution is. So
Now in expression when we say
now adherence to any concept is something, when we express, are we
against evolution. You must learn to natural? Are we doing it from our heart?
face the reality, to accept the reality
The consciousness that I am doing it
and act in real way. Now you may say,
from my heart is what I want you to
achieve. Like there are people who work
very hard in Sahajayoga. Others will just
happens this is a miracle. May be for the
human beings, may be for Sahajayogis
take it for granted. They don't want to
also, but not for me. I know what it is.
So, to rise above this half-baked
consciousness, one has to see how one is
help. They want everything to be ready
made. That shows that they are not
conscious of their own powers of
enjoyment. If they do it from their heart
then they will never feel what effort they
have put in. They will only feel what they
have been blessed with or what they have
working it out. The whole system of
relating to each other must change
completely. That is very important at least
for Western people, because atleast in
India people know that human efforts lead
achieved. The sense of fulfilment and
satisfaction will overcome all your
problems especially of your left
you nowhere and you have to take to your
ascent. I mean the real Indians. Some of
them do take advantage of Sahajayoga
Vishudhi.
and then disappear. But most of them
Now the second stage would be where
know that you have to be conscious of
you will be conscious of whatever you
what you have got. So we can say that
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Nov - Dec.
Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
12
1999
are doing, where there will be no
mistakes. Whatever you will do may
You have to mature in your ascent.
Now you may say what should we do?
Face yourself everyday. In reality, see
be alright. Nobody is so far like that, I how much time you spend about
want to tell you because some people do mundane worries and how much about
feel whatever I say of praising, I am saying your ascent. Have you left everything,
it to them. Now for example, today I had all your worries to God Almighty?
my watch, I wanted to set my watch, so I Have you completely jumped out of
pulled the screw out, simple thing. Now your background? Have your come
way out all the way leaving everything that
appear to be mistake will turn out to
this I did, I would say, in
a
unconsciously but quite consciously
because watch stopped. As I knew what
was nonsensical? And how do I relate
to others? How do I talk to others, who
are Sahaja Yogis? I am surprised
sometimes, if one Sahaja Yogi is attacked
by a non-Sahaja Yogi, that a Sahaja Yogi
group should support a non-Sahaja Yogi!
Or a Sahaja Yogi who has to come up
pays more attention to the negative
people than to the positive! He relates
better to the people who are negative than
to the people who are positive. He is more
friendly and open with negative persons
than with the positive. You have to cling
on to the positive but it is always the other
way round because, it is very subtle ego
in that. All this subtle understanding, I
have told you many a times. But with your
complicated brain, which is like a
machine, like a spoiled computer, you can
reach some conclusion out of what I have
said which is just contrary. Like supposing
I said, you forget the past. That means
time I have to be there. So consciously I
have put myself against myself. If the
watch had not stopped I would have come
earlier, but that was not the time I had to
come. So I had to pull the screw to keep
it stopped. So whatever mischief you play
you know and you can play it against
yourself, and then you can make a drama,
Oh I made a mistake and things like that,
for nothing at all. But such a stage is far
off, I must tell you. Just now the stage is
fixed. We are still making lots of mistakes
because we are not self conscious. In a
gross way we understand self conscious-
ness like this-that a person has to go
for interview, he has to select a suit
properly, he combs his hair properly
before going, he clears his throat. But
when it is the question of your ascent,
are we alert? Or we take it for granted
that Mother is just now going to give us
a nice bath, put us in the cradle and take
us there? This is being cherished.
you forget everything that is good of the
past? That is, as if I wish you should not
understand why you are behaving like
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Nov Dec
: 11 & 12
13
1999
Volume: XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
before, a cleverness.
this? Forget the past, means do not allow
the past to overpower.
So you don't argue about it. Don't argue
with
A brain which is simple, which is about Sahajayoga. You don't argue
straight forward, which has got love your leaders. You may be his wife but
in it, can understand what I am saying don't argue. We are having a very bad
straight forward. This complicated time from some of the wives of the leaders
brain is to be put right and the best because they try to influence the
way is to stop thinking, just stop husbands. As far as Sahajayoga is
thinking. That is what you have to do. concerned they have nothing to do with
that. Supposing you are working in an
Now when you stop thinking you feel
that nothing can be done but by office and the husband is some great
official and you are a clerk, will you
correct the husband? In this case the
thinking only you do not do it. Now
for example I have to give you a speech
now if I start thinking about it, what will
women have to nourish the organization,
nourish the husband with love, from their
you hear? Can you hear my thinking? You
have to, say, enlighten these lamps.
Alright, then you just start thinking about
it, I have to enlighten. Will it get
enlightened? This is to be understood
that by thinking you do not do it.
Thinking is lazy man's guard, as is
used to avoid work. Once Iasked a lady.
heart and not from their brain. I think it is
so great to her, being born as a woman
myself, because I can enjoy the heart, the
emotions, the emotions of my love; the
working and the play of my love. It is so
great that no incarnation can enjoy that
as I can. So the women should not feel
I had in the house, that we are going out,
will you be cooking something for us.
When we came back, she had not cooked
anything. She used to cook everyday but
that day she did not cook anything. I said
Why did not you cook something for us?
"She said, "I thought you may eat
outside." She was a Westerm lady. So my
husband said, alright we are going to eat
outside, you stay at home. I said it does
not look nice. He said, "No, let her know
what she thought is meant for herself."
So this is the escape which you have learnt
degraded if they have to look after the
heart. But they are in a way in a higher
aspect. You can do without thinking
but you can't do without the heart. So
the ladies should not argue with their
husbands if they are leaders and also
one should not argue otherwise also.
Because I have seen if the women are very
argumentative, the men become deaf.
They just do not listen what women are
talking. If they are very aggressive then
the men become absolutely shut up. So
in relationship with each other, you
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Dec.
Nov
14
The Divine Cool Breeze
11 & 12
Volume: XI Issue
8661
Sanidhya from God, Salokya meaning
must behave in a natural way that you
to see God, Samipya closeness to God
and Sanidhya is the companionship of
God. But you have got Tadatmaya-
are a man and you are a woman. You
should become more a woman and more
a man and then you will see the fun.
the oneess with Him. It is not in the
Imagine in this world if there were only
men and if there were only women, what concept of any one of the Yogis and
would have happened. So we have to the saints and the seers who have been.
know that in our awareness we have to This Tadatmaya you have when you
be conscious, how far we have achieved are outside my body, while they have
the consciousness for our relationship this tadatmaya when they are inside
with each other. That is the collective my body, they are no more. So you
. should understand the time limit, you
must understand your greatness, and
consciousness of Virat, of the brain, i.e.
of Sahasrara
you must understand how you people
are chosen for the highest work in this
So, in principle Sahasrara is Vishnu Tatva.
But the deity is Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi.
creation.
So you can see how the beautiful
So now there is no time for lethargy. Now
you have to rise and awake. Today is the
day when I hope you have to jump into
Nirvikalpa. But only by effort you will
stay there otherwise you will slip down.
So go through this lecture again and again
and do not think about it. Don't think that
it is for somebody else. It is for you, for
all of you, each one of you, and you must
integration has taken place. The only
powers of Shri Vishnu have to act
according to the deity, surrendered at the
Lotus feet of the deity. So the
consciousness of Shri Vishnu is absolutely
in the hands of the deity. I do not want to
talk about this tremendous deity. It is too
much, because it may fill you up with awe.
So whatever is working out, allow it to
know yourself, how far you are going
every day. Today is a special day of
Sahasrara. Actually if you see, according
work out. They say surrender your
Sahasrara to the deity and it is so simple
for you because you have the deity, you
have your own Sahasrara and it is only
to the Sun Calendar, Sahasrara would
have been tomorrow. It is Monday which
is a Sahasrara. Just imagine that we are
having it one day earlier. So one has to
know that a Calendar of God has nothing
you, the people who are the Sahajayogis
today, in modern times, who have seen
the deity.
They say that you have to ask for three
things for Salokya. Samipya and
to do with the human calendar. According
continued on page 17
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 11 & 12
15
Nov- Dec:
Volume: XI issue:
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
GURU PUJA
(Internet Message)
Sunday 30th July 1999
Shri Mataji began by saying this was the
tenth anniversary of Sahaja Yogis coming
to Cabella to worship Her as their Guru.
Through Sahaja Yoga we have achieved
absolute knowledge but we are yet to
reach the stage where this absolute
knowledge can be assimilated. We are yet
seeking revenge against that anger.
She said that love is the only way to solve
problems.
Shri Mataji then said that to be good
Gurus we must keep a close watch over
our animal inheritance and develop a
to go deep into this knowledge.
peaceful, loving, compassionate
temperament. Then when we try to help
another person they may feel our love and
Shri Mataji defined one of the reasons that
we have been unable to assimilate this
improve.
knowledge as due to a heritage we share
with the animal kingdom which lingers
within us still– aggressiveness,
peevishness and fear are all part of our
As Sahaja Gurus we should also forgive
which means to forget completely the
misdeeds of others.
inheritance.
Shri Mataji defined our first problem as
Shri Mataji added to this the ability to being our animal inheritance, the second.
think, to react, and to rationalise which which is worse, develops from thinking
creates additional problems such as and ego. With the advent of Sahaja Yoga
jealousy. This creates problems which are it is not necessary to physically or
not seen in the animal kingdom. Thinking emotionally punish anyone, we must
further perverts these inherited know that this will not help a person's
tendencies, which lead to expanded spiritual ascent.
reactions.
Shri Mataji said that we must be kind and
understanding which will help everyone's
Shri Mataji said that as Gurus we should
not react nor try to suppress others.
adding that rather than getting angry, our
methods should be of love and After receiving our realisation we have
compassion. If we avoid anger, this will also received the power of love and
prevent others also getting angry and compassion; it was because of our love
spiritual ascent.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Volume: XI
Nov Dec.
Issue: 11 & 12
1999
16
The Divine Cool Breeze
worrying about a person, speaking to
them, putting our attention to that person
because we feel attached to them, then
that we received our realisation.
Shri Mataji explained that in all things we
must be detached, which is more than just
mere words, it is a state of mind that must
he achieved. When it comes to helping
attention will not work out. Being
attached to a few people means that our
attention becomes bound and useless and
our
someone then we must go all out.
cannot be useful, there is so much to do,
Thinking and worrying about people is there are so many people who want their
attached attention, when we leave realisation. Our attention has to be
everything to the Divine then this is absolutely free so when we put our
detached attention. As Sahaja Yogis we
attention it remains absolutely free, this
iS spiritual attention; which is the same
as love.
should realise the extent of our problems,
then slowly these should be dissolved: this
does not happen by argument or
discussion. but through love and about this mundane world, but another
Shri Mataji said that She is not talking
compassion.
world, one which is higher, and where our
attention works beautifully and is not
Shri Mataji described how the majority
of people the world over value love: this
is the third quality of human beings. First
bound by our attachments.
This can all be achieved through
introspection whereby we can face
ourselves and all problems may be left to
the Param-Chaitanya. Our problems
is our animal inheritance, second is
thinking, and the third is that we value
love.
cannot be solved by worrying and
thinking, they must be left to this power
Only Sahaja Yogis can achieve this state
of mind and are capable of detached love,
which can manage everything.
where one is absolutely detached, and
absolutely attached. If we know through Shri Mataji declared that Love is Truth
vibrations that someone is alright then and Truth is Love. In all our dealings we
there is no need to worry about them. If should endeavour to be extremely
the vibrations indicate that there is a truthful, and to have pure love which is
problem then we can apply full attention not directed towards some personal gain
to that person, not through attached or reward.
attention, but through detached attention.
She remarked that the subject of pure love
Shri Mataji remarked that if we are always could go on forever and forever. As
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Nov - Dec.
Volume XI Issue 11 & 12
17
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Gurus we need to know the extent of our Following the conclusion of the Puja the
duties which requires of us to be International gifts were presented to Shri
meditative in order to improve our vision Mataji. Many of the gifts had been
and to enable us to be clear of all purchased in America during the
celebration of Adi Shakti Puja. Shri
negativities.
Mataji had explained how the Param-
Shri Mataji ended her discourse by Chaitanya had worked it all out- a
explaining the meditative state that emits
liquidation sale was being conducted in a
vibrations which bestows upon us the
warehouse near to the site for the Puja
where She had found enough gifts for two
powers to do our work. There, then
remains no need to fight or struggle. We
attain a state where we are completely
surrounded with love and compassion.
Pujas.
continued from page 15
know, that whate ver heights you are
to certain Calendars, I should have come
two thousand years later, and some say I
brought to, it is you who have to maintain
it with full with power and action. May
should have come atleast two thousand
years back, in this form. So the ealendar
is alright. timing is alright, everything is
alright.
God Bless You.
This lecture is a concern of your Mother.
Don't take it as anything ill. I could not
You are not robots. You are not machines. have said this even two years back or one
You are evolved through evolutionary year back. Now you are at a stage where
process, and through evolutionary I can say these things to you. You can
process only you have to achieve the understand it but it has to become your
higher state. So whatever we may do and consciousness. The stage has reached to
whatever may be alright, it is you who understand, but it should become your
have to show the results. We may take consciousness. Whatever has become
your Sahasrara to a great enlightenment, should happen if you keep it there.
out again it will collapse. So you have to
b
Again May God Bless You.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Nov - Dec.
11& 12
Volume: XI Issue
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
1999
SHIV PUJA, DELHI 14-2-99
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Today we have assembled here to do the
puja of Shri Maha Deva – Shri Shiv
Shankara. Because of Adi
Shankaracharya's emphasis people have
taken up the Puja of Shiva in a big way.
In Southern India two sects have come
up: one is Shaivites and the other is
Vaishnavites. Shaivites are the
worshippers of Lord Shiva and the
Vaishnavites are those who worship Lord
central path-is the path of Lord Vishnu.
1S
Through this path we attain the Shiva
Tattva. So Shiv Tattva is the destination
and the path is made by Lord Vishnu. This
central path is the creation of Lord Vishnu
and the Adi Shakti; Lord Shiva has no
role in it: He sits comfortably in his Seat,
without bothering for any body; if
someone wishes to come, may come. To
attain Shiv Tattva we should go through
this Vishnu Path (Sushumna Path) and
Vishnu. In our country we are very expert
in dividing ourselves. We divide Deities
correct all the centres that are created on
it When the centres are cleansed, the
as well, and when we try to reunite them
then things take a very bad (Vidrup) Vishnu path opens up and our ascent
Shape. "Ayyappa' cult in the Southern begins. Many a times I have told about
India is an example. According to them
when Lord Vishnu assumed the form of Heart, which we call 'Left Heart'. This is
"Mohini' then from Lord Shiva she got a not the centre of the heart, In a way it is
child. Is it possible? Such nonsensical the reflection of Shri Maha Deva in the
beliefs are generally spread in our heart. The abode of Shiva is above our
country? Then they form different groups Minds and Thoughts.
and find out excuses to fight with each To attain Shiv Tattva we have to see how
all these centres. There is a centre in
other? If Indians have nothing to fight
pure our heart is? We give place to many
over, then they create something from
their own imaginations.
evil thoughts in our hearts. e.g. jealousy.
There is no use of becoming jealous: we
should not feel jealous of any one. They
might have harassed us or done harm to
us, jealousy does no good to you. If your
heart is pure then the mirror in which the
reflection of Lord Shiva has to come u
So these two things are connected with
each other as Sun is with sun light, Moon
with Moon light and word with its
meaning. I mean to say that the 'Sopan
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Volume XI Issue 11 & 12
Dec.
Nov
19
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
remain pure. But if you are full of jealousy
leader and who is what?
then the mirror will not remain clean and
The Second thing with Indians is that they
as such the reflection of Lord Shiva will
feel jealous in money matters. Even in
also not be perfect. Enemity and ill
feelings for others are not to be fostered Sahaja Yoga people have jealously on
in the heart. That is why Christ has said account of money matters. Someone has
to forgive every one. Forgiving is very
important. Many Saints, before and after doing Sahaja work people see how much
Christ, have said the same thing, that money one earns and how much he gives
"Forgive everyone'. The moment you
forgive your enemy, immediately Lord
Shiva takes over. The power of Shri
got more money and some less. While
for Sahaja Yoga. The person whose
heart is obsessed with money is useless
for Sahaja Yoga because materialism
has caught his heart. If you are caught
in the clutches of materialism then
Mahadeva is the Subtlest and it punishes
the evil doer in a nice way. This is the
your ascent is very difficult. This is the
work of Lord Shiva, its not your work.
speciality of our country only. I have not
seen it in foreign countries. In Russia and
Eastern Block countries there is very little
of wealth but they are not much bothered
about money. Their heart is so much
Therefore jealousy for any one is very
bad.
But I find that there is lot of jealousy even
in Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yogis are jealous
of each other. If one person is made
trustee, the other one will feel jealous. possible only with the pure heart.
This trusteeship etc. have absolutely no Before meditation, we wash our hands
meaning in Sahaja Yoga. It is all false; and take bath. It will be better if we
Drama of your Mother. Your mother has purify our heart and pray to the Divine
spread a web of Maya (Maya jalam). Even to remove all the negativities that are
then it disturbs the people; one person there within us.
pure-very pure. Bhakti (Devotion) is
gets disturbed and the others feel bad
The third thing is the six enemies (Shad
Ripus). Out of these Shri Krishna has laid
emphasis on Krodha -The Anger
about it! I do not understand what to do!
Such a big work of Sahaja Yoga is going
on in different countries all over the
(krodha) is the worst of all the enemies;
world. I need some one who could be a
link between me and Sahaja Yogis. Of
course things are getting sorted out now.
all other negativities emanate from
Krodha. Anger brings to us attachment
and then the person repents over what he
But you will be surprised that even now
there is lot of discussion about who is the
has said. But in the fit of anger he goes
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Now Dec.
Volume: Xi isue: 11 & 12
20.
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
protection at all? A seeker is always
protected. Who could touch a person
out of self-control and hlurts-out all the
dirt that was hidden in his heart since long.
in whose hearts resides Shri Maha
That comes out of his mouth. We have to
be beware of this krodha (Anger). Why Deva? Who could destroy such a
do we get angry, we have to think over person? Whatever is done against
them, no amount of troubles could
it.
destroy such seekers, but those who
harass them will get destroyed
particular person. There are others who themselves. You should have full faith
are angry with some society. So people in it. Keep your heart absolutely pure.
get angry for different causes. But we Only in a pure heart it could work out
should think as to why we get angry. because the reflection of Shiva falls in our
Some people said to me that Shri Mataji. heart and for that the heart should be pure.
There are people who are angry with a
"If some one speaks against you. we feel
It is said that Shiva gets angry only once.
Buu I have seen him getting angry many
a times. It is his right. If some one works
against Adi Shakti, then he has the right
and he has very long hands. He finishes
up such people because he knows that
Adi Shakti will not do anything herself.
She will not punish anyone. She will
forgive all those who commit sins against
Her. The powers of Shiva are limitless.
When He wants to punish then no one
very angry." But if some one speaks
against me then I really feel like laughing
at him, because there is no meaning at all
in speaking against me. I am going to love
all.even then if they speak against me then
what could I do! But some people are
insensible enough. They are to be pitied
upon. We have to think that such a person
is a big fool and we should look very
compassionately at him. This outlook will
pacify his anger. In our country there are
different kinds of people and
organisations who get angry. They will
can stop Him. Who is there to check Him?
He has got his own protocols, which
could not be changed. So in their
individual lives Sahaja Yogis have to
follow Lord Shiva. If you do not follow
Him then first thing will be that you will
have heart problem. This is the first
punishment. It works out in two ways.
Firstly with excessive anger your heart
catches and secondly as after effect of the
be angry with some one, heat others and
kill some others. This is becoming a social
evil. This violence is very dangerous and
for this they recruit army of their own. It
IS very dangerous. If some one does so
for his own protection then it is justified
to some extent, but if a person is a seeker
(A Bhakta) then why does he need
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Nov
Deo,
21
1999
The Divine Coal Breeze
Volume XI issue 11 & 12
Tattva is absent in you. You are unable
to understand the feelings of love with
which the poor fellow had given you that
anger when a person repents he gets the
disease of Angina'. Both, Anger and
repentance are harmful. But one can not
get rid of anger because like drinking present.
anger also becomes a habit. Once one
starts enjoying it the face of an angry
In India we have the example of Sudama.
Sudama went to meet Shri Krishna and
twok along roasted rice to be presented
person gets distorted and he goes in the
state of delirium. No one can control such
to Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna ate those
a person. So, as a solution. I thought that
if you sit before the mirror and get angry
rice with great respect and love. Anything
on yourself, rebuke yourself and say, 'I presented with the feelings of love is just
am the most stupid fellow', then, may
like paras' chemical which when put
be.
you get rid of your anger. I am saying behind the glass, makes it a mirror.
Similarly, if you have feelings of love for
someone, but for want of money you offer
some small present then it should be
received by him with the same love and
respect. This feeling of love gives a subtle
sight to the person. It is artistic, Art
that it is possible to get rid of anger.
But the problems are so complicated that
it is difficult to find out solutions. Further
it is seen that the more attention we pay
to some thing, the more we react. There
is reaction to everything and this reaction
is much more in foreign countries. Here
emanates from it So how much artistic
is this art of love! By this you could see.
there is a carpet, immediately they will
how much love is there in this person?
How much loving is he! How gentle and
say. "I don't like it, I like it." Who are
they to say all this? But it has become a
fashion to say 'I like it, I don't like it', as
nice is he? When you start seeing this
quality in others then you will look within
yourself also and think, "What am I ? 'Da
I have that much of love?" Am I so
gentle?" Do I have all this goodness in
meor am I rendering lip service only and
thus confusing the people! Matter-of-fact
by our misdeeds we confuse ourselves
and none else. By our wrongful thoughts
and styles of life we can give comforts to
none and to ourselves, not at all. So from
the point of view of Swartha
if everyone were a renowned doctor who
says 'Ilike it', I don't like it'. This should
not be said. This is the indication of your
bad Agnya. What do you think about
yourself that you say, 'I like it. I don't
.
like it You have no right to do that.
Someone offers you a beautiful flower
and you immediately say. "Idon't like this
flower." You are unable to understand the
fceling of love of that person because Shiv
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Dec..
22
1999
Volume XI Issue 11 & 12
Nov
The Divine Cool Breeze
should purify our
heart.
(Selfishness)-The word Swartha is very
beautiful. 'Swa' means self" (Atma). You
So far I have talked to you, about three
enemies. The fourth enemy present within
must know the meaning of Self. For this
purpose people do the puja of Lord Shiva.
But I have seen that the worshippers of
us is 'Ego". Ego-centric ladies behave like
Shiva are hot tempered, miserly and what
not! No deity is as generous and as loving
as Lord Shiva. He is the source of love.
men. They start walking like men, like
ladies they can not walk. Ego comes to
them for many reasons
because of
money, beauty, High Education etc.
Whatever the cause, under the impact of
The love that is flowing today is
emanating from His Holi feet, It'is
because of Him that human beings are
ego, ladies start walking like men and
ego-effected men start behaving like
bathing in the ocean of love and all this
work is getting done. After sef realization
when you attain that state - The state
women. I mean such a man makes himself
up, for hours sits before the mirror,
combes his hair again and again and all
sort of stupidity. Such a person behaves
of say Jeev Atma, then your attention gets
established in the Holy feet of Lord Shiva
like women. Its for the women to do the
make up. He cannot walk straight. From
behind, if you see him walking you will
and the qualities of five elements (Pancha
Tattva) become very subtle and manifest.
Already I have told you about the four feel that it were some lady in male dress,
elements but the fifth one, 'Ether', I didn't moving ahead with ego. They get
intoxicated like elephants, In all their
(Sky Element), When a seeker ascends. activities, ego is apparent. It is difficult
to understand the cause of their ego. What
for do they consider themselves.
something special? All these things are
stupid and meaningless. In Sahaja they
have no meaning at all.So if you consider
yourself something special, you are
finished, there is nothing left in you.
So its not wise to imagine yoursellf to be
touch. In Hindi we call it "Aakash Tattva
he attains subtle Aakasha. the Subtlety
of Ether element. There is no need to
activate this element. If a seeker has some
problem. this element is omnipresent. It
is present every where. Your attention
immediately reaches where it is required
It is just wonderful? It is like that: people
may call it miracle, but it is not. In Sahaja
a rich person (Raceszada) or some thing
great. Now even the poor people sufer
from ego element: dalits (Down Trodden)
also suffer from it. Its beyond
Yoga if your Shiva Tattva is awakened
then all subtle-
and the subtlest state that is within you,
gets awakened. Therefore first of all we
The subtlest-qualities
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Volume : XI tssue : 11 & 12
23
Dec.
Nov
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
I am like this, I
am like that. say it to
understanding. People talk in such a way
and think themselves to be something
yourself, and when you start doing that,
very great. What are you as an individual? then all the bhoots (evil spirits) will run
Thinking of oneself like that is going away away because by our continuous thought
from the state of joy (Ananda). because process, by our Agnya, we have gathered
the power of Shiva takes the seeker to all these negativities. The excessive use
the state of joy. The seeker does the bhakti of Agnya creates all the problems, every
of Shiva, to have this bliss of joy, But I thing becomes mental projection and such
have seen that most of the Shiv bhaktas
person becomes very troublesome.
are short tempered type. No one could
He himself is always in fixes. By troubling
talk to them, what is the use? Natraj
Sakshat, from whom emanates all art and
joy, who is joy incarnate, how could these
so called pseudo devotees be called His
bhaktas? They hang such a big linga in
their neck that it could give heart attack.
What is the need of it? you are yourself
others one could not be happy. It will have
its impact on you even if you are a stone.
Il will have its impact and the person
becomes miserable. Mother thinks of your
comforts. She desires you to be
comfortable, contented and peaceful. She
wishes
you to be loved. So that you
the sakshat ling-swarupa. Without
becoming that they say that they are Shiva
bhaktas! On one side they will do Shiva
become gentle. This is the method of the
Mother. But Lord Shiva's method is quite
different. He tolerates to a limit and then
deals so severely that I get terrified about
that person. What will happen to this
man? Where shall he reach? What is He
doing? But Lord Shiva doesn't think all
these things. He doesn't forgive evil doers.
He forgives only those who are worthy
of His forgiveness. He blesses those who
meditate upon Him continuously. But the
person who does not basically want to
get improved, Lord Shiva sets him right.
bhakti and on the other, fight with each
other. They have different marks, Shiv
bhaktas have different style to put
Sandal
on their foreheads and Vishnu bhaktas
have different style. What is the meaning
of it? Vertical application of Sandal on
the forehead means that we are ascending.
Alright, if you are ascending then you
should be peaceful. It should be applied
both ways-Vertically and Horizontally.
otherwise do not apply it. It should have
Its true. That's why we should be scared
some meaning. It is the central path
of Him. "Bhayankara" (fearful, terrifying)
is one of His name. Because in anger he
forgives none. But the worst of his anger
leading to the goal. By passing through it
you leave behind all the negativities.
Before eriticizing others criticise vourself.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Nov - Dec.
Volume : XI Issue 11 & 12
24
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
protection, now who could save him? So
you should try to seek your protection in
Lord Shiva. Of course, you are
(Kopa) is at the time of pralaya, in the
night of doom. At that time He destroys
everything with his anger. I told you that
it is the last judgement: which path you
take to, where you go, whatever you do,
it is fully recorded in you. According to
protected by the Mother, yet you
should seek protection in Lord Shiva,
and for that I have told you about five
your deeds, you go to hell or to heaven.
It is Lord Shiva who sends people to hell;
I do not do that. I have nothing to do
with (Narka) Hell. But Shiva will take the
elements. You have to attain the
subtlety of these elements. To achieve
that State its necessary to meditate
regularly. Those who meditate could be
person from his legs and throw him in distinguished from those who do not.
the hell. You may keep on saying that I There is no doubt about it. Now those
am the worshipper of the Mother, I am
her follower, Why am I being punished?
I am not instrumental in it. Once some
who meditate but whose attention is
not there in meditation, those who do
not have understanding or expertise
for meditation, who are lazy about
one calls me Mother then I can not think
ill of him. If I am the protocols meditation, their meditation also could
(Maryadas) for Shiva then He is my not be successful. They can not get
benefited by meditation. Meditation
should be so deep that each of your cell
gets filled with joy, and joy pours out of
protocols too. But we both have
altogether different natures. So you have
to be very careful.
them.
Lord Shiva is the eleven Rudras of Jesus
The first and foremost blessing of Lord
Christ. These Rudras are the form of Lord
Shiva. So you have to be very careful. I
Shiva is that he gives you Joy, fills your
being with joy. Only the chanting of his
name makes one joyful, but people behave
have to warn you because even in
Sahaja Yoga people come to earn
money, to do ill of others and to be
unjust. Such persons are sieved out.
But as soon as they are out, they get in
opposite to it They do not behave in the
expected munner.
the people whom we think to be Shiva
bhaktas (devotees), how could they be
so dry? They could not be. There could
Iam very surprised that
to the orbit of Lord Shiva. Then I am
told that they have gone bankrupt,
also be one more reason for it. Those who
they have this problem and that
keep over busy all the time, they become
right sided. Such people get disconnected
problem. I said please don't tell it to
me now. He himself ran out of his
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Dec.
25
Nov
1999
Volume : XI Issue: 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
moment we stop following these
from Lord Shiva and then He shows His
powers You know it already that goddess maryadas, we are finished All these
Saraswati is the sister of Lord Shiva The maryadas are because of the grace of Lord
worshippers of Saraswati, the people who Shiva. Whatever has been told to us so
are busy in acquiring knowledge, those far. do not do this, do not do that, Shiva
who are keen seekers of art, should know has created all these Maryadas'. He is
that she is the sister of Lord Shiva, that so much concerned about His maryadas.
Sister's relationship is very important. If The moment you disobey them, you get
you try to go against her, create impure
literature or bad books and thus misuse
affected.
People have created so many wrong
in the name of Shiva Tattva. Many of them
think that by taking Bhang (An
intoxicating Herb) Shiv Tattva is
awakened. Some others are of the opinion
ideas
your knowledge, then Lord Shiva
punishes you with heavy hand. His sister
is very important to Him and going
against her is a terrible sin. For Adishakti
too, Lord Shiva has very rigid rules and
that drinking of Alcohol submerges you
protocols.
in Shiva Tattva! We have created such
wrong ideas. Lord Shiva drank poison,
would you also drink it? He drank poison
to make the world free of it: He ate the
Now Sahaja Yogis have to pay attention
towards themselves first of all I do not
mean to say that they should sit before
the mirror for hours together Not at all.
sitting before the mirror is considered to
poisonous Dhatura. So that people don't
have to eat these poisons. Similarly you
be a disease. What I mean to say is that
you should have attention towards your
"self and see what is the problem in me?"
"What wrong things I do The straight
path, that is told in Indian culture, should
be taken, Nowadays people think it
might have heard that Sai Nath smoked
tobacco. because in Maharashtra most of
the people are addicted to take tobacco.
so Sai Nath thought that why not
consume the whole tobacco of
Maharashtra? But people have taken it
the other way They say Sai Nath used to
smoke Chilam (faci) so why not we?
Shri Sai Nath wanted them to get rid of
appropriate to live as you like, Whats
wrong? But it is not proper. In India, one
has to live according to Indian culture.
Your life style should remain connected
this bad habit and that's why he wanted
to finish up the whole tobacco. Now the
to Indian culture because in it great
the Bhoots of the whole
importance is given to Shiv Tattva. Shiv
Tattva has created all our maryadas. The
goddess eats
up
world, would you also eat Bhoot? Devi
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Volume : XI issue 11 & 12
Nov Dac.
26
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
go and eat anywhere. Even in my own
house I eat without salt and sugar. Right
from my childhood I have made my self
insensitive to the tastes of tongue.
Whatever is available I enjoy myself of
it. But our tongue is used to different
takes up all the diseases that are there in
you. Would you also absorb the diseases
of others? Its not your work. So, what
all these sadhus are doing? You have
neither the powers to do that nor is it your
duty. Your duty is to cleanse yourself,
tastes. All Indians-whether from U.P..
correct yourself. First you attain that state
then everything will be alright. Without Punjab or South-all are very expert in
this regard. With tasty food they befool
people. My husband likes this, my
achieving that state its useless.
There is absolutely no use of doing all
these rituals. Many things could be
justified in wrong manners, but if we go
in the right direction, in right manner, then
husband likes that. What to do? Women
will be slaves to their husbands and day
and night keep pleasing them. The one
who talks about food all the times is
first of all we should cleanse and purify
not a Sahaja Yogi.
our hearts. All these habits, we are
addicted to, affeet our heart, In the olden In Milan, at the time of Guru Puja.
times disciples were made to live in myself had to cook. What to do? For four
jungles, amidst snakes, scorpians, other years I myself had been cooking because
animals and insects, so that they were not no one else could prepare tasty food.
addicted to luxurious life. At the most Sahaja Yogis (Indians Specially) would
they could live in huts done with say Mother, it is just like plastic. Indians
cowdung. They were made to sleep there
and lead a very simple life. Very few
who come their for Puja would like to
see me. They have a special right on me.
Also they are very critical of the food
offered to them. Now one more thing has
begun. Indian Sahaja Yogis need attached
bathrooms! How their parents used to
simple clothes were given to them so that
they could not be crazy about clothes.
shoes and special type of food. It is
unnecessary to say all these things to
live? Now they want British style attached
bath rooms. I am mentioning because I
am tired of it. In Ganapatipule I provided
Western bathrooms for the foreigners and
Indian for Indians. I thought Indian Sahaja
Sahaja Yogis. You know that your
Mother could live anywhere, could sleep
anywhere, could eat any food. Indians are
very fond of tasty food. Sahaja Yogis
invite each other for dinner and lunch.
Yogis would like the Indian style. But
Ladies, specially, ask me to come to their
houses to eat. I say, its difficult for me to
Indian Sahaja Yogis demanded western
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Nov Dec.
27
1999
Volume XI issue 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
away of the attention in absurdities
will make you just an ordinary person.
bathrooms. I said, take tumblers and go
to jungle, that is how you will improve.
They have been going for years like that.
But now they have become big Sahibs! Its a fashion, nowadays the ladies will go
Then the poor foreigner Sahaja Yogis to beauty parlour, the face will remain the
said, Shri Mataji we like Indian style same but they will throw away their
bathrooms. There are very clean, please money. Brahmin ladies of Pune wear
sleevless, black goggles and drive
mopeds. I could not understand! Pune is
give these bathrooms to us. Then I
changed the arrangement and Hindustanis
were very happy that they have got punaya patnam', but what is this punyai
attached bathrooms. You should be (good deeds)? Thus we have adopted
ashamed of it. Sahaja Yogis talking about shiy Tattya. Look at Shiva. He is not
such things should be ashamed. Your bothered about clothes. Even in His
forefathers used to go to jungle with marriage procession He sat upon Nandi,
tumblers and now what are you the 'Ox. Why Nandi? Because Nandi is
demanding? Have you got some disease His disciple. He obeys His commands.
or any other problem? Unneccessarily and that is the reason that Nandi is Lord
they put me in trouble. But some how it Shiva's most beloved disciple. Shiva sat
struck me and things were managed. You upon Nandi and reached the place of
western system without even thinking of
will be surprised, Indians who come to Parvati. Of course Parvati had no
Cabella, do not like to live together. objection but her brother. Lord Vishnu,
Western Sahaja Yogis are very rich, they was surprised to see this strange
have got cars and other facilities, but they
bridegroom. I do not mean to say that
you should dress up shabbily at the time
of marriage. To accept every thing, all sort
offoods is nice. Wisdom is your ornament.
But these people will keep on criticizing
their hosts for the food that they offer.
What food did they prepare? If the food
was good then they will ask their wives
to prepare like that. So this taste of the
tongue is in abundance in India. It should
be reduced. These foreigner Sahaja Yogis
sleep in Hanger. But Indians need a
special place; they will stay in hotels. They
cannot sacrifice their comforts. They have
not learnt that this modernism is beyond
me to understand. These foreigners have
no servants. So they have only one
bath.oom in their houses because they
themselves have to clean it. Since you can
afford to have servants, you keep many
bathrooms but all these habits will take
you away from your power. Your eat your Indian food, I have never heard
attention will fritter away. Frittering any complaint. But none of you could
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Volume XI Isue 11 & 12
Nav Dec.
28
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
importance. If you sleep on the bed, then
for ten days you should sleep on the earth.
Without enslaving your body, you cannot
achieve your ascent. Many people can not
walk at all because they have the habit to
travel by car. They keep on borrowing
the cars. None of them will think to go
by bus. In olden times there used to be
take their Western food. Till you are
caught in this temptation, you cannot have
this deep joy. In olden days seekers were
asked to renounce every thing to achieve
the joy of Lord Shiva. First renounce, go
to Himalyas, stand on one leg. You should
not wear any clothes. Take a dip in the
river and then meditate with wet clothes.
They used to torture the body. Even these
days Gurus beat their disciples. They do
not give realization so easily. After lot of
no bus at all. We used to walk five miles
every day to reach the school though we
had a car and every thing. But we were
very fond of walking barefoot. Walking
barefooted on the earth is good to
torture and hard work a few seekers get
it but such seekers get established in it.
receive vibrations. You should also
Sahaja Yogis are given realization make the habit of walking without
without undergoing such penance. shoes. Its very important. You will be
Their previous Sanskaras (habits) still
linger on in then. What to do with that?
benefited, Mother earth will have your
vibration and you will feel nice.
These sanskaras are to be pushed away,
to be finished. There is no need to get in
to extremities. No need to renounce home
We have become slaves to the comforts
just like Nawabs. What did the Nawabs
achieve? Similarly our lives will be wasted
if we do not come out of the clutches of
the slavery. First we have to reduce the
slavery and establish Shiv Tattva in our
hearts. Nothing else is much important
and everything: There is no need to do.
Dravidi Pranyamas (controlling the
breath). But one thing is a must, you have
to reduce this temptation of taste.
Temptations for the taste are to be gotten
rid off. It is very necessary. Freedom from
taste is a big achievement. People get
enraged if they do not get food of their
own choice. They throw away their
plates, beat their servants and so on. If
you make yourself insensitive to taste,
then I think, many sweet shops will close
down. However, what I mean to say is
that the body should not be given much
-beautiful and fashionable dresses etc.
Whatever is available, wear it. You will
lose nothing. On the contrary you will be
happy that you are a contented person.
Now a days the price of gas cylinders in
India has been increased by Rupees
Sixteen. The ladies opposed the price rise
and had a procession. I saw their
photographs in the news paper. All were
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Nov - Dec.
Volume XI Issue 11 & 12
29
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
so well decorated that I said that each
people should also learn to be above
the tastes of the tongue. It will be better
one of them might have applied powder
worth Rupees fifteen. Why are they going
on strike now? No one thinks of the
if you take boiled food for a few days.
No mother would suggest such a thing
to her children, what do I do? It is
damaging the Shiv Tattva in you. If you
are much absorbed in tasty food then
Shiva Tattva will disappear and all the
labour will be lost. It is not good to be
absorbed in eating all the times. People
in olden days used to observe fasts and
sacrifice some thing. If you are contented
increased salary, We used to pay Rupees
Twenty-Twenty five to our servant.
Today he gets two thousand five hundred,
clothes and other facilities, yet he is
complaining. When salaries are increascd
so much, would not the prices increase?
Salaries and prices rise with the same
speed. There is a story that in Sri Lanka
labours were given one gold brick a day.
One person received two bricks against
one day's work. He went to a barber shop
then there is no need to think of food all
the time nor to invite people at your place.
for shave. He asked from the barber, Cast system is another big problem in
"What are the charges? Two bricks". India. Kayasth is separate, Brahmin is
came the answer. As the income, so the separate. Even now it exists. Each one of
expenses. Its unwise to keep complaining them forms a separate group. Now you
about price rise. When your salaries are
are all Sahaja Yogis, then why should you
worry about these castes? If you were to
so much increased then why to keep
crying about the price rise? Its a very
do all these things even now then why
did you come to Sahaja Yoga? There is
no Caste and creed in Sahaja Yoga. What
is the caste of Lord Shiva? People with
simple thing. If we learn it then socially
also we could achieve Shiv Tattva.
one eye blind, bare footed and Limb
broken were taken in the marriage
procession by Lord Shiva. So it is against
I was with Gandhiji in his Ashram for
some time. People staying in the Ashram
used to run away because they were to
Shiv Tattva to be concerned about castes
clean the bathrooms of others. No
sweeper was engaged in the Ashram. One
had to wash ones own clothes, wash ones
own plates. Every one had to take boiled
food, at the most a little raw mustard oil
and to think that different food should be
prepared for different castes. I could
never understand as to how the people
draw pleasure out of it! Whats the reason
Bangalis want Bangali food, Madrasis
put on it. How many Hindustanis eat such
a food? Most of the people ran away from
the Ashram in twa-three days. You
want South Indian food. Once I asked
why there is no standard food in Airlines?
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Volume : XI issue : 11 & 12
Nev Dec.
30
The Divine Cool Breeze
1999
They replied, "Shri Mataji, which is the have to be caught in it. Lead simple life.
standard food in our country?" That's In our country simple people have
right. Every one has liking for the food attained heights. During pre-
of his own state. One should have sweet independence days Gandhiji asked every
tongue. One feels as if Ravana's are one to wear khaddar and thus he set the
coming out of the smiles of certain people right. Now you have to control
person's and when ladies speak, it appears yourself because you are enlightened
to be like "Chandika'. Both men and beings. You are in the Holy feet of Lord
women are very strange. Where is Shiv Shiva. Correct yourself, do not try to
correctothers, correct yourself and feel
blessed that you are a self realized
Tattva in these strange habits? Lord Shiva
is the ocean of love, He bestows boons
person. How many realized souls were
there in the olden times? Today you are
in thousands. So start talking to each
other very sweetly, from the depth of the
heart. From heart if you talk to people
even on Rakshasas. If we have to awaken
Shiv Tattva with in us then how could
we be caught in such stupidity? How
could we do all that? Tell me. The way
we criticise each other and call high and
low, it is not like Lord Shiva.
no one takes ill of it. Observe all the
The streams of love are flowing in Lord
Shiva, While bathing in this ocean of
protocols (Maryadas) with your children
and elders. This way you will make
yourself and others happy. But without
the blessings of Lord Shiva you cannot
do that. So look within yourself and see
love -you should not say such baseless
things. There is no use of it. We should
enjoy each others love and
understanding. Of course, Sahaja Yogis
do not fight with each other. With great
love they meet each other. However, their
small, small individual likings, eating and
moving should be corrected a little bit. If
that you are an enlightened person.
Am I patient enough or not? Do I
quarrel with others over small small
things and find faults with them? Then
definitely there is something wrong
with me. Put your attention on that,
only then you could be cleansed. Until
we do that it will be wonderful. Your
attention will go towards your heart. It
you know your shortcomings, how
could you cleanse them? This cleansing
is much needed. Only by this cleansing
you could visualise the Divine Father.
The God Almighty within you and
will not remain entangled in these things.
Fashion and designing is much more
rampant in foreign countries. They create
different fashionable dresses and the
wearer thinks very great of himself or
other people could also have this bliss.
May God Bless You.
herself. Italian people are very much
affected by these things. But you do not
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Nov
Volume : XI Issue : 11 & 12
31
The Divine Cool Breeze
Dec.
1999
HANUMANA PUJA (PUNE 31-3-99)
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Today we are celebrating Hanumana's of Shri Hanumana,
Jayanti. What to say about Hanumana?
The more powerful and wise, he was
The Second quality of Shri Hanumana is
that he is half human and half monkey
equally devoted and dedicated. Generally
such a powerful person becomes right-
sided and considers himself so high that
A perfect combination of animal and
human being. In the process of our
he would not listen to anyone else But evolution, love and emotions that we had
Hanumana is a special deity, a typical left behind, Shri Hanumana had taken up.
deity full of qualities. There was a perfect A guru has many disciples who are
balance between his devotion and power. supposed to be his slaves. Dogs also have
How could he achieve this balance is a that loyalty. A dog is loyal to his master
thing to be understood. In Sahaja Yoga, and for him it could sacrify its life.
when we are enlightened, we get many Similarly a seeker has to be dedicated to
powers. Then we have to keep balance. his Guru. The way in evolutionary process
a creature, in the company of the human
being, learns complete devotion and
loyality, shows that devotion (Bhakti) is
innate in us. The seed of Bhakti is already
We love others and with the power of the
love, we keep on doing our duties.
Shri Hanumana was very powerful. He
had many divine powers in him-
Navdha, that is Garima, Laghuma etc. He
could be as big as he wanted to be and as
sown in us. In the beginning we were not
in human state. With the awakening of
Bhakti we came to this level. Let us take
small as an atom. He had achieved all
the example of an animal. You give it a
little of your love and affection, it will
close to you and will be
these powers. Without attaining balance
and coming to the central path. Such a
powerful person, generally goes crazy.
Each cell of Shri Hanumana's body was
filled with power and devotion. Because
of this speciality today we worship Shri
Hanumana all over the world. Smail. small
very
come very
loyal. Take the example of a horse. How
it scarifies its life for the sake of its master!
The loyality of the elephant is well known.
It will never let the master suffer. If a tiger
orany other animal attacks the master the
elephant protects him even at the cost of
its life. This relation of master and evolved
foreign children, when they start painting,
Iam surprised, first of all paint the picture
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Volume XI Issue : 11 & 12
1999
32
Nov Dec.
The Divine Cool Breeze
killed the Ravana when he came to it.
animal is established in us. We have to
Tulsi Dasa has described his bow very
very beautifully. Shri Rama was aiming
at Ravana's head with his arrow. Out of
awaken it. The elephant has the power to
fight and die for the master because it is
devoted to him and loves him. We say
ten head's of Ravana one will fall down.
that Sahaja Yoga is the work of Divine
Love. Its right, whether we know it or
But again it will assume its place.
Lakshamana suggested Shri Rama to
shoot an arrow in the heart of Ravana,
not, its power is innate. It is divine power.
When a human being bows before
without which he will not die. Hit him in
someone and regards him higher, it is the
the heart. Shri Rama was a very humble
person. Though he was very powerful yet
he said to Lakshmana that Ravana has
expression of that divine power. But when
a person is respectful to his Guru then he
gets blessed with the grace and power of
placed my Sita in his heart, therefore, I
cannot hit him in the heart. Again and
the Guru.
So the devotion and the power (Bhakti
and Shakti) are not different things. It is
again when I chop off his heads, his
attention will be diverted from the heart.
Only then shall I shoot him in the heart.
What an example of the love of a husband
for his wife! Ocean of power, how he was
one. We shall say that the right side is the
source of power and the left of Bhakti.
Shri Hanumana had in Him this harmony
of Bhakti and Shakti. In Lanka when he
full of love!
went to Shri Sitaji and requested her to
There are many stories about Shri
Hanumana which prove that he was also
accompany him back, Shri Sitaji said,
"You are my son, I will not come with
you. My husband has to come and kill the ocean of love and compassion. But
this Rakshasa. Only then I will go with he had no hesitation in killing an evil
him". Shri Hanumana bowed before Shri person who harassed and killed others.
Sitaji. He was powerful enough to bring Shri Hanumana knew that Ravana is
Sitaji back to Shri Rama. But he thought afraid of fire. So he went to Lanka and
that when Mother is saying like that then burnt it with his power. He burnt Lanka
its all right. After that a big war was
but didn't kill anyone. Ravana was not
burnt. But he was terrified. Every one in
fought because it was needed.
Lanka was afraid that Ravana has
Shri Rama has many special qualities. He
was very powerful and a perfect archer.
You might have heard about what he did
in Sita Swayamvara. The same Shri Rama
committed sins. Before that the people
of Lanka accepted whatever Ravana did
and bowed before his desire. Nobody
dared stop him. But when Lanka was
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 11 & 12
Volume XI Issue
Nov Dec.
The Divine Cool Breeze
1999
33
judge and understand everything with
burnt, the people were terrified. We could
love. Shri Ganesha and Shri Hanumana
have been burnt down! But none was
are the incarnations of this divine wisdom.
burnt. To make them conscious about
Shri Hanumana was very powerful and
Ravana's henious sins, Shri Hanumana
fast and Shri Ganesha is cool-natured. But
burnt Lanka. How wise and halanced was
when required, both are very big hitters.
They remain with you every moment.
Whenever anyone troubles you, your
protectors are there. Often you see that
security moves with the ministers and
V.L.Ps. The security of Sahaja Yogis also
moves with them; that is, the security of
Ganas. Ganas have many things to do.
Ganapati-Shri Ganesha keeps them
Bajarangbali? In history we find that the
most of the powerful people were full of
love. Shivaji is an example. The more
power he had, the more wise, systematic
and balanced he was. When you could
achieve this balance, only then you are
Sahaja Yogis. Achieving power does not
mean that you should say good bye to
love and start misbehaving.
informed about you as to where is the
The dignity of your power lies in problem, from where you are getting
becoming the guardians of poor and down attacked and troubled. You do not know
trodden. You have no need to fight with that if anybody wants to attack you
those who harass them and put them to secretly, even then these god's ganas
trouble. Only bandhan will do the whole
work for you. The power that you have
achieved should be used to finish the
stand by you. When Shri Ganapati
informs about it, Shri Hanumana sets
them right. So Sahaja Yogis have no need
negativity. But like Hanumana you do not
have to take Sword and Gada in your
hands. Your power is with in you. By your
to be frightened. No need at all to be
frightened.
experiences you could see that anyone
harassing you is automatically finished,
wheather you take up weapons or not.
Thus you are protected and with you
other Sahaja Yogis will also be protected.
In it Shri Hanumana has an important
role. You do not know that he is with you.
I tell you a story which is very surprising.
America bombarded certain areas of
Africa where they thought terrorists had
hideouts. I am telling you the story of a
place where some Sahaja Yogis used to
live. One of the bombs exploded there and
most of the people died. But there was
absolutely no damage done to Sahaja
Yogis. They were flabbergasted. Even the
dust particles did not fall on them. They
had never come to Cabella, not even
His nature is as pure and innocent as that
of a child. But he is very disereet and full
of all the qualities. He was blessed with
divine-discretion with which he could
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Volume XI issue 11 & 12
Nɔv - Dec.
1999
34
Nov
The Divine Cool Breeze
before you. You are no saint'. Lot of hue
and cry was made. On the day the king
was to cut the neck of Hazarat
thought of it. But after this incident they
came to Cabella and told, "Shri Mataji
we do not know who protected us? But
we all Sahaja Yogis were saved. All other
Nizamuddin, some one chopped off the
neck of the king. No one knew how it
people have died. Now this is one
incident You are protected because you
was done! If this protection was not there
then all the saints and religious people
have accepted the God Almighty and
Sahaja Yoga made yourself spiritually
conscious. By this transformation you
would have been finished. The rulers of
the nation were so violent that they would
have finished these people. But God is
have become such devoted and
powerful persons. Now no one dare
touch you. I can give you thousands of
such examples that once you get your
self-realization in Sahaja Yoga then no
one could harm you.
there with these saints and God is made
of the power of Shri Ganesha and Shri
Hanumana. They look to this protection.
When Maha Rana Pratap, the ruler of
Mewar, went to fight with the Mughals,
his soldiers requested him to go back
because it was difficult to defeat the
formidable enemy. Maharana Pratap
asked the soldiers to go back. He said
that I will not budge and keep fighting
because Ganas are with me. He was also
a Sahaja Yogi. He told his soldiers to go
avway if they wished to do so but. "I will
fight with the enemy because Ganas are
with me." So understand that you are
protected from all sides. What should
happen to a Sahaja Yogi when he gets
this protection? He should become
In olden times also there used to be saints
and Sadhus. All were troubled and
cheated. But despite all these troubles and
difficulties they stuck fimly to their faith.
They were also protected. They said such
things that angered the rulers. They didn't
hesitate to speak against the rulers and
evil doers but because of the power of
Shri Hanumana no one could touch them,
no one could kill them. There is a beautiful
story about Khawaza Nizamuddin Sahib.
The emperor ordered him to come and
bow before him. Hazarat Nizamuddin
very patient, discreet and a fearless
person. He will not be afraid of
stick to his place and face the evil people.
He need not do anything. Now that age
has gone. You just stand boldly and the
negative people will run away. Many
flatly refused to do that. The king was
furious and warned him that within three
enemy,
days if he doesn't come and bow down
before him then his neck will be chopped
off. Hazarat Nizamuddin said, Do
whatever you like, I will not bow down
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI Issue: 11 & 12
Dec.
Nov
1999
35
Sahaja Yogies write to me their need to strengthen your body. You are
interesting
experiences. Otherwise it was not an casy already strong. There is
job to spread Sahaja Yoga in Western Chinese story. Chinese people like cock
countries. Now Muslims are also fighting. Once a Chinese King thought
very
accepting Sahaja Yoga. So you can that it would be better if his cock could
understand how powerful this Divine be trained by some saint. A Saint fights
Power-The power of love is and how with none yet none touches him. People
much it could perform! But that doesn't are afraid of him and bow before him.
mean that in the name of Shri Hanumana What is their speciality that they live
comfortably in this evil world? He took
you should create some big institution.
Not at all. The way people are doing now
a days, they will take the name of Shri
his cock to the saint who asked him to
leave the cock there. After one month the
king took away his cock and on the day
of cock fighting, he put the cock in the
arena. All the cocks were fighting with
each other but this one was standing by
itself. One after one all these cocks ran
away. It was the only one standing in the
arena. All the cocks got frightened of it
because it stood undaunted.
Hanumana, or of Shri Ganesha or of Lord
Shiva. You need not create such
organizations. You yourself are an
organisation. No one could touch you,
no one could destroy you. Only you
have to know Thy Self.
Its mentioned in all the scriptures that Self
Realization means Knowing Oneself.
What do you mean by Knowing Today we are worshipping Shri
ourselves'? It means that we should be
Hanumana. So we should think that He
aware of the fact as to who stand
resides within us. He controls our right
side-The Pingla channel-and gives
us zeal. As a result heat is generated. But
his path is such that the heat (power) and
devotion should go side by side. So the
heat, the energy acts on right side but
around us, who are our protectors, and
how will you give your love and affection
to the people? As some one said yesterday
that I will comfort every one and fill the
whole world with joy', when this feeling
without the balance of Shri Hanumana
comes to you then you think that there is
this heat gives birth to many diseases in
us, such as liver problem, bronchial
no one to harm you. No oe dare do that.
For this you have to do nothing at all.
You need not take a sword or any other
asthma and heart attacks. When this heat
weapon. All these things are already with
you. They are innate in you. You have no
goes downward, Shri Hanumana tries to
control it, but when the heat goes out of
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Nov Dec.
Volume: XI Issue 11 & 12
36
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
his control then many incurable diseases
emanate from it. It could cause blood
cancer, intestine problem etc. Hot Liver
is the cause of many diseases and liver
problem comes because we do not follow
Shri Hanumana. Sometimes we get angry.
your heart. The one who doesn't respect
him could get heart attack, or many other
diseases even after coming to Sahaja
Yoga. You should understand that Shri
Hanumana is the ideal before you. Lord
Ganesha is also there. He was innocence
incarnate. He is as innocent as a small
There is no need of getting angry. But in
the fit of anger we create lot of problems,
beat others and so on.
child. But he is very wise and discreet.
Shri Hanumana is balanced and full of
love and joy. At the same time he is power
Anger is not the power of Shri Hanumana.
There is absolutely no need to get
incarnate.
Sahaja Yogi should understand all these
things and his life and character should
angry with others. If you respect Shri
Hanumana you have no need to get
be well balanced. When angry, you should
watch silently. I think I never get angry.
angry. Shri Hanumana never gets angry
with any one. But we human beings are
Without getting angry every thing works
infuriated over silly things. Ego plagues
us. Shri Hanumana had no ego at all.
out. But people could not control their
Generally right sided people are ego anger. In the fit of anger they start
oriented. Human beings have so much of abusing, Excessive anger is a serious
thing, resulting in a serious disease called
Ego that I can not understand! When I
Alzheimer. Anger is the cause of
Alzheimer-Anger which has no cause
try to see through them, there appears to
be no cause for this Ego. Even an ordinary
at all. Suppose someone slaps your son.
Its enough to make you angry. What is in
it to get angry? What is in it to get angry?
Actually you should think that your child
might have made some mistake or you
are spoiling him by your love. If this type
person is full of Ego, whereas many kings
have no Ego at all, Ego affects all those
who do not follow Shri Hanumana. As
you respect Shri Hanumana similarly you
regard Shri Rama. Now tell me whether
a right sided person should get the disease
of asthma or not because Shri Rama is
of balance is not achieved then this disease
of Alzeimer is there, which makes madcap
of a man. Such a person neither dies
himself nor lets anyone else die. He
always keeps abusing and shouting. Such
a person could be cured in Sahaja Yoga,
the ruling deity of the right heart. Because
you do not respect Shri Hanumana, do
not behave like him you are not balanced
like him, therefore you fall victim to this
disease of asthma. Lord Shiva resides in
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Volume XI Isue : 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
Dec.
Nov
37
1999
but the treatment is very difficult because the reason drinking is prohibited in all
such mad caps will abuse those who try religions. But these Christians find
to cure them. So who will go to such a excuses to drink. Hindus and Muslims are
person? If a patient abuses the Doctor, also no exception. Christians say that
the doctor will say "Go to Hell what have Jesus Christ made wine to be served in a
I to do? Same thing happens to such wedding feast. Its false. But people take
people:; no Sahaja yogi likes to go near
it as an excuse for drinking. In England, I
them.
was surprised, if some one dies people
will drink, if a child is born, they will
Drunkards are the worst enemies of Shri
drink! Drinking, has become an addiction.
Hanumana. He burns up the Lanka of Alcohol has become their culture. They
those drunkards. No one likes to mix up have written books on Alcohol, when to
with such people. They gather ten take which Alcohol! On what Occasion
Alcohol addicts and drink. There is a particular type of glasses are to be used
nothing in the house for the children to
eat but the stupid people spend everything
for drinking. When I see these drunkards,
1 think them to be half human. Half of
on wine! Those who follow Shri
Hanumana can not take Alcohol because
drinking is disrespect to this deity. He
would not allow it. But these days
them are absolutely mad. Butdrinking has
become their culture. France is the worst
in it. You have nothing to learn from them.
When they talk of Jesus Christ they are
drinking is rampant. I am surprised. Once
I went to the house of a friend of my
absolutely wrong. In Hebrew, I have read
wine that they drink is the juice of grapes
husband who was a big officer. Both,
(Draksha). Jesus Christ put his finger in
the water and it was converted to juice
husband and wife were used to drinking,
It was winter and they asked me to stay
of grapes. Without fermentation how
there for the night. I agreed. Oh God'!
could one make wines? The more
there was only one blanket in the house.
fermented it is, the more costly. Fifty year
I said, does not matter, I will manage. But
old wine is valuable and hundred year old
is a rarity. These ideas have been formed
by the drunkards. Drunkards are the
they were very ashamed and upset. They
had only one daughter. She was misled
but they won'Laccept and kept boasting
of her. So the girl was ruined of drinking.
Of late, She came to me weeping.
writers and they are the narrators. Many
people are being befooled by their
lectures. But you might have never seen
The element of love disappears in a the statue of some heavy drunkard being
drunkard. He is unable to love. That is put in any country! All such people are
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
Dec,
1999
38
Nov
not only against Shri Hanumana, but also
and requested me to deliver a lecture. But
I refused. They asked the reason for the
they attäck him and then Shri Hanumana
generates such heat in them that they fall
victims to Abdominal Cancer and many
other diseases. Yet people go on drinking.
This System of drinking, which is
ramphant, I am afraid of it. No one knows
what Shri Hanumana may do! I control
him, otherwise who knows, he may throw
all the drunkards in the ocean one day! I
refusal. I said you get drunk and sing dirty
songs before Shri Hanumana. Do you
know what this Maruti is? He will.strangle
such people. Now they have told me that
they do not allow drunkards there. See
how bold they are! Before Hanumana
they will do all that and such people think
that they can have more money by
drinking! Actually most of such drinking
people are bankrupt. People ask the
am really afraid of Him. He is full of
compassion and devotion. But he does
not spare those who stand against him.
reason for it. Its the concern of Shri
Shri Ganesha also punishes the immoral Hanumana, what reason could be
people. Immorality affects the Muladhar assigned? You are going against Shri
centre of a person. Alcohol damages the
consciousness. When Shri Hanumana
Hanumana. His power flows in you, in
Use it in a balanced manner.
the right side.
On the contrary you take to drinking and
damage your liver and the whole system.
Naturally He will be annoyed. In a subtle
way its the work of Shri Hanumana. He
sees someone drinking, he is displeased.
There is disharmony in the family of such
person. There will be no peace and
equanimity in the house. Husband and
wife will.quarrel, quarrel with each other.
Drunkards generally fight with each other
and thus get bad name in the society. So after his life. Those who do not drink are
Sahaja Yogis should not go to the houses called stupid and outdated. "Shri
of the drunkards, nor keep any relation Hanumana is there to protect those who
with them. Such relations are very
does not care for the extemal reasons. If
one opposes drinking then people will be
are against drinking. Once he hits, you
are finished. But Shri Hanumana generally
doesn't harm, otherwise people would
harmful for Sahaja Yogis. On the one side
you follow Shri Hanumana and on the
not have talked like mads. All the time
other you maintain relations with the
they talk of drinking. parties, this and that.
In wedding parties they drink wine like
mads. Human beings are very thoughtful
and think of the future. But there is no
drunkards! In Pune, particularly, their are
many types of Hanumanas-Maruti,
Dulya Maruti and many others. So Pune
people should be beware of them. These
followers of Hanumana once came to me
love left in them
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 Volume XI Issue : 11 & 12
Nov
Dec.
1999
39
The Divine Cool Breeze
The feelings of love for all are absent in
human beings. Shri Hanumana is
anguished by such an approach. You can
not say about the Hanumana who is
devotee of Shri Rama. You may be a great
you did not allow me to stop the rain?" I
said, there is nothing such as that.
Actually you are a Sanyasi and you have
bought a Sari for me. How could I accept
something from a Sanyasi? I thought of
getting drenched, so that I could accept
Sari that you brought for me. Tears started
rolling down his eyes and he fell on my
feet. I said, what had I to do? To get wet
worker, a fine person, everything. But if
there is no love for all in your heart then
it will not work out.
One should have love for all. Jesus Christ
a little! Otherwise How I could accept
has said, "Forgive everyone." Who are that sari? So I thought it better to get
you not to forgive? Over small-small drenched and have an excuse to accept
things people get crazy and the joy of love
vanishes. Every one should salute and
it I told him that he has brought an orange
coloured Nauwar Sari for me. It's good
because my petticoat is also wet and this
bow before Shri Hanumana, the devotee
of Shri Rama. We should understand that
Nauwar could be worn without it. He was
powers of Sahaja Yoga, we are blessed
with, we should keep them in balance.
very much pleased. Love is a boon which
melts the angriest of the angry persons.
Whole night is notenough if I start telling
such examples. It's happening every day.
With love you can handle the most
difficult people. I have to face very
strange people, but I handle them with
love. With love bring them round. Once I
Talking with love costs nothing. By
loving others you will imbibe the good
qualities of others', but by hating
them, you will absorb their evil
went to meet a saint. He was known for
his anger. I climbed the mountain to reach
his cave. When I reached there, I found
qualities. It is a practice with people that
him twisting his neck in anger. He had
the powers to control rain. But that day
if some one comes to their house they
will entertain him and keep praising on
the face; the moment he goes they will
stärt criticising him. It is very common
it rained heavily and I got drenched. He
was in the fit of anger. In his cave he was
brought before me'. He asked, "Mother,
why did not you allow me to stop the rain?
Did you want to purge me of my Ego?"
He was very proud of his powers to stop
the rain. I said, "What happened if I am
with ladies. On the face they praise and
on the back criticise. This show of love
will not do. The recipient also
understands that you are just showing off.
You are a Sahaja Yogi and you have
wet?" He said, to humble down my ego
the power to love by heart. When
you
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Nav - Dec.
Volume :XI Issue: 11 & 12
1999
40
The Divine Cool Breeze
But I say that it is no miracle, it is the
. So my
imbibe this quality, then the tree of love
blossoms, then you will give joy to
blessing of Shri Hanumana
blessings and love to you all. Love
yourself, also love others. Do not confine
others and be joyful with its fragrance.
Nothing else will attract you but that
your love to my son, my this, my that'.
No! love means selfless love-Nirvajya
Prem-love that expects no return. love
ihat is not confined to relations only. You
have been blessed with such unfathomable
ocean of love.
What we have to learn from Shri
Hanumana is this devotion (Bhakti) and
the power that he has given to you. If
your devotion (Bhakti) is real, then no
power of love. Use it.
one dare touch you. No one could touch.
There are thousands of examples in
May God Bless You.
Sahaja Yoga. People call them miracles.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Volume XI Issue 11 & 12.
41
Nov Dec.
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
AN INTERVIEW WITH SHRI MATAJI
The following is an interview with Mataji I heard Shri Mataji before I saw her.
Shri Nirmala Devi that appeared in a
"How are you? How is America?" Then
the lady appeared, short, plump, with long
dark hair falling free, and a smile that chips
magazine called Ziereus in May 1983
before a visit by Shri Mataji to the U.S.
It is interesting in that the writer gets his
self-realization during the interview.
away all defences.
Tea was ordered and I was asked to sit
down.
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
"And The Cool Breeze"
Before I could get the first question into
gear Shri Mataji asked, "Do you know
by Stan Bostock
what the chakras are?"
The aim was to talk to Shri Mataji
Nirmała Devi about her forthcoming Imumbled something about subtle energy
North American tour. What happened centres along the spine "That's right," she
was something that is only now, a week said, and tapped the base of her neck with
her index finger. "This one is called the
Vishuddhi. In the universe the Vishuddhi
I telephoned the number Shri Mataji's is North America. Australia is the lower
followers in New York had given me, and chakra, the mooladhara. India is the
found myself, an hour later, knocking on kundalini, which can link all the chakras
the carved door of a five storied terraced together," she traced a line from the base
house in London's classy Knights bridge of the spine to the top of her head, "but
later, starting to make sense.
district.
America is the Vishuddhi, isn't it? such
an important chakra.
The door was opened by a young Indian
who ushered me into a reception room
Shri Mataji then touched the red spot in
as ornate and rich as a jewel box.
her forehead. "This chakra," she said, "is
Furniture covered with rose silk, tables
the agnya, It is presided over by Lord
Jesus Christ, isn't it? The agnya is
forgIveness. It shows that the spirit cannot
be destroyed. Just as Christ could not be
inlaid with ivory, carved and gilded
wooden sereens, pale pink crystal
chandeliers.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Volume XI Issue : 11 & 12
Nov - Dsc.
The Divine Cool Breeze
42
1999
things, the land of sweetness turned
destroyed, but rose again, didn't he?"
bitter, then yes, perhaps Lord Krishna
might withdraw the protection.
Shri Mataji quietly contemplated the risen
Christ for a moment, then jabbed her suddenly she laughed. "On my tour Ishall
fingers towards the base of her neck tell everybody how to stop that from
again.
happening."
"The vishuddhi, its presiding deity, you
could say, is Lord Krishna. The Vishuddhi
I asked Shri Mataji if she was visiting
North America just to sound such a
stands for diplomacy, sweetness, self-
esteem, communication and collectivity
warning.
There are seekers of money, seckers after
like your Abraham Lincoln. He stood
for collectivity. Abraham Lincoln was a power, seekers of physical gratification,"
saint - did you know that?- a realized she replied, "and then there are people
soul. You have had many great men. who have done all those things, and are
Roosevelt now, he said. "poverty now seeking the truth, seeking their spirit,
anywhere is a threat to prosperity seeking God. There are many, many
everywhere. So clear. America is so seekers of truth in America. Great, great
great. It is protected by Lord Krishna's seekers. Oh so great. I want to meet them.
Show them how they can get what they
have been looking for probably since
discus."
Shri mataji held up the index finger of ages. lifetimes even. Their self
her right hand and twirled it, and I realization."
swear I could see a bright glittering
"What is that exactly?" Ihadn't yet asked
one question from my carefully prepared
disc whirling round.
"As long as that discus is there," she
list.
said, "America can never be invaded."
Tea arrived. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, the
"Could that protection ever be spellbinding visionary, turned into
withdrawn?" I asked.
Mrs. C.P. Srivastava, the attentive
hostess. Did I have the right amount of
Shri Mataji shrugged expressively, and
raised her eyebrows high. "Perhaps," she
said. "If the land of diplomacy stopped
being diplomatic, the land of
sugar and milk? Would I have a biscuit?
(Which turned out to be a cookie.)
"Self realization," said Shri Mataji, is
communications communicated bad
the yoga, the union. The joining of the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-44.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
: 11 & 12
Nov Dec.
431
1999
microcosm to the macrocosm, you Shri Mataji's face became serious. "As
[I am the only
each of us called kundalini. (There is one who can do it en-masse. Once, in
no English word for it. You should invent India, 6000 villagers got it at the same
one. There is a good job for you, invent a time. But if there is someone else who
good English word for kundalini.) The can do it, then I am only too happy to
linking of that energy with the all- retire. I am sixty years old." (At times
pervading energy of God, that is what she looks half that.) "I am happily
married. I have a heautiful house as you
far as I know," she said,
could say. The raising of the energy in
self realization is."
can see. It would be good to settle down
and stop all this travelling around, all the
"What exactly does it do?" I felt a fool at
the naivety of the question.
time. But until I find someone else who
can do it, then it is up to me, isn't it, to
"It brings about a change in
awareness. You feel it as a cool breeze,
cool vibrations, you could say, on the
meet the seekers and let them know how
to gain this gift that is their own, their
top of the head and on the hands. It is right, this Union with God."
an actual happening! Not self- "Could I receive this gift?" I asked,
certification. Not saying I am born
Shri Mataji's eyes danced, "Put your hand
again!' or I am this or that!' You
actually become! If you desire self above your head," she said.
realization, and you get it, then you
become collectively conscious, truly so faint coolness on my hand. I looked
sweet and truly diplomatic. A true blue round to see if there could be a draft
I did as I was told. There was a faint, oh
American, you could say." And the
joyous laugher flowed into every corner air conditioning and the windows were
of the room.
coming from anywhere, but there was no
closed.
I asked Shri mataji if she was the only
"You feel it?"
one who could grant this self realization.
I nodded, tentatively.
"Oh no." came the reply, "once you have
it you can pass it on to others."
"That is the beginning. Perhaps while you
were drinking your tea you said to
"But it all seems to start from you," I said,
yourself, 'I'd like that experience. and
Shri Mataji snapped her fingers, you got
"Why you?"
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Volume : XI Issua : 11 & 12
The Divine Cool Breeze
Nov -Dec: 1999
44
it. It can only happen if you desire it. Give
me your hand."
"It is a gift of love from God, who is
the ocean of love, the ocean of
compassion. How can you pay for
that? God does not understand money.
She took my hand and started tracing a
cross over the palm.
How can you pay for your evolution?
Did you pay to stand up on two legs?
Anyway, why would I want money? I
come from a wealthy family. My husband
is Secretary General of the United
"You think too much," she said. "Your
mind is busy, busy, busy, thinking away."
From that moment on it wasn't. It was
hardly thinking at all.
Nations International Maritime
organization here in London. I do not
Too much thinking can give people
need money. I do not accept money."
diabetes. It is not sugar that causes
diabetes, it's thinking. We can cure
diabetes. After realization. And this new
Shri Mataji let go of my hand and smiled.
"Better now?"" she asked.
thing AIDS, after realization we can eure
that too. With realization you become
I nodded.
your own guru. You can diagnose your
own problems and those ofothers, and
you can cure them. Anybody with their
realization and the desire to develop their
"That is because your brain is not so
active. You are more balanced, more
centered, more relaxed. Have some more
spirit, can cure and be cured."
tea?"
At this point a wave of most pleasant Iput my hand above my head again. The
well-being swept over me. It wasn't a coolness was still there. Perhaps even
trance or a hypnotic state (I've stronger.
experienced those) - it was a feeling of
"There are so many great seekers in North
deep peace.
America," she said. "I want to meet
I regretted my next question. It caused
them."
the smile to fade from Shri Mataji's face.
Now, almost a week later, when I sit
"How much are you going to charge
down quietly, that sense of peace and
relaxed happiness returns. I am hoping it
won't go away!
Americans for this experience?"
"It is part of evolution," she replied.
