The Divine Cool Breeze July-August, 1999 Volume Y fssue :7 & 8 "So this (Sahaja Yoga) is not just a conversion of people. It is not only even transformation but it is a new fashioning of a new human being which has come forward and which is capable of carrying the will of God further." Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 In this Issue: Editorial Shivratri Puja -(14-2-99) 3. Shri Mataji Starts N.G.O. Diwali Puja (25-10-98) Guru Puja 1998- (A Report) 17 Krishna Puja 1998 - (A Report) 19 Diwali Puja in Italy, 1998 (A Report) 23 News from Around the world 27 Smile of the Adi Shakti 29 30 Invocation for the cleansing of America Shri Mataji's Talk with Dr. Talwar 27-2-87 37 Edited by : Yogi Mahajan :V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar Published by New Delhi-110 067 Admission Notice Fresh Admissions to International Sahaja Public School, Dharamshala, have started. Please apply for application forms immediately. The last date for Registration for admission is 31.10.99 Admission Fees is As 42,000/- (Rupees Forty-two Thousand only) Please write to:- International Sahaja Public School Talnoo, Dharamshala, Cantt, H.P. India. Phone-01892-21766, 21416, 21225, 21954. Fax : No. 21535 7,

 July Aug 1999 Volume: XI Issue 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Breeze Editorial was not a coincidence that when "O Great Spirit Columbus discovered America, he Whose voice speaks in the winds, and in thought it was India. It was not a the trees: coincidence that native Americans were Whose breath gives lift to all the world. called Red Indians. It is not a coincidence that the land of Shri Krishna should be blessed by Shri Kubera It is not a coincidence that the land of Shri Krishna Listen to your creature! Hear all! I am small and weak. should be the Vishudhi Chakra of the I need the power that you give universe and an instrument of global communication. It is not a coincidence I need the wisdom that you give. that our Divine Mother purchased 140 Let me walk in beauty, acres of Native American land called And let my eyes be glad, beholding the red & purple dawn. Cannajoharil. America is the abode of Shri Krishna and Make my hands touch all things you made therefore bears a primordial connection with love, with its motherland India". Shri Krishna's And help my ears to hear your voice in sister Vishnumaya cast her Divine maya on Christopher Columbus. Under her illusion he thought he had discovered India, and called the Natives-Red Indians. everything" It was not a coincidence that on 20th June 1999, the year of your Divine Mother, Sahaja yogis from all over the globe congregated at the sacred land of Cannajoharil to worship Shri Adishakti. It is also not a coincidence that the word No doubt the Natives were of Indian origin. Their spiritual belief in the soul and the Adishakti as the creator of the universe and also the worship of nature originated from the ancient Aryans who inhabited India They revered the mother Earth and Cannajoharil' in Native Indian language means "The seif cleansing Vessel". The seekers of modern times had to come here worshipped the primordial Kundalini as the Holy Spirit. This is revealed in their for their inner cleaning. The ancient Red Indian prophecy of the "White Buffalo' prayer

 July Aug The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 1999 2. testifies that "a lady of all powers in whom light appears will come here to heal the Sick Nation. the great law and labour together for the welfare of man." On the 20th of June 99 messengers of The great Red Indian peace maker peace from all nations of the world met Deganawidah prophesied; that in Cannajoharil "A council fire of all the pledged before Shri Adishakti to bring nations shall be kindled. All shall receive world peace. on the sacred soil of Cannajoharil and May Shri Adishakti show us the way to honor Our sacred pledge May Shri Adishakti remove all obstacles in the Way of our holy pledge May Shri Adishakti protect us from falling into Temptations and illusions May the goddess America-re-shwari save the lost Children of America and Allow them a taste of the sweet Ambrosia that eternally flows from Her Lotus Feet.

 July Aug Volume XI issue : 7 & 8 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Shivratri Puja '99 Delhi, 14/02/99 It is a very long lecture I have given in others, to have envy for others, all these Hindi Language because there are very reactions within us act and our heart become like a stone. It cannot reflect. You telling them was that the principle of Shiva have to reflect the quality of Shiva, which is in your heart and that reflection is not is very important today in this Kaliyuga on a Chakra but like a mirror. Now There are very few people who are really whatever is visible of you is this mirror. reflecting the image of Shiva in their own In this mirror what reflection you have? character So. it is important to watch Do you have a reflection which is clear, yourself and see for yourself as to what clean ? Have you cleansed your heart? is wrong with you. Where is my attention Have you cleansed your mirror that is going? Where am I going? What am I doing? Go on judging yourself and not others. One of the Western things is that Now what I told them at length was this they think they have a right to criticise that how there are six enemies we have others, everybody. I like it. I do not like got and all these six enemies, one after it Who are you? Why do you say that? another try to corrupt us. Out of that I Somebody has made a beautiful, say, have told them about five. The sixth does arrangement for you. you sit in his house few Sahajayogis from abroad. What I was reflecting? That is what one has to see. not exist much in India which we call as nicely and say I do not like it, to hurt that lust. It is much lèss but for foreign countries one has to know that it is one you think of yourself? Who are you to of the major things that they have in the judge? For Sahajayogis it is prohibited to West because they think that lustful life say, I like and I do not like. It is prohibited. is the only life worth living. person. After all, who are you? What do Look at Shiva. He likes everything. What he wears, also snakes. He likes all kinds of animals, every type of thing that we think is not good, but for him they are not. For example in his Wedding he took with him, in his Baraat, people who were all infirm. Some people had one leg, some Bevond that is Shiva and that is why we have to understand that in our heart the reflection of Shiva is only possible, in complete form. when we have cleansed our heart. To have malice for others, to have lust for others, to have anger for

 July Aug 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Breeze beings into selfhood, into self awareness, into the spirit. This has to be done and the time has come. This evolutionary process has started. There are so many of them who have got it. people had limbs broken down, some had only one eye. All such people he carried with him. To him these people were very dear and he looked after them. Because he is the source of joy. He is the one who gives us joy and the one that makes us Now the old saints and people who were Gurus, real Gurus, they used to really test joyous. The real joy is only possible if in your the disciples by making them stand on hearn his reflection is there, but if your their heads for years together. Sometimes heart is full of all these things, then, once put them in the water, do all kinds of I described, it becomes a dirty, very very things. They used to beat them and they were very harsh testing all of them and then only one of them used to get realisation. Now what I thought of is, that it takes too much time to cleanse them, dirty mirror. Very surprising. I told them also that compared to Indians, Westerners are not so particular, Western Sahajayogis are not so particular about their comforts. Though they come from a very materialistic surroundings, they are not so much bothered. They can live anywhere. They can be happy anywhere. to put them into all kinds of dresses, this, that, send them to Himalayas or to Gobi Desert. I thought it will take too much time. I said why not first enlighten, give them the light? In that light they can see their problems and they will themselves That is a very good stage they have reached and that is what the Indians must try to follow, and do not pay attention to nonsensical things. It is not necessary to waste your energy on nonsensical things. correct themselves. They will be their own Guru and it was successful, it was good. Now you can see for yourself what you are doing, what is your problem, what makes you so much different from others Then only you can have real Bhakti for your Self, for your Atma and that is what Shiva's place is above the head, above is needed today that your spirit should your thoughts, above your mind, above shine in your character, in your behaviour your emotions. It is here and you have to and in your personality. If that happens then you have achieved what Sahajayoga wanted to do for you. It is important Only when you do not react to things and today, very important. If you read the and what will elevate you because Sada cross this limit. also to you, nothing is more important than Shiva, then only it will work out. newspaper you cannot read it and what you need is to change, the transformation So, in somethings Indians have to learn and in somethings you foreigners have to as we in Hindi call it Parivartan of human Lrank

 July - Aug Volume XI Issue : 7 & 8 1999 666 The Divine Cool Breeze learn. So many things you have done I to contribute for N.G.O, you are allowed must thank you very much People used to think that I cannot do anything. You of people who want to work it out This have given up drinking, you have given up all kinds of bad habits. You are not our attention for people who are in great womanisers. Your attention is so clean. trouble around us. to contribute. We have a very good team is something I thought that we must have So many things you have done which is really praiseworthy but still you must learn that still there are certain things lingering which must be cleared out and must be absolutely finished. So, this N.G.O. will work for women who are left by their husbands, by their families, who have nobody to be looked after by, and also their children. Still I have not made the whole plan but before starting Sahajayoga I used to do lots of things like that. So I have quite a lot of experience. Our attention should be really towards people who are in trouble now, You do not have very much politics but sometimes there is also politics. Group forming is there. All these has to go away because for Shiva what is this. The as we are now blessed with Divine Power. Universe is at his feet. To have one group here and one group there, all that does not matter to Him. It does not come into his head, you see. For a person, like very big ocean, it touches many shores but in itself it is a big ocean. In the same way is Shiva principle and you all should develop that principle of Shiva and then see the joy, the joy of this great ocean of love. May God bless you. We should look after those who really deserve our attention. You will be very happy to know about women who are destitutes, recommended by Sahajayogis will be a better idea and it can be worked out very well. So far we have not got any application of women who want to have protection. Also we are going to teach them different arts and crafts and things so that within two years they will be able to stand on their legs and there would not be any more beggars on the street. Talk on NG0-Delhi - 13-2-99 We have started one N.G.O. for destitute Firstly we will make them Sahajayogis. women and children, plus we will be Then we will work it out and I am sure having a hospital here. As you know we you will like the idea of having one have been rumning a good hospital in Belapur near Vashi, New Bombay and this hospital will be in Noida. Today. you will be happy to know that we have now taken the land in Noida, and we are going to start our work there. Whatever you want N.G.O. here. Then the second one will be starting near Bombay, Vaitarna That I had planned before, about fifteen years back but they would not give us permission. Now it has

 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 July Aug The Divine Cool Breeze been finalised. We have got the permission. So, I want to start an organization where to educate boys and girls but mostly first boys we are trying. Those boys who have failed in 8th class and 9th class, to learn some vocational for writing that book which I did fifteen years back but the Government was so bad, it would not give me permission. Luckily now with this BJP Government I have been able to get the permission and we are going to do it in a very big way and there are many people who are coming forward to help me in that venture. So now Sahajayoga is spreading outward to give sustenance and help to people who require real help from people. This is a new movement of Sahajayoga and I hope it will be successful. things like small small things. We do not have good electricians, good plumbers, all kinds of things like that. So they will also stand on their legs because after failing in the 9th class or 8th class, they have nothing to do. They are absolutely in trouble. This I started 15 years back. Now Mr. Amartya Sen has written it now, I mean not in such good details. But he has written and he got now a Noble Prize Thank you.

 July Aug Volume XI Issue : 7& 8 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze DIWALI PUJA - CABELLA 25-10-98 Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Diwali Puja is a very small Puja but starting I went to the waiting room andI extremely significant. Firstly, in Diwali, was surprised, she was sitting in the the first day they buy something for the waiting room there! I said, "What are you family. May be some cooking utensil, doing here? They are all waiting for you could be an ornament for the wife or outside." So she said, they asked me to something else, because that is the day of sit here. So, I went out and I told them housewife and that day is to be celebrated that now she is sitting there. Why don't as the housewife's, I should say, homage you call her to sit in her seat? "Is she the to her. As a result you know in India, even wife?" I said, of course, "she is the wife." now, housewives are very much We thought she was some secretary! respected. Actually they are respected all said what made you think? This lady, you over. You will be amazed that even in the see, was wearing modern ideas, wearing protocol of the Government Receptions a very modern silk dress and all that and anywhere, the wife is very important., everybody thought that this lady must be Where she is sitting, what is her position, the secretary at the most. So they made is very important. Even today, in the most her sit in the waiting room. So, it is modern and advanced countries also they expected of a housewife to be decently have a special respect for the housewife. dressed, honourably dressed and not to Housewife may not be educated, she may dress up like a secretary or somebody be a very simple woman, she may not be who is just in the office because she is regarded as the highest whether you like it or not. But she had combed her hair There was an experience for me. In and she has been to & very expensive place London we had a Programme where we for all decorations and everything, and all were invited and the wife of the head poor thing when she arrived, they put her of the delegation was missing. So they in the waiting room near the bath room. very modern. asked me where is she because there is a That is what it is. seat for her. She has to sit there. I said, I So, for a housewife, she is the dignity of the house. Not only that but she is don't know. I did not see her. She must be somewhere here. So just before

 July Aug 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Breeze responsible for the complete culture of kind of a great collectivity of housewives that country, complete culture of that that has to work out. They have common country. They represent the culture. Like problems, they have to face their children, in India now they have started, in the they have to look after the households, films, showing all kinds of things, funny everything. I mean there are so many funny dresses but I have not seen any common problems with the housewives housewife wearing that. I have not seen and the housewife also knows all little anybody. It is not in reality. It is only in the films, because the society is so strong little things. Men, atleast in India, do not know much because they live in the air, I think. So, and the housewife is supposed to be a decent person. She has to be decent. She the women have more sense in this has to be very dignified and she has to behave in a dignified manner. respect for small small things. They are quite aware. It is very interesting. On the contrary, I would say, we had a Sometimes the men commit mistakes of Prime Minister called Lal Bahadur such a great humour because they do not deal with day to day life, with all the problems of daily life. On one side, the Shastri. His wife was absolutely uneducated because Shastriji went to jail woman housewife has to deal with the and she could not take her education. daily life, on the other side she has to look after her family, her children. Also, poor thing, she is responsible for the society, she has to maintain the society. In a Very simple ordinary woman. She went to France. That time there was this Mr. Degol. He was the President and his wife was another very simple woman. So country where women are sensible and Shastriji told her that you are not to cry when we are leaving Mrs Dogol. Now are matured, you will be amazed that they we have become great friends. God become extremely good families, good knows, she did not know French, she did societies and good children. That is why not know Hindi but somehow both of Imust say India is a very good country, a them became great friends, on the level very good society. This has come out of of housewives. He warned her not to cry. the housewives, the Gruhalaxmis of the What happened that they started crying house, who have done all the work. That when they had to leave. So Shastriji said, is important as far as the culture is I told you not to cry. She said that it is concerned. This kind of thing is very much she, this French Lady started crying, what in India and with that what you find that can I do? I had to cry. So you see it is the people respect, respect the housewives.

 July Aug 1999 Valume: XI lssue: 7 & B The Divine Cool Breeze So, respecting the housewife is the most important thing in our Sahaja culture but if they do not show any respect, the children can never respect the mother. It is something criminal to do to women that does not mean that the women should try to dominate and trouble and fight with who are in the household, doing all the the husbands but it means a very work for you, looking after you, your important position in the society of a family, not demanding anything housewife. She is treated as something Only if you want to understand how they can be troublesome, see them in the like a Devi but she too has to be a Devi If you treat her like a doormat then children will never respect her. If you do Ppolitics. When they go in the politics, they put all men upside down and one woman can put all of them in their proper senses not pay proper respect to her, the children will not respect the mother and there will be no impact of the mother on the because their field is their house, their children. As a result the children get family. If they are not respected in the waivered That is why in the society or in family, they get out of the family and the countries where the mother is not behave in such a manner that you can't respected, you will find the children imagine. Though she has to bear a lot, become extremely dominating, hot she has to suffer a lot, but in the family. tempered and horribly uncollective. she must be respected. That is a very very important message of Gruhalaxmi. So, it is very important that on this day. Then the second day is the one where this we call it Dhan Teras, the 13th day, you horrible Rakshsa called as Narkasura was have to buy something for vour wife and killed. Always all killing is done with the power of the Shakti. This Narkasura was the fellow who had tortured so many people and had turned lots of cunning stuff. He was a very treacherous cunning you have to give her something as a present. Atleast you should buy a little pot or something that can be used in the kitchen to show your respect to her. In the families where mother is not man and it was impossible to kill him. But then, somehow e the other, with the advent of a special power that this Narkasura was killed. That was the respected, children become extremely troublesome and the whole of their family also sutfers, wherever they are married, whatever happens to them. Men have to realise it is their mistake that they have another day, fourth day when Narkasura was killed. They say that when he was killed the door of hell was closed. So reople should take their baths early in the never respected their wives as they should have In the presence of the children if they shout, in the presence ofthe children

 10 July Aug 1999 : 7 & 8 Volume : XI issue The Divine Cool Breeze morning, but I am of the opinion that, that day if the door is opened, better not to take bath. Be in your beds till this fellow he was crowned also as the King. So it is long time back, thousands of years back, this thing has happened. That jubilation is very significant, that the right king gets is put fully into Narak. You should not his own throne and he rules and all bother about him. Narak means Hell and injustice and all kinds of atrocities he has from the Hell they extracted him and killed him. gone through, has to be completely finished from his life and that is why Diwali is important. The last one is the best where they have the meeting of Sri Rama and his brother Bharata. Shri Rama went to jungle obeying his father and for 14 years he was in the forest. It was a kind of a jail only because from palaces he was sent to the forest by his father. His wife and also the brother, they went into great sufferings and you know the whole story of So the last day they worship the Goddess Laxmi because it is her blessings that brought forth all these beautiful meetings and that is why they worship Laxmi, as I said. But there are nine types of Laxmis now within us which I think 1 have told you sometimes back. Now in that Laxmi Puja, is this that you worship the Laxmi herself. It does not mean money, not at all. To worship money is wrong. What it means that Laxmi is the money which is with us or whatever prosperity is with us should be very carefully spent because she is very mobile and the money can slip out. Ramayana. The child that lived in the palaces had to go in the forest and live in terrible conditions when he was to be the King. It was too much but Sita went with him and she supported him and ultimately it so happened that Ravana came and took away Sita. Shri Rama fought Ravana, On the contrary you should not be at all miserly. With a miserly people, Laxmi is not happy, but if you want to spend, you must spend it in the right way otherwise killed him and brought back his wife. When they came back to their own capital in Ayodhya, there was a big jubilation, and Bharat, his brother, he was very much the money is spent in the wrong way. Now when the Laxmi was created, must be out attached to his brother and he ruled that country with the 'Paduka', they say, is a kind of Sandalwood Chappals they used, of the churning of the Sea she came out. of his brother. He put it on the throne She had four hands. One hand was to and ruled. So that is how the Bharat give, she is generous. She gives, like this she gives and with one hand she blesses. Milap, the meeting of Bharat with Shri These are her two hands, one is to give Ram, is celebrated and that was the time

 July Aug 1999 11 Volume : XI issue: 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Breeze and to bless the person. Very important it inside and sleeps very nicely and is that when you give to somebody comfortably. Even the beetle, is something you forget about it and you undisturbed. That is how one should treat, bless that person. Now only you give if you have money. But here, what I find money but also you bless that person. in the world now, if your have money you Other two hands have got two lotuses of become yourself like a beetle. It is so full of thorns and horrible ideas, so insulting and think no end of yourself. Just surprising that money we should give them, the form of Laxmi, Laxmi Sarupa they become like Devils and the way they pink colour. Pink is the colour of love and a person who has money should have a house which is full of love. Any guest who comes in the house should be respected. He should be treated just like God. treat other people is even worst than that. So this is the significance of the form of the Goddess but the best is she is just standing on the lotus. That means no In India, you have noticed how they think of foreigners Foreigners means God to them. Here foreigner is a bad word but in India it is very respectable. If you are foreigner means you are God. How they have looked after, you know that, in India! This is the reason. This is the basic pressure on anyone. She exists on her own. No pressure. She does not put any pressure on any one. Just on her own she stands and all her weight and all balance TH culture of India that anybody who is a guest, he may be anything, if he is a guest, then he is to be treated like God. In other on her own dignity. This is the way a Laxmi should be and that is how if it happens, in the countries countries it is just the other way round, where people are now having financial crises and all kinds of crises, things will improve. People will enjoy. They do not enjoy their money, nothing. They do not enjoy. This is just aggressiveness and also funny ideas of ha ving something very expensie thing when whst you call the deslgners. Nowv I think these designers are anti Laxcmi that they have come you know. If vou are a foreigner then people think that it is not even proper to talk to them. I do not know how the mentality is like that, but not in Sahajayoga. Sahajayogis are not like that. They treat the guests very well. I have heard, they look after each other and they are beautifully collective. So this is what is the meaning of the Lotuses, is the house full of love. Like a beetle which has got because they are extracting all your money nicely and all your money goes to even thorns, when it comes to the lotus, waste. If not that, then people take to the lotus opens out and the beetle goes

 July Aug Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 12 The Divine Cool Breeze 1999 dresser. I said I did not know this, they womanising or to drinking, such wasteful habits. They do not do anything which you can call as really the blessings of the do not go to the hair dressers. That is why they think that you are from the royal family. Just imagine what ideas people have about hair dressing and all that. But in India or these places a woman must be Laxmi. So one has to remember that when you want to give something to someone, do properly combed up. She should not look it with the full heart. Such full heart that it forms that Laxmi Prasada. So that should happen, otherwise what is the use like a hippy going around, because we have many people who still believe in a kind of a hyppism and they wear their hair of giving presents to any one? They are very funny people, you know, who give presents out of their very narrow outlook but they try to give presents. Like in Japan, if you go, they will give you such a big present. You go on opening and opening and opening and opening, till you come to a point where you will get a match box. In the match box inside you will take to, you can say, two doll like things made out of small little match sticks. Start looking at it, what it is. Why such a big design and very surprising. But they are very simple people otherwise, very simple. When we went there they told us wherever we went, you know, even in a shop, when it was raining, they would give us a present. I said, what is this. Why are they giving us a present like this? So the lady who was translating, she said they think you are from a royal family. I said what makes them feel we are from dress like that. Now woman plays a very big part in the society as I told you. Whatever way she wears, whatever she goes about also, the children become much more, from the mother than from the father. Sometimes could be much more from the father also. But actually all the fine things are picked up from the mother. So it is more for the ladies to understand how they dress up, how they live. I went to London and asked one Indian Sahajayogini what is the fashion now. So she said, 'Jhipria' in Marathi. Jhipria,' means if you put your hair like this. See in India if you have hair like this, the mother will say now remove your Jhiprias because if you put your hair like that, your eyes can become squint. But that is the fashion to put the hair like this, you see, very much, sometimes on the eyes also. So that is the 'Jhipria' fashion and this now is quite common, I find, everybody, dignified ladies also, except for Mrs. Thatcher, everybody puts a royal family? Because you do not go to hair dressers. I said, really. Yes, in Japan royal family people never go to a hair

 July Aug Volume: XI Issue : 7& 8 The Divine Cool Breeze 1999 (13 his character. It is alright. You must know that he does not mean it because he really does not know anything. Also in art, I do on this kind of a thing. I do not know how Mrs. Thatcher has escaped it? But anybody who does anything that should not be followed by women, it is very not think men know much about art Also their one side is missing, that is aesthetics. Poor things they make one type of dress. wear all throughout. Just one type of dress they will make and that they will make and wear throughout. They do not have any demand. But women are artistic. If our Indian women give up wearing sarees and take to jeens where will the slavish Because this is the fashion that is why they do, that is the fashion, so they do. It is absolutely stupid to do that way and to play into the hands of these people who make fashions. You are independent, must stand on your own character, must stand on your own understanding of things. Instead of ruining your faces, you villagers go, because they live with the sarees that they make during holidays and should try to improve them by your dignity, by your understanding. Now it is things like that. So, in India, it is not possible to introduce all these dresses. In more on the women, I am sorry to say, Laxmi Puja is more on the women, That is why they have to understand, what they have to be, how they should do. the school, may be, but later on they all give up because they like sarees. So the sarees are still on and will be on because it is so artistic, it is so beautiful. One saree does not look like another saree. So the idea of beauty and the idea of art is much 1 have already told you that it is necessary for a woman to be dignified, very much more than the man. Men can be stupid, does not matter, you see, does not matter so much but women have to be dignified and sensible. And men as it is do not know much as you know very well. Poor things. more with the women not with the men and so one should see that if men do not know, does not matter but you make your houses absolutely artistic. Make it comfortable like the lotus as I said, that should be such. But some of the ladies you know: They are educated only in Universities but as far as the practical side is concerned, they do not know anything. So. one should not feel bad about it.I in the household, very dictating. It should can be very much like a Hitler, you know, mean it is very enjoyable to see the way men make mistakes and then they go on be like this, that should be like that, making the life of men absolutely saying, No, No, I know this, I know that. They do not know anything. But men will never say I do not know, you see. That is miserable. I have known a person who used to carry a newspaper in his house. I said, why you carry this all the time. He

 1999 14 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 July Aug The Divine Cool Breeze were sixteen thousand people. So, how could we give these presents. So, the women took out their chains and they said alright we will give it to men. Alright, we will give them our ear tops, alright, and they were making fun of men who were feeling bad that they could not get said, whenever I sit, I put the newspaper first and then I will sit. Why, because if it is spoiled a little bit, my wife will shout at me. I said, why. Because she does not like anything to be spoiled. So she is so particular. I carry a newspaper always with me wherever I have to sit I put the anything. Such fun, you know, much understanding because they are not so money oriented, I think, and they are very spiritual men. So a spiritual woman should not bother about other things like this and will keep a dignity of her own and will show by her every gesture that newspaper. I said, it is too much. He said, you will also have to do that, I tell you. So very particular about the whole house that it is impossible to live in that house and is even worse than a hospital. So, some women can be very particular about that and very methodical but normally women should be very loving and she is spiritual. This is something so extremely accommodating and also being sweet, you know. friendly with all the family members, with As I was telling you, on one side every one. sometimes you feel little different. Say, I said it about Japan. But in the same Japan when I went there I liked their tiles very much. So they were building up something. I liked the design of that tiles. I said, can I take one from here. No, No. does not matter. We will send it to your ship, and on the ship a big load of those This is very important that our family is so big. We have a very large family, so many brothers and sisters and everybody- one better than the other. It is so remarkable that every body has a different type of a perfume, I think, or a kind of a fragrance that shows an individual personality in them. Despite that they are also nice and so good, so accommodating and so much enjoying that it is remarkable how people live together! Especially in tiles was there, and the Captain asked me what are we to do. I said, how did you get it? He said, they brought it to you kinds of varieties of those tiles, can you all imagine? So, on one side it is a way of expression, on the other side it is different. So, one should understand also when Russia I found the women are very adoptable and very humorous and they were making fun of everything and enjoying life. Very surprising. We had taken presents for them but we have taken some body gives you something you should understand what is the significance of that and not to feel bad about that. The for about two thousand people but there

 July Aug 1999 15 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Breeze to give, then you must give something significance of that could be very much great, you may not understand. So, better which is worth the person whom you are to ask why they have given you these giving. That is one of the lessons you things. That is what is, what we call should have about Shri Rama's auspiciousness. temperament. One of the great qualities of the Laxmi is that it should be auspicious. Whatever you give, should be auspicious. Like sometimes I have seen little children out of mischief will bring a lizard and try to give me. I mean it is very inauspicious to do that but they are not told, you see, that it is inauspicious. So, they are doing like that. They are to be told that it is not auspicious, it will not please the Goddess. So, that has to be understood very well When he went into the village he found there was an old woman, and this old woman had all her teeth out practically and she was from the aboriginals and she gave him some, we call them Ber, is something like a kind of a fruit, small fruit and she said, see l have tasted all of them and all of them are very sweet because you should not have something which is not sweet. So I have tasted them with my teeth. I have put my teeth on to them and that you should not try to insult the Laxmi by giving something which is wrong. If you do not know, you should find out and do it properly. I have tasted. So please have them. Immediately he took it. But this brother Lakshmana got very angry that it is very inauspicious in India, if you have put In this way, this is the Diwali thing but something in the mouth and then you want to give it to somebody. It is something not to be done. Shri Rama said. the greatest message of this is that the Kingdom was given to Shri Rama. Shri "I have never eaten such beautiful fruits. Rama was the embodiment of justice and fair play and this was given to him, In the They are the most beautiful fruits I haye ever eaten!" So, his wife says, give me same way we have to feel that our some, after all, I am your half. You must expression of gratitude, our expression of love should be such that it should be give. So Shri Rama gave her some. She given to a person who is a symbol of such said, "wao, what a thing it is, tremendous." She ate it and then greatness like Shri Rama. Lakshmana says, give me also, sister-in- law. She said, just now you were saying all kinds of things against this lady. Why It is a very very subtle thing one should try to understand. If you do not want to give, you should not give but if you want do you want to have it. He said, now

 July Aug Volume XI Issue : 7 & 8 16 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze value of money and when you are please forgive me. saturated and you are fed up, from inside, you get detached, then a new see her love, her vibrations in those fruits form of Laxmi comes forward, that is that she had offered and he could Mahalaxmi. That is the power which appreciate to that extent that he gave it takes you higher and higher, which is to his wife and the wife also joined hands the spiritual awakening. You have seen with him. This is what it is that whatever in all the countries which are very rich, So you see it shows that Shri Rama could you do, you do it with love. If you do it with love, you will be able to make it the truth. They should find out the truth auspicious but if there is no love, you are just doing for some purpose, then it is means Mahalakshmi power started useless. So this is what is there for giving. working in you that you were seeking this desire started that they should seek and that is how you are all here. That Giving to the person like Shri Rama and to such a great incarnation, she just you came to Sahaja Yoga. So. this the truth and while seeking the truth thought of her love and she gave it to him. In the same way you have to be very simple, simple hearted and then you will Mahalaxmi is very important for you also and you know, in Kolhapur there is a temple of this Mahalxmi which came out know what is the best to be done. of the Mother Earth but they themselves did not know that in that temple why they So, today, actually the Diwali is over and I want to wish you again and again a Happy Diwali and a very prosperous new sang Jogwa. It is said that Oh Ambay, awaken. Ambay is the Kundalini. So why in Mahalaxmi's temple they sing? You can understand that why in that temple they started singing the song of Jogwa by year. May God Bless you all. The same Laxmi becomes Maha Laxmi i.e. when you understand the which to raise the Kundalini.

 July Aug 17 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Breeze Guru Puja, 1998 (A Report) It was quite a powerful Puja weekend. video from Russia where a Russian As you all know, at Guru Puja there are physicist was able to show some of his representatives from all the countries in research work. He has proved by the world where Sahaja Yoga has been scientific theories that Shri Mataji is practiced. The Italian's organization was fantastic. For Shri Adi Shakti Puja, the It became even more impressive when the source of infinite cosmisc energy. hangar was moved to the next village, Sir C.P. was able to give some more Albera, which is a 7-8 minute drive from details about this, as well as talk about the Royal Albert Hall program. The "downtown Cabella." Friday night program also featured Nirmal Sangeet Sarita, some new songs The Italians had organized a shuttle van service between the hangar and Cabella and qawwalis. every 30 minutes. This new place is very Shri Mataji was very busy the whole weekend with Her family who had come over from India. The Saturday night practical for many reasons. Firstly, it gives Shri Mataji and Her family some privacy and secondly, this place is just next to the river which made a heavenly difference for the yogis. program started around 9:00 p.m. after the arrival of Shri Mataji. The concert began with a great young artist from The host countries had invited Nirmal Nagpur Music Academy who played Sangeet Sarita (about 8 artists) and the sarod on the synthesizer. It was quite famous sitarist, Nishad Khan, for the remarkable. After that, the Italians did entertainment program. Shri Mataji did not attend the Friday night program as Kuchipudi dance, Bitaratanatyam, and a She had spent the whole day sorting out Panjabi Bhangra dance which was many other matters related to the Puja excellent. quite an amazing program. They had weekend. Nevertheless, we had the Then there was a very nice drama with honour of having Sir C.P. for the Friday night program. Shri Mataji had expressed the desire earlier that morning to show a some TEV artists. There was also a doçumentary on Sici!,: it was about how

 Volume. XI Issue : 7 & 8 July Aug 18 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 9:30 p.m. for the Puja. It was a very short but very powerful Puja and speech. Shri Mataji talked a lot about gravity in a guru. People should automatically be attracted toward a guru. She said that She would the respect for the Mother has been established so strongly in Italy and Sicily. The most important thing about this film was that it was directed by Shri Mataji's grandson, Anand Verma. She was quite be very happy to see at least a few yogis who can be good gurus with all the qualities ofthe Guru principle. Shri Mataji said times in Her speech that She pleased with it. After that, Nirmal Sangeet came back on the stage and it was quite profound many concert. Then Shri Mataji invited Nishad expects every single Sahaja Yogi to become a Sahaja Guru and spread Sahaja Yoga. Khan to come to the stage. In his own words, it was his best performance. He started with Raga Darbari and also Shri Mataji also asked the Yogis to write played Raga Bahar and./ri.ai Vanti. The entertainment program ended after 4:00 a.m. After that Shri Mataji asked the yogis their miracle stories and send them to Cabella. She has asked for a book to be published on miracle stories. to go and enjoy the moonlight by the river. On Sunday. Shri Mataji arrived at around -Manoj Kumar, USA

 July Aug 19 1999 7 & B Volume XI issue The Divine Cool Breeze Krishna Puja, 1998 (A Report) serving area (including half of a 200-year- old stone house recently purchased by Shri Mataji). This was the first time that this new house was used to prepare the food for the seminar. Serving food was fun and very easy, since the large pots only Krishna Puja 1998 was held in Albera, near the quaint village of Cabella Ligure, Italy Yogis and yoginis from every part of the earth gathered together to celebrate and worship Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in the form of Lord Shri Krishna. The puja was hosted by about had to be carried a few metres from the 150 Americans who came from North fire to the serving tables. and South America, Canada, USA, The tent and cooking areas each connect Brazil, Colombia. Argentina. Penu, and other countries within Shri Krishna's vast territory. to a large parking area which is out of sight of the main road. Beyond the food area is the access road, then the hangar where the ladies stay. Below the hangar is a flat open area which Shri Mataji requested not to be used for parking. And below everything is the cool, refreshing river. There was time every day for the Stage backdrops were brought from South America, Canada and USA. Each of the three nights in the hangar featured a different backdrop. From the first time, all puja stage hosts to take a break from cooking, preparation, food preparation, serving, accommodation, parking and river serving, constructing or cleaning, and sink blissfully into the reinvigorating and calming river currer t. splashing were all close together, alongside the river. The new arrangement, set up by Shri Mataji, puts The new layout is completed with a villa all of the main puja activities in Albera, up on the side of the mountain in the village just before Cabella. Below the Centrassi, a pleasant walk from the main road to Cabella, and extending along hangar, between the hangar and Cabella. the bank of the river, there is now a men's Shri Mataji purchased the villa so that host tent area, then the food preparation and country organizers would have a place to

 Volume: XI Issue : 7 & 8 20 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze July Aug stay together near the hangar, to be able to coordinate more easily. The view from the balcony of the villa is breathtaking- helping busy organizers to be in thoughtless awareness. It is a quaint, rustic yet spacious modern house where we prepared collective meals before and from within. There were several performances by the South American yogis, including displays of regional costumes and dance styles. We were also treated to songs performed by the Yuva Shakti and a devotional, moving classical Indian music performance by Deepak Verma. There was also a performance by the yogis of Vancouver of a lively Indian after the seminar weekend, and has a chance to strengthen the collectivity bhangra dance in colourful costumes. The festivities lasted well into the night, but among the Americas. Friday, August 14 at one point we all found a few hours of The festivities began on Friday with sleep before the next day. dinner served outside below the warm Saturday, August 15 evening sky. The evening was full of happy reunions, especially those between the children of the summer camp and their Saturday was a day of cleansing in preparation for the puja. Many yogis and yoginis could be found foot soaking (and parents. 150 or so children had participated in the camp at Daglio-two weeks of beautiful experiences with the full-body soaking!) in the cool waters. The day was sprinkled with a few guidance of their moving aunties and raindrops. During the daytime hours uncles, all living in Daglio where you throughout the weekend, some yogis awake each morning to the mist slowly bought gifts for their Rakhi brothers and rising off the adjacent mountain tops. sisters. The sweetly offered gifts included Their days were spent enjoying song and lavender from Shri Mataji's garden, the powerful music of Nirmal Sangeet Sarita dance and crafts. on a new cassette, the crafts of our After dinner 800 or so of us gathered in brothers and sisters, or pictures of Her the hangar to share in the creativity of Holiness in all Her Majesty. our American brothers and sisters as they presented us with a very lively entertainment program. We were blessed with the arrival of Shri Mataji, and then In the late afternoon, everyone gathered within the hangar to perform havan to all aspects of Shri Krishna, praying to clear the land of the Vishuddhi of adharma. The Her instruments came to life in front of Her expressing the creativity flowing havan was very powerful, identifying

 July Aug 1999 21 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Breeze laughter during a humorous skit about a future Sahaja Yogi president of the United States. (Shri Mataji was noticed enjoying various aspects of distortion within the Americas. We asked: O Devi, strengthen us as Your divine instruments for the cleansing of the land of Shri Krishna. Let America be the source of ongoing merriment, song and dance. Lord Krishna's flute playing the delicate music of the Divine will cure the Spirit of America. We only ask that America starts the skit very much). A theatrical depiction of several scenes from Shri Krishna's life, complete with original songs and choreography, was well received. As dandia stick dancers went to bed Sunday morning, the rest of us rose for meditation to listen to His divine rasa, the beautiful and preparation for Puja! poetry of His rhythm. In so doing, let America-North, Central, and South- become obedient to the inspiration of the Divine. He is Nirmala Gamya, accessible only through You. Sunday, August 16 The Puja began after a late lunch. We all settled down nicely before the arrival of the Queen. As might be expected at Krishna Puja, the expected sequence of the parts of the puja was changed by Shri Mataji. She asked that the What powerful vibrations flooded the hangar as the whole world prayed for America. Our Global attention focussed commemorative card containing the 108 names of Shri Krishna be passed out at the beginning of the puja. When the names on the crippling ature of materialism and greed. With those two evils destroyed, what a beautiful future America has to were read, everyone in the hangar was able to repeat each name without any look forward to! Saturday night was the continuation of difficulties. One of the names had been the entertainment program. (There was changed by Shri Mataji before the puja. too much for one night alone.) We were She wrote the corrected name on the again floating on a cloud of joy as Shri Mataji was again present in the audience. feather adorning His head). card: Mormukntdhari (He has a peacock We were privileged to hear the flute playıng of Anand Murudeshwar. There She spoke te us about the aspect of was more dancing, including a classical witnessing and not reacting. We were led piece high-lighting Radha and Krisha (one gently through the steps of becoming dancer was from the west coast of detached from our actions, deepening Canada, the other from the east coast of ourselves through the principle of USA). The hangar was filled with witnessing ourselves and life as it

 July - Aug 22 7 & 8 1999 Volume : XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze that we were still in the darshan of the Goddess Adi Shakti Herself. After She had left, She instructed the world leaders happens. The Puja was incredibly powerful, full of so many lessons and guidelines. to go back and talk to the collective about A hand-made decorative rakhi was the protocol of respect in Her presence. This message has not been emphasized offered to Shri Mataji, artfully expressing the rupa of Krishna, She held a pure gold in recent years, and perhaps many people sudarshan and then a flute. Fresh butter are not cware of how important it is to was offered in a large painted pot, which was later distributed as prasad. Several put all of our attention om Shri Mataji while She is there to absorb vibrations. commemorative gifts were offered to Shri We all boarded buses and planes for our respective countries soon after the puja. Those of us who were lucky enough to Mataji to vibrate for those who attended the puja: an ink stamp of the Shri Chakra which is the symbol of Vishwa Nirmala Dharma, some hand-made miniature stay a few extra days went into Cabella flutes, and hand-cut and painted dandia and relaxed, enjoying the company of sticks. After receiving presents from all faces both old and new. We shared the of the counties, Shri Mataji offered gifts fun and joy of having been in the presence to all of the host country yogis who attended the puja. of the Adi Shakti and able to share vibrations with hundreds of people. The puja ceremony felt shorter than the previous year's Krishna Puja. However, at the time we decided the puja was Having returned home, the change from within that happened to each of us that weekend stays with us and enhances our being every day. In the days and weeks *over.' after the Aarti Shri Mataji was still seated on the stage in the hangar, afterwards, we have had lessons and accepting gifts from various countries. experiences which have enhanced our Many of us began to chat and scatter out ability to witness and not react and attention. Before leaving the hangar, Shri express our true collectivity. May we continue to be Shri Krishna's Warriors of Mataji Herself took the mierophone and joy, today and everyday! sitent and in a reminded us to remain meditative mood while She was still there. --Melanie Rothenberg, Jack Cohen, We hed collectively gotten tricked hy Her Mark Taylor, USA. gentle, non-assertive maya cmd forgotten

 July Aug Volume XI Issue : 7& 8 23 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Puja Diwali in Italy, October 23-25, 1998 (A Report) On Saturday the weather was sunny and pleasant, paving the way to spend the day in Cabella near the river and hangar. We had all come prepared to face cold and wind, so it was especially refreshing to be able to enjoy a day outside in the sun. Lunch was served and we ate on the grass Diwali Puja was originally scheduled to take place in Portugal. but at the last minute the venue was changed to Italy. It was too cold to stay in the hangar, so a heated sports arena was secured in Novi Ligure about a 40-minute drive from Cabella. Maps and directions were strategically placed in Cabella near the hangar and on the Internet, and somehow or other, people found their way to this new place near the old mill (the new kitchen near the hangar), then proceeded to the hangar for a late afternoon havan, which began about 5 p.m, The havan was quite powerful, with the African host countries expressing their pure desire to solve the pressing problems of their continent. The host countries only gained entry to this facility at midnight on Thursday, but by Friday evening, there were festive Diwali decorations all over the hall, After the havan, we travelled into the setting the mood as yogis arrived from town of Cabella where fireworks were all over the world. The customary "Italian scheduled to begin just after dark. It was Night" dinner was served, transported a different and very special feeling to from Cabella. Friday evening, a mixed spend the day in Cabella without staying band of French and African musicians, there, a feeling of reverence visiting the our hosts for the weekend, improvised place where our Holy Mother was in and sang music with an African "feel" that residence. The firev. orks were launched was so engaging that it was impossible from the pleir field near the bridge, so not to join the dance. The atmosphere that Shri Mataji could easily view them very light and joyful, with a playtul trom the Castle balcony. I had never element of many coloured balloons being kept in the air by the dancing yogis. was seen-or been so close to-such a spectacular display. It felt as if the lights

 July Aug 1999 24 : 7 & 8 Volume : XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze Next on the program was a series of were falling right onto us, in Kundalini patterns (coils) and impressive sequences musical presentations by host country groups. A combined group from Kenya and South Africa performed a Mirian Makeba song with Sahaja words, a traditional Kenyan song, a song called Adi ourselves (it was past the tourist season) Shakti Nirmala Mata, and ended with a of colour and booming sound. What a fitting heralding of the new year! Luckily, we had the town mostly to because there was a lot of yogi traffic leaving town, travelling in a long caravan on the winding roads back to Novi Ligure song called Pour the Spirit in three languages. Next, a French western band of five musicians, called the Pandavas, for the evening program. Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. arrived at about 10:30 p.m. The program opened with two qawwalis from with a lead singer from the Congo, played a song called Mother Earth. A large group from Benin (where there are now about 2,000 people practising Sahaja the Romanian/French group that has been performing for some time. Then the French yogis staged a powerful four-act Yoga!) came on the stage in colourful play about Joan of Arc called Jeanme d'Arc: Revelation d'ume Shakti, adapted costumes and hats to sing two songs. Last but not at all the least, the group from Ivory Coast performed one dance and one song, bringing the audience to its feet to dance along. from a play by Friedrich Schiller. To set the stage for the play, there was a moving song, followed by a dance performed by a Dutch lady dressed in white, in which Indian classical and western dance styles Shri Mataji praised all of the performers for an excellent entertainment program. were beautifully merged. The drama Before leaving the hall at about 2 a.m., portrayed Joan of Arc as a humble saint She reminded us not to take for granted who was a living example of an inspired the privilege of attending puja the next shakti. The play was very moving, the day, even though we may have the stage and costumes true to the period, opportunity to attend many pujas. She and Shri Mataji was very appreciative of cautioned us to prepare ourselves well for the theme and execution of this the puja-in heart and mind, and to performance. She had once commented beware of the Lakshmi power if our on the divine qualities of Joan of Arc, and attitudes are disrespectful in any way. was pleased that the French had taken the opportunity to understand and present the life of this great woman in history on the Sunday was cold and rainy weather for staying inside and preparing perfect ourselves for puja. We even had an extra occasion of Diwali.

 July Aug 25 1999 Volume: XI Issue 7& 8 The Divine Cool Breeze a strong feeling of collectivity among the ladies. This was the first time I had attended Diwali in Shri Mataji's presence, and could understand why someone had told me it was truly "a ladies' puja. hour, thanks to the change from daylight savings time Shri Mataji had said that puja would begin at 6 p.m. and we were all assembled and ready to receive Her at that time From 6 until about 8 p.m. we meditated and sang bhajans, as if the puja In Her talk, She also spoke about Shri had already started. The stage was Rama as an example and about our battles decorated like a palace in soft pink, blue and green tones. Shri Mataji arrived with negativity at this time of year, looking resplendent wearing a light culminating in the killing of Ravana purple/pink sari that expressed in colour After the talk, Shri Mataji asked us to sing the feminine qualities to be worshipped the Ganesh Stuti, but-perhaps for the in this puja. As She approached the stage, first time-did not allow anyone to come She commented that this would be a very and wash Her Feet, Next. seven married short puja ladies were called to perform the puja. She wore a light pink satin crown with The puja talk was short, beginning with jewels as we sang the Aarti, standing in awe in the presence of Shri Mahalakshmi Herself explanations of the significance of the different nights of Diwali The role of the housewife wvas emphasized, since housewives are generally not appreciated Fresh fruits and a few other types of prasad were offered to Shri Mataji. Prasad was distributed later, not immediately, to or respected in the west as they are in India. She encouraged women to talk to each other, to foster collectivity among the assembled yogis. Then the house-wives. since they have common international gift and national gift from problems and concerns She spoke about the host countries were offered, followed women's practicality and aesthetic sense, by gift offerings from all of the countries, and repeatedly said, with a note of including beautiful lamps and other humour, that men don't know anything- except about politics. Women must not as well as handmade embroidery items only look after the house and family, but offered by the ladies from several omaments to decora te a home (or castle). they are also responsible for the whole society. In this talk, and throughout the puja, Shri Mataji established an incredible sense of closeness with the ladies, creating countries. There were many handmade. gifts from the African countries. including a large chair and a small wooden sculpted chair for Shri Ganesha. She spoke for a

 Volume XI Issue: 7 & 8 26 July - Aug 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze attention focussed, absorbing vibrations while with the South African yogis, and from the puja. Coins from all of the then it was announced that there would countries present had been offered to Shri be a series of public programs in South Mataji to vibrate during the puja, and these were then distributed as prasad. The Africa in July 1999, and yogis were requested to go there to help. commemorative gift was a calendar for Shri Mataji asked if all the gifts had been offered, and then with great delight, began 1999 And then the festivities continued-many dancing yogis, full of vibrations, enjoying the light and lively African songs and music. Dinner was served after the puja to prolong the enjoyment and profound sense of contentment. Paper flowers that to give gifts to the host country yogis. You could clearly see how much She was enjoying the giving After calling all the men and ladies from the host countries, She called all the children who were present at the puja to come for a gift. had decorated the hall were taken down Shri Mataji left the hall about I a.m., and and distributed-one more vibrated it was only then that the prasad was remembrance of an unforgettable distributed to the collective Delaying the collective event, prasad distribution until after Her departure had helped us to keep our -Linda Taylor, USA

 Volume : XI Issue : 7& 8 July Aug 1999 27 The Divine Cool Breeze NEWS FROM AROUND THE WORLD weekly programs. The following week we had better response including one seeker News From China It's been some time since we shared with who said that they normally never buy that newspaper. Through Shri Mataji's grace you how things are progressing in China, so here are some of the things we are they all received their realization. doing to spread the divine love of Shri Mataji. Each week new people were coming to it was difficult to advance the programs for the benefit of all who were attending. It was decided that it would be a good idea to rent a small flat so that we could There is still a very limited scope of what we can do in China We had been holding regular weekly programs in Shenzhen which is a city very close to the border of Hong Kong. People seemed to be coming in ones and twos but after a few weeks about eight people were coming regularly. We discovered that there is an underground movement of seekers who hold additional programs for the people who wanted to progress and go deeper. We managed to find a suitable centre near a large park. It has two bedrooms and a small living room but it was affordable enough for the Hong Kong yogis to pay for. A couple who had been coming for some time decided that they would live in the centre which gave us a more are interested in yoga and meditation. They seem to be well connected and often try out new things that become available, So we had a lot of people from this permanent venue. By Shri Mataji's grace, this has helped establish the vibrations in this southern part of China. There is a little seeking group coming and seeing what Sahaja Yoga was about, but after a few programs they would disappear. more freedom in Shenzhen as it is a special economic zone, very close to Hong Kong A group of dedicated Hong Kong yogis run the programs every One of the main problems is that we can't advertise the programs. We tried to arrange a newspaper ad but the official paper rejected our request. We advertised Sunday. in a paper printed in Hong Kong which is circulated in Southern China. The paper does not have a big readership but was the only option we had to promote the Realization in the Park One thing that is common in China is that all the different types of Tai Chi, Chi

 July Aug 28 1999 Volume : XI Issue 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Breeze and we travelled up the coast to a peaceful Gong, meditation and hatha yoga are practised in the local parks. The authorities turn a blind eye to these enjoyed a day of working with the activities and there are many seekers who elements and exchanging vibrations. attend classes in the early morning. It was About 14 local Chinese yogis attended an obvious place to hold programs. The and the vibrations were very strong. After next week a number of yogis from Hong the seminar we enjoyed a Chinese meal Kong gathered at 6:30 am and set up a which is always a good way to get to small altar and simply sat in front know the people. There were many deep meditating. Within a few minutes a number of other people also sat down in front of the photo of Shri Mataji. One of foundations for establishing Sahaja Yoga the yogis gave simple instructions, all the people followed a guided meditation and they all felt the cool breeze. No Please give bandhans to these programs explanation - just straight into the experience! After the meditation people attention to work things out. asked questions and they were invited to beach near Dia Bay. The new yogis seekers among them so by the grace of Shri Mataji they will become the in China. as we need all the collective love and -Alex Henshaw, Hong Kong come back to the new centre. News from Amsterdam All the people that came back to the For a few months Sahaja Yogis from Amsterdam have been holding weekly programs in the biggest Hindu temple in Amsterdam. Holland has a fairly large Indian community. Many "Hindustanis" originate from Surinam, where many Indians migrated at the end of the nineteenth century. A few years ago Shri centre have continued coming for the regular programs which have been going on for the past three months. Each week more and more people spontaneously join in the meditation. Some come back, some don't but the important thing is that many more people are being given self- realization and word is spreading. Mataji had expressed a strong interest in the Hindu community. In 1993, at Shri Seminar on the Beach Mataji's request, there was a public program specially for the Indians. About 350 attended and Shri Mataji gave the In December a seminar was arranged with the more established people and a group of 15 yogis came from Hong Kong to help entire lecture in Hindi. support the group. A bus was arranged

 Volume : XI Issue 7 & 8 29 1999 July - Aug The Divine Cool Breeze Since then, Shri Mataji has occasionally we are bringing to them the more inquired about how it is going with the universal views and knowledge of Sahaj Indians in Holland. Recently, the main About 15 people are attending the Hindu priest in the area himself contacted programs regularly. the Sahaja Yogis with a request to hold regular meetings in the mandir, free of charge and with all facilities offered. Now Henno de Graaf, Holland. Smile Of the Ari Shakti The Mona Lisa, the most well-known 1506) has been an object of painting in the world: it has held a certain contemplation and admiration for mystery to all who have seen it. The centuries. The painter's use of many beautiful face is commanding in its beauty layers of transparent colour gives a subtle and compelling in its atmosphere. A brilliance to a realistic face of a woman. controversy still remains, though, as to This technique of sfuma-to (half-light) whose portrait Leonardo Da Vinci puts the woman painted seemingly in two actually painted. A Florentine matron? worlds, that of sitting in a chair in front of a natural, almost primeval landscape. Who? Compare the painting with the The photo of Shri Mataji-the soulful photograph of Shri Mataji. This photo eyes, the part of the hair, her hands speaks the answer, if someone only has clasped, the pose in the chair, even the eyes to see. Shri Mataji's beauty, gesture way the tapestry and the open land and mood all speak of the secret of the beyond gives a sense of depth similar to Mona Lisa. the painting's landscape! The qualities of pure beauty and intelligence that radiate Da Vinci, a realized soul and genius, has from the painting in a quietly mystical way painted the ideal woman, the Adi Shakti through thoughtless inspiration. The Jai Shri Mataji! identity of the actual model for the work seems unimportant in comparison to the (The photographer/yogi who took the resemblance of the painting to the photo. photo is requested to contact The Divine say, "Who is She?" And finally we know. Cool Breeze to give details on when and how the photo was taken.) The painting (completed between 1503-

 July - Aug 30 Volume : XI Issue 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 7 & 8 Invocation for the Cleansing of America Shri Krishna, Supreme Lord of the Land: m twameva sakshat Shri Ganesha sakshat. Shri Radha You are the charioteer who brings us to Krishnä sakshat. Shri Adi our destination of Union with the Divine. Shakti Namoh Namah. Inspired by Our Holy Mother in Her form as Radha, You use the weapons of Joy and Detachment to conquer the I. O Devi, strengthen us as Your divine negativity instruments for the cleansing of the land Your land is so rich and grand: All of its nature is painted with splendour. Let this land again become the Grand Palace of Delight: nature and city glowing in the of Shri Krishna. Let America be the source of ongoing merriment, song and dance Lord Krishna's flute playing the delicate music of the Divine will cure the bliss of Sahaja culture. Spirit of America We only ask that America starts to listen to Shri Krishna's Divine Rasa, the beautiful poetry of His rhythm. In so doing, let America-North. o Devi, You have given us powers- weapons of joy-to fight against the sins of greed, materialism and social Central, and South-become obedient to confusion. Let these powers manifest the the inspiration of the Divine. He is Nirmala Gamya. accessible only through power of Nirananda, the absolutely pure joy. You. П. Shri Krishna, you are dark-dark as "There is a wvar that opens the doors of night- and in your land, people of all colours live in harmony. Language is heaven, Arjuna. Happy the warriors sweet and easily understood in Your whose fate is to fight such war. Kindgom. Words bring no sorrow. As Bhagavad Gita, Ch. 2, 32. you are the strongest and most protective Father You create playfulness and mirth. Your Leela brings joy and childlike Shri Vishnumaya announces Shri Krishna's coming, and Shri Yashoda gives us the respect needed for America to delight.

 31 Volume XI Issue : 7.& 8 1999 JulyAug The Divine Cool Breeze women of the United States) to look become righteous once again. deeply into the mirrors of their souls. Let them surrender the ego and conditionings that are preventing them from being For years we have, like children, tried to walk in the footsteps of yoga, but now the battle is at its peak. We can no longer Gruha Lakshmis in every way. continue to just hold back the battalions As a flower opens and gives fragrance to of negativities assaulting our doors. its last moment, let all the ladies, at whatever stage of life they are in, bloom O Devi by Your grace, victory is sure, especially as the yogis gain mastery over more fully in graciousness and subtle themselves, and in confidence the battle powers. is fought. We have all been prone to weakness on the Kurukshetra of life Release us from Karpanya, the cowardice May all the people on this great continent achieve satisfaction of the Spirit. that allow us to justify our weaknesses. O Devi, By Your Grace, please conquer by the Power of Joy: Shri Krishna, Your planet Saturn is the teacher of lessons. Having had many hard The habit of wearing clothing by lessons, we ask that our citizens return women that does not give respect to to the ways of dharma, worshipping sin Draupadi's sari. no more. In so doing, grant and restore The aggressiveness of women protection from harsh lessons, illness, and social disorder. 2. seeking to be the same as men. 3. The idea in American womens' minds that caring for a family is a With a sense of urgency, we ask that the negativities attacking Amerca's ascent be cleansed so that Shri Krishna's quality of Gruhananda, that of giving joy to the household, may manifest. The original lesser goal than a career. 4. The idea of pursuing a career without also building up the Gruha Lakshmi qualities in a woman. native people of the American continent had this sense of harmony and inner self contentment. hut the conquerors of this 5. The despair that blocks the ascent of America's women and blocks their love for the responsibilities of caring for a home and family. land have brought disorder and discontent. The women of North, Central and South The habit of not cooking at home America pledge (and most especially the 6.

 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 July Aug 1999 32 The Divine Cool Breeze people's greed that keep the that is weakening the Nabhi of attention on the material level. America. 18. Negativity preventing the grace of handi-work and creativity from 7. The lack of satisfaction that prevents love. manifesting in modern American 8. Any attacks on marriage that prevent family life from flowering. women. 19. The weakness that makes women The ego that resists the beauty of the women's role in home and family. 9. pressure others instead their being like Shri Lakshmi standing on the lotus. 10. The ego that insists that men and women are the same. They are equal, All obstacles that prevent the gentle, 20. but different in nature. enduring love of family. 11. The damage to the mother-daughter 21. All obstacles to the true qualities of relationship that has prevented girls woman-hood transforming our from learning from their mothers. societies. 12. The lack of satisfaction about life m. Ш. that creates greed and the desire for O Parampujya, enlighten fully the powers of the Krishna Tattwa so that we may fulfil pleasure from things. 13. Miserliness that is masked as our roles in the Leela of the truth that savings. you have so graciously let us yogis join. 14. The credit and loan system that We pledge to sow the seed of Self- enslaves America to the banks, and Realization throughout America-North, prevents satisfaction. Central and South. Let America become One, a unified land. 15. The use of credit cards that impoverishes in the name of wealth. We pray that political oppression be dissolved so that Sahaja Yoga can meet its destiny as the vehicle of Truth. For 16. All the aspects of materialism being spread throughout the entire world until political oppression stops, many are by the United States. not free to hear your message or deepen their Self-Realization. 17. The economic problems caused by

 July Aug Volume : XI Issue: 7 & 8 33 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze as did Vasudeva's as he fled prison to Release all the citizens of our land from poor discrimination, the obstacle of the protect Baby Krishna. Carrying Hamsa. Such was Arjuna's battle. Let miraculous Baby Krishna on his head America be the land of discretion once wrapped in a cloth and a basket, Vasudeva crossed the River yamuna. The waters again. rose high, yet the child krishna had only to point his foot towards the river, and it immediately fell, and the waters became If we are to figm for the joy and for the Kshema (well-being) of all who live in this land, then our Vishnu Tattwa, the passable again. vibration of Dharma, must be in order. If activated, this Tattwa would help us prevent extreme behaviour, so much of of Baby Krishna to conquer our own O Devi, give us the infinite powers of Joy River Yamuna which has become a joyless which is rampant in our societies. river of despair for so many people who live in this land-despair that is All the yogis pledge to open their hearts. and, at whatever cost. to stand by the preventing America from recognizing Shri Adi Shakti Nirmala Devi. moral values that Shri Krishna represents. We pledge to place the collective interest first, to always be willing to understand others, and always to be generous in this North, Central and South-remember Shri land of wealth. All of this is possible Krishna's call to Arjuna-Arise, O great through the detachment that Shri Krishna warrior, arise! brings, and through the comfort of the spirit that fills us with Divine compassion O Devi, at this time of the coming In all the countries throughout America- millennium, at this beginning of Satya Yuga, let a new call resound for all to IV. hear: May the chains of materialism fall away Arise, O Warrior of Joy, Arise! from America as did the chains which fell from the wrists of Lord Krishna's father, Arise, Anandvira, Arise! Vasudeva, when he was held captive. May all the yogis become true warriors of joy May the closed doors of America's heart open just as the prison doors flew open to free Vasudeva. Jai Shri Americeshwari Shri Adi Shakti Mataji May the faith of the yogis remain strong

 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 34 1999 July Aug The Divine Cool Breeze 9. The negativity preventing Sahaja culture from taking root in the brains of America's people. Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah! V. List of Negativities for Shri Krishna 10. The many religious myths in America Havan: that do not lead to the Central Channel. O Devi, by your grace please conquer by the Power of Joy: 11. The social conditionings that perpetuate attachment to false beliefs and ideals. American individualist The 1. archetype that prevents surrender. 12. The false ideas about the New Age The seriousness of intellectuals and 2. that are preventing Americans from seeing the Kundalini Herself standing scientists that prevents them from experiencing Shri Krishnan's joy. before them. 3. The tobacco industry and its false 13. The colonistic attitudes that allowed the slaughter of the Native Peoples research on the terrible etfects of smoking. of America. The proliferation of plastic which is emptying homes of natural goods. 4. 14. The mercantile and racist beliefs that continue to affect the whole The overuse of computers causing continent, North, Central and South. the hands, the instrument of the 15. The poverty that continues to force people to flee Central America. Vishuddhi, to become dull and insensitive. 16. The drug cartels enslaving people The export of butter products that makes it expensive to buy butter in 6. throughout the North and South American continents. Shri Krishna's land. 17. The inauspicious use of flowers to smuggle drugs from South to North America. 7. The poisoning of the dairy industry by chemical additives. The use of pharmaceutical drugs to 18. The ethnic conflicts over language create behavioural change without true healing. in Canada. 5. 8.

 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 35 July Aug 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 30. The anti-melodious music that blares in the ears of teenagers everyday. 19. Dictatorial governments in the Vishuddhi. 20. The expansion of multi-national 31. Aggressive use of the voice in the corporations that is eliminating American products in American Vishudhi. 32. Forms of dance that confuse the economies. dharma and create false collectivity. 21. The misuse of natural resources, 33. The confusion of male and female especially that of nuclear power in roles in American society. the United States. 34. The aggressiveness of women seeking to be the same as men. 22. The pro-right, pro-Nazi and extremist movements trying to take hold in our societies. The popularization of designer-lavel 35. goods in the United States that are 23. The arrogance of the United States which sees itself as superior to other sold world-wide. countries. 36. The habit of wearing clothing by women that does not give respect to 24. The media's influence in promoting violence and social disorder. Draupadi's sari. 37. Negative use of the internet that destroys the attention and 25. The media's influence eroding the maryadas in all aspects of social life. encourages the spread of adharma. 26. Hollywood's offences against the 38. The idea in American women's purity and graciousness of film and minds that caring for a family is a video. lesser goal than a career. 27. Anti-joy art that is modern but without spirit. 39. The habit of eating out that is weakening the Nabhi of America. 28. The early sophistication of our children that takes away their 40. The idea of pursuing a career without also building up the Gruha Lakshmi qualities in a woman. innocence and wisdom. 29. The negativity turning young people 41. The despair that blocks the ascent to crime.

 Volume XI Issue : 7& 8 July Aug 1999 36 The Divine Cool Breeze seekers from becoming like Arjuna. of America's women and their love for the responsibilities of caring for the home and family. 48. The deafness of those who turn from the auspicious flute of Lord Krishna 42. The negativity in Washington. D.c. preventing auspicious leadership. 49. The negativity preventing Swadeshi in the United States-the popularization of locally-made goods. 43. The banking and loan systems which impoverish in the name of wealth. 44. The excessive use of credit cards 50. Malnutrition and obesity problems which began in the United States and 51. Negativity of false gurus attacking has now spread as a bad habit the arts in America. worldwide. 52. The residue of false gurus in the brains of the seekers of Americas. 45. All the aspects of materialism being spread throughout the entire world by the United States. 53. Problems of black magic in all its forms and vices. 46. The fragmentation of America into North, Central, and South. It is one. 54. All forces that are against the Nirmala Bhaktas. 47. The drug-like sleep preventing

 Volume XI Issue : 7 & 8 - Aug 37 The Divine Cool Breeze 1999 July Sri Mataji's Talk with Dr. Talwar in Bombay on 26th and 27th February 1987 during the auspicious celebration of "Shiva Puja" Sahaja Yoga was known to me all along. It is a unique knowledge with which I was born. It was not so easy to reveal it and I People said that he cannot talk. It has to be experienced. So very few people got to swallow it. Nobody could actualise the experience by feeling on their finger tips, wanted to find out how to reveal it, or feel it on their senses, or on their minds, or even understand it with their intellect. so it was a big problem. They all tried and prepared a ground for it. First of all I thought that the seventh chakra must be opened, which I did, on Sth of May 1970, It is a secret in a way. Formerly, the Brahma Chaitanaya was Avvakta. It was not manifested. It was Now I have come as the Incarnation of the Brahma-Chaitanya As a Whole. The sea of the Nirakar has now become a big cloud (Saakar). It has taken a form. Those who came before were all a part-and not expressed by itself, and so the people who managed to reach Brahma Chaitanya somehow, by attaining Realisation", said - It was Nirakar Ka Guna. You are like a drop that gets dissolved in the ocean parcel of it. Now the whole has come No one could say, explain or tell people This cloud has rain water. The rain water anything more about it. The great is nourishing the minds of the people. incarnations also who came out of this Gradually they are brought to a level were great Ocean of Brahma-Chaitanya, tried their best to share it with the hest available their Realisation and now gradually they followers (which were very few) and are feeling everything on their senses. introduce them to this Brahma-Chaitanya. their Kundalinis have risen. They have got their finger tips. This is the reason why But because the Brahma-Chaitanya was nobody has talked about vibrations so not in a Vyakta form, these incarnations clearly. They managed to talk about Chaitanya Lahiri This was so because of its-Avyakta form. It was only a state. A state to be enjoved, only in that state with got dissolved in it. Like Gvaneshwara took his Samadhi.

 July Aug Volume : XI Issue 7 & 8 38 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Yogis because they will understand. To no manifestation in the gross. In that State they went beyond temptations, beyond bear this truth is so difficult. When one temper etc. That is proof before us. How gets money or position, it is difficult to they did it. what was this Brahma- remain balanced. People become so Chaitanya? – they could not show its shaky. So for them the fact that I Pratyaksha form. What they could show encompass all the Incarnations is too was only through similes or through some parable. difficult to bear. One day I went to Aurangabad, where a This is what I have achieved-Its boy told me that Brahma-Chaitanya is Pratyaksha form. The complete form of beyond feeling and non-feeling. He had the Brahma-Chaitanya I have brought read about it in some book. I told him it from the sea So now, I do not allow you was true, but he should forget about it dissolved in it. I have put it in the and just feel it. It was then that I decided to get to tell about it to a few people. You see, form of a big Ghata. In that. you are smaller Kumbhas. In other words, I have the right time also had to come before I taken you all in my body as small cells, disclosed it. All other religions have so nourishing you, looking after you, cleansing you and working it out. But I Now the whole integration has come. I am Maha-Maya. So I have to work very slowly, gradually, and at the right time and right point far been segmented and non-integrated. can now explain Christ, Mohamad Sahib and others, because they are all part and parcel of the whole, which is Brahma- Chaitanya. When the seventh chakra was opened, all Đã not talk about me to the Scientists. the chakras came to your Sahasrara, and Just tell them that this is a Unique Method that has come. Though it is a little difficult to understand, yet it has happened and we have seen it for ourselves. Like that so I could manage all chakras and all your deities. Any Deity you ask and you get the vibrations, So that proves that am the Brahma-Chaitanya. your you tell them. If you talk about Me, they will be shocked. Maximum you can tell them that -this knowledge was brought The Brahma-Chaitanya is the Adi-Shakti and Sada-Shiva is also in my heart. But since I am so much humanised, it is not out by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, by which the Kundalini could be arisen. How she so easy to find it out. If you tell this to Modern human beings. they will not has managed it. we do not know. It is probably a secret. Put the whole thing on understand. It can only be told to Sahaja

 July Aug Volume XI Issue 7 & 8 39 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze whole experience remained to be individual and not collective. Now that is me Now you understand, Can you say- how does a seed sprout? By putting it in the Mother earth. So you say, that by over. Now it is collective, Everything has putting everything to Mataji, our seed has sprouted It is a living process and we to be collective at a point. Even to reach this point, hard testing of the seekers was done. Ultimately Christ got crucified. See how Mohammad Sahib. Nanak and Tukaram were treated? They come from Vaikuntha, and see how they were treated? Things just did not work have seen it for ourselves. So far nobody has been able to give Realisation to others. May be only one or two have given Realisation to others. Most people have achieved it by the process of cleansing. For example out then. Buddha got his Realisation by thorough cleansing. Brahma-Chaitanya crawled I know all beyond the Vaikuntha, but I inside him because he asked for it, have not revealed it so far. I will slowly reveal it because people are not yet prepared to become capable of absorbing it. You see, it is like the preparation of a genuinely wanted it and prayed for it and was therefore cleansed by it. But again He went into its state. There was no communication about it thereafter. This Khichdi. It is yet under preparation. So is what is in the collective now. This let it be cooked. You are all in it. The collective working is now happening quality of people being built up now is because this State has started expressing equivalent to the choicest of the handful of disciples of the past Prophets. Now and here everyone is destined to come Supposing you discover electricity, and along slowly and steadily. All those who you keep it to yourself and not talk about will now fall into this great pot (Handi) it to anybody Then how will anyone of the Supreme Cook will be well know about it? It is not that the great prepared in it. Rest who opt to remian Saints did not want to express it, but there out will be left out. It is all beyond time. was no communication then. It is just like Each to his own capability to achieve. Just itself if someone has no eyes to see, then whom as it is difficult to say how long will one are you going to show to. or talk to? learn to ride a Bicycle, or become a C.A., There was no one to appreciate and absorb that state at that time. Those who or a Doctor. Some may take very little time, while others very long. did achieve realisation, their Sahasraras The bondage of time is created by man got opened, but they got lost in it The

 July Aug 40 1999 Volume: XI Issue : 7 & 8. The Divine Cool Breeze himself In reality this body has no timing. you move from left to right. In your Time dimension has been created by man Habits you move towards the left while by his habits. With the formation of habits, in Ambitions you move towards the right. the Kaal or time bondage is created To set me in your Heart, is a Bhava or a feeling. So just as you develop habits on the left side, you must practice to have that Habit-like Bhava for me in your hearts. If, so easily you can acquire your habits, then why not this Beautiful Bhava? All this is nothing but a change in Bhava After all Habits are easy to relieve, When there is no habit, there is no time dimension. With Sahaja Yoga lots of habits leave you. But this takes time too. You must therefore never justify your habits if you want to rid them. It is with justification that habits stay. If in one life time you being just a mere state of mind. can achieve Self-Realisation, reach the Once you have established my Bhava in entire point of having begun to loose your habits, then in that very life time it is you, it takes its position in possible for you to acquire that so called state. In the event that you may happen your body and carries itself through eternity. Depends on how much you are using to remain half-baked during the process yourself to it. It is just like of one life time, then you will come back of smoke on your room then all the mosquitoes will run away. So it depends on how much of me you have filled in your hearts! to complete your achievement. This is how Sahaja Yoga will now work out for some time: This is now the last judgement. During the process of the revelations in Sahaja Yoga, when I still The question that now arises is that, how does one come to stabilise the state of see people behave against it. I feel My Bhava in ones heart? The answer is stability comes by constantly awesome. I continue to have such bad experiences at times but then such people leave Sahaj Yoga This happens, but you stopping your own attention or Chitta. Always do Chitta-nirodh. Just like you go out and you see something you must must not get discouraged You must go on working towards it putting in your very best efforts. consciously stop your Chitta from going towards it. It comes with practice. Pull it Always remain in the Centre. Do not inside. This is called detachment. worry about your growth in Sahaja Once you are in the centre, growth is automatic. It is already being nourished by me. Daily Remember the contact outside, or Samparka is always through the Chitta. Watch where it goes all the time.

 July Aug 41 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Breeze understand it is like you have to accept a Always ask yourself, Where is my Chitta? Actually Chitta is segregated Hypothesis that there exists an all within us as our consciousness as well as pervading power above the Human Brain. This is the only hypothesis. The human our awareness within us. When our consciousness becomes one with brain is in the form of a Pyramid. The awareness, it assumes the form of Parama-Chaitanya or all pervading power Vibratory awareness which balances you. is coming from all sides and is striking This balancing keeps you in the Centre. the brain of a Featus (soon after its The moment your chitta goes out in the formation). wrong direction, immediately you feel the What actually happens is that, at the apex heat on your senses. That is how the all of this pyramidical brain, the Parama- Chaitanya passes unhindered and settles pervading Power works and grows within you. down the spine in the inverted Triangular bone area, at the base, in three and a half coils as the Kundalini Shakti. In the All our habits and Samskaras crumple our Brain formation and appear as process it leaves its mark called the "Vaccum Channel" in the spine. Now the convolutions in the brain. When all these convolutions open up, new spaces are Parama-Chaitanya hitting on the sides of the triangular brain, has to permeate the Grey and the White matter. These have their own Densities, and so governed by the physics Laws of Refraction, the Chaitanya refracts from left to right and from right to left. This is also called the Prismatic refraction effect. This phenomena exists mostly for human brains and not so much in animals. created in the brain, having more absorption power. The crumpled brain subtly opens. This is how the connection with the Divinity is made. Scientists basically have to be stunned. Like I went to a Medical Institute and I told them about the Para-Sympathetic nervous system. They got stunned. The mode of action of Stiponilan Adrenaline, they cannot explain, but we can. Now take carbon. If you see it from the left side, you can see the right side and vice- versa. On the left side you can see the figure of Carbon as in form of a Swastic. On the right side it looks like the Omkara. During the refraction process, the Human attention is pulled out to both the sides and is driven in the outward direction. Both the attention and the refracted Chaitanya cross at the Agnya Chakra from both sides on their way out. As a If you see upward from down below, it looks like a cross. That is a fact. Now to result of this pull, an additional force

 : 7 & 8 42 Volume : XI issue July Aug 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze action element, the potential of which called the resultant force is created. Now the theory of Parallelogram of forces (of forms the Pingala Nadi. The overflow of physics) comes into play. The resultant the Ida Nadi forms a Balloon-like cloud force is divided into two parts, each being at the back of the Agnya chakra called at a 90 degree angle to the other on both the Super-Ego, while the overflow of the the left as well as the right side. The Pingala nadi forms a similar cloud in front resultant force acts in the centre of its two of the Agnya chakra called the Ego. The counterparts. One part creates the left and Agnya remains directly in-between these the right Sympathetic Channel of the two balloons. The front of the Agnya is foetus by pushing its way down the body. controlled by the Pituitary of the brain, The other part pushes its way out through the senses, dragging with it the Human When the Kundalini enters the Agnya attention both to the left and the right. chakra, she enlightens, it. Then Christ while the back is controlled by the Pineal. The second part is also known at the within you is enlightened or awakened. He sucks both these balloons of the Ego and the Super-Ego, and the whole Agnya chakra opens. That is why Christ died for our sins. There is simultaneous opening of the Sahasrara. I saw the Sahasraras of the Virat open. It was like tons of flame. Just like when you disect the human brain, its cross-section looks like petals or like In short, our Chitta accompanied by the flames. In the centre of it, it looks like a resultant Brahma-Chaitanya's living force yellow hole. The opening of the went to the outer world, collected a Sahasraras is sudden. With a bang it reaction and brought back with it a opens. How can I explain,-it gives the conditioning from the left, thereby effect of one telescope into another. forming the manasa or the mind. Both Normally with the opening of the Agnya the action and reaction pass through both and the Vishuddi, the Ego and the Super- the agnya and vishuddhi chakras. The Ego get sucked in. Mind is Super-Ego. Chitta, being dispersed in nature, has the Ahamkara is Ego. Our soul or Atman is ability to flow from the whole body. The surrounded by all the five Elements plus reaction of the left is the desire element, their causal expression, with the Kundalini on the periphery. The elements are mainly the Earth and the Water, while their causal action in the outer world. From the outer world, this action brings back a reaction., (another famous law of Physics.) The path followed by the action and reaction is the same. On the left side this reaction builds one's Conditionings while on the right side it builds the Ego. the potential of which gives birth to the IDA nadi on the left sympathetic channel. Similarly, the reaction of the right is the is just jyot matra.

 July Aug 1999 . Volume: Xi Issue : 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Brenze we humans are slaves of our habits. When self-Realisation takes place, the Deities are awakened, and the chakras are nourished and freshened. They open out We, out of sheer habit, de not allow our Chitta to stay, put in that state permanently. Actually the chitta should not go out. Here is a simple situation that I find myself to be in with you: 1 am putting you in the Boat to sail-off, but you are resisting my help and start releasing energies. At the Pithas (representative points of the chakras on our brain) all actions begin against each related chakra. Coordination at both levels starts and all chakras get integrated. Take an example of your mind. It wants by constantly sticking your one foot in to do something. Your body-it wants the water. Your attention is on to do something else. Thirdly, your frivolous things you see, out of your Intellect-it wants to do something else: habit you put out your leg, knowing There is no Integration. On Realisation, very well, I am sitting inside to sail you through. I also happen to see that your leg may be swallowed any time by an Take another example of a piece of alligator, But you, in your own habits cloth, it represents the attention. are blind enough not to notice the Before realisation it is all spread out aligator. Now, can you imagine my all three become one. and in all directions. Now take a finger plight? Imagine how I feel? and poke the cloth in the centre from the bottom and raise it upwards. What happens? The cloth is pulled up to a point and in the process it just wraps or falls around the finger. In the same way, when the Kundalini rises, it pokes That is why I say- Do satsang – meaning spend time with other Sahaja Yogis with the object to keep your attention in the Centre. It is very important to constantly keep your attention in the centre. With the attention, raises it to the Sahasrara, where it gets enlightened by the light of the Brahma-Chaitanya. It then just wraps and falls in line with the Kundalini's path on the Sushumna realisation, our left and right Nadis relax off upon receipt of Divine energy. Due to release of tension, the Chakras open out still further. It is a cycle. More Kundalini fibres can then rise and so Nadi in the centre. What has actually on. At this stage the attention develops happened is that on realisation, our Chitta is pulled inside from wherever a quality to renain in the centre. You it is spread out in the outer mundane can then direct it out to perform a world. The Chitta is thereby enlighted. particular task, and after achieving it, This is the so-called state. But in reality without any reaction, it occupies its

 July Aug 44 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze from it, you can see it, but when you are position in the centre. It has by now achieved the quality of not getting in it, then what can you attached to anything. see? Thoughtless awareness comes when In my case it is different. If my attention is on you, I will take all your problems into myself and cleanse it and myself suffer. This I will do only ifI want to. Now, Sahaja Yogis, I have to fix, because I have put them indiscriminately into my body. So I have to suffer. The Sahaja Yogis themselves are just barometric in this regard. They cannot your Kundalini crosses the Agnya Chakra-when there is no thought. It happens by control. Slowly it becomes a part of you and encompasses your whole body. It becomes a state. This is doubtless Awareness. You become the Brahma-Chaitanya or the state. At this state, you all need to work for suffer the way I do, may be a little bit, me and not just land up in the state and get into a Samadhi. I have achieved it for you without giving it to because whatever they suck, goes into the vast ocean. you. Then why do you ask for it? You must know that you are there and Now the study of the fifth dimension of matter is going on in Russia-the study of there is no doubt about it. This is now Bioplasma. This is completely a right sided activity. Each human being has his own Aura and depending on his changing Gunas, the colour represented by that the final game. In reality this state is very easy and spontaneous to achieve, but vet I would like you to work for it and try for it. When you feel like achieving this state right now and for your own individual self, then I would Guna or Aura changes. What do you give bandhans to? To your Auras so as to protect it. Only matter can have an Aura. So it is all materialistic. The fifth away you are becoming an escapist. say that you are being selfish and dimension is actually a microscopic or a photographic dimension. So when you see some lights in my photographs, it is You have to first become collective. Otherwise on an individual basis you will get lost in the Nirakar and you will not even be able to see me. You see, you will be in that state-you will be dissolved in the ocean. So evolving from the ocean and dissolving in it is one form of an Aura, You see Brahma- Chaitanya has got its own light. This is only visible to me. Some people can also see it when their Agnya is bad. They can see it from outside. not anything unique or great. But to become a cloud from the ocean and The principle is that when you are away

 July Aug Volume: XI Issue 7 & 8 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze then soak everyone with your rain- am nobody in my human form as far as water would surely be a unique the new comers are concerned, achievement. This is my aid and also EPILEPSY. my game. Just as every game has an Cause: Movement of the attention to the aim, so has mine. To stay in the Centre, extreme left. Collective Subconscious is hecome Sharanagata. Say "you are everything Mother, so you do everything". It is complete surrender. when you develop some fear or fright the state into which you go. This happens SO being a weak person on the left side. Also For a Scientific mind. you have to give when you happen to be involved in an them this whole vidya in bits If their cup accident - sudden fright or jurk. is small you cannot fill imore than the Cure: Bring attention to the centre. To do this, first bring it to the right by saying capacity it can take. So have patience. You cannot give them the whole ocean the Gayatri Mantra. Then to the centre now Remember that Science is only a by saying the Brahmadeva-Saraswati mantra. On moving to the right, you start feeling vibrations, stop at this point. Do wee part of the whole. First create a craving for Sahaja in them by introducing it to them. Once they come, then watch them Remember your time? The same not say any more Gavatri Mantra because thing happened with each one of you. At first you experienced it then craved more and more for it, very progressively. This you must not go too much to the right. Too much to the right means the frequency of Vibrations start decreasing process is also Scientitic Example-Mr Jalan's Mamdi's cure. In the mundane, when you work to earn money, you will encounter the maya. Just remember that you are earning for me. That's all. Go ahead and earn It needs proper adjustment from one side to the other. It is important that you must get the Vibrations. If not, then repeatedly raise the Kundalini till you feel the as much as you can. This I am only Vibrations. talking from the materialistic point of view. Another best way is to put the left hand towards the Photograph and the right on the ground. Say Mahakali mantra so that the Vibrations start flowing. Use of the People who come into Sahaja Yoga through you Sahaja Yogis come better than through me You see, with me they tend to get entangled in my maya. See, I Candle from the back side on the left will also help.

 July Aug 46 7 & 8 1999 Volume XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze and you do Action, then everything This treatiment is also the sanie for cancer. other psychosomatic diseases. It includes become mechanical and hypocritical. The Muscular Scheletar disorders. In right desire is only to achieve your Muscular problems, the trouble comes growth. This is Shuddha-ichha. If you from your disturbed Sri Ganesha have a gross desire like-I must have a (Mooladhara). In Hysterectomy cases, son etc. you have it too, but then you where the Uterus is removed the problem will want something else also. Meaning is of Sri Ganesha (Mooladhara), And fear that you are now becoming a hypocrite. element. If somebody is not having a In pure desire you get everything in a child, then she has a left Swadishthana bundle. It is from genuine desire that you problem. Same problem is also true for grow. This whole concept is you attitude heavy Periods-when there is too much towards you Ichha-Shakti. stimulation in the Parasympathetic in the Now take the Action energy or Kriya Sacral region, there is too much flow Shakti. This has two aspects, namely resulting in heavy bleeding. Other results Physical and Mental, Physically you must are Diarrhoea and Excessive urination. sit down and Meditate to become Cure: Use of Gayatri Mantra, Initially. thoughtless. Mentally you must see that But it must also be backed by some your mind does not go towards all Medicines. You can give ajvain ki dhuni nonsensical things in gross forms. All that (even for surgery patients). For Lumbago you must say is. "Mother you are doing you give ajvain ka pani. For Muscular everything, I do nothing". This is the Lumbago use Ajvain for intake and geru for application only. In Lumbago the bone For both left and right sided persons it is gets twisted, therefore use vibrated important to first cleanse yourself and kerosine oil mixed with some other oil. then do your meditation. Then you move In few days it gets alright. control on you. towards the left side, you raise your Kundalini and it just comes out. You must For any treatment whatsoever, remember that the most important fact remains that Do not just be mechanical when sitting everything depends on your Ichha or to do Puja. Your desire must be genuine Desire Shakti. So Ida nadi is important raise your Kundalini before Meditation. to grow. that you must have desire and it must be the right Desire. No wrong Desires People who are from Arya-Samaj are because eventually everything goes back basically Right sided people. They must to the Desire. If you have wrong desires use Bhakti Bhajan, seat me in their hearts

 July Aug 1999 Volume XI lssue 7 & 8 47 The Divine Cool Breeze ie move towards the left side. Cleansing into spasms due to tensions. e.g., Left must be done only by use of mantras on the Central Chakras. Mahakali and Maha start to twist (Physical). When you put Saraswati, both act on the centre from your chakras in me (in my care) they will both the sides and are therefore inter- be relaxed and then you can adjust by connected. Even the Mantras for the left giving vibrations. Those vibrations can be and right are chanted only for the given to others. You need not touch the purposes of raising the Kundalini alone. other person, but give vibrations by using There is no use of attention here. circular movement by hand using mantra. Treatment of left side through chanting of mantras for raising the Kundalini is only In left sided diseases, you get into the Vishuddi or any chakra, the vertebrae collective subconscious from where you to improve upon your desire energy collect Protein 52. viruses. These make Another way is to raise your right and you beyond help sometimes. Fever is lower it to the left by hand. This helps a caused to those whose liver is out, who lot. In addition activate your right side has overworked his Liver. He is heated by mantras of Brahmadeva and of up etc. It can be corrected by putting ice Gayatri. But all upto a point You see when I have to do it I control it by raising ie. Mosquito bites. Bacterial fevers are your Kundalini upto a point. And before left sided. These are mainly due to certain it goes too much to the other side. 1 in-takes of food such as fungus like control by pulling it out just in time. It is mushrooms, old paneer etc. Diabetes is all in my control. When people do not on the liver. Malarial fevers are right sided the action of the right side affected by the left side. Right side being vulnerable. Firstly when you think too much, pay no attention and remain in your habits, then a fear element adds to you vulnerability., Just like a hard working man thinks too much. All his fat cells are used for the brain. The swadhishthana goes into and control, they just go on and on. Like Rama, Rama. Panduranga, Panduranga .. and get lost on one side totally. Mother is now asking you all-"Where is you attention". First must come Bhakti Bhava and this then must move onto Shraddha Bhava. neglects its left counter part. The left side gets drained. You become vulnerable. At ON PHYSIOTHERAPY this stage if some fear comes up in you When the vibrations flow, they relax the muscles. The muscles in reality have gone and you also start feeling guilty, then you develop Diabetes.

 Volume XI ssue 7 & 8: 1999 48 July Aug The Divine Cool Breeze pumping of the heart difficult, so it becomes tired because it cannot pump. Due to extreme left Vishuddhi, the Correction is use Ali's name in mantra Source is from swadhisthana and Nabhi of the left. Left Nabhi gets first affected lethargic heart gives you Angina. These are the two types of Heart attacks. The first type can be cured by putting ice on the stomach and on the heart on the right side. Also move from left to right. Sit in water. Do not use light at all. Sleep in darkness, stay more indoors. Take full by having fear of wife or worries for her or any other family member, In addition your vulnerability at that point brings about Diabetes. Clear it by cleaning your Agnya chakra. Don't think so much. Go into Thoughtless Awareness. Put left side to right side. Take more salt so that it rest. And repeat that "I am the Spirit". "O Lord, please forgive me". The second type can be cured by asking him to say -"Mother you are my heei mantra. You are the Mantrika. Also "I am not guilty". neutralises the action of sugar excretion because it has got water of crystallisation. Use ice on right Swadhishthana and Nabhí. Avoid sugar after proper tests if necessary. and say "I forgive everybody Lord". So that all the hurts disappear. Use lightened HEART ATTACKS: Over active and inactive or lethargic fire to clear the left side. heart. Overactive heart is of right sided Asthma is mostly a left sided people. In such cases the heart can psychosomatic disease. It can sometimes collapse. Especially it can happen in very be right sides with persons who are very young age This is because their attention dry and have always tried to dominate is too much outside. Due to this their others The dryness of the Peritorium Atma departs. The atma gets no attention is too much. Mostly it also comes from due to their extreme materialistic nature. the right heart- For those whose father Overactivity can also come from too is dead or that, you are not a good father much worry about the family, thinking too or that you happen to trouble your child much of the future. The heart starts to or that you are unhappy about your pump more blood and over works itself. ownself. It can be a combination of any It gets tired. In addition the attention is Intake. For left side- if people eat the not on the spirit. For Lethargic hearts- fat it is bad. Because the fat is stored and this people take all kinds of mantra's and it is not available for circulation. For thin first spoil their Left Vishuddhi. They take people their fat is available for circulation, Tobacco and cigarette, creating a problem so they can eat fat. But for fat people. on Left Vishuddhi. This makes the they should only put fat in their nose, oil

 49 July Aug Volume XI Isue : 7& 8 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze decrease the flow of the RBC's. That's in the ears etc. For fat people oil massage on the head is very good. Thin people can how the spleen goes crazy. This is also massage with Golden Amla hair oil. It the root cause of Blood Cancer for people who are hectic. cools them down. When you have the Back Agnya working. you become lethargic and when you the front Agnya working you become overactive. The balance of chemicals in the body comes from the Agnya. That is why you should always be in thoughtless Awareness. Left sided people are ones Articaria is also psychosomatic When your liver is lethargic, it becomes have vulnerable. Cure: Use geru-rub it on some stone and give it to your child in Honey (very little) - Also for grown ups. For very old people it is also very good for it has soluble calcium Any soluble calcium is sided people trouble others. So those good It is good for application and then who are left sided, their bodies will pain who have troubles themselves and Right cover it with something black. The source of its problem is left Nabhi You see when and they will suffer The right side people, the live is lethargic, the left Nabhi who inflict pains on others will not notice becomes lethargic The person is not using much of his energies. So it is a it. These right sided people can therefore develop diseases like sorosis of the liver or a problem on the eyes. lethargic liver. excited by the left Nabhi Shakti is the guna of the left. Shradha is of the centre, The left side is very pleasant Treatment: is again left side Best is to cover the body with something black, so that the heat is given to it You see it is a form of an allergy Most ällergies are till you start getting the pangs and then you start getting drifted away - this is happening in Bhakti with some people. caused from cold to hot. i.e taking bath in cold water and then hot water. To take When I speak, every word is a mantra. coffee and immediately take cold water As I speak people start getting alright. This sudden change. the system cannot Now all types of people are coming up Some are coming up very fast now. As adjust to, In the left Nabhi area is the spleen The spleen is a speedometer and also an adjuster. When it adjusts and it is not properly done due to sudden change, it causes problem So it has to suddenly provide its energies to either inerease or far as I am concerned they have put me aside as a Devi and that I cannot be reached. Now, it will be one of you only who will stand up and people will see you

 1999 July Aug 50 Volume XI Issue 7 & 8 The Divine Cool Breeze The Causal of realisation is the Shuddha Sahaja. This is the best way and come int Iccha. Man is made of 3 potentials i.e the subtle and causal. This to let some people just come up. This is the game. the gross, causal of realisation, i.e Shuddha Iccha Lots of people have personalised it. They want to know what is happening about it in my family. then to others, then to people of Bombay etc. Sahaja Yogi's are very honest, compassionate and diligent, enlightens the subtle and the gross bodies. Just like you put a seed into mother earth. The mother earth enlightens the seed and gives its potential to it- In the same way, the Kundalini is the mother Earth in good natured and have lesser tempers. you. She rises and gives this potential dimension to your seed. Every things has Their character has assumed a new dimension in this process of building up. a different causal and so every chakra acts Each one of you must work hard towards according to its own causal. The problem it and not bother too much about the is, we do not understand even at the other Sthiti is tested only when you are grosser level. Now take a very gross level you reach a point where to take an exposed to it That is the time of paristhiti. Sthiti must be clubbed with complete atom. This atom has Nucleus which as protons, Neutrons and Mesotons. Now, if you cool down this atom such as Helium gas, the atoms become collective. So also the mesotons act on their own, and even they become collective when cooled to a certain point. So even to the grosser and Discrimination. There are Deities who are in the Chakras. When the Kundalini rises, she awakens them just like seeds. Once they are awakened, they start working it out, They know what is their job, what to work out - like they have been appointed. These Deities you have achieved through your grosser, this potential exists, Scientifically it can be proved When we take a human being, we are talking about a living process. The human being has most manifested one on the grosser level. Now, the inner growth has evolution at different points So where ever they are settled, they do the job. Take a seed. It is gross. It has potential to become a tree and this has the-potential to come. On the grosser level he is now to become numerous trees. So this potential is subtle to subtler to subtlest. fully manifested. Just take a seed which Its appearance is gross. The causal of has reached its grosser level and is now mother earth is fragrance so when it living and pulsating and it is then put awakens the Kundalini, it touches the inside the mother Earth then what is to causal also just like you get the fragrance. happen?

 Volume XI. lssue 7 & 8 July Aug 199 51 The Divine Cool Breeze know how to use it. The exhibition of its Thus, the subtle and the subtlest is Feplicated in our whole being as such. The potential is the Kundalini. The Kundalini comes on the gross through the central Nervous system is representing the causal of the mother Earth The causal of the Virat is The Sakaar is the Doer or the 'Karata'. collectivity The causal is the power of a particular Deity-the unmanifested power. But as soon as the Deities are awakened. their The representatives of Sadashiva and Adi powers are also awakened. This is a living Shakti in us are the Atma and the process and how it works out you cannot explain. Now see the foetus, how does it take its form, who guides it, there must be some Intelligence-who does it, who Kundalini (These are beyond the causal. in fact they excite the causal) Take an Exumple Light a candle. Put your hand befrre it. It is awakened before manages it - who plans it out? my photograph. The potential of the candle has come in. That is, my Now I will question a Gynae: Anything foreign in the body is thrown out of the system, then why not the foetus? Answer photograph has awakened its potential. And with it, it can now burm the negativity. You have seen a wall getting black out of such an etfect. me. Something nourishes it, looks after it and then throws it out at the right point of time. It is growing within and it does not trouble the mother, but in fact the Everything has a causal which keeps all the potential From causal to the gross move through the subtle Now what you happens, just as fragrance is the causal of mother's face changes while the whole the mother Earth, through that causal all energy of the being is transformed. Now flowers and trees come out Also for where does this beauty on the mother human being it is the carbon, How the See the nourishing and come from? looking after. It is so amazing to see its mother earth burns within herself, creates perfection, isn't it? this carhon within herself with the heat and that carbon becomes a part and parcel We think no end of our intelligence. But living in the presence of God, a small seed came and at the end of each a small cell within vou to create Amino Acids. So the mother knows. at the causal level. she knows what you are. The causal is the Nirakar in the Shakti form while the came out. The intelligence which this cell has, if it is to come to man then Sahaja Yoga would be fully established. It Deities are in the Sakaar to use it. They

 52 7 &B July Aug Volume : XI Issue 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze straight away, see its own direction It see a stone, it does not fight with it, it just are free. Now it is in this freedom, when lots and lots is lost and gone, then human beings settle down. This freedom was zoes around it and binds it so that later given at Adam and Eve level. If they were when it is to become a tree it will help in its foundation Then slowly, and easily it sensible, there would have been no problem. Now one has to pay too much reaches out towards the water. It has no prenmonition about where it will tind the for this freedom. Now just see what is happening to me in the midst of this level of water. I once experimented with a bumble bee. freedom But Now-a-days it is all working I applied some colour on to it as it used out. This living process cannot be to make its own house at my place Now explained to Science. The Scientists will not accept the Deities. So don't worry about them. If we don't have Scientists somehow that colour came to its wings One fine day I went to a place which was very far away, I saw the same bumble bee there Then she was seen again at my The greatest thing for all Scientists is to house How did she take on all these routes She must be having some magnet. explained to them. Say Sulphur di-oxide what is the harm, we will not miss them. see for themselves. Nothing can be Also how do birds find their homes from has got vibrations that electromagnetic Symmetric and Iso- are Australia to Siberia? You see they all are in collective and Symmetric. They just state what they see. absolutely Homogeneous And they all They will see in Sahaja Yoga what it is, you give them the facts and let them experience it, How can you show them anything Scientifically? move together. This is all for the P'ashu state of the Pashus (animals). But we humans are no longer pashus, we

 全051



----------------------

1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July-August, 1999
Volume Y fssue :7 & 8
"So this (Sahaja Yoga) is not just a conversion of people. It is not only even
transformation but it is a new fashioning of a new human being which has come
forward and which is capable of carrying the will of God further."
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Editorial
Shivratri Puja -(14-2-99)
3.
Shri Mataji Starts N.G.O.
Diwali Puja (25-10-98)
Guru Puja 1998- (A Report)
17
Krishna Puja 1998 - (A Report)
19
Diwali Puja in Italy, 1998 (A Report)
23
News from Around the world
27
Smile of the Adi Shakti
29
30
Invocation for the cleansing of America
Shri Mataji's Talk with Dr. Talwar 27-2-87
37
Edited by : Yogi Mahajan
:V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
Published by
New Delhi-110 067
Admission Notice
Fresh Admissions to International Sahaja Public School, Dharamshala,
have started. Please apply for application forms immediately. The last
date for Registration for admission is 31.10.99
Admission Fees is As 42,000/- (Rupees Forty-two Thousand only)
Please write to:-
International Sahaja Public School
Talnoo, Dharamshala, Cantt, H.P. India.
Phone-01892-21766, 21416, 21225, 21954.
Fax : No. 21535
7,
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 July Aug
1999
Volume: XI Issue 7 & 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
Editorial
was not a coincidence that when "O Great Spirit
Columbus discovered America, he Whose voice speaks in the winds, and in
thought it was India. It was not a the trees:
coincidence that native Americans were
Whose breath gives lift to all the world.
called Red Indians. It is not a coincidence
that the land of Shri Krishna should be
blessed by Shri Kubera It is not a
coincidence that the land of Shri Krishna
Listen to your creature!
Hear all!
I am small and weak.
should be the Vishudhi Chakra of the
I need the power that you give
universe and an instrument of global
communication. It is not a coincidence I need the wisdom that you give.
that our Divine Mother purchased 140 Let me walk in beauty,
acres of Native American land called
And let my eyes be glad, beholding the
red & purple dawn.
Cannajoharil.
America is the abode of Shri Krishna and
Make my hands touch all things you made
therefore bears a primordial connection
with love,
with its motherland India". Shri Krishna's
And help my ears to hear your voice in
sister Vishnumaya cast her Divine maya
on Christopher Columbus. Under her
illusion he thought he had discovered
India, and called the Natives-Red Indians.
everything"
It was not a coincidence that on 20th June
1999, the year of your Divine Mother,
Sahaja yogis from all over the globe
congregated at the sacred land of
Cannajoharil to worship Shri Adishakti.
It is also not a coincidence that the word
No doubt the Natives were of Indian
origin. Their spiritual belief in the soul and
the Adishakti as the creator of the universe
and also the worship of nature originated
from the ancient Aryans who inhabited
India They revered the mother Earth and
Cannajoharil' in Native Indian language
means "The seif cleansing Vessel". The
seekers of modern times had to come here
worshipped the primordial Kundalini as
the Holy Spirit. This is revealed in their
for their inner cleaning. The ancient Red
Indian prophecy of the "White Buffalo'
prayer
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 July Aug
The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
1999
2.
testifies that "a lady of all powers in whom
light appears will come here to heal the
Sick Nation.
the great law and labour together for the
welfare of man."
On the 20th of June 99 messengers of
The great Red Indian peace maker peace from all nations of the world met
Deganawidah prophesied; that in
Cannajoharil "A council fire of all the pledged before Shri Adishakti to bring
nations shall be kindled. All shall receive world peace.
on the sacred soil of Cannajoharil and
May Shri Adishakti show us the way to honor
Our sacred pledge
May Shri Adishakti remove all obstacles in the
Way of our holy pledge
May Shri Adishakti protect us from falling into
Temptations and illusions
May the goddess America-re-shwari save the lost
Children of America and
Allow them a taste of the sweet Ambrosia
that eternally flows from Her Lotus Feet.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 July Aug
Volume XI issue : 7 & 8
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Shivratri Puja '99
Delhi, 14/02/99
It is a very long lecture I have given in others, to have envy for others, all these
Hindi Language because there are very reactions within us act and our heart
become like a stone. It cannot reflect. You
telling them was that the principle of Shiva have to reflect the quality of Shiva, which
is in your heart and that reflection is not is very important today in this Kaliyuga
on a Chakra but like a mirror. Now There are very few people who are really
whatever is visible of you is this mirror. reflecting the image of Shiva in their own
In this mirror what reflection you have? character So. it is important to watch
Do you have a reflection which is clear, yourself and see for yourself as to what
clean ? Have you cleansed your heart? is wrong with you. Where is my attention
Have you cleansed your mirror that is going? Where am I going? What am I
doing? Go on judging yourself and not
others. One of the Western things is that
Now what I told them at length was this they think they have a right to criticise
that how there are six enemies we have others, everybody. I like it. I do not like
got and all these six enemies, one after it Who are you? Why do you say that?
another try to corrupt us. Out of that I Somebody has made a beautiful, say,
have told them about five. The sixth does arrangement for you. you sit in his house
few Sahajayogis from abroad. What I was
reflecting? That is what one has to see.
not exist much in India which we call as nicely and say I do not like it, to hurt that
lust. It is much lèss but for foreign
countries one has to know that it is one you think of yourself? Who are you to
of the major things that they have in the judge? For Sahajayogis it is prohibited to
West because they think that lustful life say, I like and I do not like. It is prohibited.
is the only life worth living.
person. After all, who are you? What do
Look at Shiva. He likes everything. What
he wears, also snakes. He likes all kinds
of animals, every type of thing that we
think is not good, but for him they are
not. For example in his Wedding he took
with him, in his Baraat, people who were
all infirm. Some people had one leg, some
Bevond that is Shiva and that is why we
have to understand that in our heart the
reflection of Shiva is only possible, in
complete form. when we have cleansed
our heart. To have malice for others, to
have lust for others, to have anger for
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 July Aug
1999
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
beings into selfhood, into self awareness,
into the spirit. This has to be done and
the time has come. This evolutionary
process has started. There are so many
of them who have got it.
people had limbs broken down, some had
only one eye. All such people he carried
with him. To him these people were very
dear and he looked after them. Because
he is the source of joy. He is the one who
gives us joy and the one that makes us
Now the old saints and people who were
Gurus, real Gurus, they used to really test
joyous.
The real joy is only possible if in your the disciples by making them stand on
hearn his reflection is there, but if your their heads for years together. Sometimes
heart is full of all these things, then, once put them in the water, do all kinds of
I described, it becomes a dirty, very very things. They used to beat them and they
were very harsh testing all of them and
then only one of them used to get
realisation. Now what I thought of is, that
it takes too much time to cleanse them,
dirty mirror.
Very surprising. I told them also that
compared to Indians, Westerners are not
so particular, Western Sahajayogis are not
so particular about their comforts.
Though they come from a very
materialistic surroundings, they are not
so much bothered. They can live
anywhere. They can be happy anywhere.
to put them into all kinds of dresses, this,
that, send them to Himalayas or to Gobi
Desert. I thought it will take too much
time. I said why not first enlighten, give
them the light? In that light they can see
their problems and they will themselves
That is a very good stage they have
reached and that is what the Indians must
try to follow, and do not pay attention to
nonsensical things. It is not necessary to
waste your energy on nonsensical things.
correct themselves. They will be their
own Guru and it was successful, it was
good. Now you can see for yourself what
you are doing, what is your problem, what
makes you so much different from others
Then only you can have real Bhakti for
your Self, for your Atma and that is what Shiva's place is above the head, above
is needed today that your spirit should your thoughts, above your mind, above
shine in your character, in your behaviour your emotions. It is here and you have to
and in your personality. If that happens
then you have achieved what Sahajayoga
wanted to do for you. It is important Only when you do not react to things and
today, very important. If you read the
and what will elevate you because Sada
cross this limit.
also to you, nothing is more important
than Shiva, then only it will work out.
newspaper you cannot read it and what
you need is to change, the transformation So, in somethings Indians have to learn
and in somethings you foreigners have to
as we in Hindi call it Parivartan of human
Lrank
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 July - Aug
Volume XI Issue : 7 & 8
1999
666
The Divine Cool Breeze
learn. So many things you have done I to contribute for N.G.O, you are allowed
must thank you very much People used
to think that I cannot do anything. You of people who want to work it out This
have given up drinking, you have given
up all kinds of bad habits. You are not our attention for people who are in great
womanisers. Your attention is so clean. trouble around us.
to contribute. We have a very good team
is something I thought that we must have
So many things you have done which is
really praiseworthy but still you must
learn that still there are certain things
lingering which must be cleared out and
must be absolutely finished.
So, this N.G.O. will work for women who
are left by their husbands, by their
families, who have nobody to be looked
after by, and also their children. Still I have
not made the whole plan but before
starting Sahajayoga I used to do lots of
things like that. So I have quite a lot of
experience. Our attention should be really
towards people who are in trouble now,
You do not have very much politics but
sometimes there is also politics. Group
forming is there. All these has to go away
because for Shiva what is this. The
as we are now blessed with Divine Power.
Universe is at his feet. To have one group
here and one group there, all that does
not matter to Him. It does not come into
his head, you see. For a person, like very
big ocean, it touches many shores but in
itself it is a big ocean. In the same way is
Shiva principle and you all should develop
that principle of Shiva and then see the
joy, the joy of this great ocean of love.
May God bless you.
We should look after those who really
deserve our attention. You will be very
happy to know about women who are
destitutes, recommended by Sahajayogis
will be a better idea and it can be worked
out very well. So far we have not got any
application of women who want to have
protection. Also we are going to teach
them different arts and crafts and things
so that within two years they will be able
to stand on their legs and there would
not be any more beggars on the street.
Talk on NG0-Delhi - 13-2-99
We have started one N.G.O. for destitute Firstly we will make them Sahajayogis.
women and children, plus we will be Then we will work it out and I am sure
having a hospital here. As you know we you will like the idea of having one
have been rumning a good hospital in
Belapur near Vashi, New Bombay and this
hospital will be in Noida. Today. you will
be happy to know that we have now taken
the land in Noida, and we are going to
start our work there. Whatever you want
N.G.O. here.
Then the second one will be starting near
Bombay, Vaitarna That I had planned
before, about fifteen years back but they
would not give us permission. Now it has
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 1999
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
July Aug
The Divine Cool Breeze
been finalised. We have got the
permission. So, I want to start an
organization where to educate boys and
girls but mostly first boys we are trying.
Those boys who have failed in 8th class
and 9th class, to learn some vocational
for writing that book which I did fifteen
years back but the Government was so
bad, it would not give me permission.
Luckily now with this BJP Government I
have been able to get the permission and
we are going to do it in a very big way
and there are many people who are
coming forward to help me in that
venture. So now Sahajayoga is spreading
outward to give sustenance and help to
people who require real help from people.
This is a new movement of Sahajayoga
and I hope it will be successful.
things like small small things. We do not
have good electricians, good plumbers,
all kinds of things like that. So they will
also stand on their legs because after
failing in the 9th class or 8th class, they
have nothing to do. They are absolutely
in trouble. This I started 15 years back.
Now Mr. Amartya Sen has written it now,
I mean not in such good details. But he
has written and he got now a Noble Prize
Thank you.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 July Aug
Volume XI Issue : 7& 8
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
DIWALI PUJA - CABELLA 25-10-98
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Diwali Puja is a very small Puja but starting I went to the waiting room andI
extremely significant. Firstly, in Diwali, was surprised, she was sitting in the
the first day they buy something for the waiting room there! I said, "What are you
family. May be some cooking utensil, doing here? They are all waiting for you
could be an ornament for the wife or outside." So she said, they asked me to
something else, because that is the day of sit here. So, I went out and I told them
housewife and that day is to be celebrated that now she is sitting there. Why don't
as the housewife's, I should say, homage you call her to sit in her seat? "Is she the
to her. As a result you know in India, even wife?" I said, of course, "she is the wife."
now, housewives are very much We thought she was some secretary!
respected. Actually they are respected all said what made you think? This lady, you
over. You will be amazed that even in the see, was wearing modern ideas, wearing
protocol of the Government Receptions a very modern silk dress and all that and
anywhere, the wife is very important., everybody thought that this lady must be
Where she is sitting, what is her position, the secretary at the most. So they made
is very important. Even today, in the most her sit in the waiting room. So, it is
modern and advanced countries also they expected of a housewife to be decently
have a special respect for the housewife. dressed, honourably dressed and not to
Housewife may not be educated, she may dress up like a secretary or somebody
be a very simple woman, she may not be who is just in the office because she is
regarded as the highest whether you like
it or not. But she had combed her hair
There was an experience for me. In and she has been to & very expensive place
London we had a Programme where we for all decorations and everything, and
all were invited and the wife of the head poor thing when she arrived, they put her
of the delegation was missing. So they in the waiting room near the bath room.
very modern.
asked me where is she because there is a
That is what it is.
seat for her. She has to sit there. I said, I
So, for a housewife, she is the dignity of
the house. Not only that but she is
don't know. I did not see her. She must
be somewhere here. So just before
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 July Aug
1999
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
responsible for the complete culture of kind of a great collectivity of housewives
that country, complete culture of that that has to work out. They have common
country. They represent the culture. Like problems, they have to face their children,
in India now they have started, in the they have to look after the households,
films, showing all kinds of things, funny everything. I mean there are so many
funny dresses but I have not seen any common problems with the housewives
housewife wearing that. I have not seen
and the housewife also knows all little
anybody. It is not in reality. It is only in
the films, because the society is so strong
little things.
Men, atleast in India, do not know much
because they live in the air, I think. So,
and the housewife is supposed to be a
decent person. She has to be decent. She
the women have more sense in this
has to be very dignified and she has to
behave in a dignified manner.
respect for small small things. They are
quite aware. It is very interesting.
On the contrary, I would say, we had a Sometimes the men commit mistakes of
Prime Minister called Lal Bahadur such a great humour because they do not
deal with day to day life, with all the
problems of daily life. On one side, the
Shastri. His wife was absolutely
uneducated because Shastriji went to jail
woman housewife has to deal with the
and she could not take her education.
daily life, on the other side she has to look
after her family, her children. Also, poor
thing, she is responsible for the society,
she has to maintain the society. In a
Very simple ordinary woman. She went
to France. That time there was this
Mr. Degol. He was the President and his
wife was another very simple woman. So
country where women are sensible and
Shastriji told her that you are not to cry
when we are leaving Mrs Dogol. Now are matured, you will be amazed that they
we have become great friends. God become extremely good families, good
knows, she did not know French, she did societies and good children. That is why
not know Hindi but somehow both of Imust say India is a very good country, a
them became great friends, on the level very good society. This has come out of
of housewives. He warned her not to cry. the housewives, the Gruhalaxmis of the
What happened that they started crying house, who have done all the work. That
when they had to leave. So Shastriji said, is important as far as the culture is
I told you not to cry. She said that it is concerned. This kind of thing is very much
she, this French Lady started crying, what in India and with that what you find that
can I do? I had to cry. So you see it is the people respect, respect the housewives.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 July Aug
1999
Valume: XI lssue: 7 & B
The Divine Cool Breeze
So, respecting the housewife is the most
important thing in our Sahaja culture but
if they do not show any respect, the
children can never respect the mother. It
is something criminal to do to women
that does not mean that the women should
try to dominate and trouble and fight with who are in the household, doing all the
the husbands but it means a very work for you, looking after you, your
important position in the society of a family, not demanding anything
housewife. She is treated as something
Only if you want to understand how they
can be troublesome, see them in the
like a Devi but she too has to be a Devi
If you treat her like a doormat then
children will never respect her. If you do
Ppolitics. When they go in the politics, they
put all men upside down and one woman
can put all of them in their proper senses
not pay proper respect to her, the children
will not respect the mother and there will
be no impact of the mother on the because their field is their house, their
children. As a result the children get family. If they are not respected in the
waivered That is why in the society or in family, they get out of the family and
the countries where the mother is not
behave in such a manner that you can't
respected, you will find the children imagine. Though she has to bear a lot,
become extremely dominating, hot she has to suffer a lot, but in the family.
tempered and horribly uncollective.
she must be respected. That is a very very
important message of Gruhalaxmi.
So, it is very important that on this day.
Then the second day is the one where this
we call it Dhan Teras, the 13th day, you
horrible Rakshsa called as Narkasura was
have to buy something for vour wife and
killed. Always all killing is done with the
power of the Shakti. This Narkasura was
the fellow who had tortured so many
people and had turned lots of cunning
stuff. He was a very treacherous cunning
you have to give her something as a
present. Atleast you should buy a little
pot or something that can be used in the
kitchen to show your respect to her. In
the families where mother is not
man and it was impossible to kill him. But
then, somehow e the other, with the
advent of a special power that this
Narkasura was killed. That was the
respected, children become extremely
troublesome and the whole of their family
also sutfers, wherever they are married,
whatever happens to them. Men have to
realise it is their mistake that they have
another day, fourth day when Narkasura
was killed. They say that when he was
killed the door of hell was closed. So
reople should take their baths early in the
never respected their wives as they should
have In the presence of the children if
they shout, in the presence ofthe children
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
July Aug
1999
: 7 & 8
Volume : XI issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
morning, but I am of the opinion that, that
day if the door is opened, better not to
take bath. Be in your beds till this fellow
he was crowned also as the King. So it is
long time back, thousands of years back,
this thing has happened. That jubilation
is very significant, that the right king gets
is put fully into Narak. You should not
his own throne and he rules and all
bother about him. Narak means Hell and
injustice and all kinds of atrocities he has
from the Hell they extracted him and
killed him.
gone through, has to be completely
finished from his life and that is why
Diwali is important.
The last one is the best where they have
the meeting of Sri Rama and his brother
Bharata. Shri Rama went to jungle
obeying his father and for 14 years he was
in the forest. It was a kind of a jail only
because from palaces he was sent to the
forest by his father. His wife and also the
brother, they went into great sufferings
and you know the whole story of
So the last day they worship the Goddess
Laxmi because it is her blessings that
brought forth all these beautiful meetings
and that is why they worship Laxmi, as I
said. But there are nine types of Laxmis
now within us which I think 1 have told
you sometimes back. Now in that Laxmi
Puja, is this that you worship the Laxmi
herself. It does not mean money, not at
all. To worship money is wrong. What it
means that Laxmi is the money which is
with us or whatever prosperity is with us
should be very carefully spent because she
is very mobile and the money can slip out.
Ramayana. The child that lived in the
palaces had to go in the forest and live in
terrible conditions when he was to be the
King. It was too much but Sita went with
him and she supported him and ultimately
it so happened that Ravana came and took
away Sita. Shri Rama fought Ravana,
On the contrary you should not be at all
miserly. With a miserly people, Laxmi is
not happy, but if you want to spend, you
must spend it in the right way otherwise
killed him and brought back his wife.
When they came back to their own capital
in Ayodhya, there was a big jubilation,
and Bharat, his brother, he was very much
the money is spent in the wrong way. Now
when the Laxmi was created, must be out
attached to his brother and he ruled that
country with the 'Paduka', they say, is a
kind of Sandalwood Chappals they used,
of the churning of the Sea she came out.
of his brother. He put it on the throne She had four hands. One hand was to
and ruled. So that is how the Bharat give, she is generous. She gives, like this
she gives and with one hand she blesses.
Milap, the meeting of Bharat with Shri
These are her two hands, one is to give
Ram, is celebrated and that was the time
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 July Aug
1999
11
Volume : XI issue: 7 & 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
and to bless the person. Very important it inside and sleeps very nicely and
is that when you give to somebody comfortably. Even the beetle, is
something you forget about it and you undisturbed. That is how one should treat,
bless that person. Now only you give if you have money. But here, what I find
money but also you bless that person. in the world now, if your have money you
Other two hands have got two lotuses of become yourself like a beetle. It is so full
of thorns and horrible ideas, so insulting
and think no end of yourself. Just
surprising that money we should give
them, the form of Laxmi, Laxmi Sarupa
they become like Devils and the way they
pink colour. Pink is the colour of love and
a person who has money should have a
house which is full of love. Any guest who
comes in the house should be respected.
He should be treated just like God.
treat other people is even worst than that.
So this is the significance of the form of
the Goddess but the best is she is just
standing on the lotus. That means no
In India, you have noticed how they think
of foreigners Foreigners means God to
them. Here foreigner is a bad word but in
India it is very respectable. If you are
foreigner means you are God. How they
have looked after, you know that, in
India! This is the reason. This is the basic
pressure on anyone. She exists on her
own. No pressure. She does not put any
pressure on any one. Just on her own she
stands and all her weight and all balance
TH
culture of India that anybody who is a
guest, he may be anything, if he is a guest,
then he is to be treated like God. In other
on her own dignity.
This is the way a Laxmi should be and
that is how if it happens, in the countries
countries it is just the other way round,
where people are now having financial
crises and all kinds of crises, things will
improve. People will enjoy. They do not
enjoy their money, nothing. They do not
enjoy. This is just aggressiveness and also
funny ideas of ha ving something very
expensie thing when whst you call the
deslgners. Nowv I think these designers
are anti Laxcmi that they have come
you know. If vou are a foreigner then
people think that it is not even proper to
talk to them. I do not know how the
mentality is like that, but not in
Sahajayoga. Sahajayogis are not like that.
They treat the guests very well. I have
heard, they look after each other and they
are beautifully collective. So this is what
is the meaning of the Lotuses, is the house
full of love. Like a beetle which has got
because they are extracting all your
money nicely and all your money goes to
even thorns, when it comes to the lotus,
waste. If not that, then people take to
the lotus opens out and the beetle goes
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 July Aug
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
12
The Divine Cool Breeze
1999
dresser. I said I did not know this, they
womanising or to drinking, such wasteful
habits. They do not do anything which
you can call as really the blessings of the
do not go to the hair dressers. That is
why they think that you are from the royal
family. Just imagine what ideas people
have about hair dressing and all that. But
in India or these places a woman must be
Laxmi.
So one has to remember that when you
want to give something to someone, do
properly combed up. She should not look
it with the full heart. Such full heart that
it forms that Laxmi Prasada. So that
should happen, otherwise what is the use
like a hippy going around, because we
have many people who still believe in a
kind of a hyppism and they wear their hair
of giving presents to any one? They are
very funny people, you know, who give
presents out of their very narrow outlook
but they try to give presents. Like in
Japan, if you go, they will give you such
a big present. You go on opening and
opening and opening and opening, till you
come to a point where you will get a
match box. In the match box inside you
will take to, you can say, two doll like
things made out of small little match
sticks. Start looking at it, what it is. Why
such a big design and very surprising. But
they are very simple people otherwise,
very simple. When we went there they
told us wherever we went, you know,
even in a shop, when it was raining, they
would give us a present. I said, what is
this. Why are they giving us a present like
this? So the lady who was translating, she
said they think you are from a royal family.
I said what makes them feel we are from
dress like that.
Now woman plays a very big part in the
society as I told you. Whatever way she
wears, whatever she goes about also, the
children become much more, from the
mother than from the father. Sometimes
could be much more from the father also.
But actually all the fine things are picked
up from the mother. So it is more for the
ladies to understand how they dress up,
how they live. I went to London and
asked one Indian Sahajayogini what is the
fashion now. So she said, 'Jhipria' in
Marathi. Jhipria,' means if you put your
hair like this. See in India if you have hair
like this, the mother will say now remove
your Jhiprias because if you put your hair
like that, your eyes can become squint.
But that is the fashion to put the hair like
this, you see, very much, sometimes on
the eyes also. So that is the 'Jhipria'
fashion and this now is quite common, I
find, everybody, dignified ladies also,
except for Mrs. Thatcher, everybody puts
a royal family? Because you do not go to
hair dressers. I said, really. Yes, in Japan
royal family people never go to a hair
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 July Aug
Volume: XI Issue : 7& 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
1999
(13
his character. It is alright. You must know
that he does not mean it because he really
does not know anything. Also in art, I do
on this kind of a thing. I do not know
how Mrs. Thatcher has escaped it? But
anybody who does anything that should
not be followed by women, it is very
not think men know much about art Also
their one side is missing, that is aesthetics.
Poor things they make one type of dress.
wear all throughout. Just one type of
dress they will make and that they will
make and wear throughout. They do not
have any demand. But women are artistic.
If our Indian women give up wearing
sarees and take to jeens where will the
slavish Because this is the fashion that is
why they do, that is the fashion, so they
do. It is absolutely stupid to do that way
and to play into the hands of these people
who make fashions. You are independent,
must stand on your own character, must
stand on your own understanding of
things. Instead of ruining your faces, you
villagers go, because they live with the
sarees that they make during holidays and
should try to improve them by your
dignity, by your understanding. Now it is
things like that. So, in India, it is not
possible to introduce all these dresses. In
more on the women, I am sorry to say,
Laxmi Puja is more on the women, That
is why they have to understand, what they
have to be, how they should do.
the school, may be, but later on they all
give up because they like sarees. So the
sarees are still on and will be on because
it is so artistic, it is so beautiful. One saree
does not look like another saree. So the
idea of beauty and the idea of art is much
1 have already told you that it is necessary
for a woman to be dignified, very much
more than the man. Men can be stupid,
does not matter, you see, does not matter
so much but women have to be dignified
and sensible. And men as it is do not know
much as you know very well. Poor things.
more with the women not with the men
and so one should see that if men do not
know, does not matter but you make your
houses absolutely artistic. Make it
comfortable like the lotus as I said, that
should be such. But some of the ladies
you know: They are educated only in
Universities but as far as the practical side
is concerned, they do not know anything.
So. one should not feel bad about it.I in the household, very dictating. It should
can be very much like a Hitler, you know,
mean it is very enjoyable to see the way
men make mistakes and then they go on
be like this, that should be like that,
making the life of men absolutely
saying, No, No, I know this, I know that.
They do not know anything. But men will
never say I do not know, you see. That is
miserable. I have known a person who
used to carry a newspaper in his house. I
said, why you carry this all the time. He
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 1999
14
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
July Aug
The Divine Cool Breeze
were sixteen thousand people. So, how
could we give these presents. So, the
women took out their chains and they said
alright we will give it to men. Alright, we
will give them our ear tops, alright, and
they were making fun of men who were
feeling bad that they could not get
said, whenever I sit, I put the newspaper
first and then I will sit. Why, because if it
is spoiled a little bit, my wife will shout
at me. I said, why. Because she does not
like anything to be spoiled. So she is so
particular. I carry a newspaper always
with me wherever I have to sit I put the
anything. Such fun, you know, much
understanding because they are not so
money oriented, I think, and they are very
spiritual men. So a spiritual woman
should not bother about other things like
this and will keep a dignity of her own
and will show by her every gesture that
newspaper. I said, it is too much. He said,
you will also have to do that, I tell you.
So very particular about the whole house
that it is impossible to live in that house
and is even worse than a hospital. So,
some women can be very particular about
that and very methodical but normally
women should be very loving and she is spiritual. This is something so
extremely accommodating and also being sweet, you know.
friendly with all the family members, with
As I was telling you, on one side
every one.
sometimes you feel little different. Say, I
said it about Japan. But in the same Japan
when I went there I liked their tiles very
much. So they were building up
something. I liked the design of that tiles.
I said, can I take one from here. No, No.
does not matter. We will send it to your
ship, and on the ship a big load of those
This is very important that our family is
so big. We have a very large family, so
many brothers and sisters and everybody-
one better than the other. It is so
remarkable that every body has a different
type of a perfume, I think, or a kind of a
fragrance that shows an individual
personality in them. Despite that they are
also nice and so good, so accommodating
and so much enjoying that it is remarkable
how people live together! Especially in
tiles was there, and the Captain asked me
what are we to do. I said, how did you
get it? He said, they brought it to you
kinds of varieties of those tiles, can you
all
imagine? So, on one side it is a way of
expression, on the other side it is different.
So, one should understand also when
Russia I found the women are very
adoptable and very humorous and they
were making fun of everything and
enjoying life. Very surprising. We had
taken presents for them but we have taken
some body gives you something you
should understand what is the significance
of that and not to feel bad about that. The
for about two thousand people but there
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 July Aug
1999
15
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
to give, then you must give something
significance of that could be very much
great, you may not understand. So, better which is worth the person whom you are
to ask why they have given you these giving. That is one of the lessons you
things. That is what is, what we call should have about Shri Rama's
auspiciousness.
temperament.
One of the great qualities of the Laxmi is
that it should be auspicious. Whatever
you give, should be auspicious. Like
sometimes I have seen little children out
of mischief will bring a lizard and try to
give me. I mean it is very inauspicious to
do that but they are not told, you see,
that it is inauspicious. So, they are doing
like that. They are to be told that it is not
auspicious, it will not please the Goddess.
So, that has to be understood very well
When he went into the village he found
there was an old woman, and this old
woman had all her teeth out practically
and she was from the aboriginals and she
gave him some, we call them Ber, is
something like a kind of a fruit, small fruit
and she said, see l have tasted all of them
and all of them are very sweet because
you should not have something which is
not sweet. So I have tasted them with my
teeth. I have put my teeth on to them and
that you should not try to insult the Laxmi
by giving something which is wrong. If
you do not know, you should find out and
do it properly.
I have tasted. So please have them.
Immediately he took it. But this brother
Lakshmana got very angry that it is very
inauspicious in India, if you have put
In this way, this is the Diwali thing but something in the mouth and then you
want to give it to somebody. It is
something not to be done. Shri Rama said.
the greatest message of this is that the
Kingdom was given to Shri Rama. Shri
"I have never eaten such beautiful fruits.
Rama was the embodiment of justice and
fair play and this was given to him, In the
They are the most beautiful fruits I haye
ever eaten!" So, his wife says, give me
same way we have to feel that our
some, after all, I am your half. You must
expression of gratitude, our expression
of love should be such that it should be
give. So Shri Rama gave her some. She
given to a person who is a symbol of such said, "wao, what a thing it is,
tremendous." She ate it and then
greatness like Shri Rama.
Lakshmana says, give me also, sister-in-
law. She said, just now you were saying
all kinds of things against this lady. Why
It is a very very subtle thing one should
try to understand. If you do not want to
give, you should not give but if you want
do you want to have it. He said, now
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 July Aug
Volume XI Issue : 7 & 8
16
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
value of money and when you are
please forgive me.
saturated and you are fed up, from
inside, you get detached, then a new
see her love, her vibrations in those fruits form of Laxmi comes forward, that is
that she had offered and he could Mahalaxmi. That is the power which
appreciate to that extent that he gave it takes you higher and higher, which is
to his wife and the wife also joined hands the spiritual awakening. You have seen
with him. This is what it is that whatever in all the countries which are very rich,
So you see it shows that Shri Rama could
you do, you do it with love. If you do it
with love, you will be able to make it the truth. They should find out the truth
auspicious but if there is no love, you are
just doing for some purpose, then it is means Mahalakshmi power started
useless. So this is what is there for giving. working in you that you were seeking
this desire started that they should seek
and that is how you are all here. That
Giving to the person like Shri Rama and
to such a great incarnation, she just you came to Sahaja Yoga. So. this
the truth and while seeking the truth
thought of her love and she gave it to him.
In the same way you have to be very
simple, simple hearted and then you will
Mahalaxmi is very important for you also
and you know, in Kolhapur there is a
temple of this Mahalxmi which came out
know what is the best to be done.
of the Mother Earth but they themselves
did not know that in that temple why they
So, today, actually the Diwali is over and
I want to wish you again and again a
Happy Diwali and a very prosperous new
sang Jogwa. It is said that Oh Ambay,
awaken. Ambay is the Kundalini. So why
in Mahalaxmi's temple they sing? You can
understand that why in that temple they
started singing the song of Jogwa by
year. May God Bless you all.
The same Laxmi becomes Maha
Laxmi i.e. when you understand the which to raise the Kundalini.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 July Aug
17
1999
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
Guru Puja, 1998
(A Report)
It was quite a powerful Puja weekend. video from Russia where a Russian
As you all know, at Guru Puja there are physicist was able to show some of his
representatives from all the countries in research work. He has proved by
the world where Sahaja Yoga has been scientific theories that Shri Mataji is
practiced. The Italian's organization was
fantastic. For Shri Adi Shakti Puja, the It became even more impressive when
the source of infinite cosmisc energy.
hangar was moved to the next village, Sir C.P. was able to give some more
Albera, which is a 7-8 minute drive from details about this, as well as talk about
the Royal Albert Hall program. The
"downtown Cabella."
Friday night program also featured
Nirmal Sangeet Sarita, some new songs
The Italians had organized a shuttle van
service between the hangar and Cabella
and qawwalis.
every 30 minutes. This new place is very
Shri Mataji was very busy the whole
weekend with Her family who had come
over from India. The Saturday night
practical for many reasons. Firstly, it gives
Shri Mataji and Her family some privacy
and secondly, this place is just next to the
river which made a heavenly difference
for the yogis.
program started around 9:00 p.m. after
the arrival of Shri Mataji. The concert
began with a great young artist from
The host countries had invited Nirmal Nagpur Music Academy who played
Sangeet Sarita (about 8 artists) and the sarod on the synthesizer. It was quite
famous sitarist, Nishad Khan, for the remarkable. After that, the Italians did
entertainment program. Shri Mataji did
not attend the Friday night program as Kuchipudi dance, Bitaratanatyam, and a
She had spent the whole day sorting out Panjabi Bhangra dance which was
many other matters related to the Puja excellent.
quite an amazing program. They had
weekend. Nevertheless, we had the
Then there was a very nice drama with
honour of having Sir C.P. for the Friday
night program. Shri Mataji had expressed
the desire earlier that morning to show a
some TEV artists. There was also a
doçumentary on Sici!,: it was about how
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Volume. XI Issue : 7 & 8
July Aug
18
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
9:30 p.m. for the Puja. It was a very short
but very powerful Puja and speech. Shri
Mataji talked a lot about gravity in a guru.
People should automatically be attracted
toward a guru. She said that She would
the respect for the Mother has been
established so strongly in Italy and Sicily.
The most important thing about this film
was that it was directed by Shri Mataji's
grandson, Anand Verma. She was quite
be very happy to see at least a few yogis
who can be good gurus with all the
qualities ofthe Guru principle. Shri Mataji
said times in Her speech that She
pleased with it.
After that, Nirmal Sangeet came back on
the stage and it was quite profound
many
concert. Then Shri Mataji invited Nishad
expects every single Sahaja Yogi to
become a Sahaja Guru and spread Sahaja
Yoga.
Khan to come to the stage. In his own
words, it was his best performance. He
started with Raga Darbari and also
Shri Mataji also asked the Yogis to write
played Raga Bahar and./ri.ai Vanti. The
entertainment program ended after 4:00
a.m. After that Shri Mataji asked the yogis
their miracle stories and send them to
Cabella. She has asked for a book to be
published on miracle stories.
to go and enjoy the moonlight by the river.
On Sunday. Shri Mataji arrived at around
-Manoj Kumar, USA
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 July Aug
19
1999
7 & B
Volume XI issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
Krishna Puja, 1998
(A Report)
serving area (including half of a 200-year-
old stone house recently purchased by
Shri Mataji). This was the first time that
this new house was used to prepare the
food for the seminar. Serving food was
fun and very easy, since the large pots only
Krishna Puja 1998 was held in Albera,
near the quaint village of Cabella Ligure,
Italy Yogis and yoginis from every part
of the earth gathered together to celebrate
and worship Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi in the form of Lord Shri
Krishna. The puja was hosted by about
had to be carried a few metres from the
150 Americans who came from North
fire to the serving tables.
and South America, Canada, USA,
The tent and cooking areas each connect
Brazil, Colombia. Argentina. Penu, and
other countries within Shri Krishna's vast
territory.
to a large parking area which is out of
sight of the main road. Beyond the food
area is the access road, then the hangar
where the ladies stay. Below the hangar
is a flat open area which Shri Mataji
requested not to be used for parking. And
below everything is the cool, refreshing
river. There was time every day for the
Stage backdrops were brought from
South America, Canada and USA. Each
of the three nights in the hangar featured
a different backdrop.
From the first time, all puja stage hosts to take a break from cooking,
preparation, food preparation, serving,
accommodation, parking and river
serving, constructing or cleaning, and sink
blissfully into the reinvigorating and
calming river currer t.
splashing were all close together,
alongside the river. The new
arrangement, set up by Shri Mataji, puts The new layout is completed with a villa
all of the main puja activities in Albera, up on the side of the mountain in
the village just before Cabella. Below the Centrassi, a pleasant walk from the
main road to Cabella, and extending along hangar, between the hangar and Cabella.
the bank of the river, there is now a men's Shri Mataji purchased the villa so that host
tent area, then the food preparation and
country organizers would have a place to
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Volume: XI Issue : 7 & 8
20
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
July Aug
stay together near the hangar, to be able
to coordinate more easily. The view from
the balcony of the villa is breathtaking-
helping busy organizers to be in
thoughtless awareness. It is a quaint,
rustic yet spacious modern house where
we prepared collective meals before and
from within. There were several
performances by the South American
yogis, including displays of regional
costumes and dance styles. We were also
treated to songs performed by the Yuva
Shakti and a devotional, moving classical
Indian music performance by Deepak
Verma. There was also a performance by
the yogis of Vancouver of a lively Indian
after the seminar weekend, and has a
chance to strengthen the collectivity
bhangra dance in colourful costumes. The
festivities lasted well into the night, but
among the Americas.
Friday, August 14
at one point we all found a few hours of
The festivities began on Friday with sleep before the next day.
dinner served outside below the warm Saturday, August 15
evening sky. The evening was full of
happy reunions, especially those between
the children of the summer camp and their
Saturday was a day of cleansing in
preparation for the puja. Many yogis and
yoginis could be found foot soaking (and
parents. 150 or so children had
participated in the camp at Daglio-two
weeks of beautiful experiences with the
full-body soaking!) in the cool waters.
The day was sprinkled with a few
guidance of their moving aunties and raindrops. During the daytime hours
uncles, all living in Daglio where you throughout the weekend, some yogis
awake each morning to the mist slowly bought gifts for their Rakhi brothers and
rising off the adjacent mountain tops. sisters. The sweetly offered gifts included
Their days were spent enjoying song and lavender from Shri Mataji's garden, the
powerful music of Nirmal Sangeet Sarita
dance and crafts.
on a new cassette, the crafts of our
After dinner 800 or so of us gathered in brothers and sisters, or pictures of Her
the hangar to share in the creativity of Holiness in all Her Majesty.
our American brothers and sisters as they
presented us with a very lively
entertainment program. We were blessed
with the arrival of Shri Mataji, and then
In the late afternoon, everyone gathered
within the hangar to perform havan to all
aspects of Shri Krishna, praying to clear
the land of the Vishuddhi of adharma. The
Her instruments came to life in front of
Her expressing the creativity flowing havan was very powerful, identifying
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 July Aug
1999
21
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
laughter during a humorous skit about a
future Sahaja Yogi president of the United
States. (Shri Mataji was noticed enjoying
various aspects of distortion within the
Americas. We asked: O Devi, strengthen
us as Your divine instruments for the
cleansing of the land of Shri Krishna. Let
America be the source of ongoing
merriment, song and dance. Lord
Krishna's flute playing the delicate music
of the Divine will cure the Spirit of
America. We only ask that America starts
the skit very much). A theatrical depiction
of several scenes from Shri Krishna's life,
complete with original songs and
choreography, was well received. As
dandia stick dancers went to bed Sunday
morning, the rest of us rose for meditation
to listen to His divine rasa, the beautiful
and preparation for Puja!
poetry of His rhythm. In so doing, let
America-North, Central, and South-
become obedient to the inspiration of the
Divine. He is Nirmala Gamya, accessible
only through You.
Sunday, August 16
The Puja began after a late lunch. We all
settled down nicely before the arrival of
the Queen. As might be expected at
Krishna Puja, the expected sequence of
the parts of the puja was changed by
Shri Mataji. She asked that the
What powerful vibrations flooded the
hangar as the whole world prayed for
America. Our Global attention focussed
commemorative card containing the 108
names of Shri Krishna be passed out at
the beginning of the puja. When the names
on the crippling ature of materialism and
greed. With those two evils destroyed,
what a beautiful future America has to
were read, everyone in the hangar was
able to repeat each name without any
look forward to!
Saturday night was the continuation of difficulties. One of the names had been
the entertainment program. (There was changed by Shri Mataji before the puja.
too much for one night alone.) We were She wrote the corrected name on the
again floating on a cloud of joy as Shri
Mataji was again present in the audience. feather adorning His head).
card: Mormukntdhari (He has a peacock
We were privileged to hear the flute
playıng of Anand Murudeshwar. There She spoke te us about the aspect of
was more dancing, including a classical witnessing and not reacting. We were led
piece high-lighting Radha and Krisha (one gently through the steps of becoming
dancer was from the west coast of detached from our actions, deepening
Canada, the other from the east coast of ourselves through the principle of
USA). The hangar was filled with witnessing ourselves and life as it
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 July - Aug
22
7 & 8
1999
Volume : XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
that we were still in the darshan of the
Goddess Adi Shakti Herself. After She
had left, She instructed the world leaders
happens. The Puja was incredibly
powerful, full of so many lessons and
guidelines.
to go back and talk to the collective about
A hand-made decorative rakhi was
the protocol of respect in Her presence.
This message has not been emphasized
offered to Shri Mataji, artfully expressing
the rupa of Krishna, She held a pure gold
in recent years, and perhaps many people
sudarshan and then a flute. Fresh butter
are not cware of how important it is to
was offered in a large painted pot, which
was later distributed as prasad. Several
put all of our attention om Shri Mataji
while She is there to absorb vibrations.
commemorative gifts were offered to Shri
We all boarded buses and planes for our
respective countries soon after the puja.
Those of us who were lucky enough to
Mataji to vibrate for those who attended
the puja: an ink stamp of the Shri Chakra
which is the symbol of Vishwa Nirmala
Dharma, some hand-made miniature stay a few extra days went into Cabella
flutes, and hand-cut and painted dandia and relaxed, enjoying the company of
sticks. After receiving presents from all faces both old and new. We shared the
of the counties, Shri Mataji offered gifts fun and joy of having been in the presence
to all of the host country yogis who
attended the puja.
of the Adi Shakti and able to share
vibrations with hundreds of people.
The puja ceremony felt shorter than the
previous year's Krishna Puja. However,
at the time we decided the puja was
Having returned home, the change from
within that happened to each of us that
weekend stays with us and enhances our
being every day. In the days and weeks
*over.' after the Aarti Shri Mataji was still
seated on the stage in the hangar, afterwards, we have had lessons and
accepting gifts from various countries. experiences which have enhanced our
Many of us began to chat and scatter out ability to witness and not react and
attention. Before leaving the hangar, Shri
express our true collectivity. May we
continue to be Shri Krishna's Warriors of
Mataji Herself took the mierophone and
joy, today and everyday!
sitent and in a
reminded us to remain
meditative mood while She was still there.
--Melanie Rothenberg, Jack Cohen,
We hed collectively gotten tricked hy Her
Mark Taylor, USA.
gentle, non-assertive maya cmd forgotten
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 July Aug
Volume XI Issue : 7& 8
23
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Puja
Diwali
in Italy, October 23-25, 1998
(A Report)
On Saturday the weather was sunny and
pleasant, paving the way to spend the day
in Cabella near the river and hangar. We
had all come prepared to face cold and
wind, so it was especially refreshing to
be able to enjoy a day outside in the sun.
Lunch was served and we ate on the grass
Diwali Puja was originally scheduled to
take place in Portugal. but at the last
minute the venue was changed to Italy.
It was too cold to stay in the hangar, so a
heated sports arena was secured in Novi
Ligure about a 40-minute drive from
Cabella. Maps and directions were
strategically placed in Cabella near the
hangar and on the Internet, and somehow
or other, people found their way to this
new place
near the old mill (the new kitchen near
the hangar), then proceeded to the hangar
for a late afternoon havan, which began
about 5 p.m, The havan was quite
powerful, with the African host countries
expressing their pure desire to solve the
pressing problems of their continent.
The host countries only gained entry to
this facility at midnight on Thursday, but
by Friday evening, there were festive
Diwali decorations all over the hall, After the havan, we travelled into the
setting the mood as yogis arrived from town of Cabella where fireworks were
all over the world. The customary "Italian scheduled to begin just after dark. It was
Night" dinner was served, transported a different and very special feeling to
from Cabella. Friday evening, a mixed spend the day in Cabella without staying
band of French and African musicians, there, a feeling of reverence visiting the
our hosts for the weekend, improvised place where our Holy Mother was in
and sang music with an African "feel" that residence. The firev. orks were launched
was so engaging that it was impossible from the pleir field near the bridge, so
not to join the dance. The atmosphere that Shri Mataji could easily view them
very light and joyful, with a playtul trom the Castle balcony. I had never
element of many coloured balloons being
kept in the air by the dancing yogis.
was
seen-or been so close to-such a
spectacular display. It felt as if the lights
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 July Aug
1999
24
: 7 & 8
Volume : XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
Next on the program was a series of
were falling right onto us, in Kundalini
patterns (coils) and impressive sequences musical presentations by host country
groups. A combined group from Kenya
and South Africa performed a Mirian
Makeba song with Sahaja words, a
traditional Kenyan song, a song called Adi
ourselves (it was past the tourist season) Shakti Nirmala Mata, and ended with a
of colour and booming sound. What a
fitting heralding of the new year!
Luckily, we had the town mostly to
because there was a lot of yogi traffic
leaving town, travelling in a long caravan
on the winding roads back to Novi Ligure
song called Pour the Spirit in three
languages. Next, a French western band
of five musicians, called the Pandavas,
for the evening program. Shri Mataji and
Sir C.P. arrived at about 10:30 p.m. The
program opened with two qawwalis from
with a lead singer from the Congo, played
a song called Mother Earth. A large
group from Benin (where there are now
about 2,000 people practising Sahaja
the Romanian/French group that has been
performing for some time. Then the
French yogis staged a powerful four-act Yoga!) came on the stage in colourful
play about Joan of Arc called Jeanme
d'Arc: Revelation d'ume Shakti, adapted
costumes and hats to sing two songs. Last
but not at all the least, the group from
Ivory Coast performed one dance and one
song, bringing the audience to its feet to
dance along.
from a play by Friedrich Schiller. To set
the stage for the play, there was a moving
song, followed by a dance performed by
a Dutch lady dressed in white, in which
Indian classical and western dance styles
Shri Mataji praised all of the performers
for an excellent entertainment program.
were beautifully merged. The drama Before leaving the hall at about 2 a.m.,
portrayed Joan of Arc as a humble saint She reminded us not to take for granted
who was a living example of an inspired the privilege of attending puja the next
shakti. The play was very moving, the day, even though we may have the
stage and costumes true to the period, opportunity to attend many pujas. She
and Shri Mataji was very appreciative of cautioned us to prepare ourselves well for
the theme and execution of this the puja-in heart and mind, and to
performance. She had once commented beware of the Lakshmi power if our
on the divine qualities of Joan of Arc, and attitudes are disrespectful in any way.
was pleased that the French had taken the
opportunity to understand and present the
life of this great woman in history on the
Sunday was cold and rainy
weather for staying inside and preparing
perfect
ourselves for puja. We even had an extra
occasion of Diwali.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 July Aug
25
1999
Volume: XI Issue 7& 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
a strong feeling of collectivity among the
ladies. This was the first time I had
attended Diwali in Shri Mataji's presence,
and could understand why someone had
told me it was truly "a ladies' puja.
hour, thanks to the change from daylight
savings time Shri Mataji had said that
puja would begin at 6 p.m. and we were
all assembled and ready to receive Her at
that time From 6 until about 8 p.m. we
meditated and sang bhajans, as if the puja
In Her talk, She also spoke about Shri
had already started. The stage was
Rama as an example and about our battles
decorated like a palace in soft pink, blue
and green tones. Shri Mataji arrived with negativity at this time of year,
looking resplendent wearing a light culminating in the killing of Ravana
purple/pink sari that expressed in colour After the talk, Shri Mataji asked us to sing
the feminine qualities to be worshipped the Ganesh Stuti, but-perhaps for the
in this puja. As She approached the stage, first time-did not allow anyone to come
She commented that this would be a very and wash Her Feet, Next. seven married
short puja
ladies were called to perform the puja.
She wore a light pink satin crown with
The puja talk was short, beginning with
jewels as we sang the Aarti, standing in
awe in the presence of Shri Mahalakshmi
Herself
explanations of the significance of the
different nights of Diwali The role of the
housewife wvas emphasized, since
housewives are generally not appreciated Fresh fruits and a few other types of
prasad were offered to Shri Mataji. Prasad
was distributed later, not immediately, to
or respected in the west as they are in
India. She encouraged women to talk to
each other, to foster collectivity among the assembled yogis. Then the
house-wives. since they have common international gift and national gift from
problems and concerns She spoke about the host countries were offered, followed
women's practicality and aesthetic sense, by gift offerings from all of the countries,
and repeatedly said, with a note of including beautiful lamps and other
humour, that men don't know anything-
except about politics. Women must not as well as handmade embroidery items
only look after the house and family, but offered by the ladies from several
omaments to decora te a home (or castle).
they are also responsible for the whole
society. In this talk, and throughout the
puja, Shri Mataji established an incredible
sense of closeness with the ladies, creating
countries. There were many handmade.
gifts from the African countries. including
a large chair and a small wooden sculpted
chair for Shri Ganesha. She spoke for a
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Volume XI Issue: 7 & 8
26
July - Aug
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
attention focussed, absorbing vibrations
while with the South African yogis, and
from the puja. Coins from all of the
then it was announced that there would
countries present had been offered to Shri
be a series of public programs in South
Mataji to vibrate during the puja, and
these were then distributed as prasad. The
Africa in July 1999, and yogis were
requested to go there to help.
commemorative gift was a calendar for
Shri Mataji asked if all the gifts had been
offered, and then with great delight, began
1999
And then the festivities continued-many
dancing yogis, full of vibrations, enjoying
the light and lively African songs and
music. Dinner was served after the puja
to prolong the enjoyment and profound
sense of contentment. Paper flowers that
to give gifts to the host country yogis.
You could clearly see how much She was
enjoying the giving After calling all the
men and ladies from the host countries,
She called all the children who were
present at the puja to come for a gift.
had decorated the hall were taken down
Shri Mataji left the hall about I a.m., and and distributed-one more vibrated
it was only then that the prasad was remembrance of an unforgettable
distributed to the collective Delaying the collective event,
prasad distribution until after Her
departure had helped us to keep our
-Linda Taylor, USA
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 7& 8
July Aug
1999
27
The Divine Cool Breeze
NEWS FROM AROUND THE WORLD
weekly programs. The following week we
had better response including one seeker
News From China
It's been some time since we shared with
who said that they normally never buy that
newspaper. Through Shri Mataji's grace
you how things are progressing in China,
so here are some of the things we are
they all received their realization.
doing to spread the divine love of Shri
Mataji.
Each week new people were coming to
it was difficult to advance the programs
for the benefit of all who were attending.
It was decided that it would be a good
idea to rent a small flat so that we could
There is still a very limited scope of what
we can do in China We had been holding
regular weekly programs in Shenzhen
which is a city very close to the border of
Hong Kong. People seemed to be coming
in ones and twos but after a few weeks
about eight people were coming
regularly. We discovered that there is an
underground movement of seekers who
hold additional programs for the people
who wanted to progress and go deeper.
We managed to find a suitable centre near
a large park. It has two bedrooms and a
small living room but it was affordable
enough for the Hong Kong yogis to pay
for. A couple who had been coming for
some time decided that they would live
in the centre which gave us a more
are interested in yoga and meditation.
They seem to be well connected and often
try out new things that become available,
So we had a lot of people from this
permanent venue. By Shri Mataji's grace,
this has helped establish the vibrations in
this southern part of China. There is a little
seeking group coming and seeing what
Sahaja Yoga was about, but after a few
programs they would disappear.
more freedom in Shenzhen as it is a
special economic zone, very close to
Hong Kong A group of dedicated Hong
Kong yogis run the programs every
One of the main problems is that we can't
advertise the programs. We tried to
arrange a newspaper ad but the official
paper rejected our request. We advertised
Sunday.
in a paper printed in Hong Kong which
is circulated in Southern China. The paper
does not have a big readership but was
the only option we had to promote the
Realization in the Park
One thing that is common in China is that
all the different types of Tai Chi, Chi
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 July Aug
28
1999
Volume : XI Issue
7 & 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
and we travelled up the coast to a peaceful
Gong, meditation and hatha yoga are
practised in the local parks. The
authorities turn a blind eye to these enjoyed a day of working with the
activities and there are many seekers who elements and exchanging vibrations.
attend classes in the early morning. It was About 14 local Chinese yogis attended
an obvious place to hold programs. The and the vibrations were very strong. After
next week a number of yogis from Hong the seminar we enjoyed a Chinese meal
Kong gathered at 6:30 am and set up a which is always a good way to get to
small altar and simply sat in front know the people. There were many deep
meditating. Within a few minutes a
number of other people also sat down in
front of the photo of Shri Mataji. One of foundations for establishing Sahaja Yoga
the yogis gave simple instructions, all the
people followed a guided meditation and
they all felt the cool breeze. No Please give bandhans to these programs
explanation - just straight into the
experience! After the meditation people attention to work things out.
asked questions and they were invited to
beach near Dia Bay. The new yogis
seekers among them so by the grace of
Shri Mataji they will become the
in China.
as we need all the collective love and
-Alex Henshaw, Hong Kong
come back to the new centre.
News from Amsterdam
All the people that came back to the
For a few months Sahaja Yogis from
Amsterdam have been holding weekly
programs in the biggest Hindu temple in
Amsterdam. Holland has a fairly large
Indian community. Many "Hindustanis"
originate from Surinam, where many
Indians migrated at the end of the
nineteenth century. A few years ago Shri
centre have continued coming for the
regular programs which have been going
on for the past three months. Each week
more and more people spontaneously join
in the meditation. Some come back, some
don't but the important thing is that many
more people are being given self-
realization and word is spreading.
Mataji had expressed a strong interest in
the Hindu community. In 1993, at Shri
Seminar on the Beach
Mataji's request, there was a public
program specially for the Indians. About
350 attended and Shri Mataji gave the
In December a seminar was arranged with
the more established people and a group
of 15 yogis came from Hong Kong to help
entire lecture in Hindi.
support the group. A bus was arranged
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue 7 & 8
29
1999
July - Aug
The Divine Cool Breeze
Since then, Shri Mataji has occasionally we are bringing to them the more
inquired about how it is going with the universal views and knowledge of Sahaj
Indians in Holland. Recently, the main About 15 people are attending the
Hindu priest in the area himself contacted programs regularly.
the Sahaja Yogis with a request to hold
regular meetings in the mandir, free of
charge and with all facilities offered. Now
Henno de Graaf, Holland.
Smile Of the Ari Shakti
The Mona Lisa, the most well-known 1506) has been an object of
painting in the world: it has held a certain contemplation and admiration for
mystery to all who have seen it. The centuries. The painter's use of many
beautiful face is commanding in its beauty layers of transparent colour gives a subtle
and compelling in its atmosphere. A brilliance to a realistic face of a woman.
controversy still remains, though, as to This technique of sfuma-to (half-light)
whose portrait Leonardo Da Vinci puts the woman painted seemingly in two
actually painted. A Florentine matron? worlds, that of sitting in a chair in front
of a natural, almost primeval landscape.
Who?
Compare the painting with the The photo of Shri Mataji-the soulful
photograph of Shri Mataji. This photo eyes, the part of the hair, her hands
speaks the answer, if someone only has clasped, the pose in the chair, even the
eyes to see. Shri Mataji's beauty, gesture way the tapestry and the open land
and mood all speak of the secret of the beyond gives a sense of depth similar to
Mona Lisa.
the painting's landscape! The qualities of
pure beauty and intelligence that radiate
Da Vinci, a realized soul and genius, has from the painting in a quietly mystical way
painted the ideal woman, the Adi Shakti
through thoughtless inspiration. The Jai Shri Mataji!
identity of the actual model for the work
seems unimportant in comparison to the (The photographer/yogi who took the
resemblance of the painting to the photo. photo is requested to contact The Divine
say, "Who is She?" And finally we know.
Cool Breeze to give details on when and
how the photo was taken.)
The painting (completed between 1503-
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 July - Aug
30
Volume : XI Issue
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
7 & 8
Invocation for the Cleansing of America
Shri Krishna, Supreme Lord of the Land:
m twameva sakshat Shri
Ganesha sakshat. Shri Radha
You are the charioteer who brings us to
Krishnä sakshat. Shri Adi
our destination of Union with the Divine.
Shakti Namoh Namah.
Inspired by Our Holy Mother in Her form
as Radha, You use the weapons of Joy
and Detachment to conquer the
I.
O Devi, strengthen us as Your divine negativity
instruments for the cleansing of the land
Your land is so rich and grand: All of its
nature is painted with splendour. Let this
land again become the Grand Palace of
Delight: nature and city glowing in the
of Shri Krishna. Let America be the
source of ongoing merriment, song and
dance Lord Krishna's flute playing the
delicate music of the Divine will cure the
bliss of Sahaja culture.
Spirit of America We only ask that
America starts to listen to Shri Krishna's
Divine Rasa, the beautiful poetry of His
rhythm. In so doing, let America-North.
o Devi, You have given us powers-
weapons of joy-to fight against the sins
of greed, materialism and social
Central, and South-become obedient to
confusion. Let these powers manifest the
the inspiration of the Divine. He is
Nirmala Gamya. accessible only through
power of Nirananda, the absolutely pure
joy.
You.
П.
Shri Krishna, you are dark-dark as
"There is a wvar that opens the doors of
night- and in your land, people of all
colours live in harmony. Language is heaven, Arjuna. Happy the warriors
sweet and easily understood in Your whose fate is to fight such war.
Kindgom. Words bring no sorrow. As
Bhagavad Gita, Ch. 2, 32.
you are the strongest and most protective
Father You create playfulness and mirth.
Your Leela brings joy and childlike
Shri Vishnumaya announces Shri
Krishna's coming, and Shri Yashoda gives
us the respect needed for America to
delight.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 31
Volume XI Issue : 7.& 8
1999
JulyAug
The Divine Cool Breeze
women of the United States) to look
become righteous once again.
deeply into the mirrors of their souls. Let
them surrender the ego and conditionings
that are preventing them from being
For years we have, like children, tried to
walk in the footsteps of yoga, but now
the battle is at its peak. We can no longer
Gruha Lakshmis in every way.
continue to just hold back the battalions
As a flower opens and gives fragrance to
of negativities assaulting our doors.
its last moment, let all the ladies, at
whatever stage of life they are in, bloom
O Devi by Your grace, victory is sure,
especially as the yogis gain mastery over
more fully in graciousness and subtle
themselves, and in confidence the battle
powers.
is fought. We have all been prone to
weakness on the Kurukshetra of life
Release us from Karpanya, the cowardice
May all the people on this great continent
achieve satisfaction of the Spirit.
that allow us to justify our weaknesses.
O Devi, By Your Grace, please conquer
by the Power of Joy:
Shri Krishna, Your planet Saturn is the
teacher of lessons. Having had many hard
The habit of wearing clothing by
lessons, we ask that our citizens return
women that does not give respect to
to the ways of dharma, worshipping sin
Draupadi's sari.
no more. In so doing, grant and restore
The aggressiveness of women
protection from harsh lessons, illness, and
social disorder.
2.
seeking to be the same as men.
3. The idea in American womens'
minds that caring for a family is a
With a sense of urgency, we ask that the
negativities attacking Amerca's ascent be
cleansed so that Shri Krishna's quality of
Gruhananda, that of giving joy to the
household, may manifest. The original
lesser goal than a career.
4. The idea of pursuing a career
without also building up the Gruha
Lakshmi qualities in a woman.
native people of the American continent
had this sense of harmony and inner self
contentment. hut the conquerors of this 5. The despair that blocks the ascent
of America's women and blocks their
love for the responsibilities of caring
for a home and family.
land have brought disorder and
discontent.
The women of North, Central and South
The habit of not cooking at home
America pledge (and most especially the
6.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
July Aug
1999
32
The Divine Cool Breeze
people's greed that keep the
that is weakening the Nabhi of
attention on the material level.
America.
18. Negativity preventing the grace of
handi-work and creativity from
7. The lack of satisfaction that prevents
love.
manifesting in modern American
8. Any attacks on marriage that prevent
family life from flowering.
women.
19. The weakness that makes women
The ego that resists the beauty of the
women's role in home and family.
9.
pressure others instead their being
like Shri Lakshmi standing on the
lotus.
10. The ego that insists that men and
women are the same. They are equal,
All obstacles that prevent the gentle,
20.
but different in nature.
enduring love of family.
11. The damage to the mother-daughter
21. All obstacles to the true qualities of
relationship that has prevented girls
woman-hood transforming our
from learning from their mothers.
societies.
12. The lack of satisfaction about life m.
Ш.
that creates greed and the desire for
O Parampujya, enlighten fully the powers
of the Krishna Tattwa so that we may fulfil
pleasure from things.
13. Miserliness that is masked as
our roles in the Leela of the truth that
savings.
you have so graciously let us yogis join.
14. The credit and loan system that We pledge to sow the seed of Self-
enslaves America to the banks, and
Realization throughout America-North,
prevents satisfaction.
Central and South. Let America become
One, a unified land.
15. The use of credit cards that
impoverishes in the name of wealth. We pray that political oppression be
dissolved so that Sahaja Yoga can meet
its destiny as the vehicle of Truth. For
16. All the aspects of materialism being
spread throughout the entire world
until political oppression stops, many are
by the United States.
not free to hear your message or deepen
their Self-Realization.
17. The economic problems caused by
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 July Aug
Volume : XI Issue: 7 & 8
33
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
as did Vasudeva's as he fled prison to
Release all the citizens of our land from
poor discrimination, the obstacle of the protect Baby Krishna. Carrying
Hamsa. Such was Arjuna's battle. Let miraculous Baby Krishna on his head
America be the land of discretion once wrapped in a cloth and a basket, Vasudeva
crossed the River yamuna. The waters
again.
rose high, yet the child krishna had only
to point his foot towards the river, and it
immediately fell, and the waters became
If we are to figm for the joy and for the
Kshema (well-being) of all who live in
this land, then our Vishnu Tattwa, the
passable again.
vibration of Dharma, must be in order. If
activated, this Tattwa would help us
prevent extreme behaviour, so much of of Baby Krishna to conquer our own
O Devi, give us the infinite powers of Joy
River Yamuna which has become a joyless
which is rampant in our societies.
river of despair for so many people who
live in this land-despair that is
All the yogis pledge to open their hearts.
and, at whatever cost. to stand by the
preventing America from recognizing
Shri Adi Shakti Nirmala Devi.
moral values that Shri Krishna represents.
We pledge to place the collective interest
first, to always be willing to understand
others, and always to be generous in this North, Central and South-remember Shri
land of wealth. All of this is possible Krishna's call to Arjuna-Arise, O great
through the detachment that Shri Krishna warrior, arise!
brings, and through the comfort of the
spirit that fills us with Divine compassion O Devi, at this time of the coming
In all the countries throughout America-
millennium, at this beginning of Satya
Yuga, let a new call resound for all to
IV.
hear:
May the chains of materialism fall away
Arise, O Warrior of Joy, Arise!
from America as did the chains which fell
from the wrists of Lord Krishna's father,
Arise, Anandvira, Arise!
Vasudeva, when he was held captive.
May all the yogis become true warriors
of joy
May the closed doors of America's heart
open just as the prison doors flew open
to free Vasudeva.
Jai Shri Americeshwari
Shri Adi Shakti Mataji
May the faith of the yogis remain strong
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
34
1999
July Aug
The Divine Cool Breeze
9. The negativity preventing Sahaja
culture from taking root in the brains
of America's people.
Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah!
V.
List of Negativities for Shri Krishna
10. The many religious myths in America
Havan:
that do not lead to the Central
Channel.
O Devi, by your grace please conquer by
the Power of Joy:
11. The social conditionings that
perpetuate attachment to false beliefs
and ideals.
American individualist
The
1.
archetype that prevents surrender.
12. The false ideas about the New Age
The seriousness of intellectuals and
2.
that are preventing Americans from
seeing the Kundalini Herself standing
scientists that prevents them from
experiencing Shri Krishnan's joy.
before them.
3. The tobacco industry and its false
13. The colonistic attitudes that allowed
the slaughter of the Native Peoples
research on the terrible etfects of
smoking.
of America.
The proliferation of plastic which is
emptying homes of natural goods.
4.
14. The mercantile and racist beliefs that
continue to affect the whole
The overuse of computers causing
continent, North, Central and South.
the hands, the instrument of the
15. The poverty that continues to force
people to flee Central America.
Vishuddhi, to become dull and
insensitive.
16. The drug cartels enslaving people
The export of butter products that
makes it expensive to buy butter in
6.
throughout the North and South
American continents.
Shri Krishna's land.
17. The inauspicious use of flowers to
smuggle drugs from South to North
America.
7. The poisoning of the dairy industry
by chemical additives.
The use of pharmaceutical drugs to
18. The ethnic conflicts over language
create behavioural change without
true healing.
in Canada.
5.
8.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
35
July Aug
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
30. The anti-melodious music that blares
in the ears of teenagers everyday.
19. Dictatorial governments in the
Vishuddhi.
20. The expansion of multi-national 31. Aggressive use of the voice in the
corporations that is eliminating
American products in American
Vishudhi.
32. Forms of dance that confuse the
economies.
dharma and create false collectivity.
21. The misuse of natural resources,
33. The confusion of male and female
especially that of nuclear power in
roles in American society.
the United States.
34. The aggressiveness of women
seeking to be the same as men.
22. The pro-right, pro-Nazi and
extremist movements trying to take
hold in our societies.
The popularization of designer-lavel
35.
goods in the United States that are
23. The arrogance of the United States
which sees itself as superior to other
sold world-wide.
countries.
36. The habit of wearing clothing by
women that does not give respect to
24. The media's influence in promoting
violence and social disorder.
Draupadi's sari.
37. Negative use of the internet that
destroys the attention and
25. The media's influence eroding the
maryadas in all aspects of social life.
encourages the spread of adharma.
26. Hollywood's offences against the
38. The idea in American women's
purity and graciousness of film and
minds that caring for a family is a
video.
lesser goal than a career.
27. Anti-joy art that is modern but
without spirit.
39. The habit of eating out that is
weakening the Nabhi of America.
28. The early sophistication of our
children that takes away their 40. The idea of pursuing a career
without also building up the Gruha
Lakshmi qualities in a woman.
innocence and wisdom.
29. The negativity turning young people
41. The despair that blocks the ascent
to crime.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Volume XI Issue : 7& 8
July Aug
1999
36
The Divine Cool Breeze
seekers from becoming like Arjuna.
of America's women and their love
for the responsibilities of caring for
the home and family.
48. The deafness of those who turn from
the auspicious flute of Lord Krishna
42. The negativity in Washington. D.c.
preventing auspicious leadership.
49. The negativity preventing Swadeshi
in the United States-the
popularization of locally-made
goods.
43. The banking and loan systems which
impoverish in the name of wealth.
44. The excessive use of credit cards
50. Malnutrition and obesity problems
which began in the United States and
51. Negativity of false gurus attacking
has now spread as a bad habit
the arts in America.
worldwide.
52. The residue of false gurus in the
brains of the seekers of Americas.
45. All the aspects of materialism being
spread throughout the entire world
by the United States.
53. Problems of black magic in all its
forms and vices.
46. The fragmentation of America into
North, Central, and South. It is one.
54. All forces that are against the
Nirmala Bhaktas.
47. The drug-like sleep preventing
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Volume XI Issue : 7 & 8
- Aug
37
The Divine Cool Breeze
1999
July
Sri Mataji's Talk with Dr. Talwar in Bombay on
26th and 27th February 1987 during the
auspicious celebration of "Shiva Puja"
Sahaja Yoga was known to me all along.
It is a unique knowledge with which I was
born. It was not so easy to reveal it and I
People said that he cannot talk. It has to
be experienced. So very few people got
to swallow it. Nobody could actualise the
experience by feeling on their finger tips,
wanted to find out how to reveal it,
or feel it on their senses, or on their minds,
or even understand it with their intellect.
so it was a big problem. They all tried
and prepared a ground for it.
First of all I thought that the seventh
chakra must be opened, which I did, on
Sth of May 1970, It is a secret in a way.
Formerly, the Brahma Chaitanaya was
Avvakta. It was not manifested. It was
Now I have come as the Incarnation of
the Brahma-Chaitanya As a Whole. The
sea of the Nirakar has now become a big
cloud (Saakar). It has taken a form. Those
who came before were all a part-and
not expressed by itself, and so the people
who managed to reach Brahma Chaitanya
somehow, by attaining Realisation", said
- It was Nirakar Ka Guna. You are like
a drop that gets dissolved in the ocean
parcel of it. Now the whole has come
No one could say, explain or tell people This cloud has rain water. The rain water
anything more about it. The great is nourishing the minds of the people.
incarnations also who came out of this Gradually they are brought to a level were
great Ocean of Brahma-Chaitanya, tried
their best to share it with the hest available their Realisation and now gradually they
followers (which were very few) and are feeling everything on their senses.
introduce them to this Brahma-Chaitanya.
their Kundalinis have risen. They have got
their finger tips. This is the reason why
But because the Brahma-Chaitanya was nobody has talked about vibrations so
not in a Vyakta form, these incarnations clearly. They managed to talk about
Chaitanya Lahiri This was so because of
its-Avyakta form. It was only a state. A
state to be enjoved, only in that state with
got dissolved in it.
Like Gvaneshwara took his Samadhi.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-39.txt 
 July Aug
Volume : XI Issue 7 & 8
38
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Yogis because they will understand. To
no manifestation in the gross. In that State
they went beyond temptations, beyond bear this truth is so difficult. When one
temper etc. That is proof before us. How gets money or position, it is difficult to
they did it. what was this Brahma- remain balanced. People become so
Chaitanya? – they could not show its shaky. So for them the fact that I
Pratyaksha form. What they could show encompass all the Incarnations is too
was only through similes or through some
parable.
difficult to bear.
One day I went to Aurangabad, where a
This is what I have achieved-Its boy told me that Brahma-Chaitanya is
Pratyaksha form. The complete form of beyond feeling and non-feeling. He had
the Brahma-Chaitanya I have brought read about it in some book. I told him it
from the sea So now, I do not allow you was true, but he should forget about it
dissolved in it. I have put it in the and just feel it. It was then that I decided
to
get
to tell about it to a few people. You see,
form of a big Ghata. In that. you are
smaller Kumbhas. In other words, I have the right time also had to come before I
taken you all in my body as small cells, disclosed it. All other religions have so
nourishing you, looking after you,
cleansing you and working it out. But I Now the whole integration has come. I
am Maha-Maya. So I have to work very
slowly, gradually, and at the right time
and right point
far been segmented and non-integrated.
can now explain Christ, Mohamad Sahib
and others, because they are all part and
parcel of the whole, which is Brahma-
Chaitanya.
When the seventh chakra was opened, all
Đã not talk about me to the Scientists.
the chakras came to your Sahasrara, and
Just tell them that this is a Unique Method
that has come. Though it is a little difficult
to understand, yet it has happened and
we have seen it for ourselves. Like that
so I could manage all chakras and
all your deities. Any Deity you ask and
you get the vibrations, So that proves that
am the Brahma-Chaitanya.
your
you tell them. If you talk about Me, they
will be shocked. Maximum you can tell
them that -this knowledge was brought
The Brahma-Chaitanya is the Adi-Shakti
and Sada-Shiva is also in my heart. But
since I am so much humanised, it is not
out by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, by which
the Kundalini could be arisen. How she
so easy to find it out. If you tell this to
Modern human beings. they will not
has managed it. we do not know. It is
probably a secret. Put the whole thing on
understand. It can only be told to Sahaja
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-40.txt 
 July Aug
Volume XI Issue 7 & 8
39
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
whole experience remained to be
individual and not collective. Now that is
me Now you understand, Can you say-
how does a seed sprout? By putting it in
the Mother earth. So you say, that by
over. Now it is collective, Everything has
putting everything to Mataji, our seed has
sprouted It is a living process and we
to be collective at a point.
Even to reach this point, hard testing of
the seekers was done. Ultimately Christ
got crucified. See how Mohammad Sahib.
Nanak and Tukaram were treated? They
come from Vaikuntha, and see how they
were treated? Things just did not work
have seen it for ourselves.
So far nobody has been able to give
Realisation to others. May be only one
or two have given Realisation to others.
Most people have achieved it by the
process of cleansing. For example out then.
Buddha got his Realisation by thorough
cleansing. Brahma-Chaitanya crawled I know all beyond the Vaikuntha, but I
inside him because he asked for it,
have not revealed it so far. I will slowly
reveal it because people are not yet
prepared to become capable of absorbing
it. You see, it is like the preparation of a
genuinely wanted it and prayed for it and
was therefore cleansed by it. But again
He went into its state. There was no
communication about it thereafter. This Khichdi. It is yet under preparation. So
is what is in the collective now. This let it be cooked. You are all in it. The
collective working is now happening quality of people being built up now is
because this State has started expressing equivalent to the choicest of the handful
of disciples of the past Prophets. Now
and here everyone is destined to come
Supposing you discover electricity, and along slowly and steadily. All those who
you keep it to yourself and not talk about will now fall into this great pot (Handi)
it to anybody Then how will anyone of the Supreme Cook will be well
know about it? It is not that the great prepared in it. Rest who opt to remian
Saints did not want to express it, but there out will be left out. It is all beyond time.
was no communication then. It is just like Each to his own capability to achieve. Just
itself
if someone has no eyes to see, then whom
as it is difficult to say how long will one
are you going to show to. or talk to?
learn to ride a Bicycle, or become a C.A.,
There was no one to appreciate and
absorb that state at that time. Those who
or a Doctor. Some may take very little
time, while others very long.
did achieve realisation, their Sahasraras
The bondage of time is created by man
got opened, but they got lost in it The
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-41.txt 
 July Aug
40
1999
Volume: XI Issue : 7 & 8.
The Divine Cool Breeze
himself In reality this body has no timing. you move from left to right. In your
Time dimension has been created by man Habits you move towards the left while
by his habits. With the formation of habits, in Ambitions you move towards the right.
the Kaal or time bondage is created
To set me in your Heart, is a Bhava or
a feeling. So just as you develop habits
on the left side, you must practice to
have that Habit-like Bhava for me in
your hearts. If, so easily you can acquire
your habits, then why not this Beautiful
Bhava? All this is nothing but a change in
Bhava After all Habits are easy to relieve,
When there is no habit, there is no time
dimension.
With Sahaja Yoga lots of habits leave you.
But this takes time too. You must
therefore never justify your habits if you
want to rid them. It is with justification
that habits stay. If in one life time you
being just a mere state of mind.
can achieve Self-Realisation, reach the
Once you have established my Bhava in
entire
point of having begun to loose your
habits, then in that very life time it is you, it takes its position in
possible for you to acquire that so called
state. In the event that you may happen
your
body and carries itself through eternity.
Depends on how much you are using
to remain half-baked during the process yourself to it. It is just like
of one life time, then you will come back
of smoke on your room then all the
mosquitoes will run away. So it depends
on how much of me you have filled in
your hearts!
to complete your achievement. This is
how Sahaja Yoga will now work out for
some time: This is now the last
judgement. During the process of the
revelations in Sahaja Yoga, when I still
The question that now arises is that, how
does one come to stabilise the state of
see people behave against it. I feel
My Bhava in ones heart? The answer is
stability comes by constantly
awesome. I continue to have such bad
experiences at times but then such people
leave Sahaj Yoga This happens, but you
stopping your own attention or Chitta.
Always do Chitta-nirodh. Just like you
go out and you see something you must
must not get discouraged You must go
on working towards it putting in your
very best efforts.
consciously stop your Chitta from going
towards it. It comes with practice. Pull it
Always remain in the Centre. Do not inside. This is called detachment.
worry about your growth in Sahaja Once
you are in the centre, growth is automatic.
It is already being nourished by me. Daily
Remember the contact outside, or
Samparka is always through the Chitta.
Watch where it goes all the time.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-42.txt 
 July Aug
41
1999
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
understand it is like you have to accept a
Always ask yourself, Where is my
Chitta? Actually Chitta is segregated Hypothesis that there exists an all
within us as our consciousness as well as pervading power above the Human Brain.
This is the only hypothesis. The human
our awareness within us. When our
consciousness becomes one with brain is in the form of a Pyramid. The
awareness, it assumes the form of Parama-Chaitanya or all pervading power
Vibratory awareness which balances you. is coming from all sides and is striking
This balancing keeps you in the Centre. the brain of a Featus (soon after its
The moment your chitta goes out in the formation).
wrong direction, immediately you feel the
What actually happens is that, at the apex
heat on your senses. That is how the all
of this pyramidical brain, the Parama-
Chaitanya passes unhindered and settles
pervading Power works and grows within
you.
down the spine in the inverted Triangular
bone area, at the base, in three and a half
coils as the Kundalini Shakti. In the
All our habits and Samskaras crumple our
Brain formation and appear as
process it leaves its mark called the
"Vaccum Channel" in the spine. Now the
convolutions in the brain. When all these
convolutions open up, new spaces are
Parama-Chaitanya hitting on the sides of
the triangular brain, has to permeate the
Grey and the White matter. These have
their own Densities, and so governed by
the physics Laws of Refraction, the
Chaitanya refracts from left to right and
from right to left. This is also called the
Prismatic refraction effect. This
phenomena exists mostly for human
brains and not so much in animals.
created in the brain, having more
absorption power. The crumpled brain
subtly opens. This is how the connection
with the Divinity is made.
Scientists basically have to be stunned.
Like I went to a Medical Institute and I
told them about the Para-Sympathetic
nervous system. They got stunned. The
mode of action of Stiponilan Adrenaline,
they cannot explain, but we can. Now
take carbon. If you see it from the left
side, you can see the right side and vice-
versa. On the left side you can see the
figure of Carbon as in form of a Swastic.
On the right side it looks like the Omkara.
During the refraction process, the Human
attention is pulled out to both the sides
and is driven in the outward direction.
Both the attention and the refracted
Chaitanya cross at the Agnya Chakra
from both sides on their way out. As a
If you see upward from down below, it
looks like a cross. That is a fact. Now to
result of this pull, an additional force
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-43.txt 
 : 7 & 8
42
Volume : XI issue
July Aug
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
action element, the potential of which
called the resultant force is created. Now
the theory of Parallelogram of forces (of forms the Pingala Nadi. The overflow of
physics) comes into play. The resultant the Ida Nadi forms a Balloon-like cloud
force is divided into two parts, each being at the back of the Agnya chakra called
at a 90 degree angle to the other on both the Super-Ego, while the overflow of the
the left as well as the right side. The Pingala nadi forms a similar cloud in front
resultant force acts in the centre of its two of the Agnya chakra called the Ego. The
counterparts. One part creates the left and Agnya remains directly in-between these
the right Sympathetic Channel of the two balloons. The front of the Agnya is
foetus by pushing its way down the body. controlled by the Pituitary of the brain,
The other part pushes its way out through
the senses, dragging with it the Human When the Kundalini enters the Agnya
attention both to the left and the right. chakra, she enlightens, it. Then Christ
while the back is controlled by the Pineal.
The second part is also known at the
within you is enlightened or awakened.
He sucks both these balloons of the Ego
and the Super-Ego, and the whole Agnya
chakra opens. That is why Christ died for
our sins. There is simultaneous opening
of the Sahasrara. I saw the Sahasraras of
the Virat open. It was like tons of flame.
Just like when you disect the human brain,
its cross-section looks like petals or like
In short, our Chitta accompanied by the flames. In the centre of it, it looks like a
resultant Brahma-Chaitanya's living force yellow hole. The opening of the
went to the outer world, collected a Sahasraras is sudden. With a bang it
reaction and brought back with it a opens. How can I explain,-it gives the
conditioning from the left, thereby effect of one telescope into another.
forming the manasa or the mind. Both Normally with the opening of the Agnya
the action and reaction pass through both and the Vishuddi, the Ego and the Super-
the agnya and vishuddhi chakras. The Ego get sucked in. Mind is Super-Ego.
Chitta, being dispersed in nature, has the Ahamkara is Ego. Our soul or Atman is
ability to flow from the whole body. The surrounded by all the five Elements plus
reaction of the left is the desire element, their causal expression, with the Kundalini
on the periphery. The elements are mainly
the Earth and the Water, while their causal
action in the outer world. From the outer
world, this action brings back a reaction.,
(another famous law of Physics.) The path
followed by the action and reaction is the
same. On the left side this reaction builds
one's Conditionings while on the right side
it builds the Ego.
the potential of which gives birth to the
IDA nadi on the left sympathetic channel.
Similarly, the reaction of the right is the
is just jyot matra.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-44.txt 
 July Aug
1999
.
Volume: Xi Issue : 7 & 8
The Divine Cool Brenze
we humans are slaves of our habits.
When self-Realisation takes place, the
Deities are awakened, and the chakras are
nourished and freshened. They open out
We, out of sheer habit, de not allow
our Chitta to stay, put in that state
permanently. Actually the chitta
should not go out. Here is a simple
situation that I find myself to be in with
you: 1 am putting you in the Boat to
sail-off, but you are resisting my help
and start releasing energies. At the Pithas
(representative points of the chakras on
our brain) all actions begin against each
related chakra. Coordination at both
levels starts and all chakras get integrated.
Take an example of your mind. It wants by constantly sticking your one foot in
to do something. Your body-it wants the water. Your attention is on
to do something else. Thirdly, your frivolous things you see, out of your
Intellect-it wants to do something else: habit you put out your leg, knowing
There is no Integration. On Realisation, very well, I am sitting inside to sail you
through. I also happen to see that your
leg may be swallowed any time by an
Take another example of a piece of alligator, But you, in your own habits
cloth, it represents the attention. are blind enough not to notice the
Before realisation it is all spread out aligator. Now, can you imagine my
all three become one.
and in all directions. Now take a finger
plight? Imagine how I feel?
and poke the cloth in the centre from
the bottom and raise it upwards. What
happens? The cloth is pulled up to a
point and in the process it just wraps
or falls around the finger. In the same
way, when the Kundalini rises, it pokes
That is why I say- Do satsang –
meaning spend time with other Sahaja
Yogis with the object to keep your
attention in the Centre. It is very
important to constantly keep your
attention in the centre. With
the attention, raises it to the Sahasrara,
where it gets enlightened by the light
of the Brahma-Chaitanya. It then just
wraps and falls in line with the
Kundalini's path on the Sushumna
realisation, our left and right Nadis
relax off upon receipt of Divine energy.
Due to release of tension, the Chakras
open out still further. It is a cycle. More
Kundalini fibres can then rise and so
Nadi in the centre. What has actually
on. At this stage the attention develops
happened is that on realisation, our
Chitta is pulled inside from wherever a quality to renain in the centre. You
it is spread out in the outer mundane can then direct it out to perform a
world. The Chitta is thereby enlighted. particular task, and after achieving it,
This is the so-called state. But in reality without any reaction, it occupies its
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-45.txt 
 July Aug
44
Volume : XI Issue : 7 & 8
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
from it, you can see it, but when you are
position in the centre. It has by now
achieved the quality of not getting in it, then what can you
attached to anything.
see?
Thoughtless awareness comes when
In my case it is different. If my
attention is on you, I will take all your
problems into myself and cleanse it and
myself suffer. This I will do only ifI want
to. Now, Sahaja Yogis, I have to fix,
because I have put them indiscriminately
into my body. So I have to suffer. The
Sahaja Yogis themselves are just
barometric in this regard. They cannot
your Kundalini crosses the Agnya
Chakra-when there is no thought. It
happens by control. Slowly it becomes
a part of you and encompasses your
whole body. It becomes a state. This is
doubtless Awareness. You become the
Brahma-Chaitanya or the state.
At this state, you all need to work for
suffer the way I do, may be a little bit, me and not just land up in the state
and get into a Samadhi. I have
achieved it for you without giving it to
because whatever they suck, goes into the
vast ocean.
you. Then why do you ask for it? You
must know that you are there and
Now the study of the fifth dimension of
matter is going on in Russia-the study of
there is no doubt about it. This is now
Bioplasma. This is completely a right
sided activity. Each human being has his
own Aura and depending on his changing
Gunas, the colour represented by that
the final game. In reality this state is
very easy and spontaneous to achieve,
but vet I would like you to work for it
and try for it. When you feel like
achieving this state right now and for
your own individual self, then I would
Guna or Aura changes. What do you give
bandhans to? To your Auras so as to
protect it. Only matter can have an Aura.
So it is all materialistic. The fifth away you are becoming an escapist.
say that you are being selfish and
dimension is actually a microscopic or a
photographic dimension. So when you
see some lights in my photographs, it is
You have to first become collective.
Otherwise on an individual basis you
will get lost in the Nirakar and you will
not even be able to see me. You see,
you will be in that state-you will be
dissolved in the ocean. So evolving
from the ocean and dissolving in it is
one form of an Aura, You see Brahma-
Chaitanya has got its own light. This is
only visible to me. Some people can also
see it when their Agnya is bad. They can
see it from outside.
not anything unique or great. But to
become a cloud from the ocean and
The principle is that when you are away
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-46.txt 
 July Aug
Volume: XI Issue 7 & 8
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
then soak everyone with your rain- am nobody in my human form as far as
water would surely be a unique the new comers are concerned,
achievement. This is my aid and also
EPILEPSY.
my game. Just as every game has an
Cause: Movement of the attention to the
aim, so has mine. To stay in the Centre,
extreme left. Collective Subconscious is
hecome Sharanagata. Say "you are
everything Mother, so you do
everything". It is complete surrender. when you develop some fear or fright
the state into which you go. This happens
SO
being a weak person on the left side. Also
For a Scientific mind. you have to give when you happen to be involved in an
them this whole vidya in bits If their cup
accident - sudden fright or jurk.
is small you cannot fill imore than the
Cure: Bring attention to the centre. To
do this, first bring it to the right by saying
capacity it can take. So have patience.
You cannot give them the whole ocean
the Gayatri Mantra. Then to the centre
now Remember that Science is only a
by saying the Brahmadeva-Saraswati
mantra. On moving to the right, you start
feeling vibrations, stop at this point. Do
wee part of the whole. First create a
craving for Sahaja in them by introducing
it to them. Once they come, then watch
them Remember your time? The same
not say any more Gavatri Mantra because
thing happened with each one of you. At
first you experienced it then craved more
and more for it, very progressively. This
you must not go too much to the right.
Too much to the right means the
frequency of Vibrations start decreasing
process is also Scientitic
Example-Mr Jalan's Mamdi's cure.
In the mundane, when you work to earn
money, you will encounter the maya.
Just remember that you are earning
for me. That's all. Go ahead and earn
It needs proper adjustment from one side
to the other. It is important that you must
get the Vibrations. If not, then repeatedly
raise the Kundalini till you feel the
as much as you can. This I am only
Vibrations.
talking from the materialistic point of
view.
Another best way is to put the left hand
towards the Photograph and the right on
the ground. Say Mahakali mantra so that
the Vibrations start flowing. Use of the
People who come into Sahaja Yoga
through you Sahaja Yogis come better
than through me You see, with me they
tend to get entangled in my maya. See, I
Candle from the back side on the left will
also help.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-47.txt 
 July Aug
46
7 & 8
1999
Volume XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
and you do Action, then everything
This treatiment is also the sanie for cancer.
other psychosomatic diseases. It includes become mechanical and hypocritical. The
Muscular Scheletar disorders. In right desire is only to achieve your
Muscular problems, the trouble comes growth. This is Shuddha-ichha. If you
from your disturbed Sri Ganesha have a gross desire like-I must have a
(Mooladhara). In Hysterectomy cases, son etc. you have it too, but then you
where the Uterus is removed the problem will want something else also. Meaning
is of Sri Ganesha (Mooladhara), And fear that you are now becoming a hypocrite.
element. If somebody is not having a In pure desire you get everything in a
child, then she has a left Swadishthana bundle. It is from genuine desire that you
problem. Same problem is also true for grow. This whole concept is you attitude
heavy Periods-when there is too much towards you Ichha-Shakti.
stimulation in the Parasympathetic in the Now take the Action energy or Kriya
Sacral region, there is too much flow Shakti. This has two aspects, namely
resulting in heavy bleeding. Other results Physical and Mental, Physically you must
are Diarrhoea and Excessive urination.
sit down and Meditate to become
Cure: Use of Gayatri Mantra, Initially. thoughtless. Mentally you must see that
But it must also be backed by some your mind does not go towards all
Medicines. You can give ajvain ki dhuni nonsensical things in gross forms. All that
(even for surgery patients). For Lumbago you must say is. "Mother you are doing
you give ajvain ka pani. For Muscular everything, I do nothing". This is the
Lumbago use Ajvain for intake and geru
for application only. In Lumbago the bone For both left and right sided persons it is
gets twisted, therefore use vibrated important to first cleanse yourself and
kerosine oil mixed with some other oil. then do your meditation. Then you move
In few days it gets alright.
control on you.
towards the left side, you raise your
Kundalini and it just comes out. You must
For any treatment whatsoever, remember
that the most important fact remains that Do not just be mechanical when sitting
everything depends on your Ichha or to do Puja. Your desire must be genuine
Desire Shakti. So Ida nadi is important
raise your Kundalini before Meditation.
to grow.
that you must have desire and it must be
the right Desire. No wrong Desires People who are from Arya-Samaj are
because eventually everything goes back basically Right sided people. They must
to the Desire. If you have wrong desires
use Bhakti Bhajan, seat me in their hearts
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-48.txt 
 July Aug
1999
Volume XI lssue 7 & 8
47
The Divine Cool Breeze
ie move towards the left side. Cleansing into spasms due to tensions. e.g., Left
must be done only by use of mantras on
the Central Chakras. Mahakali and Maha start to twist (Physical). When you put
Saraswati, both act on the centre from your chakras in me (in my care) they will
both the sides and are therefore inter- be relaxed and then you can adjust by
connected. Even the Mantras for the left giving vibrations. Those vibrations can be
and right are chanted only for the given to others. You need not touch the
purposes of raising the Kundalini alone. other person, but give vibrations by using
There is no use of attention here. circular movement by hand using mantra.
Treatment of left side through chanting
of mantras for raising the Kundalini is only In left sided diseases, you get into the
Vishuddi or any chakra, the vertebrae
collective subconscious from where you
to improve upon your desire energy
collect Protein 52. viruses. These make
Another way is to raise your right and you beyond help sometimes. Fever is
lower it to the left by hand. This helps a caused to those whose liver is out, who
lot. In addition activate your right side has overworked his Liver. He is heated
by mantras of Brahmadeva and of up etc. It can be corrected by putting ice
Gayatri. But all upto a point You see
when I have to do it I control it by raising ie. Mosquito bites. Bacterial fevers are
your Kundalini upto a point. And before left sided. These are mainly due to certain
it goes too much to the other side. 1 in-takes of food such as fungus like
control by pulling it out just in time. It is mushrooms, old paneer etc. Diabetes is
all in my control. When people do not
on the liver. Malarial fevers are right sided
the action of the right side affected by
the left side. Right side being vulnerable.
Firstly when you think too much, pay no
attention and remain in your habits, then
a fear element adds to you vulnerability.,
Just like a hard working man thinks too
much. All his fat cells are used for the
brain. The swadhishthana goes into and
control, they just go on and on. Like
Rama, Rama. Panduranga, Panduranga
.. and get lost on one side totally.
Mother is now asking you all-"Where
is you attention". First must come
Bhakti Bhava and this then must move
onto Shraddha Bhava.
neglects its left counter part. The left side
gets drained. You become vulnerable. At
ON PHYSIOTHERAPY
this stage if some fear comes up
in you
When the vibrations flow, they relax the
muscles. The muscles in reality have gone
and you also start feeling guilty, then you
develop Diabetes.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-49.txt 
 Volume XI ssue 7 & 8:
1999
48
July Aug
The Divine Cool Breeze
pumping of the heart difficult, so it
becomes tired because it cannot pump.
Due to extreme left Vishuddhi, the
Correction is use Ali's name in mantra
Source is from swadhisthana and Nabhi
of the left. Left Nabhi gets first affected
lethargic heart gives you Angina. These
are the two types of Heart attacks. The
first type can be cured by putting ice on
the stomach and on the heart on the right
side. Also move from left to right. Sit in
water. Do not use light at all. Sleep in
darkness, stay more indoors. Take full
by having fear of wife or worries for her
or any other family member, In addition
your vulnerability at that point brings
about Diabetes. Clear it by cleaning your
Agnya chakra. Don't think so much. Go
into Thoughtless Awareness. Put left side
to right side. Take more salt so that it
rest. And repeat that "I am the Spirit".
"O Lord, please forgive me". The second
type can be cured by asking him to say
-"Mother you are my heei mantra. You
are the Mantrika. Also "I am not guilty".
neutralises the action of sugar excretion
because it has got water of crystallisation.
Use ice on right Swadhishthana and
Nabhí. Avoid sugar after proper tests if
necessary.
and say "I forgive everybody Lord". So
that all the hurts disappear. Use lightened
HEART ATTACKS:
Over active and inactive or lethargic fire to clear the left side.
heart. Overactive heart is of right sided Asthma is mostly a left sided
people. In such cases the heart can psychosomatic disease. It can sometimes
collapse. Especially it can happen in very be right sides with persons who are very
young age This is because their attention dry and have always tried to dominate
is too much outside. Due to this their others
The dryness of the Peritorium
Atma departs. The atma gets no attention is too much. Mostly it also comes from
due to their extreme materialistic nature. the right heart- For those whose father
Overactivity can also come from too is dead or that, you are not a good father
much worry about the family, thinking too or that you happen to trouble your child
much of the future. The heart starts to or that you are unhappy about your
pump more blood and over works itself. ownself. It can be a combination of any
It gets tired. In addition the attention is Intake. For left side- if people eat the
not on the spirit. For Lethargic hearts- fat it is bad. Because the fat is stored and
this people take all kinds of mantra's and it is not available for circulation. For thin
first spoil their Left Vishuddhi. They take people their fat is available for circulation,
Tobacco and cigarette, creating a problem so they can eat fat. But for fat people.
on Left Vishuddhi. This makes the they should only put fat in their nose, oil
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-50.txt 
 49
July Aug
Volume XI Isue : 7& 8
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
decrease the flow of the RBC's. That's
in the ears etc. For fat people oil massage
on the head is very good. Thin people can how the spleen goes crazy. This is also
massage with Golden Amla hair oil. It the root cause of Blood Cancer for people
who are hectic.
cools them down.
When you have the Back Agnya working.
you become lethargic and when you
the front Agnya working you become
overactive. The balance of chemicals in
the body comes from the Agnya. That is
why you should always be in thoughtless
Awareness. Left sided people are ones
Articaria is also psychosomatic When
your liver is lethargic, it becomes
have
vulnerable.
Cure: Use geru-rub it on some stone and
give it to your child in Honey (very little)
- Also for grown ups. For very old
people it is also very good for it has
soluble calcium Any soluble calcium is sided people trouble others. So those
good It is good for application and then who are left sided, their bodies will pain
who have troubles themselves and Right
cover it with something black. The source
of its problem is left Nabhi You see when and they will suffer The right side people,
the live is lethargic, the left Nabhi who inflict pains on others will not notice
becomes lethargic The person is not
using much of his energies. So it is a
it. These right sided people can therefore
develop diseases like sorosis of the liver
or a problem on the eyes.
lethargic liver. excited by the left Nabhi
Shakti is the guna of the left. Shradha is
of the centre, The left side is very pleasant
Treatment: is again left side Best is to
cover the body with something black, so
that the heat is given to it You see it is a
form of an allergy Most ällergies are
till you start getting the pangs and then
you start getting drifted away - this is
happening in Bhakti with some people.
caused from cold to hot. i.e taking bath
in cold water and then hot water. To take
When I speak, every word is a mantra.
coffee and immediately take cold water
As I speak people start getting alright.
This sudden change. the system cannot
Now all types of people are coming up
Some are coming up very fast now. As
adjust to, In the left Nabhi area is the
spleen The spleen is a speedometer and
also an adjuster. When it adjusts and it is
not properly done due to sudden change,
it causes problem So it has to suddenly
provide its energies to either inerease or
far as I am concerned they have put me
aside as a Devi and that I cannot be
reached. Now, it will be one of you only
who will stand up and people will see you
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-51.txt 
 1999
July Aug
50
Volume XI Issue 7 & 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
The Causal of realisation is the Shuddha
Sahaja. This is the best way
and come int
Iccha. Man is made of 3 potentials i.e
the subtle and causal. This
to let some people just come up. This
is the game.
the gross,
causal of realisation, i.e Shuddha Iccha
Lots of people have personalised it. They
want to know what is happening about it
in my family. then to others, then to
people of Bombay etc. Sahaja Yogi's are
very honest, compassionate and diligent,
enlightens the subtle and the gross bodies.
Just like you put a seed into mother earth.
The mother earth enlightens the seed and
gives its potential to it- In the same
way, the Kundalini is the mother Earth in
good natured and have lesser tempers.
you. She rises and gives this potential
dimension to your seed. Every things has
Their character has assumed a new
dimension in this process of building up. a different causal and so every chakra acts
Each one of you must work hard towards according to its own causal. The problem
it and not bother too much about the is, we do not understand even at the
other Sthiti is tested only when you are
grosser level. Now take a very gross level
you reach a point where to take an
exposed to it That is the time of paristhiti.
Sthiti must be clubbed with complete
atom. This atom has Nucleus which as
protons, Neutrons and Mesotons. Now,
if you cool down this atom such as Helium
gas, the atoms become collective. So also
the mesotons act on their own, and even
they become collective when cooled to a
certain point. So even to the grosser and
Discrimination.
There are Deities who are in the Chakras.
When the Kundalini rises, she awakens
them just like seeds. Once they are
awakened, they start working it out, They
know what is their job, what to work out
- like they have been appointed. These
Deities you have achieved through your
grosser, this potential exists, Scientifically
it can be proved
When we take a human being, we are
talking about a living process. The human
being has most manifested one on the
grosser level. Now, the inner growth has
evolution at different points So where
ever they are settled, they do the job. Take
a seed. It is gross. It has potential to
become a tree and this has the-potential
to come. On the grosser level he is now
to become numerous trees. So this
potential is subtle to subtler to subtlest. fully manifested. Just take a seed which
Its appearance is gross. The causal of has reached its grosser level and is now
mother earth is fragrance so when it living and pulsating and it is then put
awakens the Kundalini, it touches the inside the mother Earth then what is to
causal also just like you get the fragrance. happen?
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-52.txt 
 Volume XI. lssue 7 & 8
July Aug
199
51
The Divine Cool Breeze
know how to use it. The exhibition of its
Thus, the subtle and the subtlest is
Feplicated in our whole being as such. The
potential is the Kundalini. The Kundalini
comes on the gross through the central
Nervous system
is representing the causal of the mother
Earth The causal of the Virat is The Sakaar is the Doer or the 'Karata'.
collectivity
The causal is the power of a particular
Deity-the unmanifested power. But as
soon as the Deities are awakened. their
The representatives of Sadashiva and Adi
powers are also awakened. This is a living
Shakti in us are the Atma and the
process and how it works out you cannot
explain. Now see the foetus, how does it
take its form, who guides it, there must
be some Intelligence-who does it, who
Kundalini (These are beyond the causal.
in fact they excite the causal)
Take an Exumple Light a candle. Put
your hand befrre it. It is awakened before
manages it - who plans it out?
my photograph. The potential of the
candle has come in. That is, my Now I will question a Gynae: Anything
foreign in the body is thrown out of the
system, then why not the foetus? Answer
photograph has awakened its potential.
And with it, it can now burm the negativity.
You have seen a wall getting black out of
such an etfect.
me.
Something nourishes it, looks after it and
then throws it out at the right point of
time. It is growing within and it does not
trouble the mother, but in fact the
Everything has a causal which keeps all
the potential From causal to the gross
move through the subtle Now what
you
happens, just as fragrance is the causal of mother's face changes while the whole
the mother Earth, through that causal all energy of the being is transformed. Now
flowers and trees come out Also for where does this beauty on the mother
human being it is the carbon, How the
See the nourishing and
come from?
looking after. It is so amazing to see its
mother earth burns within herself, creates
perfection, isn't it?
this carhon within herself with the heat
and that carbon becomes a part and parcel
We think no end of our intelligence. But
living in the presence of God, a small seed
came and at the end of each a small cell
within vou to create Amino Acids. So the
mother knows. at the causal level. she
knows what you are. The causal is the
Nirakar in the Shakti form while the
came out. The intelligence which this cell
has, if it is to come to man then Sahaja
Yoga would be fully established. It
Deities are in the Sakaar to use it. They
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-53.txt 
 52
7 &B
July Aug
Volume : XI Issue
1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
straight away, see its own direction It see
a stone, it does not fight with it, it just
are free. Now it is in this freedom, when
lots and lots is lost and gone, then human
beings settle down. This freedom was
zoes around it and binds it so that later
given at Adam and Eve level. If they were
when it is to become a tree it will help in
its foundation Then slowly, and easily it
sensible, there would have been no
problem. Now one has to pay too much
reaches out towards the water. It has no
prenmonition about where it will tind the for this freedom. Now just see what is
happening to me in the midst of this
level of water.
I once experimented with a bumble bee. freedom But Now-a-days it is all working
I applied some colour on to it as it used out. This living process cannot be
to make its own house at my place Now explained to Science. The Scientists will
not accept the Deities. So don't worry
about them. If we don't have Scientists
somehow that colour came to its wings
One fine day I went to a place which was
very far away, I saw the same bumble bee
there Then she was seen again at my The greatest thing for all Scientists is to
house How did she take on all these
routes She must be having some magnet. explained to them. Say Sulphur di-oxide
what is the harm, we will not miss them.
see for themselves. Nothing can be
Also how do birds find their homes from has got vibrations that
electromagnetic Symmetric and Iso-
are
Australia to Siberia?
You see they all are in collective and Symmetric. They just state what they see.
absolutely Homogeneous And they all
They will see in Sahaja Yoga what it is,
you give them the facts and let them
experience it, How can you show them
anything Scientifically?
move together. This is all for the P'ashu
state of the Pashus (animals).
But we humans are no longer pashus, we
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-54.txt 
 全051
