The Divine Cool Breeze 00 Volume : XI Issue :5 & 6 May- June, 1999 The main point is that you leave everything to Param Chaitanya in your wisdom. If you cannot, then yet you have not felt the real knowledge within you. (Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Navaratri Puja, Cabella 1998

 In this Issue: Editorial 76th Birthday Puja, Delhi : 21-3-99 4. 76th Birthday-Felicitation Programme 7. Shri Mataji Tells About Vande-Matram 14 15 Navaratri Puja, Cabella : 27-09-98 Adi Shakti Puja Seminar (1998) 28 Shri Mataji explains Sahaja Yoga 29 News from Around the World 30 38 Dr. U.C. Rai Tours Europe Edited by : Yogi Mahajan Published by :V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Volume : XI Issue:5& 6 The Divine Cool Breeze May- June 1999 Editorial G anapatipule is an annual preparing themselves for the greatest pilgrimage for Sahaja Yogis. pilgrimage of their lives. They would be The custom of pilgrimage is going to Ganapatipule to worship Shri deeply buried in all religions, but it has Adi Shakti in December, so they decided now reduced to spiritual tourism. to cleanse themselves for the most Because firstly, the holy sites have either auspicious occasion. For ten months each becomes money-spinners or are taken one started doing foot soak twice a day, over by fundamentalists. Secondly. 3-candle, treatment and early morning without self-realisation the pilgrims meditation daily, apart from their cannot absorb the vibrations of the collective meditations, listening to Shri swayambhus. Blind faith may provide Mataji's tapes and public programmes. them with some solace or satisfaction of Liverish Yogis who did not have the having performed an act of faith ordained by the scriptures. For example in North India the kshtris, for the first hair shave possibility of ice at home hired fridges for ice packs. How deeply they worshipped the goddess at Ganapatipule and how much love they enjoyed in the collectivity of a child, undertake pilgrimage to the temples of the goddess Chindpurmi, Naina a totally fulfilled them. They did not waste Devi, Chamunda Devi. Jawalamukhi, their precious time cleansing. and their Kundalini was not burdened with the task Kangra temple and Vaishno Devi. These places were blessed with different parts from the body of Goddess Sati after her dismemberment. A Sahaja Yogi would enjoy the vibrations of the sacred sites but for non-realized seekers such of clearing the left and right sides. So the Kundalini could immerse herself completely in the ocean of love of the Primordial Kundalini. This was the Real pPilgrimage. In real pilgrimage infinite pilgrimages are merely spiritual tourism. An old saying goes, "After killing 900 mice the cat went to Haj". Divine blessings are showered. It turned out that maximum marriages were arranged from Nasik. Shri Mataji arranges the marriages on the vibrations; she never Sahaja Yogis have experienced the real meaning of pilgrimage. In 1998 some notices the place of origin. It was 300 Sahaja Yogis from Nasik started spontaneous blessing to the collectivity.

 May - June 1999 Volume:XT Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze other hand the negativity of one individual One not only receives material permeates the collective but if the collective is strong at the Sahasrara it blessings but in the real pilgrimage one also receives the blessings of experiencing clears out. Our programme shifts from an individual to the collective level and we start feeling a part and parcel of Her universal being. Then Her universal being starts protecting us. An amazing episode occurred in the New Jersey Ashram last collective consciousness. One receives guidance from collective consciousness, under its guidance one's deeds are directed towards collective benevolence. One spontaneously becomes selfless and matures into the collective self. After the year. A Sahaja Yogi boy drowned in the swimming pool. Just then, they said, a phone call came from Shri Mataji, who was at Cabella and She gave a bandhan. pilgrimage of collective consciousness. one starts feeling a part of the Divine collective programme. For instänce, on Feb 20th,99, Shri Mataji had an overwhelming public programme in Mumbai. The Nasik collective instantly After several hours of Medical death the boy recovered. But Shri Mataji said that She never called, She does not even know the phone number of New Jersey Ashrarn. tuned into the collective pattern and organized a major public programme in Nasik showing the video of Shri Mataji's We all know that Shri Mataji never calls anyone. These are not miracles but her bountiful blessings. Now we can realize how much She is always protecting us! Wherever we may be, provided we keep Mumbai programme on a 30-mm screen. It was as though Shri Mataji was herself present. That is a fact, whenever Shri Mataji does a public programme or a puja anywhere, it is a collective event for the ourselves in the zone of collective consciousness. world collectively. Sahaja Yogis can plug into the mains of collective consciousness In many ways we observe collective customs. For instance one Sahaja Yogi offers Her a garland on behalf of the collective. Similarly She may choose one instrument at a particular occasion to communicate a blessing. One should not feel bad that someone else is physically and enjoy its vibrations. Her message can be instantly transmitted through the electronie media and everyone would have the same inner experience, joy and absorption. What She says to one Sahaja Yogi is a message to the collective. Many Sahaja Yogis have experienced that when eloser to Her. She is elose to whoever she clears a certain Chakra of one bears Her in his heart. Say, If She is individual, that Chakra spontaneously pleased with the leader it implies Her clears everyone in the collective. On the pleasure with the collective. Seated on

 Volume : XI Isue : 5&6 May-June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze to please thee". In Her infinite generosity she may praise someone, She may bestow a gift on another, there is nothing to feel jealous. When we are a part of the same body, we are elated by the praise our collective ears receive and rejoice the gift, Her resplendent throne in Ganapatipule one smile from Her opens the hearts of thousands assembled there. Whoever pleases Her evokes a thousand blessings from Her. That is how we feel transported to the high heavens, during the magical evenings at Ganapatipule. the extensions of our hands receive. In all these deeds the love of our Divine Mother touches our soul, we proclaim Her glory and enjoy Her infinite love. All the saints from the great Markandeya to Shri Adi Shankaracharya have prayed "O Devi, Please teach us how

 The Divine Col Breeze May-June 1999 Volume: Xi Issue : 5& 6 76th Birthday Puja, Delhi : 21-3-99 Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi his vanity. By doing that you are spoiling have told in Hindi language that love, I him more. So the best thing is to show you can see one person's love manifested in so many eyes here. your love in very sweet and different When I saw the enthusiasm, also my heart manner. I will give you an example, which got filled with great love, greater love. I have given many a times, that I went to So one can see how powerful is this love! see this Gagangarh Maharaj, who was All kinds of bad feelings, negative living on a very high mountain and there thinking and also self destructive elements was no way of going by ear or anything can be corrected and controlled very and I had to walk. So everybody said, simply in Sahaja Yoga, if with sincere Mother, why should you go there after heart, you meditate morning and evening, all'? I said, "You see the vibrations". twice, That time you shouldn't see your watches of course, but enjoy, enjoy your that's why I am going. He had told meditation. That will give you such a people about me and he said that strength to love others, to forgive others, Adishakti is born in Bombay. Why do you instead of feeling bad for small small come to me? So they told us. So I said, I things, feeling irritated because you think must see this man and that's how I went your self respect is challenged. Sometimes to his place to meet him. Now he is we become aggressive towards some supposed to control the rain. He would people, very aggressive for no fault of control the rain. So he was sitting there theirs. Best thing is to see the vibrations on a stone and moving his head with great of another person; if the vibrations are agitation when I reached there. It was bad no use fighting. It will create more raining so heavily that I was completely confusions. A person who has very bad drenched when I went up to his place. So vibrations, you can't fight with that I went inside the cave where he used to person, you can not control that person. Or a person, who is too much of self importance, you should not try to pacify him or sort of try to negotiate with him, Good vibrations are coming, alright, many live and he came back with great anger iowards the rain. So he said, "Mother, why did you not allow me to control the rain". I said, "I didn't do that", "No, you did, because I can always control the rain or also, sometimes people try to temper

 May- June 1999 Volume: XI Issue 5&6 The Divine Cool Breeze and you were coming all the way with shrunk, you know, with their ignorance. my invitation and this rain should not have misbehaved. I said, "No, no, it didn't But today see same Delhi has become so misbehave". So what happened? He was great, so beautiful and so enthusiastic. I quite in a temper, you know. I said you saw them with their flags on. I didn't settle down, I will tell you what has know such a procession of flags will be happened? See you have bought a saree for me and you are a Sanyasi. I won't think, in Cabella, but how they were take a saree from a Sanyasi. So the rain enjoying each other! It is really has made it convenient. Iam all drenched, so I have to take your saree. Immediately won't enjoy anything else, but love for he felt terrible love for me, started erying. other people and not for yourself. On the and he fell at my feet. And then he said contrary you will see that your body, your 'Mother, now I know what is the mind, your thoughts, everything, are greatness of love. How it takes you away from mundane things and dry behaviour and not for yourself. The whole attitude and takes you to a place where you can enjoy the showers of love!" This is one of see anything but even the small light the stories I am telling you. But the main Spreads all over. Nobody tells the light thing behind the whole episode is this, that that you have to spread the light all over. you should try your love, your tricks of In the same way you all are enlightened, pure love, pure love, and it works. You you are all enlightened with love, and the must learn, gradually you will learn how light of this love spreads automatically, to try. You should not give up. Some spontaneously, Sahaja. I was also very people are very difficult, I agree, very very difficult. But atleast try with people who dancing and enjoying. I think its a very I said now what to do? What will happen? here! Though we had once or twice, I remarkable! If you can enjoy love you directed towards creating love for others changes: like in the darkness you can't much enamoured the way Yuvashakti was are not so difficult and you will be amazed great blessing because these days our that you will have a good company and young children, our young people are getting astray. They are not so badly off as in other countries but quite a big trend As we have here now in Sahaja Yoga, first is going on to spoil them and to make time when I came to Delhi I got such a them very westernized. spoiled fright of this place, because there were personality. But now I saw so many of these dancing together, forgetting their they wanted to do my Puja? Might be cast, ereed, everything and enjoying each Bombay people must have told them others' company. This is something that has to happen in this country and in every everything in small plastic bottles. I really country, that we should all feel oneness lots of friends and friendship. very few Sahaja Yogis. I don't know why something. They brought kum-kum and

 Volume :XI isue : 5&6 May - Juna 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze this Sahaja Yoga family is one. It doesn't believe in having separate existence or separate specialities. We are all one with each other and we don't care and enjoy the oneness with each other. If we do not enjoy, we are like a drop out side the ocean. Which can be dried any time. But if you are a part and parcel of that ocean then what happens is that every what sort of differences are outside. I was movement of the ocean you carry with you and you are part and parcel of that ocean, absolutely, because you don't have really very much touched becauIse now the new year is coming with a new challenge for all of us. We have to accept that Kaliyuga is over and we have to establish the Satya Yuga for which all of separate identity. All these things that make a separate you, from every country should have identity, in our society or in our culture, thinking that how you can do it in your or in our behaviour, in personal lives all country and other countries. What are the should be completely curbed down. This problems in other countries? Put your will settle many problems, from family life attention outside, not inside, this way that to national life, to international life. So you should say that I need this, I need we should curb down all such feelings of that. We should know what other people separatedness, that we should have need, What is their need. What the people separate house, separate state, separate in our society, in our nation, in our world nation. Gradually all nations will become require. Better write them down, what one, Lam sure of that, because great times do they require? Its better, it will work, are coming and so many pcopie at the might be, it might be corrected. Its very helm of affairs will take to Sahaja Yoga. important for Sahaja Yogis to sit-down Once they take to Sahaja Yoga, then things would be very much different. Today it is not with them, Sahaja Yoga is not with them. They have no knowledge of our great movement of love. So they want to have separate of every thing. They don't know tomorrow they will be scorched away with the heat around or may be with the rain they will be washed away, or may be that Mother Earth might and write down what the world needs and what is to be done. It will be a nice idea for all of you to really aspire for that kind of homogeneous society that we have here today. One day, you will be surprised, that we will be the one's who will guide and lead the rest of the people with our love, attention and care. So its very important time and at this time you should think on those lines. absorb them. So we all should be together whatever may be the differences, in different families you are born after all, all cannot be born in one family. But now Thank you very much. May God Bless You. you belong to Sahaja Yoga family and

 7 May-June 1999 Volume XI Issue:5&6 The Divine Cool Breeze 76th Birthday- Felicitation Programme Talk By Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, Delhi: 19-3-99 one of the deities who was supposed to bring in Kali Yuga and all the problems of Kali Yuga. bow to all the seekers of truth. All this being said on my birthday really embarrasses me because its all being already scheduled, it was all timed out. It Firstly it creates illusions (Bhranti). It had to happen this way, and the time has creates illusions. People will not come now that this whole world has to understand who is the real person, who is unreal person. So we have many false Gurus, as you know, we have many false propagandists, we have many people who talk big but there is nothing in them. This is one type of a (Bhranti) illusion that Kaliyuga creates. Once it so happened that Nala and Damayanti were in love with each other, they were husband and wife. Damayanti was separated from Nala by this horrible fellow called Kali. This take to global understanding how human beings, I was surprised, were anxious, in those difficult times, to get to the truth because it is very difficult to carry on with the truth where there is untruth all along. The way people get after you, when you talk of truth, is also a very hazardous task- to fight those who are just always vowing to cruelties, to untruth, to aggressiveness. These are all self destructive elements. Also we have other self destructive Kali has been doing this kind of work to elements within us like drinking, smoking, drug taking. But people do it. Just they create the problems in the minds of do it, not that they don't know, but they people, disturbing families. disturbing just do it, because of the influence of the nations, disturbing all the good wishes and time. That is what is the Kaliyuga where the good feelings among human beings. we destroy ourselves and try to destroy So once this gentleman, Kali, was caught others and have a kind of a funny up by Nala-the one who hated him. Nala temptation for this. Not only that, also said that why don't you allow me to kill we enjoy all this, all this cruelty, all this you? You should be killed because you aggression we enjoy. Now when we say are such a horrible person, you create that the Kali Yuga is over, we should such ( ) illusion, you create such problems for people. He said, if you want know something about Kaliyuga. Kali was

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI Issue:5 & 6 May- June 1999 I don't know, what it is. But we start to kill me, you can kill me but first listen to my importance, to my Hel44. What is your Helu, what is your importance? He said my importance is that when I will feeling jealous and out of jealousy we start hating people without any rime and reason. So many countries have this come on this earth, when I will rule on problem. The top politicians indulge in this kind of hatred for other people, this earth, I know there will be ia, there will be chaos, there will be problems, but people will be so much fed up with that, that they will seek the truth. Those people without understanding what is the achievement of the other person? How he has achieved? Why should I be jealous? who are going to the hills today to find out the truth will be there as ordinary Apart from that we have another problem which is the worse thing, as Krishna has said. It is the temper. Hot human beings, as house holders. Thev will find the truth, definitely they will find the tempered people, you see, can not see the truth because at the slightest provocation truth. It has been already predicted by Kali himself. So as you see lots of chaos is there, lots of problems are there and when you see people, you can't understand how such people who are educated, intelligent, they become hot and start hitting others and beating others or saying horrible things which should not be said. Now this is another criteria for every Sahaja Yogi supposed to be at the helms of affairs can go about with wrong ideas, with wrong things? The problem is, this Kali Yuga to know how far he is out of this sense of krodha', the anger? To be angry shows that you have no peace within, and you creates this funny situation in our lives. get angry just to attack another person, which is not necessary. Even Firstly it creates the situation where a person starts thinking he is very insecure keeping quiet you can be very much and he must take to some way of effective. There is a story about Chinese protecting himself. Then where he goes people, that in China there was a fight is the place where he will be destroyed going on between some people and they before he knows even that he will be said lets have the cocks fight for us. So destroyed. they had a cock fight. One person took a cock to Zen fellow. He said, what should I do with this cock so that it fights. He The second point is that we have a great sense of jealously. That sense of jealousy is even more heightened by this Kaliyuga. We feel jealous for every thing, which shows our inferiority complex or, said that it is very simple, you teach the cock to be absolutely quiet. He said I cannot do that. He said, alright, give me the cock and he taught the cock how to

 Volume : XI Issue : 5 & 6 May-June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze be quiet whatever is happening, see, something we cannot conceive with this mind. It is beyond the mind that it works. I was surprised, in Russia whosoever is attacking him. When he went in to the arena, many cocks started attacking him and he was just standing quietly, watching at everyone. This settled the things because every body ran away. They thought he is such a powerful thing he is not saying anything. So not attacking, not reacting is what he had especially, I had to face the scientists. The scientists were so much equipped, so much deep and they understood so well. Even in a place, you can call it a place of great learning, one of the oldest Petersberg "Saint universities, achieved. University'. I don't know what made Actually reaction is a very great them give me the highest reward? For what? I do not know, but they said you enemy of human beings. We react to are even higher then Science. So this they every thing. We should not react, we called as Cognitive Science. They give a name as Cognitive Science. So Mother should just become silent and then this power which, I tell you about, is the power of Paramachaitanya acts. If you want to react all right, it says 'go ahead' and if you leave it and you just become quiet, silent, it acts. It acts so well, it can act sitting down here, it can act some where else. It is such a tremendous power, your all knowledge is of Cognitive Science. Only thing is, if I tell you some thing, then you can verify it, the scientist can verify it, every body can find it out if it is so or not. But if you put this test to all these false Gurus, you will see that they don't have any scientific basis. They have it is such an effective power! It is such an understanding, knowledgeable power and above all it loves. It loves you. So when no way of giving you any explanation as to why this is happening or what is happening. I had to face all of them all this power comes into existence, in a way over the world, and I was surprised they recognized me. They said Mother this is Cognitive Science and like that every- where they gave me awards and things like that. I never knew what the Cognitive I would say it has always been existing, but when it is effective, in the krita yuga it is effective, by that you will be amazed how things happen! Every body tells me Mother this miracle has taken place, that miracle has taken place; So I know it is Science is but this is the knowledge that you get beyond your mind. With your mind you get your bias, may be full of jealousy, may be full of anger. But beyond the mind when you get this knowledge, not miracle, it is parama chaitanya which is doing all the work, all beautiful things, which is trying to help you and trying to suggest its love. It is something we can't

 Volume : XI IssUe 5& 6 10 May-June 199 The Divine Cool Breeze back, of which we are not aware. Like, must say, Indians suddenly became very westerernized after independence. Somehow, all Gandhiji's ideas and every thing was put on the shelves. So we did not know what was so great in our that is absolute. Nobody can challenge it. It is absolute knowledge. For example I will tell you one thing, I told them that I carbon atom has made the Muladhara Chakra, the first chakra. This Muladhara Chakra gives you, out of carbon atoms, a special type of construction. If you country! Such a great Sampada, such a could photograph it and make a model great power existed in this country! They knew so many things, so many things: about something that science do not know. Now it is for the science to find out of it, and if you see this model from the right side to the left side, it will look like a Swastika. I made a model for them out whatever they have said is true or not. to show. If you see it from the left side to Ihave seen it is very simple. If you really know the truth and you tell a scientist, he will get after it and it will work it out. It the right side, it will be 3 written down. If you see from down upward it is a cross, that means Shri Ganesha who is on Muladhara incarnates as Christ. So they is not one example. There can be made a picture, they made a model, the hundreds, I can give you where I have scientists, and they found out that what I told them something, they said alright. said is true and this model really can be You verify, you find out by your scientific methods and they found it. They found it! So many ways of finding it out, you have in science. But they don't know what to find!They are just going on in this one, that one they are going to the moon, they are going to this thing. That's not the way. First you find out what you have to find and then see if it is there or not. I was surprised, in the West, though we call them very much, sort of, advanced and all this thing! But as far as spirituality is concerned they are no where. Their Cognitive Science faculty is very poor compared to us; but our's also is zero because we have all become Westernized now. All our ideas are Westernized and shown. I mean one of them is like this. So whatever you know, whatever you say, should be verified by even scientists. do not discard science. Science is amoral, whatever you may say, but once they come to Sahaja Yoga, these scientists, they just get transformed. But scientists in other countries, I don't know about our country, have reached such a state, such a state that they want to know what is beyond. Allof them come to India. Why? Why don't they go to Japan, why don't they go to China. America? To find the truth they come to India. So in India this Cognitive Science existed long time

 May June 1999 Volume : XI Issue: 5& 6 11 The Divine Cool Breeze nonsensical ideas of religion, cast, nation, this. that. It separates human beings from human beings. But artificially you can not join. Many people start talking 'no no, we should not have all these different we take all the knowledge from outside and even those who want to do something about Indian culture and all that, they are so small, they are so incapable of telling them as to what it is! It has nothing to do with a fundamentalist idea, nothing of the kind. But it is a fact, it is the truth, it is the reality which they don't know themselves. They just want to proclaim things. we should have one.' You cannot. You can't have because temperamentally human beings are not made like We had a little discussion there in Italy the Bharatiya Sanskriti, Indian culture, but there is nothing like that: because unless and until you are a realized soul with other religious groups and they said to me, "we don't want one religion, one global religion we don't want." I said, 'Why"? Because you want to fight, that's and you have reached that state, till then you do not know anything about the mysteries of Parama Chaitanya. So for every Indian, it is very important to take to Sahaja Yoga. Also for all the people why? Why you don't want one religion? One religion is that you are a human being and you are a wonderful human being and that you can be one with the divine. This all over the world, every where, I told you about the Russia; the condition is very bad. But still, I must say, the Sahaja Yogis are very much happy there. When I was is your religion which is promised and has to work out. But they wouldn't accept. Now the people are changing. They are transforming themselves so fast that, I am there once, the coup was on and surprised, in a country like Turkey, we have two thousand Sahaja Yogis. They are converting so many. So all these funny ideas that these priests, Mullas and all everybody was worried and saw lots of tankers passing. So I asked these Russian Sahaja Yogis, they are more than, I think, one lakh, much more than one lakh, I those have created are going down; and don't know how many they are. So I asked them 'Aren't you worried over what is happening in your country?" They what is coming up? Even we have lots of these people in India, pandits and Shastras and this and that. They don't know said Mother we are not. I said, "Why'? Because we are in the kingdom of God. Why should we worry about Russia? The anything, I would say, because unless and until they feel the Paramachaitanya, their all talking is baseless. temperament changes and a person does not tell lies but he really feels that way. That's how he gets rid of all these So all these problems which are created by fighting, by aggressiveness,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI Isue : 5 & 6 May - June 1999 12 showing off or whatever you may call, we had sufis in so many countries. They all have tried to say that take your self- can be corrected with Sahaja Yoga realization, Know Thyself. They all have because your attention goes beyond the mind, you go beyond the mind. This said the same thing, 'Know Thyself". But Agnya Chakra opens and you go beyond the mind and you are one with this Divine nobody is doing that. That's a different point, but actually all those who were Power. Once you have divine power, how it works for you in small small ways! I mean you all have experienced, you are all Sahaja Yogis, so I need not tell you. realized souls, whether they were from a Muslim Religion or a Hindu Religion or a Christian Religion, any religion, in any country, if they were realized souls, they But every one can tell so many examples said the same, because truth is the by which he knows that this is the same. They said the same thing that first Paramachaitanya which has worked it. So first and foremost thing of every seeker the truth. So this is the essence of our life of truth, who is a real person, is to first that we have to know ourselves. Once get self realization. That is the essence of we know ourselves, you are beyond every spirituality all over the world, even if you thing, because what happens is that you read Bible, if you read Koran. Nobody become like a drop becomes the ocean. has read them, that's the best part of it How it disappears! The same thing will and they are trying to say things which happen and once it happens, you will be are very shameful, which are not there, surprised, that you are really one with they are fighting for that. With all these things they have helped us very much to show that the essence of all these religions Sahaja Yoga, many people say its a big is one and out of that one day people will charisma, its a big miracle. Nothing of the take to self-realization. Once they take kind; you have your own Kundalini, you to self-realization then they have to grow. have own possibility of becoming self Once they have grown into it, they can realized. see. All of you know, you are all Sahaja Yogis-sitting here, you know how much you have gained and how much you have Kaliyuga this was going to happen and achieved. So to give me the credit, I don't that's what is happening, that's why know, is not really true because we had thousands of you are getting realization. Know Thyself and then you will know everyone. Who is the other? You are one with everyone. That is how we find, in That is the blessing of Kaliyuga. In the Before that only one would get from one great saints in our country, great saints in person and those Gurus were also very this country, in every country. You know,

 13 Volume: XI isue:5&6 May- June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze strict, they would not give it to some people can get it, because any discovery, ordinary person. They used to take them supposing the electricity; if it cannot be to task and judge them first, and then they used amass then it is useless. So that is would give realization. But in Sahaja the only thing I have been able to achieve Yoga we don't do it. We just have to get in my life that amass realization can be them in to Sahaja Yoga, that's all! Now given. And that has happened, as you as it is, I am surprised that how know, very well. It is very simple and once intellectuals try to find faults without knowing that they don't know any thing! give realization to others. Now first they They have to become self realized people. were telling me Mother we are working then what ever they will do, that will be in seventy countries, now they are telling definitely very constructive, very helpful, me we are in eighty countries. I said, how? and peace giving, harmony giving to the Somebody went there, and did it, whole society. But first of all it has to be somebody visited another country and did within you, if it is not within you, how it. So just imagine, how simple it has can you give it to others? I have been become? How simple it is for me? At this watching, how Sahaja Yoga has grown age Ican't go to seventy, eighty countries. from one person to all these, so many of but it has passed there, has gone there. It them, and we have so many others in has given the blessings of the Divine. So other countries also. All this has shown why you are here? You should know here one person gets realization, can go and that the time has come for the whole only, we had Nizamuddin Aulia. world to change, and this transformation Nizamuddin was here and here we have is the most important thing that we should aim at. Forget about every thing, forget saints. They talked of love, they talked about politics, economics, this, that but of understanding. But talk becomes talk get transformation. Once you are for them because the others who are transformed, you know how to do the listening have no understanding about it. right-things. How to do the things that So we are recipient of their blessings, their will help you and the society. All this you beauties and their greatness, only when already have seen in your life and we are Sahaja Yogis or realized souls. whatever has happened, is not with my effort only but there have been so many Dum Dum Sahib. All these were great I bless you all with all my heart and with all my soul. I have been trying to work out in a way. I was surprised, in America it is spreading so fast. Otherwise who have been doing this. My part is only this much that I found out a way by which amass realization could be given. Many

 May-June 1999 Volume XI Issue:5& 6 14 The Divine Cool Breeze humility comes in, it will work out, it will all the false Gurus have been to America, but now it is something great that is work out in any person, any one. happening suddenly. So I told them that I whatever may be the cast, religion, race. will come and stay in America for about makes no difference. two month atleast, for their satisfaction. So may God bless you again and again Now staying any where is not so and I biess you from my heart. important, what is important is that people should understand. They should humble down and they should know that 15 Thank you very much for this felicitation. we still have to know the truth. Once this 'Shri Mataji Tells About Vande-Matram Delhi-19-3-99 T contributed for getting independence? What is your right to say that you will not have this song? This song is a song which suggests the beauty of our Mother land, the nature of our Mother land. This |his is the last song, which is very great song of olden days. Last time I told a story of my father. He was a great patriot. He carried our tricolour flag on top of the high court. He climbed up and they shot at him. He got a shot, here in the head. He was song was always used as a National Anthem. Somehow, some new people bleeding, bleeding, still he went up, put have come and they say it is in Sanskrit the flag there and saw that it is already language. It is not. It is not completely in flying. Only then he came down and told Sanskrit language.I mean I really some us to sing the song. We were all dancing times feel like crying, even I remember down below. You sing the song of Vande- those days when we were facing the Matram that means we salute to you, 'O British with their guns on us and singing Mother.' Now you see our country is song. Today these people, from going through some stupid movement that somewhere they have arisen and trying they said that you should not sing this to say that we should not have this song song. We fought the whole of this war of at all. This is what happens in Kaliyuga! independence singing this song; and those They forget all that has happened before. who are saying that, I ask them. "How SoI hope you now stand up for this song many of you have worked for "National Anthem'. Independence? What have you Thank you.

 Volume :XIissue:5&6 The Divine Cool Breeze May-June 1999 15 NAVARATRI PUJA, Cabella : 27-09-98 Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. (You All Should Depend on Parama Chaitanya) ou cannot imagine how a you do not have to read some sort of a poetry or going to some romantic mood. Just pure love which emits and this is the knowledge also. mother, who has so many beautiful children sees them in such joyous mood, with their families, their children nicely settled down! Very How you have to relate it is this way: satisfying to see you all so much in joy and complete oneness with the Divine. The knowledge that you have about One has to realise only one thing that yourself and about others also is though you are many, still compared to evident, is absolutely expressed on your the population of this world we are very finger tips. You know about others and few who really know the true knowledge, about yourself. This is the greatest the real knowledge. You are the people subtle knowledge you have. No one who are knowledgeable, no doubt, but knows like that. Apart from you also knowledge which has not been people, no one knows about themselves adorned with truth or which is not the or about others. So this knowledge that true knowledge, has no meaning. All that has come to you, is extremely subtle, vanishes into thin air because it is artificial. extremely secretive, absolutely seeret. If By your Kundalini awakening you all have you know about somebody, you know. achieved that state where, we can say you Others do not know that you know about know; you know what the real knowledge them. So this knowledge that you have is. But think of the people who do not got is nothing but love. know what knowledge is. It is very difficult to make knowledge and love put together because our idea of knowledge is very different, from what we read from the books. How can you love from the books? What love means For example we say that our knowledge is nothing but love. But one should understand the discrimination. The knowledge that is love within you is just to us is our attachment. In ignorance you get attached to the people, to children, emitting out from your being. You do not have to assert, you do not have to think,

 Volume : XI Isue : 5 & 6 May - June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 16 that then your knowledge is not with love. It is such a connection between the two. to family, to things. By getting attachment it is proved that we do not have the knowledge. If you have the knowledge, then all attachments should just drop out and you should become a global personality, a drop in the ocean. For example we are attached to many things like we are attached to our family. If You feel like telling every body that you got your realisation. You feel like telling everyone that you are a realised soul, but in that you feel that you are expressing your ego. Alright, by some other way, by some other method you can express to something happens in the family we get them that you have the true knowledge. very disturbed. We cannot bear it. If When you have the false knowledge anything happens to our children we feel you can get ego. You can think that I know so much. I know about these, I horrible, its just the whole world falling on you. Then from family you move on. know the colour of the carpets, all the shades, everything. Any stupid thing you know, you think that you are very great. You are attached to your friends, to your neighbours. You are also attached to your country. Attachment to your country is also not knowledge. Once you are a That is the sign of stupidity in your head realised soul, you just start seeing your also that you think that this is very great country clearly. What wrong it has got, what ignorance it has got, in what darkness it exists and in what way it is acquiring all kinds of knowledge in the quarrelling, fighting for rights and things? whole world, what we have achieved? But with the knowledge that you have Nothing. There are wars going on. There within yourself, you see it so clearly as to what is the problem of your country. Then you try to improve that through your love; wind which is going round and it is killing means the power of your knowledge is so many people and it is destroying so to know. Now we have discovered that through are all kinds of destruction coming in. I saw in television, this George. It is a world love. many people, without understanding what he is doing! But he is there and he is acting very well. So is it that he does not understand? Or is it that he understands and that he does something just to correct If you have all the knowledge within you and if you are just sitting at home and meditating, it has no meaning. What you have to do is to go about, you have people. This also we should have full idea. Yesterday when I came here it was raining heavily, I sat down and suddenly it to meet other people, your friends, your family and other relations and tell them about your knowledge. If you cannot do

 17 May June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume: XI Issue: 5& 6 I react to it, but if I do not react then I will know whether this carpet has got vibrations or not. That is all. Are they stopped, stopped till the whole programme was over. Till I spoke it was not raining. But suddenly when you started clapping, also it started raining. That is what it was. So even the nature emitting vibrations or not? Now what are these vibrations? That is the love. So the knows who you are, but you must communication is like this. If you have know the nature. This is the point. the light you can see things. Nature will act according to what your So when you see things, the light is there. level of spirituality is. Surprisingly, 1 Light gives you perception, gives you always felt that there cannot be levels of the vision to see things. In the same way when spirituality. I felt that once you get realisation you are there. But later on I these vibrations start flowing just like a discovered that I was wrong. It is not so. light and in that light you can see things Even after getting realisation I found which are good and which are bad. But people had so many obstructions in rising. sometimes you put the same parameter you are enlightened, what happens that There were so many temptations which were keeping them down. So one has to as human beings do. Like you may go to some house; very nice house, very good house, all these things make you very happy but actually what about that house? Is it having good vibrations or it is having work out on different Chakras, different Nadis, somehow or other you make yourself perfect, because the perfection within only will give you the authority to use this knowledge. bad vibrations? Is it worth living there or not. Like the other day they told me they There are, 1 told you, two ways of can get a very nice place in Milan, on rent, doing it. The other day I told you that. you should not react. It is human nature Immediately I felt the vibrations of the very cheap. I said why it is so cheap? to react, absolutely human; but if you are place. I said, did you go and see the to become super human you should not react. By not reacting you will grow, vibrations of that place? They went and saw this was all burning. Then they found definitely you will grow but if you react out that there was a Saintology there for then you cannot grow, because you are working under the pressure of other thing years together. I said that is not the place that is not yourself. Now supposing, as I where you can live. You have to have a very pure place. Even that of a poor man could be better than this comfortable, so So one has to use the said, I see this carpet. I know the colour and this and that and I react to it. Finished. I will not have any sense of judgement if called, place.

 Volume : XI Isue :5 & 6 May - June 1999 18 The Divine Cool Breeze comes there is sunlight. So what is the difference? Or we can say the Moon and vibrations all the time to understand everything that you are doing. the moonlight. What is the difference? In that also you can be misleading. There is no difference in these two things. Some people feel vibrations and they tell One is the Moon and another is the light. me, 'Mother, I felt the vibrations and I So all these things are very very felt that I should marry this man.' I said, confusing, that we do no understand how Did you feel the vibrations? Yes, yes I confused we are about it and we do not did very much andI must marry this man. understand how our vibrations can When I see the man, I see the Bhoots in mislead us, because vibrations are there him. I said, my God what sort of alright but sometimes even if they are vibrations this lady has felt about him? missing, just to justify yourself you will say we have vibrations and we feel that it So in your judgement what is there, there is no pure knowledge. is very good, excellent and later on you You see how connected they are. will discover that is not so. So even now Vibrations which is love and also the other when we are realised souls we should thing which you have to have is the know what is encompassing us, which is knowledge, the pure knowledge, the true around us. What is that which makes us knowledge. You can say that the pure feel that it is alright, it is good, we should knowledge and true knowledge is like the have it? Once we start understanding that energy, like electricity and the way you vibrations are pure knowledge, are of a feel it, the way you understand it, it exists. very different nature, then you are not That is love. People do not understand attached to that person, you are not also what the love is. They get mad after attached to that family, you are not someone and say that Mother, see, I think attached to that country, nothing. What that I am in love with that person and after you feel is the pure vibrations come into five days they will come and say, Mother, you. This is the point which is very no, I would not have anything to do with confusing. When you say my vibrations that person. Why? Because you have not are good, I like those vibrations, and while got the pure knowledge. You did not feel you jump into the ocean of filth! the pure knowledge in that person through your vibrations. Now see how why is it sometimes we make mistakes'? connected it is, like you can say the Sun You do not make mistakes. It is your Many people have asked me, 'Mother, and sunlight. What is the difference ignorance which is darkness and that is between the two? Sun is there. When Sun why whenever you plunge into it you fall

 19 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI Issue :5 & 6 May- June 1999 into trouble. So to understand that our them are murdered and like that all that idea that we will have this possession of the land, goes away. knowledge has to be completely clear, like in our house, supposing we have a lamp which is dirty, you cannot get the light. In the same way if your heart is not clean, So in the same way we can see on specially our heart, if it is not clean then smaller things also. In smaller things also you start doing things, believing that it is we are very much identified that if I have right, by which you hurt yourself and this thing then everything will be fine. You others. It is a very very common error in cannot understand how people just jump human nature to identify wrong things as at things and say, Oh Mother, this is ours, right, just to make themselves look such such a divine thing! this is ours, we must use this for ourselves, openly! They do not think it is a great, Wrong. To say that this is my country, must do for my country, and another says As I told you, now there are people who want to divide the country. Simple this is my country, I must do for my country. As long as there is this My and I, that means there is no knowledge. reason they want to divide. Now they want to divide because they want to have importance. A few people who want their importance will instigate others, tell them, alright we must have freedom. If we have knowledge is that which gives you a pure freedom, we will have this country for light. Pure light means pure vibrations. ourselves, then we can develop ourselves Now vibrations can be misleading as I told or a part of a country which is richer, you, or could be the quantity of vibrations which is better off, they will think that it can be less or more. There is another way. is alright, we will have all the money to It is to see for yourself why do you want ourselves, we will have everything to to do a particular thing? Mentally also you ourselves. So they divide, they can divide can use parameter of mental in the name of religion, in the name of understanding. Why do I want to do it? prosperity, whatever it is, but if you divide What is the gain for all the people. If you the country, actually you are facing a big Start thinking from that angle, what is the problem. You have seen that wherever gain for others, what will they gain by people divide, they fall into a kind of a this, why should I do it, you will be dark ditch from where they cannot come amazed, you will get the real picture of out. It is just a few people whose ego is what you are doing. So you must keep that they want to have some land as their yourself all the time in a state where you own, but they die. Not only die, some of witness yourself, you see yourself that The knowledge as I told you, pure

 Volume : XI Isue :5 & 6 May - June 1999 20 The Divine Cool Breeze why I am doing this. What is the purpose. you been wise to do something or you Sometimes could be some conditioning, have been just doing it because you are could be some sort of psychological thing, identified with a particular type of life or could be anything. But if you start a particular type of answer? So wisdom watching carefully, why I am doing it, you is a thing that gives you first of all will be amazed that your vibrations itself complete peace. If your wisdom is will start telling you on your finger tips. developed then you become very But sometimes, the vibrations are so peaceful, because whatever people may superficially coming, Ah, I got the say, whatever they may do, whatever vibrations, I am this, I am that! What is aggression they may do, whatever it is, the reason, Why I am saying again and you are peaceful, and you see the stupidity again though you are such a nice family of the other person, of the other nations of mine and you are also much blessed and you understand why they are doing. and we have so much of knowledge with This wisdom is such an important thing us? We should be very wise. If there is no in human beings because animals do not wisdom, we can never understand what have so much wisdom as we have. we are doing. Sometimes, of course, we have even less than animals but still by experience, you Now to develop this wisdom what see, we have to learn that we have been making mistakes. So many mistakes we have committed so far. Now are we going to commit more mistakes? Or are we going to be wise? Wisdom is not apparent have we to do? So every time they will come and say, Mother how do we get wisdom? What is the way to get the wisdom? Wisdom you have already within you. Shri Ganesha is already there who gives you the wisdom, but you must take to Shri Ganesha. There are people who outside. You cannot say somebody is wise while looking at that person. But in vibrations you will know that person is become so much addicted to Shri Ganesha that they lose his identity extremely wise. He may speak, he may not speak. If he speaks he will speak completely. They become very slavish about the whole thing and they just about something so deep, so wise and so believe that they are very spiritual, they nice without hurting others. This kind of are very great. All these false ideas are temperament if you develop is to become no good. Does your Ganesha give you wise for every question. For example some are very attached to their children. So much attached that they forget that wisdom? Now you must count how many wise things have you done so far, where they are part and parcel of this Divine did you take a very wise decision? Have

 Volume : XI Isue 5 & 6 May- June 1999 21 The Divine Cool Breeze force and they just are doing all kinds of taken place about Sahaja Yoga, I must things. The other day I met one lady whose son was very sick. She took him to the hospital and doctors gave him all say, and in that you should see the wisdom helps. Of course my attention is there always, no doubt, but still you should not take it for granted. You have to ask. One day, you see, I was just sitting. I just thought that I should telephone somebody kinds of medicines and he became even worse. Then she telephoned to me, Mother I do not know what happened? I went to the doctor and the doctor gave in the Ashram of New York. I never telephone there. So I found out the phone number and telephoned and asked "is the child alright?" So the leader there was surprised because that boy had fallen in him this and that treatment and the child has become worse. But why did not you ask me before? Why did you go to the hospital first? Lack of wisdom. I am there. Why don't you ask me. the water and was in the water for quite We had one case here in Cabella. One some time and he was all filled with water, even his brain was filled with water. As usual there was some doctor who said Now the mother did not show any that he cannot survive and even if he child who fell down and broke his arm. wisdom. She took the child to the hospital and the doctor said, tomorrow we are going to operate her and put some artificial arm, but the father was sensible. Survives, his brain has so much water that he cannot be normal. So I just said that do not worry. I did not know. No body told me. Do not worry, the boy will be He said alright, tomorrow? Today I will nght completely. So they were surprised how I said so. Firstly how I knew that take the child home. He brought the child to me at night at about 3 0'elock. I said the boy had fallen, there was some boy alright. I put it right. Next day when he took him to the hospital, the Doctor said, like that and then they did not know how "Now there is no need to operate because I said he will be alright! And he was his arm is alright. See the differene. One alright. He was perfectly alright. So they is worried. Immediately they will go to were surprised over my knowing about the doctor instead of consulting me. it. How is it that Mother knows that there asking me. They are Sahaja Yogis but they is a boy who is so sick. Here, I will say it will go and ask the doctor to do is pure knowledge. You see my attention something. When the doctor starts doing something then they will come to me.. is always around you, always dealing with you and how I know is this that this attention of mine is global. So if anything happens to you, any There are lots of miracles which have

 22 Volume: XI lssue : 5& 6 May-June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze upsetting takes place, any, I should say, deviation takes place, my attention is within you. That is the level some people are and I am not so sure about those who get realisation are all so much filled with pure knowledge. Some of them are but not all of them. With experience they learn. With meeting people they learn but as the wisdom, pure wisdom is difficult for them because they do not rely entirely on the Parama Chaitanya. Everything there. Immediately I know there is something wrong somewhere and I do not know how my attention goes to particular place which makes its life better. It helps I do not do anything about people in need. this attention but this attention is the wisdom. The wisdom that spreads all happens, just Parama Chaitanya knows it. It understands, it organizes, it loves, it does everything that is the energy it is. It does everything and how it manages, how because coincidences are really organised by Parama Chaitanya! over. With that wisdom, you know, what is wrong with another person or any other organization that is in Sahaja Yoga. Everything you come to know. If you want to know is different. It is just you know like you spread out every where. Forexample if you have to telephone then you have to use the telephone but for me I do not have to use the telephone, I just As I told you yesterday the way the rain was. The rain came and went away. It was wisdom. Innately it knows I am know. So this has come from a pure sitting here, the programme is going to innocent wisdom. The innocent wisdom start, it stops. Flowers know me. You do is just like a child. It is everywhere and it communicates and it tells what is the not know, when we have flowers they are all this size. I do not do anything to them. matter and what the problem is. Many They start growing, growing, blast like that! Now one would say, Mother how do I know? Because they are natural. We people have been cured with Sahaja Yoga. Many have been cured. Now if they can say, 'Mother, how did we get cured, what have you done? Did you see our Chakras, did you find out what is wrong with us?" No, I have not. I have not but I leave it. In my wisdom I leave it to Parama Chaitanya to do the job. This is the point, main point is that you can leave everything to Parama Chaitanya in your wisdom? If you cannot, then yet you have not felt the real knowledge are unnatural. We have taken so many artificialities as part and parcel of life. See all kinds of courtesies, these that, all that softness is there. All these stupid practices that we have adopted, sometimes keeps us away from pure knowledge and when there is no pure knowledge we do not know anything, what is happening. You just get frightened for small things, upset for small things. I mean it is something

 May- June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 23 Volume: XI Isue :5& 6 wisdom to leave everything to Parama Chaitanya? After experiences also, like there was one lady who was going in the car. She found her car's brakes were very surprising to see Sahaja Yogis getting upset. Among the hundred people, if supposing there is a problem; so if they are Sahaja Yogis they have to just witness and see. If you can not do that then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. It is not like practising; you know like they say if you have to have the blessings of Shiva you must say 108 times his names. That is not the way. He does not like it. You see no breaking. She did not know what to do about! Now brakes are no more. How to manage? It was in Germany. All the cars were moving very fast and she did not know what to do. So she put her head on the steering wheel and she said that I body likes that kind of a murmuring. You leave it to Parama Chaitanya'. She said, "She leaves it to Me? Alright, it is the same. So by saying that what happened. she said, 'Mother I do not know, when I wrong idea that you go on taking the raised my head, I found my car was taken rame of somebody and that Deity will on one side of the road and no body was help you. First of all you have to become there'. All the cars were passing by but wise enough to understand that you are a somehow or the other this car was taken part and parcel of Parama Chaitanya. there, very nicely, by some force. So the Everything will work out by that and it wisdom lies in understanding the working works out so beautifully. Of course some of Parama Chaitanya how it guides you, people have hard time. I do not say they how it helps you, how it preserves you, do not have, but it is not hard because if how depending on Parama Chaitanya you are one with Parama Chaitanya and can continue to be living very happy. see somebody comes and takes your name all the time near your door you will throw him out. So that is not the way. It is a you you know that it is doing the job, you are not feeling that hardness or sickness or I think in Sahaja Yoga we have lost anything. All the people write to me about very few Sahaja Yogis. They live for long their problems. I do not know what to They do not die and if you ask their say. You just say that do you believe in experience it is very amazing. How it Parama Chaitanya? Alright, it knows. It works out? If they do not want to live knows what is to be said. See, it can create they can pass also but if they want to live, poetry, it can create music, it can create Parama Chaitanya takes over and you can everything. But do you leave everything live long. But living long does not mean to the Parama Chaitanya? This is the that you can go on bothering yourself as second point in wisdom. Do you have to what you will do with your money, how

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI Isue :5& 6 May-June 1999 24 we will give to the doctors, we give it to some civil people, what you call them, engineers to do something. They can make mistakes, they can create problems. You leave it to Parama Chaitanya. It is something so remarkable that in my own life I have seen that at all the times it will you live, what will be the source? All these nonsensical things, worries come to you. Alright, then the Parama Chaitanya says alright, go on worrying. If you go on worrying, alright go on worrying. Does not matter that will happen? Whatever has to happen will happen. But Parama Chaitanya can interfere in case we leave it to Parama Chaitanya. He said works well. I was building a house in Poona and we had to put a slab, very very big slab, needed about three hundred bags of cement for that. So I got the cement and I got the people but they said you start early in the morning and you can finish next morning, 24 hours. I said alright. So many a times leave it to God, leave it to God but God means, 'I do not know what they mean by God'. God is Parama Chaitanya. God means living Divine Force that is working everything. So the another way of looking at it is the wisdom that we should understand that each and every particle of this World is created by at about 5 O'clock I told let us go, the Divine, by the Divine force; and this work is over. They said how do you particle, everything is completely under know?I said I know, let us go. So imagine the guidance and supervision of Parama it was going to finish after 12 hours, was Chaitanya. Nothing can move unless and already finished and all the workers were until Parama Chaitanya works out. It is walking about. Everybody said, "Mother something so connected, globally so it is a miracle." How can such a big slab much there, that people do not realise be laid in such a short time?" To make what they are doing, what they should them understand, I said, you see, have done. I mean on many scales you Hanumana must have done the job. All find something happening. That these people, all these Deities are part and supposing something is happening now parcel of that Parama Chaitanya. Now in America. Just try to find out what you are worshipping the Mother. To America has done to other countries? worship the Mother is the biggest thing because all these Deities and everybody Immediately you will get the answer. So also it takes full care of the persons who believe in Parama Chaitanya, who give are Her Children, under Her Command, under Her desire. There is a story as you know, about Ganesha that the mother said everything in the hands of Parama that the one who goes round the Mother Chaitanya. We give things to the police.

 The Divine Oool Breeze Volume : XI Issue : 5& 8 May- June 1999 25 earth three time, I will give hima Present. So Shri Ganesha thought in his wisdom who is greater than my Mother? No one just know it. So I am not saying that develop your knowledge to that extent that you can do it but your wisdom. If you start using your wisdom, it will always come handy. In any thing that you do, think of the wisdom. My advice to you else because he knew that he cannot compete with his brother who had got a peacock for the conveyance. So he said how can I go round and win over this you is that as your Mother does the whole present. So best is to take to wisdom. My Mother is greater, is greater than everything else. So he went round his mother three times and he got the prize as the other brother was just still moving on. When he came back he found that the work, loves all of you and cares for those who have not even got realisation, you should also try to create more people for Sahaja Yoga. In that if you start behaving in a manner and all the times saying you are catching this, you are a Bhoot, you are this, you are that! I never said that to present is already lost. any one. So you should not say like that. That is no love. That is no understanding. The understanding is that you were just So again and again I am saying it is the wisdom that helps. The wisdom to leave everything to Parama Chaitanya for a modern person, this is something very difficult to understand. He cannot calculate two plus two. It is so bad the same as the person was and noW you are knowledgeable. So you must use your knowledge to correct that person, not to put him down and that correction is also not verbal. It is just through your because of these computers and things like that. It is absolutely hopeless as far vibrations you can correct the other as any mathematical calculations are nerso person. needed. Now, I do not know how to handle any computer or any calculator but if you ask me just like that, "Mother, how much it will be?" I will say so much and it will be there. It will be there. I am so sure about it. It cannot be anything else but that and it works that way. Sometimes, of course, if I want to tell some wrong thing just to mislead the person then I may Most of the Sahaja Yoga work, sometimes I have seen stops because we are very methodical, become like great teachers, start telling them stories and then they get fed up. So when you are handling other people, as I said, we have to spread the knowledge, very important. We cannot keep it to ourselves. But it is say something, but normally I know it is that, but I know, not like the way we not for any ambition, for any leadership, for any kind of recognition. We use our know. I just know it. That is what it is. wisdom, our knowledge to help others

 Volume : XI Issue :5 & 6 May-June 1999 26 The Divine Cool Breeze heart you have a beautiful image of a out of love, not for any recognition, not for any position, nothing. Just we want person who is very very pure, you cannot, you cannot do anything mentally and from your heart if you have to do, your heart to do it because we love them. I am sure this will work out very effectively and the person who will be helped or the persons who will be helped will be just bound to you because they find the true knowledge. But supposing somebody comes to you and says, I know the true knowledge. You may be knowing it. But I have to know what you know. Then you ask that person, he will give you a big lecture. You say, No that is not the thing, just smile, that is not the thing. The thing is that true knowledge is a part and parcel of your being. It is just within you. It is not some sort of a concrete stuff that you have read or you have understood but it just has become a light within you. That light is there. It is not necessary for you to be has to be very clean and extremely wise. This is that point one has to jump into, that is, to make your heart wise. For example to get attached to some one too much, identify with some one, shows that your heart is not clean. It has so many bondages. Open your heart fully and that is why they say Goddess resides in the heart, in the central heart. She resides in the central heart because she is so balanced. She resides in the central heart, a Shakti, and She gives you all that you want. Within you She settles down as many things you know the Shalokas which say that She is settled within us like knowledge, settled within us as memory, She is settled within us as sleep. very well educated or to be very Also She is settled within us as illusion intelligent or to be very highly placed. Not necessary. It is how your heart is cleansed. In the heart it resides. "Bhranti'. She is the one who puts us into illusions because we are not yet fully perfect. We have to become 'Paripakava', Imagine all other knowledge resides in the brain while the pure knowledge resides in the heart! Very surprising! We means absolutely matured. Till we are matured this Mother herself puts you into illusions and plays around so that you do not know that actually our heart moves learn to be wise. So one should the head. understand that she is playing around you and you should try to be very careful and There are seven Auras around the not to be falling into Her 'Maya'. Because if she puts you in the 'Maya' you will go round and round and reach no where. heart which control the brain in such a manner that we act in the hands of the Parama Chaitanya. Unless and until, your heart is clean, unless and until in your So this power of Bhranti is also very

 27 Volume: XI Issue :5 & 6 May- June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze depend on Parama Chaitanya. Also there is a habit of many people to put the blame on others, like I got caught up from this person and caught up from that person. You are caught up by yourself. All such ideas are of no use. Face yourself. find important. This illusion, you can call it or you can call it thing by which she creates a drama in which you become like a stupid man being found out. So this stupidity and all that can be removed by this Bhranti that she creates. This power of Bhranti is because of human beings, as they are, they will not understand something straight forward. So it has to go round and round till they reach a point to understand that it was the play of the Mother that brought our about yourself and you have to perfect yourself. It is so important because at this juncture.of the time people think that something great is going to happen. I do not know. Two thousand years, according to them, will be something great. But I do not know, them to this shore of wisdom. So for us it is important to see that so much has been done by Parama Chaitanya for us. because it is all man made. All these two thousand years and three thousand years is man made. I myself feel, as predicted by many, that possibly because of your understanding and your wisdom, I am sure, something great may happen in this World and things may be brought to a proper level of understanding of spirituality. Because this is the last judgement and in this last Judgement you have to play a very vital role which, I am The Mother has done so much for us. Now what are we going to do ourselves to get all these powers that She has given us to become completely enlightened and developed. What have we done so far? Nothing to be done as such but to develop a kind of a deep devotion, deep understanding and that depth is possible. absolutely possible, because now you are on your way to that perfection. sure, you can do if you decide to achieve something for the future. So today in Cabella is that last Puja and I want to tell you as a Mother that you all should depend on Parama Chaitanya. That is very important to May God Bless You.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XI Issue:5 & 6 May - June 1999 28 Adi Shakti Puja Seminar (1998) (A Report) p.m. First we heard a sitar player followed by his wife, a famous sarod player. She had also performed at the Birthday celebrations this year. This lasted until about 3 a.m. Shri Mataji urged all of the y the grace of Shri Mataji, the Sahaja Yogis could worship Her in Her form of Shri Adi Shakti on the weekend of June 19-21 in Cabella. This puja was organized by the Dutch, Belgian, Spanish, and yogis to develop an appreciation for this Scandinavian yogis. They had a difficult wonderful music. She commented that in task because the hangar had to be brought these modern times, Indian people have down from Cabella near the Castle to a lost interest in their own musical heritage, very nice place called Albera near the and that only through Sahaja Yoga would river, about 3 km outside the village. On this great music continue on. Thursday morning there was no hangar Then the program of the organizing in sight, but by Saturday all the Sahaja countries started. They cut all the solo Yogis could enjoy a nice evening program performances, but it still lasted until 4.30 with Shri Mataji. a.m. Shri Mataji praised the Spanish for their unique and intricate use of rhythm. There were many bhajans and also a very nice Bharat-Natyam dance from the Belgian Sahaja Yogis. All the ladies are taking dance lessons now and they had created a collective dance to the music of Sahaja bhajans. Shri Mataji also commented that to entertain each other is a quality of the Divine. When we finally went to bed the roosters were already waking the hens! Since this was the first puja in the new Two miracle photos were taken: one of the hangar site before the hangar was set up, and one after the hangar was in place. In the new place, there is enough parking for all the cars and shady places to rest or eat. The river is 100 metres away and the yogis spent most of the time foot soaking or even body soaking. It is also outside of the village, so one is not so much tempted to have cappuccino or ice cream. We spent a whole weekend just with Sahaja Yogis. location, there were some moments of tremendous chaos. At times during the The hangar was finished quite late on Saturday evening and so the program with Shri Mataji started around 11.30 weekend, life seemed like an enormous board game with each move somehow miraculously working out at the last

 Volume : XI Issue:5&6 May- June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 29 Dutch yogis. Shri Mataji left at approximately I a.m. Because of the late hour, those travelling in the night packed moment to smoothly lead to the next event. The puja was announced for 7 p.m. and and left rather quickly. The yogis who had Shri Mataji arrived a little after 9 p.m. the opportunity to sleep in the hangar Uncle Guido started by describing the were blessed with the blissful atmosphere events from the tour of Russia. Shri filled with vibrations that gently lulled Mataji had asked him to speak about it. them to sleep. The peaceful atmosphere In Russia there is a very famous physicist of the puja stayed with us through the who can scientifically prove that Shri night and into the next morning. As we Mataji is the source of all vibrations and rose, gathering our belongings, we could ultimately, of everything. Shri Mataji still feel that wonderful feeling of security continued to tell about this Russian scientist in Her talk, and mentioned for the first time that She is writing another book which will be ready sometime soon. wrapping around us with the confidence that even the smallest details of our lives were being effortlessly managed. How wonderful to feel the peace and joy of walking in the Shadow of the Devi! The puja was serene but powerful. One very memorable gift was a giant windmill festively painted and decorated by the Lakshmi Ward, Germany and Nancy Kumar,USA Shri Mataji explains Sahaja Yoga ou have seen this last part of the Now our Sahaja Yoga is that we are dance which was when Udho all in love with each other. We just love went to see the women of each other and this is what is in this Brindavan, Gopis, who were all dance which she (the dancer) shows. I completely engrossed about Shri Krishna. must say, to very subtle point, she brought So he said that you should take to Yoga, it out and that is what we have to know you should take to Gyana, to knowledge. that Sahaja Yoga is nothing but love. It is very dry idea. I think very dry idea. Love, among ourselves, absolutely pure love. We say in Sanskrit, Nirvajaya They said no, we don't like to do yoga. frar, You don't expect anything, We are already one with Him, we are in His body and He is in our body. We are you just love, and this love is the one which is real yoga. absolutely one, so there is no need for us to take to yoga. May God Bless You.

 30 May-June 1999 Volume:XI Issue :5 &6 The Divine Cool Breeze News from Around the World NEWS FROM SOUTH AFRICA (the suburb formerly reserved for Xhosa people). We had a TV interview and a At the Grahamstown Arts Festival, South Africa, the Sahaja presentations which number of newspaper articles written by had been planned worked out better than we had hoped for: a large number of was happening the same week that Shri people received realization and a very Mataji was giving programs in London good time was had by all the Sahaja Yogis and about people from all the many cultures of the four rainbow nations. This and it is perhaps no accident that the first who came. But it was the unplanned events which gave the week magic. For group of British settlers in South Africa ten days in July the whole town is given over to this arts festival, and people come Most of the visiting Sahaja Yogis stayed from all over the world, especially at a farmhouse in the countryside, some founded Grahamstown. 30km from the town. So the whole Southern Africa. program turned into a collective get- By South African standards a large together. We had a havan, and much number of Sahaja Yogis supported our presentations at the festival. A British singing and dancing. The ladies from Sahaja Yogi kindly sponsored two ladies Soweto were the stars when it came to from Sowelo, near Johannesburg, to come and help us with people who only programs or even standing on the side of spoke indigenous African languages; a giving realization. Wherever they went, whether at the stall, giving prearranged the road when the car bringing them into French yogini came all the way from Europe, and about 30 other Sahaja Yogis from all over South Africa travelled the long distance to be with us. We had a stall in the high street, a room wiiere we had a Sahaja exhibition and played town one day broke down, people felt cool breezes and joy, and received realization. They were an example for all of us with their warmth, commitment and total trust in the power of Mother as the Holy Spirit. bhajans leading to realization being given. We had two introductory programs with bhajans and dancing in the local township At the first township program, which was conducted in Xhosa, after the newcomers

 Volume : XI Issue: 5&6 The Divine Cool Breeze May- June 1999 31 got their realization most of the young to visit their island. Their invitation was had people who had come decided that as we had sung for them in Indian languages and English, they should sing to us in Xhosa. They treated us to stirring rendering of our national anthem, Nkosi Sikilele Africa, which means God Bless Africa and includes a line which says, "Come Holy Spirit, please come to Africa. presented to Her. Since then, Nikhil and Raani have been having a lot of success with their programs. They had a major public program this summer in which 350 or more seekers got their self-realization. The hall was packed by 6.00 p.m. which is when the program was scheduled to start. It is very unusual On many occasions during the festival we felt She was here, blessing us and helping to create a new South Africa which truly expresses the joyful, creative and fulfilling qualities of the left swadhishthan. Thank You, Mother. With greetings from the for Arubans to be on time! The vibrations were very strong and almost everyone felt the cool breeze. The Colombian Sahaja Yogis who had come down to help out with the program were quite amazed at the response. Everything, every detail worked out so perfectly and spontaneously. After the program a lay from a local radio station (she had Sahaja Yogis of South Africa. -Linda Williams, South Africa attended the programs on both days) called and said she would like us to talk NEWS FROM ARUBA, WEST INDIES about Sahaja Yoga on her talk show the following weekend. Another seeker who Here is some wonderful news from the tìny Caribbean island of Aruba. A Sahaja Yogi couple, Nikhil and Raani Varde, have been living there for a while, and they have been trying to spread Sahaja Yoga in their island. Last year, when Shri Mataji was visiting Los Angeles, they sent an invitation (via e-mail) to Shri Mataji had come for the program offered us a t larger hall for the weekly follow-ups at half the rent? Jai Shri Mataji! -Nikhil and Raani Varde, Aruba E-mail: nitya@setarnet.aw

 Volume: XI Issue 5& 6 May-June 1999 32 The Divine Cool Breeze Creative Expressions is now widely available in the US and NEW CD-CHILDREN OF THE LIGHT Canada through stores like Tower, HMV and Borders. It can also be special Dancing in Divine Love CD/audio-tape ordered from any record store, if it was released at Krishna Puja this year in doesn't happen to be in stock, by telling Cabella. This production was personally the salesperson the artist's name, the named by our Divine Mother and has name of the recording (Point of Balance), beautiful vibrations. In the recording of the record label (A-Records) and the these tracks we strongly felt that our catalogue number (AL 73124). The Divine Mother was here producing and release has been a bit delayed in most of The long-awaited Children of the Light, arranging the tracks. Europe but was expected to be available there widely by the end of August, if not sooner. It is eurrently available in Japan. The production was recorded in Vancouver, Canada by the Vancouver Collective. It includes very nice versions of Jago Kundalini Ma and Vishwa Vandita, as well as a Russian bhajan Issue too. In Asia (including Australia) it was scheduled for release in September. For updates on the progress of the CD, Hristos and a 16 minute music score set to read reviews, and get information on with poems written by Sahaja Yogis from live appearances, anyone who's interested visit Steven's around the world. web site can For more information or to order, contact (www.stevenkirby.com) or the record anyone in the Vacouver Collective and/ company web site (www.challange.nl). A or Clayton Carrigan at E-mail: Ssample review from Jazz Times: "Point carrigan @ netеот.ca of Balance is an entire album of beautiful, meaningful compositions that sound as refreshing and striking now as Pat Metheny's Bright Size Life did 22 years ago. Kirby is one of the most promising new composers and players on the modern jazz scene today." NEW CD-POINT OF BALANCE American Sahaja Yogi and jazz guitarist/ composer Steven Kirby's CD of original compositions entitled Point Of Balance

 33 Volume : XI Issue :5 & 6 May-June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze heavy on our minds at first. However as soon as we began working, a new dimension began to evolve. We again found fresh things and new depths to the play, and are beginning to realize that just THEATRE OF ETERNAL VALUES UPDATE It has probably been a while sSince many of you have heard about what Theatre of Eternal Values has been up to, so we thought we'd give you an update and souls, in the same way Shri Mataji's work share with you some of our adventures. has an organic element. In order for as we are constantly evolving as realized The Long Gap After a successful tour vibrations to flow and for us to become of schools and the general public in better actors/instruments we have to Austria and Germany in October and Surrender to change and enjoy working November'97, we left for our own the play again and again. countries, sad to say goodbye, but in need The Joy of Togetherness After a week of financial and physical recuperation! of rehearsal we headed for the streets of Vienna. During the Edinburgh Festival last One month passed. OK, a bit of a rest summer we developed a street parade to after two years of touring. Two months attract attention for the play and distribute leaflets. This involves costumes, make-up, passed. Yes, still nice to earn some money. Three months... four months. for all of us the gap was becoming too long and music and lots of fun-even in the rain! there was an urgent need to come On the evening of our first performance together again to spread víbrations through theatre. in Akzent Theatre many people came and the response we received was extremely Six months later, thanks to Our Mother's encouraging. The joy of performing blessings and the tireless work of Martin together again and experiencing the and Sita, TEV members are getting on tremendous vibrations on stage was planes, walking, swimming, roller- incredible for all of us. Catherine, our skating, rowing to Australia to begin director, was in the audience and she told another tour of The Imaginary Invalid. us that the faces of the public were transformed during the play-some even Rehearsing Again We all feel extremely left dancing, blessed and happy to be together again working in Shri Mataji's theatre company, We experience a tremendous rush of but the idea of making the play fresh and vibrations during the performances and have received many letters from students rehearsing for the millionth time weighed

 Volume: XI Isue :5&6 May-June 1999 34 The Divine Cool Breeze thanking us for giving them such enjoyable theatre. Some have even mentioned that they felt something indescribable during the show. Jai Shri Mataji! avenues of European and other supporting agencies are labyrinthine and it is a long process. In the meantime, the company would like to feel that there was an opportunity for Sahaja Yogis worldwide to contribute to the running After this evening in Theatre Akzent we also performed for schools during the day as well as evening performances for adults. Our feelings of unity seemed to grow with each performance and our final night was magic. We felt like Shri Mataji expenses and costs of putting on the next. production. Ideally, TEV would like to have a representative in all those countries where performances could be given. Such yogis/ yoginis should be interested in what the held us in a vacuum of vibrations on the company in endeavouring to achieve, alert to the possibilities of performances and stage. We could only surrender and let Her run the show! Being Looked After Where to start? We are staying in Feichtenbach Ashram for donations and contributions which can then be forwarded to the appropriate the second time and feel once more account. In larger countries, regional completely at home and relaxed. We are representatives may be appropriate. always looked after extremely well and can hardly begin to thank the yogis Shri Mataji has identified the TEV project as one which has Her wholehearted care. We have been so much supported support. It's now up to us to realize Her by Austria and realize how hard it is to desires for it through our own desire. In look after such a big group. Despite this the first instance, please respond to lan we are always received with open arms Maitland-Hume,E-mail immh@holy road.ed.ac.uk or fax 441361 810741, if enough for all their love, support and wherever we go. you would be interested in becoming a Funding and Local Representation Throughout the run of The Imaginary making a donation or regular contribution Invalid TEV has been very generously of any amount to help with the TEV national/regional representative and/or supported by the collectives of those work, so that the company can plan ahead countries hosting the play when there has been a shortfall in receipts. Negotiations with confidence. for longer-term funding continue, but the Victor has sent an E-mail to all the leaders

 35 May- June 1999 Volume: XI Issue : 5&6 The Divine Cool Breeze so if anyone is interested in helping with funding, etc. they can contact their July 12-16. This seminar is a great leaders. The most immediate way to opportunity for people to learn about contribute to the next production would theatre and enjoy acting together- be to collect money in every country and professional or beginner. A TEV seminar was held after Guru Puja, transfer it to the Austrian TEV account. It is hard to express what it is like to do this work, only to say how much joy and satisfaction are gained when vibrations flow and transform an audience. We bow again and again to our Divine Mother for Next Until very recently we were all prepared Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream. However, Shri Mataji has suggested that we should go to India with rehearsing to start her blessings, and pray that we become clear instrumments to do Her work. We Charlie's Aunt. We are all exeited to start work on a new play and have decided to develop a TEV package. This will involve rehearsing more than one production at a time so that different acts can be offered hope to make this a regular bulletin to keep all of you aware of your activities and of forthcoming collective events. Jai Shri Mataji and lois and lots of love from to theatres. your brothers and sisters from TEV. Some of you may remember the clowning act at Sahasrara Puja in'97. Shri Mataji ISRAEL-A DIVINE MIRACLE! mentioned her appreciation of this form A new dimension of spirituality has been set in motion on the holy land of Israel. Under the auspicious attention of our Divine Mother, yogis from Israel and There are so many countries that we need other parts of the world spent three full and want to visit. Shri Mataji has also days enlightening the thirsty seekers of asked us to go to America, so we are this land blessed with great prophets and of theatre, so we have decided to prepare a clown's play for our next tour as well. preparing this for next year. There is also a festival in South Africa next July. The the divine incarnation of Lord Jesus Christ. Yogis there are trying to raise funds for The scene of action was in one of Israel's biggest fairs on alternative living where Sahaja Yoga had a stand. A us to go and perform in the communities, Shri Mataji has expressed Her concern over the lack of native South Africans and of 13 group yogis did the divine work of giving non- stop self-realization. The innocent people of Israel waited patiently in four rows to a community play might be a good way of giving realization en masse. Australian Yogis have also asked us to come.

 Volume: XI Iue: 5& 6 May June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 36 the bio-feedback stand to see if there was get their self-realization, each of them a significant change in his state. The result was five points positive over a normal human being. There were many others who just felt completely relaxed and peaceful after their realization. asking if it would be possible somehow for them to relax, become peaceful, free from stress, and stop thinking. In only a few minutes they found out that it was so simple and Sahaja. Even the Sahaja Yogis found that it was very simple to give self-realization, probably due to the Later on during a beautiful journey around deep seeking of the people and the divine the country we had more opportunities to attention of Shri Mataji. Approximately giIve realization on our way. The turning 300-400 people got realization each day. Due to time constraints we just gave self-realization and requested the people once Lord Christ walked over the water. to come to the follow-up program to At the end of the seminar we had a Havan, learn about Sahaja Yoga. To our which was very clearing and powerful. complete surprise more than 90 seekers Later on we learned that the peace are now attending the follow-up agreement in Israel was signed shortly point of the Israel tour was the two-day seminar on the Lake of Galileo, where programs. after we finished our seminar. Some of us had very interesting Postscript: The fair brought a lot of people and interest to Sahaja. In Tel Aviv, after the fourth meeting we still have about 50 to 60 people. There are some good reactions and some sincere interest. In experiences at the fair. One man explained after his realisation that he experienced a cool spiral of wind moving up his spine in a clockwise direction. Another person asked a yogi if he could help him to come out of his depression. He had just measured his bio-feedback Haifa, there are still about 20 people and we also just started in Jerusalem. Shantanu Chatterjee, Austria at another stand at the same fair, with a very negative result. The yogi very lovingly assured him that Sahaja Yoga has helped many to come out of their SAHAJA ASTHMA RESEARCH YIELDS REMARKABLE RESULTS THREE YEAR STUDY OF SAHAJA YOGA TO FOLLOW depressions. This person was so surprised with his own transformation shortly after his realization that he thanked the yogi and again went back to The asthma research program in Australia continues, with some remarkable results emerging. Here is the story of one patient

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume: XI Isue 5&6 May- June 1999 37 who has finished his 16-weck program doctors have been granted permission to of Sahaja Yoga treatments and has been conduct a three year, multifaceted research program on Sahaja Yoga. assessed. At the beginning of the program his asthma was so severe that he was unable to do many of the lung function tests at all. The basic tests that he did do indicated The plan is to conduct a number of clinical trials, as well as specialized studies such as blood-borne biochemical markers, heart rate, blood pressure, brain-mapping ete. The bulk of this research will be that he was of the very worst category. Even room air alone would trigger an funded by the university and associated hospitals. asthma attack if he breathed too hard! At the Sahaja Yoga program he took to meditation like a fish to water. At the end Our first project will probably be a trial of Sahaja Yoga in the treatment of about of the 16 sessions we assessed him. To one hundred sufferers of chronic our surprise, he now used almost no headache. This will be conducted under medication whatsoever! His asthma was the auspices of the University of New so much better that not only had his lung South Wales and the Australian Institute function almost doubled, but there was of Neurological Sciences. no trace of asthma in his system. The tremendous progress that is being There are a number of patients of the trial who have experienced other positive substantial changes. As a result of the asthma researeh, the Australian Sahaja made in these fields will become powerful support for the progress of Sahaja Yoga. -Sydney, Australia 1999 PUJA SCHEDULE Adi Shakti/Kundalini Puja 18-20 June. Cabella. hosted by Belgium. Holland, Spain, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Norway. Australia, Far East, Russia, India. . Navaratri Puja 15-17 October Cabella, hosted by UK. Switzerland. Poland, Ukraine. Guru Puja 23-25 July. Cabella, hosted by Italy. Virata Puja 3-5 September, Cabella. hosted by North & South America. Diwali Puja 12-14 November. Delthos-Greece. hosted by France. Portugal. Africa. Christmas Puja 25 December, Ganapatipule, international. Ganesha Puja and weddings 24-26 September, Cabella, hosted by

 The Divine Cool Breeze May-June 1999 38 Völume :XI Isue: 5&6 Dr. U.C. Rai Tours Europe Being a Fellow of the World Health Organization, Prof. Rai was Visiting taly, Austria, Belgium and Holland salute Prof. Dr. Umesh C. Rai. In I July this year, Prof. Dr. Umesh Professor at the Institute of Brain C. Rai visited four European countries: Research, Zurich; Physiology Italy, Austria, Belgium and Holland. Prof. Department, Oxford University: Rai is the Director of the International Middlesex Hospital medical School, Sahaja Yoga Research Centre, Navi London; and Cardiovascular Department, Mumbai, India, founded by Her Holiness Leeds University, Leeds (U.K.). He has, Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi in 1996. This in addition, received the Hari Om Ashram research and health centre is the only Alembic Awards for research in Basic hospital in the world where disease are Medical Science in India and the Vladimir cured by Cosmie Vibrations developed Vernidzky Award in Moscow in 1997 for through the practice of Sahaja Yoga. On his research in Sahaja Yoga and the use his visit, he not only shared his knowledge of Cosmic Vibrations to regenerate cells of holistic medicine and modern medicine, in cases of Type I diabetes mellitus. but was much appreciated for the In 1984. Prof. Rai heard a lecture of Shri simplicity and humility of his great heart. Mataji on Sahaja Yoga but was not convinced about the flow of the subtle Prof. Rai is in the topmost ranks of the cool breeze from the palms and of top Indian medical world and is a pioneer in the head of individuals getting Self the field of holistic medicine. He was Realization through Sahaja Yoga. As President of the Association of such, he took the permission of Her Physiologists and Pharmacologists of Holiness to do research on Sahaja Yoga India, Delhi; Chairman, Post-graduate to verify its claims. Accordingly, a Research Committee of Lady Hardinge Medical College, Delhi University; and Fellow of the International Medical taken up jointly by the Physiology systematic research study was organized. Three doctoral research projects were Sciences Academy. He is also Prof. Department of Lady Hardinge Medical College and Associated Hospitals in New Delhi: one on the "Physiological effects Emeritus of the Mahatma Gandhi Mission Medical College, Kalamboli, Navi Mumbai.

 Volume :XI Isue : 5 & 6 May-June 1999 69 The Divine Cool Breeze even cancer. One has to take medicine all of Kundalini Awakening by Sahaja Yoga," one on "The effeet of Sahaja Yoga in the Management of Idiopathic Epilepsy." In addition, for research on epilepsy, there was a collaboration with the Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences in Delhi. The doctoral thesis on through one's life: Also, many psychosomatic diseases are treated by transquilizers that not only cause dependency but also mental problems if taken for a long time. Prof. Rai has 62 research papers to his the first two research projects were duly approved by Delhi University for M.D. degrees, and third one on epilepsy was credit and has delivered lectures about the medical benefits of Sahaja Yoga in Russia, England, Europe, Australia, U.S.A., Japan, Hong Kong, China, Thailand and Mexico. He said that there was a positive response from the doctors of modern medicine in most of the above countries. They have started appreciating that Sahaja Yoga Meditation and the techniques of clearing the subtle chakras could be quite useful in the management approved for a Ph.D. degree. Prof. Rai said that the data collected: during these research studies are of such far-reaching relevance that they could revolutionize our understanding of the human psyche, or psychopathology, and of therapeutie processes. They have actually enlightened medical sciences in the understanding of the autonomic of psychosomatic diseases. nervous system and particularly of the parasympathetic nervous system. Some We in Italy had a strong desire to know observations are highly significant for the about this unique method of treatment discipline of psychiatry and represent a challenge to the current Newtonian morning, when I started reading the Cartesian paradigm of Western seience of body that belongs to mind. This has Umesh C. Rai would be in Milan on July prevented present-day doctors from understanding the psyche of human beings and thereby many illnesses of this Turin on the 23rd. Talking about Yoga in era which are psychosomatic cannot be Medicine at the public medical conference cured by modern medicine. Such common in Milan, Prof. Rai said that the first piece diseases are high blood pressure. bronchial asthma, migraine, depressive Yoga belongs to the Indus Valley psychosis, anxiety neurosis, angina, civilization, which dates back to the 3rd idiopathic epilepsy, diabetes mellitus and from Dr. Rai. A miracle happened. One paper, I was surprised to see that Dr. 14th and 15th. Vienna on the 16th and 17th, Brussels on the 20th and 21st, and of evidence available to anyone about millennium B.C. But Sahaja yoga is an

 Volume:XIIssue :5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze 40 May-June 1999 ideal yoga for modern times because it touches the physical, mental, social and Citing reasons for the sudden shift in the West towards alternative methods, Prof. spiritual aspects of one's health. And Sahaja Yoga can be experienced on our central nervous system. Rai said that doctors are rethinking their strategy of treating high blood pressure, as there has been no breakthrough and patients have to take medicine throughout their life. In the U.S., 50 million people When he was asked what changes occur in people after practising Sahaja Yoga for about 12 weeks, Prof. Rai said are estimated to have high blood pressure and only 34 million know it. Out of this, only 27 million seek treatment and only that there is a statistically significant decrease in the adrenaline 50 per ent of those seeking treatment neurotransmitter (as is evident from decreased VMA), blood lactic acid. achieve normal blood pressure. Based on heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood research data in high blood pressure case pressure. There is also a increase in at Lady hardinge Medical College in New Galvanic Skin Resistance (GSR) and Delhi, Prof.. Rai said that hypertensive alpha activity of the brain. All these patients who practised Sahaja Yoga along findings confirm that Sahaja Yoga with anti-hypertensive drugs became produces profound physical and normal in 16 weeks' time. They stopped taking drugs and could maintain normal mental relaxation and decreases blood pressure simply by doing Sahaja Yoga. sympathetic activity. In other words it means that an individual becomes stronger and the stress and strain of Another group of hypertensive patients hectir life does not affects his health. who were only on drugs and did not do The data of the above parameters Sahaja Yoga could not beeome normal and had to take drugs (maintenance dose) to keep their blood pressure within recorded in people practising Sahaja Yoga for more than two yearS revealed that normal limits. their control values were at least 40 per cent to 50 per cent less than those of Prof. Rai has also written a book, Medical subjects not doing Sahaja Yoga at all. Science Enlightened, in which he has These lower values put them in a better position, and thereby protect them from juxtaposed Sahaja Yoga with medicine for the prevention and treatment of the bad effects of stress and strain on the psychosomatic diseases, including its role body, keeping them healthier than people who are not practising Sahaja Yoga. in heart disease, cancer and AIDS.

 Volume: XI issue:5&6 The Divine Cool Breeze May-June 199s 41 Meditation do not only apply to the physical, but also to the mental, social and spiritual aspects. In fact, with the practice of Sahaja Yoga, the individual undergoes notjust an improvement in health. but also Prof. Rai gave examples of patients who had recently been cured ät the International Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centres: two Americans, one with dilated cardioma, and one with depressive psychosis; a Belgian man with high blood pressure; a South African man with Asthma; and an Indian lady who was cured of infertility due to a cystic ovary. On being asked how Sahaja Yoga works, Prof. Rai said it is difficult to explain but an internal transformation which leads him to become more cooperative and more sociable, with this also applying to behavioural disorders connected to stress. The press has shown interest in the as per research data, it modulates the message of Professor Rai. Several articles secretions of neurotransmitters, which came out in the countries he visited and further act as neuro-immune modulators others are awaiting publication this and thereby even help to treat immune autumn. In Italy and Austria, he gave mediated diseases. Moreover, the interviews on the radio (Radio Popolare vibrations developed by Sahaja Yoga are self-organizing, self-regenerating any rejuvenating, and cure various diseases received her self-realization from Prof. where moder medicine is helpless. and Blue Danube Radio, respectively). The Milanese journalist Tiziana Rici Rai. A few Viennese jounalists who helped at a conference of Prof. Rai's at the United Nations asked to receive their On the basis of these results, it possible to confirm that the daily practice was self-realization and then decided to meet at the same place every first Monday of the month to meditate together with other representatives of UNO. of Sahaja Yoga was an effective treatment for arterial hypertension, angina and myocardial coronary. Once the patient's blood pressure returned to within normal limits, it could be maintained just with It was also very interesting to see the meditation! "In all types of ailments," interest shown by the medical profession, explained Prof. Rai, "curing the most serious cases depends on three factors: specifically arTranged. One example was what energy has been awakened, and how the large number of doctors at the much effort the patient puts into his own conference in Turin, thanks to the efforts self-healing. for whom the July meetings were of the local Sahaja Yogis who placed posters in hospitals and health centres. At The beneficial effects of Sahaja Yaga the end of this conference a scientific

 Volume XI Issue:5& 6 42 May-June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze debate followed, with the particularly Dr. Rai, after leading the meditation, noteworthy participation of Dr. Bruno replied to many questions form Yogis. Bruni, head of the Department of Diabetes at the most important hospital In Europe, the next visit of Prof. Rai is in Turin, La Molinette. He stated his eagerly awaited, knowing that the appreciation for the results obtained techniques of treating the chakras can be through Sahaja Yoga methods and further studied in the light of his foresaw great possibilities in the synergy experience. On the other hand, those who between orthodox and yoga treatments. went to the Hospital at Belapur, Navi At the end of the conference, 14 doctors Mumbai (which Shri Mataji considers a expressed their intention to deepen their precious gem in the tapestry that She has knowledge of these new yoga techniques woven in India) have benefited greatly in which re-stabilize the energy balance, their health and strength. The doctors of leading to a healthy psychosomatic state. Several of them asked if they could the health centre, under the guidance of Prof. Rai, have used Sahaja Yoga techniques in full awareness of the union of mind, body and spirit. receive their Self-Realization straight away. Thank You Professor Rai, thank you beloved Shri Mataji. And the Sahaja Yogis? Those who had anxiously awaited the arrival of Prof. Rai to talk about big and small problems of their own or their families were surprised Paola Capudi, Italy Some Questions and Answers: to find someone who was more than a professor Rai with Sahaja Yogis Belgium, July 22, 1998 doctor, who was a very great Yogi. They were honoured to be able to meditate collectively with this calm and powerful Can one work with a candle on a cold personality. The more fortunate were able to ask advice directly from Dr. Rai. In Belgium. some 40 Sahaja Yogis had individual meetings with him and received, apart from valuable advice, his appreciation for the level of the Belgium collective which, he said, "will certainly succeed in saving its country." Then there liver? Dr. Rai answered by insisting that one should never use fire on the right side and also not on the central channel. Fire is reserved for the left side and when the left side is cleared out, the right side is lighter. were many collective meetings in which

 Volume: XI Issue: 5&6 May-June 1999 43 The Divine Cool Breeze About thyroid problems: Swadhisthana, and it is impossible to vibrate these herbs, even if you put them in front of Our Holy Mother's This is caused by the imbalance of the right and left channels, Vishuddhi and picture. Agnya. Clearing of these chakras and channels is very helpful in treating thyroid Commenting on this, Dr. Rai said that problems. preliminary research on the effect of Sahaja Yoga on cancer is very About food: encouraging. It has been seen that the practice of Sahaja Yoga and the activation of the Centre Heart produce more natural To vibrate food is not enough to neutralize pesticides. If possible, one can killer cells which can kill the cancer cells eat organic vegetables and fruit. in our body. As such, Sahaja Yoga can Alzhemer's disease: prevent the occurrence of cancer and also nelps in the treatment of cancer. One should not follow any system blindly. If a It is a sickness affecting the neurons and is an incurable disease. Vibrations can person finds that his Mooladhara or Swadhishthana chakras are blocked, then it is clear that this system does not suit improve the condition. Mental Problems: you. They should be treated in a Sahaja Yoga Hospital, like the Health Centre in Navi Milan, July 14, 1998 Mumbai. Ii is possible that a person can have both left side and right side problems? We were very much surprised to hear about "Ayurvedie" doctors who are established in Luxembourg, Zurich and Holland, who have treated some cancer Dr. Rai said that a person may be left- sided and then suddenly go to the right side. In the morning you find patients on patients with a certain kind of "ayurvedic the left side, but in the afternoon when medicine," so-called Pancha-Karma. The doctors have a guru called Maharishi and they follow Transcendental Meditation. you see the same patient, you find him on the right side. When you need to treat the right side, you have to use water, ice or footsoaking in cool water. You can do They give herbs as medicine called Amruta, which come from a factory in New Delhi. Their treatments badly both the treatments, but not at the same time. When the left side is more, then treat and attack the Mooladhara

 Volume:XI Issue:5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze 44 May-June 1999 the left side first; when the right side is a statement unless and untilI to make more, then treat the right side first. One know exactly how much detachment has to find out which is the root cause of the disease, whether it is the left side or the right side, and whichever side is the root cause should be treated first. there is and where, in which part of the retina the detachment is there, what the state of the chakras is and which are blocked. Then only is it possible to say how much you can be benefitted. Do not What about those who suffer from take it lightly, because it is something depression, hallucinations, and have been taking some medications? quite serious and one should take the appropriate steps to get it treated. You should get to the opthamologist so that the diagnosis can be made, and then show it to an expert Sahaja Yogi and take his opinion and only then start the treatment. It should not be left as is for a long time. Many cases have come to our Centre and practically all have been cured. Sahaja Yoga is one of the best ways to treat cases of depressive psychosis. Here in Milan, it may be very difficult because it requires a very drastic type of treatment. It may Treatment of asthma attacks: not be possible for you to cure yourself by doing yourself clearing the chakras Asthmatic attacks are a right heart because you are not in that state of problem. Clearing the right heart and thoughtless awareness. The person who is doing the clearing should be able to feel the vibrations and for the patient himself putting ice on the liver are general treatments. If you find that you are not benefitted by these techniques, then come it is not possible. to the Centre to see what other permutations and combinations are affecting you and then the treatment depends on that. If the asthmatic crisis is But if somebody who can feel the vibrations, treats him and he the treatment in the morning and the evening, think there is no reason why he should not be cured. gets very serious, you should do whatever the doctor suggests. If it is not Status-Asthmaticus, then with Sahaja Yoga you can be easily cured. This has been shown in the research study on asthmatics at Sucheta Kriplani Hospital in Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Problems of the retina: We have to see the degree of the detachment of the retina, but with Sahaja Yoga many patients with retinal detachment have benefitted. It is difficult Delhi.

 Valume XI issue :586 May June 199e The Divine Cool Breeze 45 About food: give Self-Realization and then start treating. In doing so, sometimes they treat Prof. Rai said that it is important to eat a diet rich in fibre. People who eat only chicken, ham, sausages, eggs, etc., and someone with a very badly caught Left Swadhishthana and Ekadesha Rudra who has been diagnosed with cancer. very few vegetables are more prone to develop colon caneer. People who eat more butter, fried things and a lot of eggs develop arteriosclerosis, which makes If the Sahaja Yogi is not deep in Sahaja Yoga and adequate precautionary measures are not taken to treat such a case, then one catches and develops cancer. Shri Mataji has said, if I remember them more prone to develop angina, high blood pressure and heart attacks. As per the Sahaja Yoga hypothesis of H.H. Shri Mataji, left-sided people should eat more proteins and right-sided people should eat more carbohydrates. correctly, that in general. cancer and schizophrenic patients should not be treated by Sahaja Yogis. It should be advisable to refer such patients to the International Sahaja Yoga Research & How do you explain a Sahaj Yogi getting sick and dying of cancer? Health Centre. The full address is: International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Centre, plot No. Normally, a Sahaja Yogi remains mostly in good health and is able to prevent many psychosomatic diseases and many 1, Sector 8, C.B.D. Belapur, Navi Mumbai, India 400614. epidemic diseases. The reason for this is very simple. By doing Sahaja Yoga, the defence mechanism of the body becomes stronger and that prevents the occurrence SAHAJA YOGA MEDICAL CONFERENCE IN MEXICO CITY With the blessings of our Holy Mother, of diseases, including cancer. However, at the same time, it is not surprising to the Sahaja Yoga medical conference from September 2-4 was a joyful event, with see a Sahaja Yogi once in a while sick with eancer. The reason is very simple. the important participation of Sahaja Sahaja Yogis are very compassionate and medical doctors from three continents. loving people. Being in Collective Before the Conference we had a Havan Consciousness, if they find a person Mexico City, and Ganesha Puja was held at Cuernavaca, a city to the south of suffering from an illness that is not cured after the Conference. by the doctors of modern medicine, they immediately offer their help. First they On September 2, the Faculty of Medicine

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume: XI Issue 5 & 6 46 May-June 1999 doctors, researchers and students came to the podium to congratulate him and to talk on the possibility of joint projects on of the National University of Mexico (UNAM) received Prof. Dr. U.C. Rai for a conference on the "Role of Sahaja Meditation in Medicine." Medical different areas of interest, and asked to doctors, academicians, university know more on his research. students and researchers attended this After hearing what Prof. Rai explained about Sahaja Yoga, Dr. Viesca explained how Mexican Indians believed in working on four centres of energy in the body to cure illnesses. The exchange of medical conference, presided by Dr. Carlos Viesca, Chief of the Department of History of Medicine of the Faculty, Dr. Graciela de la Lama, former Ambassador of Mexico to India and Director of the House of India in Mexico, and Dra. experiences aroused the possibility of more exchanges of experiences in the near future which could Graciela Vazquez-DiazJ., Co-Chairman of the Conference. presenting be the basis for a joint project with India or other countries with the same interest. Participants were in total silence for more than an hour, looking at the graphics of medical case studies, and hearing his explanations on how diseases have been diminished or cured by Sahaja Yoga. Prof. Rai told the delegates that high blood pressure, bronchial asthma, epilepsy, migraine, and a host of other psychosomatic diseases for which there On September 3, Dr. Rai gave a second public conference at the District of Coyoacan, to the South of Mexico City. The audience responded with great interest, asking him numerous questions. When one person asked for the experience of awakening the Kundalini, Dr. Rai finished to explain the substantive aspects of Sahaja Yoga and how its founder and master, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi has spread it in more than 70 is no cure in modern medicine now can be cured at the International Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre. This centre, located in New Mumbai, India, was founded by Her Holiness Mataji Shri countries. After Dr. Rai gave the Nirmala Devi in 1996. This Centre is Realization, everyone raised their hands unique in the whole world, where no to show that they had felt the cool breeze medicines are given and treatment to over their heads, and were invited to a follow-up program for the following patients from all over the world is done week. only by vibrations. After the conference finished, medical On Friday, September 4. Dr. Rai

 Volume: XI Issue: 5&6 May-June 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 47 addressed the Mexican Sahaja collective, supported by Sahaja medical doctors who Graciela Vazquez-Dias, Mexico City SAHAJA YOGA MEDICAL had come to the Medical Conference. Edgar Patarroyo from Colombia CONFERENCE AT NIH IN demonstrated his great capacity to WASHINGTON, DC interpret the two conferences into For the first time, the value of Sahaja Spanish, and directed the Sahaja cleansing Yoga has been recognized by a major techniques during the workshop. Other scientific institution in the United States Sahaja doctors in attendance were Henry in an historic event. On September 9, Forero, also from Colombia, Pepe Suero 1998, the prestigious National Institutes from Spain and Chanda his wife who is a of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Maryland medical doctor from India. (a suburb of Washington, D.C.) was the The TV channel PCTV, that transmits to site of a day-long medical conference on an audience of a million people in Mexico Sahaja Yoga. The internationally- and Latin America, inaugurated a new renowned medical physiologist and program called "New Horizons for the Sahaja Yogi, Prof. Dr. U.C. Rai presented Millennium", with a special program on Sahaja Yoga. They interviewed Dr. Rai. the physiological effects and medical the other Sahaja medical doctors, and the benefits of Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja representative in Mexico. the findings of 12 years of research into During the conference, Dr. Rai showed a video recording of interviews with The Sahaja Medical Conference in patients from the USA, UK, Mexico. Mexico has opened a new chapter for the treatment of psychosomatic diseases between the Faculty of Medicine of the Germany, Brazil, Russia and India who were treated at the health centre and were National University of Mexico and the healed. NIH host Dr. George Patrick, International Sahaja Yoga Research and Ph.D., Chief of Recreational and Health Centre. It has also awakened great Rehabilitation Therapy, thanked Dr. Rai interest in the general public on the for his excellent presentation and explained why Sahaja Yoga, besides philosophy and practice of Sahaja Yoga. tackling health problems from stress to cardiovascular disease, was important to the work of the research giant. Calling Sahaja Yoga "complementary medicine. Dr. Patrick spoke of the NIH's May our Holy Mother continue blessing Sahaja Yoga in Mexico, and favour this small collective with established yogis from other countries.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI issue : 5 & 6 May-June 1999 48 understanding of the necessity to continue studying the mind-body effect in healing he arrived in Washington, DC from the medical conference in Mexico City, he gave a talk to the yogis who had gathered for the Ganesha Puja seminar in nearby Maryland. (This talk will be reported in the next issue.) The atmosphere was charged with excitement. As we anticipated the upcoming NIH conference, the yogis could feel that we were part of history in the making. and to introduce effective new methods. "NIH believes in energy medicine and complementary medicines and sees the powerful role of spirituality in the healing process," he said. "Sometimes healing doesn't necessarily mean a cure, but it does mean making people whole. Sahaja Yoga helps that process along and we like what we see," he concluded. The next day, he graciously agreed to two A report about the conference aired on a 20-minute videotaped interviews about his work at the Sahaja Yoga Research and local cable news program that night. The five-minute piece was the second story of the evening, and showed Sahaja Yoga in a positive light. The journalist Health Centre. These interviews will be edited and made available for programs, cable TV and radio projects. Later, in New York, Dr. Rai gave another question-and-answer session on medicine and Sahaja Yoga. Throughout his stay, he was gracious, generous and eager to do what he could to assist the growth of Sahaja Yoga in America. interviewed several members of the audience, including some who had been treated at the Centre. The journalist even got her realization during the conference. Despite his busy schedule, Dr. Rai gave the Sahaja Yogis many opportunities to meet with him and benefit from his knowledge and experience. Shortly after -Mary Yelesin, USA



----------------------

1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
00
Volume : XI Issue :5 & 6
May- June, 1999
The main point is that you leave everything to Param Chaitanya in your wisdom. If you
cannot, then yet you have not felt the real knowledge within you.
(Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Navaratri Puja, Cabella 1998
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Editorial
76th Birthday Puja, Delhi : 21-3-99
4.
76th Birthday-Felicitation Programme
7.
Shri Mataji Tells About Vande-Matram
14
15
Navaratri Puja, Cabella : 27-09-98
Adi Shakti Puja Seminar (1998)
28
Shri Mataji explains Sahaja Yoga
29
News from Around the World
30
38
Dr. U.C. Rai Tours Europe
Edited by : Yogi Mahajan
Published by :V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue:5& 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
May- June 1999
Editorial
G
anapatipule is an annual preparing themselves for the greatest
pilgrimage for Sahaja Yogis. pilgrimage of their lives. They would be
The custom of pilgrimage is going to Ganapatipule to worship Shri
deeply buried in all religions, but it has Adi Shakti in December, so they decided
now reduced to spiritual tourism. to cleanse themselves for the most
Because firstly, the holy sites have either auspicious occasion. For ten months each
becomes money-spinners or are taken one started doing foot soak twice a day,
over by fundamentalists. Secondly. 3-candle, treatment and early morning
without self-realisation the pilgrims meditation daily, apart from their
cannot absorb the vibrations of the collective meditations, listening to Shri
swayambhus. Blind faith may provide Mataji's tapes and public programmes.
them with some solace or satisfaction of Liverish Yogis who did not have the
having performed an act of faith ordained
by the scriptures. For example in North
India the kshtris, for the first hair shave
possibility of ice at home hired fridges for
ice packs. How deeply they worshipped
the goddess at Ganapatipule and how
much love they enjoyed in the collectivity
of a child, undertake pilgrimage to the
temples of the goddess Chindpurmi, Naina
a
totally fulfilled them. They did not waste
Devi, Chamunda Devi. Jawalamukhi,
their precious time cleansing. and their
Kundalini was not burdened with the task
Kangra temple and Vaishno Devi. These
places were blessed with different parts
from the body of Goddess Sati after her
dismemberment. A Sahaja Yogi would
enjoy the vibrations of the sacred sites
but for non-realized seekers such
of clearing the left and right sides. So the
Kundalini could immerse herself
completely in the ocean of love of the
Primordial Kundalini. This was the Real
pPilgrimage. In real pilgrimage infinite
pilgrimages are merely spiritual tourism.
An old saying goes, "After killing 900
mice the cat went to Haj".
Divine blessings are showered. It turned
out that maximum marriages were
arranged from Nasik. Shri Mataji arranges
the marriages on the vibrations; she never
Sahaja Yogis have experienced the
real meaning of pilgrimage. In 1998 some notices the place of origin. It was
300 Sahaja Yogis from Nasik started
spontaneous blessing to the collectivity.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 May - June 1999
Volume:XT Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
other hand the negativity of one individual
One not only receives material
permeates the collective but if the
collective is strong at the Sahasrara it
blessings but in the real pilgrimage one
also receives the blessings of experiencing
clears out. Our programme shifts from
an individual to the collective level and
we start feeling a part and parcel of Her
universal being. Then Her universal being
starts protecting us. An amazing episode
occurred in the New Jersey Ashram last
collective consciousness. One receives
guidance from collective consciousness,
under its guidance one's deeds are
directed towards collective benevolence.
One spontaneously becomes selfless and
matures into the collective self. After the
year. A Sahaja Yogi boy drowned in the
swimming pool. Just then, they said, a
phone call came from Shri Mataji, who
was at Cabella and She gave a bandhan.
pilgrimage of collective consciousness.
one starts feeling a part of the Divine
collective programme. For instänce, on
Feb 20th,99, Shri Mataji had an
overwhelming public programme in
Mumbai. The Nasik collective instantly
After several hours of Medical death the
boy recovered. But Shri Mataji said that
She never called, She does not even know
the phone number of New Jersey Ashrarn.
tuned into the collective pattern and
organized a major public programme in
Nasik showing the video of Shri Mataji's
We all know that Shri Mataji never calls
anyone. These are not miracles but her
bountiful blessings. Now we can realize
how much She is always protecting us!
Wherever we may be, provided we keep
Mumbai programme on a 30-mm screen.
It was as though Shri Mataji was herself
present. That is a fact, whenever Shri
Mataji does a public programme or a puja
anywhere, it is a collective event for the
ourselves in the zone of collective
consciousness.
world collectively. Sahaja Yogis can plug
into the mains of collective consciousness
In many ways we observe collective
customs. For instance one Sahaja Yogi
offers Her a garland on behalf of the
collective. Similarly She may choose one
instrument at a particular occasion to
communicate a blessing. One should not
feel bad that someone else is physically
and enjoy its vibrations. Her message can
be instantly transmitted through the
electronie media and everyone would
have the same inner experience, joy and
absorption. What She says to one Sahaja
Yogi is a message to the collective. Many
Sahaja Yogis have experienced that when eloser to Her. She is elose to whoever
she clears a certain Chakra of one bears Her in his heart. Say, If She is
individual, that Chakra spontaneously pleased with the leader it implies Her
clears everyone in the collective. On the pleasure with the collective. Seated on
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Volume : XI Isue : 5&6
May-June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
to please thee". In Her infinite generosity
she may praise someone, She may bestow
a gift on another, there is nothing to feel
jealous. When we are a part of the same
body, we are elated by the praise our
collective ears receive and rejoice the gift,
Her resplendent throne in Ganapatipule
one smile from Her opens the hearts of
thousands assembled there. Whoever
pleases Her evokes a thousand blessings
from Her. That is how we feel transported
to the high heavens, during the magical
evenings at Ganapatipule.
the extensions of our hands receive. In
all these deeds the love of our Divine
Mother touches our soul, we proclaim
Her glory and enjoy Her infinite love.
All the saints from the great
Markandeya to Shri Adi Shankaracharya
have prayed "O Devi, Please teach us how
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Divine Col Breeze
May-June 1999
Volume: Xi Issue : 5& 6
76th Birthday Puja, Delhi : 21-3-99
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
his vanity. By doing that you are spoiling
have told in Hindi language that love,
I
him more. So the best thing is to show
you can see one person's love
manifested in so many eyes here. your love in very sweet and different
When I saw the enthusiasm, also my heart manner. I will give you an example, which
got filled with great love, greater love. I have given many a times, that I went to
So one can see how powerful is this love! see this Gagangarh Maharaj, who was
All kinds of bad feelings, negative living on a very high mountain and there
thinking and also self destructive elements was no way of going by ear or anything
can be corrected and controlled very and I had to walk. So everybody said,
simply in Sahaja Yoga, if with sincere Mother, why should you go there after
heart, you meditate morning and evening, all'? I said, "You see the vibrations".
twice, That time you shouldn't see your
watches of course, but enjoy, enjoy your that's why I am going. He had told
meditation. That will give you such a people about me and he said that
strength to love others, to forgive others, Adishakti is born in Bombay. Why do you
instead of feeling bad for small small come to me? So they told us. So I said, I
things, feeling irritated because you think must see this man and that's how I went
your self respect is challenged. Sometimes to his place to meet him. Now he is
we become aggressive towards some supposed to control the rain. He would
people, very aggressive for no fault of control the rain. So he was sitting there
theirs. Best thing is to see the vibrations on a stone and moving his head with great
of another person; if the vibrations are agitation when I reached there. It was
bad no use fighting. It will create more raining so heavily that I was completely
confusions. A person who has very bad drenched when I went up to his place. So
vibrations, you can't fight with that I went inside the cave where he used to
person, you can not control that person.
Or a person, who is too much of self
importance, you should not try to pacify
him or sort of try to negotiate with him,
Good vibrations are coming, alright,
many
live and he came back with great anger
iowards the rain. So he said, "Mother,
why did you not allow me to control the
rain". I said, "I didn't do that", "No, you
did, because I can always control the rain
or also, sometimes people try to temper
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 May- June 1999
Volume: XI Issue 5&6
The Divine Cool Breeze
and you were coming all the way with shrunk, you know, with their ignorance.
my invitation and this rain should not have
misbehaved. I said, "No, no, it didn't But today see same Delhi has become so
misbehave". So what happened? He was great, so beautiful and so enthusiastic. I
quite in a temper, you know. I said you saw them with their flags on. I didn't
settle down, I will tell you what has know such a procession of flags will be
happened? See you have bought a saree
for me and you are a Sanyasi. I won't think, in Cabella, but how they were
take a saree from a Sanyasi. So the rain enjoying each other! It is really
has made it convenient. Iam all drenched,
so I have to take your saree. Immediately won't enjoy anything else, but love for
he felt terrible love for me, started erying. other people and not for yourself. On the
and he fell at my feet. And then he said contrary you will see that your body, your
'Mother, now I know what is the mind, your thoughts, everything, are
greatness of love. How it takes you away
from mundane things and dry behaviour and not for yourself. The whole attitude
and takes you to a place where you can
enjoy the showers of love!" This is one of see anything but even the small light
the stories I am telling you. But the main Spreads all over. Nobody tells the light
thing behind the whole episode is this, that that you have to spread the light all over.
you should try your love, your tricks of In the same way you all are enlightened,
pure love, pure love, and it works. You you are all enlightened with love, and the
must learn, gradually you will learn how light of this love spreads automatically,
to try. You should not give up. Some spontaneously, Sahaja. I was also very
people are very difficult, I agree, very very
difficult. But atleast try with people who dancing and enjoying. I think its a very
I said now what to do? What will happen?
here! Though we had once or twice, I
remarkable! If you can enjoy love you
directed towards creating love for others
changes: like in the darkness you can't
much enamoured the way Yuvashakti was
are not so difficult and you will be amazed great blessing because these days our
that you will have a good company and young children, our young people are
getting astray. They are not so badly off
as in other countries but quite a big trend
As we have here now in Sahaja Yoga, first is going on to spoil them and to make
time when I came to Delhi I got such a them very westernized. spoiled
fright of this place, because there were personality. But now I saw so many of
these dancing together, forgetting their
they wanted to do my Puja? Might be cast, ereed, everything and enjoying each
Bombay people must have told them others' company. This is something that
has to happen in this country and in every
everything in small plastic bottles. I really country, that we should all feel oneness
lots of friends and friendship.
very few Sahaja Yogis. I don't know why
something. They brought kum-kum and
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Volume :XI isue : 5&6
May - Juna 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
this Sahaja Yoga family is one. It
doesn't believe in having separate
existence or separate specialities. We are
all one with each other and we don't care
and enjoy the oneness with each other. If
we do not enjoy, we are like a drop out
side the ocean. Which can be dried any
time. But if you are a part and parcel of
that ocean then what happens is that every
what sort of differences are outside. I was
movement of the ocean you carry with
you and you are part and parcel of that
ocean, absolutely, because you don't have
really very much touched becauIse now
the new year is coming with a new
challenge for all of us. We have to accept
that Kaliyuga is over and we have to
establish the Satya Yuga for which all of
separate identity.
All these things that make a separate you, from every country should have
identity, in our society or in our culture, thinking that how you can do it in your
or in our behaviour, in personal lives all country and other countries. What are the
should be completely curbed down. This problems in other countries? Put your
will settle many problems, from family life attention outside, not inside, this way that
to national life, to international life. So you should say that I need this, I need
we should curb down all such feelings of that. We should know what other people
separatedness, that we should have need, What is their need. What the people
separate house, separate state, separate in our society, in our nation, in our world
nation. Gradually all nations will become require. Better write them down, what
one, Lam sure of that, because great times do they require? Its better, it will work,
are coming and so many pcopie at the might be, it might be corrected. Its very
helm of affairs will take to Sahaja Yoga. important for Sahaja Yogis to sit-down
Once they take to Sahaja Yoga, then
things would be very much different.
Today it is not with them, Sahaja Yoga is
not with them. They have no knowledge
of our great movement of love. So they
want to have separate of every thing.
They don't know tomorrow they will be
scorched away with the heat around or
may be with the rain they will be washed
away, or may be that Mother Earth might
and write down what the world needs and
what is to be done. It will be a nice idea
for all of you to really aspire for that kind
of homogeneous society that we have
here today. One day, you will be surprised,
that we will be the one's who will guide
and lead the rest of the people with our
love, attention and care. So its very
important time and at this time you should
think on those lines.
absorb them. So we all should be together
whatever may be the differences, in
different families you are born after all,
all cannot be born in one family. But now
Thank you very much.
May God Bless You.
you belong to Sahaja Yoga family and
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 7
May-June 1999
Volume XI Issue:5&6
The Divine Cool Breeze
76th Birthday- Felicitation Programme
Talk By Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, Delhi: 19-3-99
one of the deities who was supposed to
bring in Kali Yuga and all the problems
of Kali Yuga.
bow to all the seekers of truth. All
this being said on my birthday really
embarrasses me because its all being
already scheduled, it was all timed out. It
Firstly it creates illusions (Bhranti). It
had to happen this way, and the time has
creates illusions. People will not
come now that this whole world has to
understand who is the real person, who
is unreal person. So we have many false
Gurus, as you know, we have many false
propagandists, we have many people who
talk big but there is nothing in them. This
is one type of a (Bhranti) illusion that
Kaliyuga creates. Once it so happened
that Nala and Damayanti were in love
with each other, they were husband and
wife. Damayanti was separated from Nala
by this horrible fellow called Kali. This
take to global understanding how human
beings, I was surprised, were anxious, in
those difficult times, to get to the truth
because it is very difficult to carry on with
the truth where there is untruth all along.
The way people get after you, when you
talk of truth, is also a very hazardous task-
to fight those who are just always vowing
to cruelties, to untruth, to aggressiveness.
These are all self destructive elements.
Also we have other self destructive
Kali has been doing this kind of work to
elements within us like drinking, smoking,
drug taking. But people do it. Just they create the problems in the minds of
do it, not that they don't know, but they people, disturbing families. disturbing
just do it, because of the influence of the nations, disturbing all the good wishes and
time. That is what is the Kaliyuga where the good feelings among human beings.
we destroy ourselves and try to destroy So once this gentleman, Kali, was caught
others and have a kind of a funny up by Nala-the one who hated him. Nala
temptation for this. Not only that, also said that why don't you allow me to kill
we enjoy all this, all this cruelty, all this you? You should be killed because you
aggression we enjoy. Now when we say are such a horrible person, you create
that the Kali Yuga is over, we should such ( ) illusion, you create such
problems for people. He said, if you want
know something about Kaliyuga. Kali was
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI Issue:5 & 6
May- June 1999
I don't know, what it is. But we start
to kill me, you can kill me but first listen
to my importance, to my Hel44. What
is your Helu, what is your importance?
He said my importance is that when I will
feeling jealous and out of jealousy we start
hating people without any rime and
reason. So many countries have this
come on this earth, when I will rule on
problem. The top politicians indulge in
this kind of hatred for other people,
this earth, I know there will be ia, there
will be chaos, there will be problems, but
people will be so much fed up with that,
that they will seek the truth. Those people
without understanding what is the
achievement of the other person? How
he has achieved? Why should I be jealous?
who are going to the hills today to find
out the truth will be there as ordinary
Apart from that we have another
problem which is the worse thing, as
Krishna has said. It is the temper. Hot
human beings, as house holders. Thev will
find the truth, definitely they will find the
tempered people, you see, can not see the
truth because at the slightest provocation
truth. It has been already predicted by Kali
himself. So as you see lots of chaos is
there, lots of problems are there and when
you see people, you can't understand how
such people who are educated, intelligent,
they become hot and start hitting others
and beating others or saying horrible
things which should not be said. Now this
is another criteria for every Sahaja Yogi
supposed to be at the helms of affairs can
go about with wrong ideas, with wrong
things? The problem is, this Kali Yuga
to know how far he is out of this sense of
krodha', the anger? To be angry shows
that you have no peace within, and you
creates this funny situation in our lives.
get angry just to attack another
person, which is not necessary. Even
Firstly it creates the situation where a
person starts thinking he is very insecure keeping quiet you can be very much
and he must take to some way of effective. There is a story about Chinese
protecting himself. Then where he goes people, that in China there was a fight
is the place where he will be destroyed going on between some people and they
before he knows even that he will be said lets have the cocks fight for us. So
destroyed.
they had a cock fight. One person took a
cock to Zen fellow. He said, what should
I do with this cock so that it fights. He
The second point is that we have a
great sense of jealously. That sense of
jealousy is even more heightened by this
Kaliyuga. We feel jealous for every thing,
which shows our inferiority complex or,
said that it is very simple, you teach the
cock to be absolutely quiet. He said I
cannot do that. He said, alright, give me
the cock and he taught the cock how to
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 5 & 6
May-June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
be quiet whatever is happening,
see, something we cannot conceive with
this mind. It is beyond the mind that it
works. I was surprised, in Russia
whosoever is attacking him. When he
went in to the arena, many cocks started
attacking him and he was just standing
quietly, watching at everyone. This settled
the things because every body ran away.
They thought he is such a powerful thing
he is not saying anything. So not
attacking, not reacting is what he had
especially, I had to face the scientists. The
scientists were so much equipped, so
much deep and they understood so well.
Even in a place, you can call it a place of
great learning, one of the oldest
Petersberg
"Saint
universities,
achieved.
University'. I don't know what made
Actually reaction is a very great them give me the highest reward? For
what? I do not know, but they said you
enemy of human beings. We react to
are even higher then Science. So this they
every thing. We should not react, we
called as Cognitive Science. They give
a name as Cognitive Science. So Mother
should just become silent and then this
power which, I tell you about, is the
power of Paramachaitanya acts. If you
want to react all right, it says 'go ahead'
and if you leave it and you just become
quiet, silent, it acts. It acts so well, it can
act sitting down here, it can act some
where else. It is such a tremendous power,
your all knowledge is of Cognitive
Science. Only thing is, if I tell you some
thing, then you can verify it, the scientist
can verify it, every body can find it out if
it is so or not. But if you put this test to
all these false Gurus, you will see that they
don't have any scientific basis. They have
it is such an effective power! It is such an
understanding, knowledgeable power and
above all it loves. It loves you. So when
no way of giving you any explanation as
to why this is happening or what is
happening. I had to face all of them all
this power comes into existence, in a way
over the world, and I was surprised they
recognized me. They said Mother this is
Cognitive Science and like that every-
where they gave me awards and things
like that. I never knew what the Cognitive
I would say it has always been existing,
but when it is effective, in the krita yuga
it is effective, by that you will be amazed
how things happen! Every body tells me
Mother this miracle has taken place, that
miracle has taken place; So I know it is
Science is but this is the knowledge that
you get beyond your mind. With your
mind you get your bias, may be full of
jealousy, may be full of anger. But beyond
the mind when you get this knowledge,
not miracle, it is parama chaitanya which
is doing all the work, all beautiful things,
which is trying to help you and trying to
suggest its love. It is something we can't
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Volume : XI IssUe 5& 6
10
May-June 199
The Divine Cool Breeze
back, of which we are not aware. Like,
must say, Indians suddenly became very
westerernized after independence.
Somehow, all Gandhiji's ideas and every
thing was put on the shelves. So we did
not know what was so great in our
that is absolute. Nobody can challenge
it. It is absolute knowledge. For example
I will tell you one thing, I told them that
I
carbon atom has made the Muladhara
Chakra, the first chakra. This Muladhara
Chakra gives you, out of carbon atoms,
a special type of construction. If you country! Such a great Sampada, such a
could photograph it and make a model great power existed in this country! They
knew so many things, so many things:
about something that science do not
know. Now it is for the science to find
out of it, and if you see this model from
the right side to the left side, it will look
like a Swastika. I made a model for them
out whatever they have said is true or not.
to show. If you see it from the left side to
Ihave seen it is very simple. If you really
know the truth and you tell a scientist, he
will get after it and it will work it out. It
the right side, it will be 3 written down.
If you see from down upward it is a cross,
that means Shri Ganesha who is on
Muladhara incarnates as Christ. So they is not one example. There can be
made a picture, they made a model, the hundreds, I can give you where I have
scientists, and they found out that what I told them something, they said alright.
said is true and this model really can be You verify, you find out by your scientific
methods and they found it. They found
it! So many ways of finding it out, you
have in science. But they don't know what
to find!They are just going on in this one,
that one they are going to the moon, they
are going to this thing. That's not the way.
First you find out what you have to find
and then see if it is there or not. I was
surprised, in the West, though we call
them very much, sort of, advanced and
all this thing! But as far as spirituality is
concerned they are no where. Their
Cognitive Science faculty is very poor
compared to us; but our's also is zero
because we have all become Westernized
now. All our ideas are Westernized and
shown. I mean one of them is like this.
So whatever you know, whatever you
say, should be verified by even scientists.
do not discard science. Science is
amoral, whatever you may say, but once
they come to Sahaja Yoga, these
scientists, they just get transformed. But
scientists in other countries, I don't know
about our country, have reached such a
state, such a state that they want to know
what is beyond. Allof them come to India.
Why? Why don't they go to Japan, why
don't they go to China. America? To find
the truth they come to India. So in India
this Cognitive Science existed long time
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 May June 1999
Volume : XI Issue: 5& 6
11
The Divine Cool Breeze
nonsensical ideas of religion, cast, nation,
this. that. It separates human beings from
human beings. But artificially you can not
join. Many people start talking 'no no,
we should not have all these different
we take all the knowledge from outside
and even those who want to do something
about Indian culture and all that, they are
so small, they are so incapable of telling
them as to what it is! It has nothing to do
with a fundamentalist idea, nothing of the
kind. But it is a fact, it is the truth, it is
the reality which they don't know
themselves. They just want to proclaim
things. we should have one.' You cannot.
You can't have because temperamentally
human beings are not made like
We had a little discussion there in Italy
the Bharatiya Sanskriti, Indian culture,
but there is nothing like that: because
unless and until you are a realized soul
with other religious groups and they said
to me, "we don't want one religion, one
global religion we don't want." I said,
'Why"? Because you want to fight, that's
and you have reached that state, till then
you do not know anything about the
mysteries of Parama Chaitanya. So for
every Indian, it is very important to take
to Sahaja Yoga. Also for all the people
why? Why you don't want one religion?
One religion is that you are a human being
and you are a wonderful human being and
that you can be one with the divine. This
all over the world, every where, I told
you about the Russia; the condition is very
bad. But still, I must say, the Sahaja Yogis
are very much happy there. When I was
is your religion which is promised and has
to work out. But they wouldn't accept.
Now the people are changing. They are
transforming themselves so fast that, I am
there once, the coup was on and
surprised, in a country like Turkey, we
have two thousand Sahaja Yogis. They
are converting so many. So all these funny
ideas that these priests, Mullas and all
everybody was worried and saw lots of
tankers passing. So I asked these Russian
Sahaja Yogis, they are more than, I think,
one lakh, much more than one lakh, I those have created are going down; and
don't know how many they are. So I
asked them 'Aren't you worried over
what is happening in your country?" They
what is coming up? Even we have lots of
these people in India, pandits and Shastras
and this and that. They don't know
said Mother we are not. I said, "Why'?
Because we are in the kingdom of God.
Why should we worry about Russia? The
anything, I would say, because unless and
until they feel the Paramachaitanya, their
all talking is baseless.
temperament changes and a person does
not tell lies but he really feels that way.
That's how he gets rid of all these
So all these problems which are
created by fighting, by aggressiveness,
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI Isue : 5 & 6
May - June 1999
12
showing off or whatever you may call,
we had sufis in so many countries. They
all have tried to say that take your self-
can be corrected with Sahaja Yoga
realization, Know Thyself. They all have
because your attention goes beyond the
mind, you go beyond the mind. This
said the same thing, 'Know Thyself". But
Agnya Chakra opens and you go beyond
the mind and you are one with this Divine
nobody is doing that. That's a different
point, but actually all those who were
Power. Once you have divine power, how
it works for you in small small ways! I
mean you all have experienced, you are
all Sahaja Yogis, so I need not tell you.
realized souls, whether they were from a
Muslim Religion or a Hindu Religion or
a Christian Religion, any religion, in any
country, if they were realized souls, they
But every one can tell so many examples
said the same, because truth is the
by which he knows that this is the
same. They said the same thing that first
Paramachaitanya which has worked it. So
first and foremost thing of every seeker the truth. So this is the essence of our life
of truth, who is a real person, is to first that we have to know ourselves. Once
get self realization. That is the essence of we know ourselves, you are beyond every
spirituality all over the world, even if you thing, because what happens is that you
read Bible, if you read Koran. Nobody become like a drop becomes the ocean.
has read them, that's the best part of it How it disappears! The same thing will
and they are trying to say things which happen and once it happens, you will be
are very shameful, which are not there, surprised, that you are really one with
they are fighting for that. With all these
things they have helped us very much to
show that the essence of all these religions Sahaja Yoga, many people say its a big
is one and out of that one day people will charisma, its a big miracle. Nothing of the
take to self-realization. Once they take kind; you have your own Kundalini, you
to self-realization then they have to grow. have own possibility of becoming self
Once they have grown into it, they can realized.
see. All of you know, you are all Sahaja
Yogis-sitting here, you know how much
you have gained and how much you have Kaliyuga this was going to happen and
achieved. So to give me the credit, I don't that's what is happening, that's why
know, is not really true because we had thousands of you are getting realization.
Know Thyself and then you will know
everyone. Who is the other? You are one
with everyone. That is how we find, in
That is the blessing of Kaliyuga. In the
Before that only one would get from one
great saints in our country, great saints in
person and those Gurus were also very
this country, in every country. You know,
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 13
Volume: XI isue:5&6
May- June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
strict, they would not give it to some people can get it, because any discovery,
ordinary person. They used to take them supposing the electricity; if it cannot be
to task and judge them first, and then they used amass then it is useless. So that is
would give realization. But in Sahaja the only thing I have been able to achieve
Yoga we don't do it. We just have to get in my life that amass realization can be
them in to Sahaja Yoga, that's all! Now given. And that has happened, as you
as it is, I am surprised that how know, very well. It is very simple and once
intellectuals try to find faults without
knowing that they don't know any thing! give realization to others. Now first they
They have to become self realized people. were telling me Mother we are working
then what ever they will do, that will be in seventy countries, now they are telling
definitely very constructive, very helpful, me we are in eighty countries. I said, how?
and peace giving, harmony giving to the Somebody went there, and did it,
whole society. But first of all it has to be somebody visited another country and did
within you, if it is not within you, how it. So just imagine, how simple it has
can you give it to others? I have been become? How simple it is for me? At this
watching, how Sahaja Yoga has grown age Ican't go to seventy, eighty countries.
from one person to all these, so many of but it has passed there, has gone there. It
them, and we have so many others in has given the blessings of the Divine. So
other countries also. All this has shown why you are here? You should know here
one person gets realization, can go and
that the time has come for the whole only, we had Nizamuddin Aulia.
world to change, and this transformation Nizamuddin was here and here we have
is the most important thing that we should
aim at. Forget about every thing, forget saints. They talked of love, they talked
about politics, economics, this, that but of understanding. But talk becomes talk
get transformation. Once you are for them because the others who are
transformed, you know how to do the listening have no understanding about it.
right-things. How to do the things that So we are recipient of their blessings, their
will help you and the society. All this you beauties and their greatness, only when
already have seen in your life and we are Sahaja Yogis or realized souls.
whatever has happened, is not with my
effort only but there have been so many
Dum Dum Sahib. All these were great
I bless you all with all my heart and
with all my soul. I have been trying to
work out in a way. I was surprised, in
America it is spreading so fast. Otherwise
who have been doing this. My part is only
this much that I found out a way by which
amass realization could be given. Many
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 May-June 1999
Volume XI Issue:5& 6
14
The Divine Cool Breeze
humility comes in, it will work out, it will
all the false Gurus have been to America,
but now it is something great that is work out in any person, any one.
happening suddenly. So I told them that I whatever may be the cast, religion, race.
will come and stay in America for about
makes no difference.
two month atleast, for their satisfaction.
So may God bless you again and again
Now staying any where is not so
and I biess you from my heart.
important, what is important is that
people should understand. They should
humble down and they should know that
15
Thank you very much for this
felicitation.
we still have to know the truth. Once this
'Shri Mataji Tells About Vande-Matram
Delhi-19-3-99
T
contributed for getting independence?
What is your right to say that you will
not have this song? This song is a song
which suggests the beauty of our Mother
land, the nature of our Mother land. This
|his is the last song, which is very
great song of olden days.
Last time I told a story of my
father. He was a great patriot. He carried
our tricolour flag on top of the high court.
He climbed up and they shot at him. He
got a shot, here in the head. He was
song was always used as a National
Anthem. Somehow, some new people
bleeding, bleeding, still he went up, put have come and they say it is in Sanskrit
the flag there and saw that it is already language. It is not. It is not completely in
flying. Only then he came down and told Sanskrit language.I mean I really some
us to sing the song. We were all dancing times feel like crying, even I remember
down below. You sing the song of Vande- those days when we were facing the
Matram that means we salute to you, 'O British with their guns on us and singing
Mother.' Now you see our country is song. Today these people, from
going through some stupid movement that somewhere they have arisen and trying
they said that you should not sing this to say that we should not have this song
song. We fought the whole of this war of at all. This is what happens in Kaliyuga!
independence singing this song; and those They forget all that has happened before.
who are saying that, I ask them. "How SoI hope you now stand up for this song
many of you have worked for "National Anthem'.
Independence? What have you
Thank you.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Volume :XIissue:5&6
The Divine Cool Breeze
May-June 1999
15
NAVARATRI PUJA, Cabella : 27-09-98
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi.
(You All Should Depend on Parama Chaitanya)
ou cannot imagine how a
you do not have to read some sort of a
poetry or going to some romantic mood.
Just pure love which emits and this is the
knowledge also.
mother, who has so many
beautiful children sees them in
such joyous mood, with their families,
their children nicely settled down! Very
How you have to relate it is this way:
satisfying to see you all so much in joy
and complete oneness with the Divine. The knowledge that you have about
One has to realise only one thing that yourself and about others also is
though you are many, still compared to evident, is absolutely expressed on your
the population of this world we are very finger tips. You know about others and
few who really know the true knowledge, about yourself. This is the greatest
the real knowledge. You are the people subtle knowledge you have. No one
who are knowledgeable, no doubt, but knows like that. Apart from you
also knowledge which has not been people, no one knows about themselves
adorned with truth or which is not the or about others. So this knowledge that
true knowledge, has no meaning. All that has come to you, is extremely subtle,
vanishes into thin air because it is artificial. extremely secretive, absolutely seeret. If
By your Kundalini awakening you all have you know about somebody, you know.
achieved that state where, we can say you Others do not know that you know about
know; you know what the real knowledge them. So this knowledge that you have
is. But think of the people who do not got is nothing but love.
know what knowledge is.
It is very difficult to make knowledge
and love put together because our idea
of knowledge is very different, from what
we read from the books. How can you
love from the books? What love means
For example we say that our
knowledge is nothing but love. But one
should understand the discrimination. The
knowledge that is love within you is just
to us is our attachment. In ignorance you
get attached to the people, to children,
emitting out from your being. You do not
have to assert, you do not have to think,
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Volume : XI Isue : 5 & 6
May - June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
16
that then your knowledge is not with love.
It is such a connection between the two.
to family, to things. By getting attachment
it is proved that we do not have the
knowledge. If you have the knowledge,
then all attachments should just drop out
and you should become a global
personality, a drop in the ocean. For
example we are attached to many things
like we are attached to our family. If
You feel like telling every body that you
got your realisation. You feel like telling
everyone that you are a realised soul, but
in that you feel that you are expressing
your ego. Alright, by some other way, by
some other method you can express to
something happens in the family we get
them that you have the true knowledge.
very disturbed. We cannot bear it. If
When you have the false knowledge
anything happens to our children we feel
you can get ego. You can think that I
know so much. I know about these, I
horrible, its just the whole world falling
on you. Then from family you move on.
know the colour of the carpets, all the
shades, everything. Any stupid thing you
know, you think that you are very great.
You are attached to your friends, to your
neighbours. You are also attached to your
country. Attachment to your country is
also not knowledge. Once you are a
That is the sign of stupidity in your head
realised soul, you just start seeing your also that you think that this is very great
country clearly. What wrong it has got,
what ignorance it has got, in what
darkness it exists and in what way it is acquiring all kinds of knowledge in the
quarrelling, fighting for rights and things? whole world, what we have achieved?
But with the knowledge that you have Nothing. There are wars going on. There
within yourself, you see it so clearly as to
what is the problem of your country. Then
you try to improve that through your love; wind which is going round and it is killing
means the power of your knowledge is so many people and it is destroying so
to know.
Now we have discovered that through
are all kinds of destruction coming in. I
saw in television, this George. It is a world
love.
many people, without understanding what
he is doing! But he is there and he is acting
very well. So is it that he does not
understand? Or is it that he understands
and that he does something just to correct
If you have all the knowledge within
you and if you are just sitting at home
and meditating, it has no meaning. What
you have to do is to go about, you have
people. This also we should have full idea.
Yesterday when I came here it was raining
heavily, I sat down and suddenly it
to meet other people, your friends, your
family and other relations and tell them
about your knowledge. If you cannot do
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
May June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: XI Issue: 5& 6
I react to it, but if I do not react then I
will know whether this carpet has got
vibrations or not. That is all. Are they
stopped, stopped till the whole
programme was over. Till I spoke it was
not raining. But suddenly when you
started clapping, also it started raining.
That is what it was. So even the nature
emitting vibrations or not? Now what are
these vibrations? That is the love. So the
knows who you are, but you must communication is like this. If you have
know the nature. This is the point. the light you can see things.
Nature will act according to what your So when you see things, the light is there.
level of spirituality is. Surprisingly, 1 Light gives you perception, gives you
always felt that there cannot be levels of
the
vision to see things. In the same way when
spirituality. I felt that once you get
realisation you are there. But later on I these vibrations start flowing just like a
discovered that I was wrong. It is not so. light and in that light you can see things
Even after getting realisation I found which are good and which are bad. But
people had so many obstructions in rising. sometimes you put the same parameter
you are enlightened, what happens that
There were so many temptations which
were keeping them down. So one has to
as human beings do. Like you may go to
some house; very nice house, very good
house, all these things make you very
happy but actually what about that house?
Is it having good vibrations or it is having
work out on different Chakras, different
Nadis, somehow or other you make
yourself perfect, because the perfection
within only will give you the authority to
use this knowledge.
bad vibrations? Is it worth living there or
not. Like the other day they told me they
There are, 1 told you, two ways of
can get a very nice place in Milan, on rent,
doing it. The other day I told you that.
you should not react. It is human nature Immediately I felt the vibrations of the
very cheap. I said why it is so cheap?
to react, absolutely human; but if you are
place. I said, did you go and see the
to become super human you should not
react. By not reacting you will grow,
vibrations of that place? They went and
saw this was all burning. Then they found
definitely you will grow but if you react
out that there was a Saintology there for
then you cannot grow, because you are
working under the pressure of other thing years together. I said that is not the place
that is not yourself. Now supposing, as I where you can live. You have to have a
very pure place. Even that of a poor man
could be better than this comfortable, so
So one has to use the
said, I see this carpet. I know the colour
and this and that and I react to it. Finished.
I will not have any sense of judgement if
called, place.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Volume : XI Isue :5 & 6
May - June 1999
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
comes there is sunlight. So what is the
difference? Or we can say the Moon and
vibrations all the time to understand
everything that you are doing.
the moonlight. What is the difference?
In that also you can be misleading. There is no difference in these two things.
Some people feel vibrations and they tell One is the Moon and another is the light.
me, 'Mother, I felt the vibrations and I So all these things are very very
felt that I should marry this man.' I said, confusing, that we do no understand how
Did you feel the vibrations? Yes, yes I confused we are about it and we do not
did very much andI must marry this man. understand how our vibrations can
When I see the man, I see the Bhoots in mislead us, because vibrations are there
him. I said, my God what sort of alright but sometimes even if they are
vibrations this lady has felt about him?
missing, just to justify yourself you will
say we have vibrations and we feel that it
So in your judgement what is there, there
is no pure knowledge.
is very good, excellent and later on you
You see how connected they are. will discover that is not so. So even now
Vibrations which is love and also the other when we are realised souls we should
thing which you have to have is the know what is encompassing us, which is
knowledge, the pure knowledge, the true around us. What is that which makes us
knowledge. You can say that the pure feel that it is alright, it is good, we should
knowledge and true knowledge is like the have it? Once we start understanding that
energy, like electricity and the way you vibrations are pure knowledge, are of a
feel it, the way you understand it, it exists. very different nature, then you are not
That is love. People do not understand attached to that person, you are not
also what the love is. They get mad after attached to that family, you are not
someone and say that Mother, see, I think attached to that country, nothing. What
that I am in love with that person and after you feel is the pure vibrations come into
five days they will come and say, Mother, you. This is the point which is very
no, I would not have anything to do with confusing. When you say my vibrations
that person. Why? Because you have not are good, I like those vibrations, and while
got the pure knowledge. You did not feel you jump into the ocean of filth!
the pure knowledge in that person
through your vibrations. Now see how why is it sometimes we make mistakes'?
connected it is, like you can say the Sun You do not make mistakes. It is your
Many people have asked me, 'Mother,
and sunlight. What is the difference ignorance which is darkness and that is
between the two? Sun is there. When Sun
why whenever you plunge into it you fall
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 19
The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI Issue :5 & 6
May- June 1999
into trouble. So to understand that our
them are murdered and like that all that
idea that we will have this possession of
the land, goes away.
knowledge has to be completely clear, like
in our house, supposing we have a lamp
which is dirty, you cannot get the light.
In the same way if your heart is not clean,
So in the same way we can see on
specially our heart, if it is not clean then smaller things also. In smaller things also
you start doing things, believing that it is we are very much identified that if I have
right, by which you hurt yourself and this thing then everything will be fine. You
others. It is a very very common error in cannot understand how people just jump
human nature to identify wrong things as at things and say, Oh Mother, this is ours,
right, just to make themselves look such
such a divine thing!
this is ours, we must use this for
ourselves, openly! They do not think it is
a great,
Wrong. To say that this is my country,
must do for my country, and another says
As I told you, now there are people
who want to divide the country. Simple
this is my country, I must do for my
country. As long as there is this My and
I, that means there is no knowledge.
reason they want to divide. Now they
want to divide because they want to have
importance. A few people who want their
importance will instigate others, tell them,
alright we must have freedom. If we have knowledge is that which gives you a pure
freedom, we will have this country for light. Pure light means pure vibrations.
ourselves, then we can develop ourselves Now vibrations can be misleading as I told
or a part of a country which is richer, you, or could be the quantity of vibrations
which is better off, they will think that it can be less or more. There is another way.
is alright, we will have all the money to It is to see for yourself why do you want
ourselves, we will have everything to to do a particular thing? Mentally also you
ourselves. So they divide, they can divide can use parameter of mental
in the name of religion, in the name of understanding. Why do I want to do it?
prosperity, whatever it is, but if you divide What is the gain for all the people. If you
the country, actually you are facing a big Start thinking from that angle, what is the
problem. You have seen that wherever gain for others, what will they gain by
people divide, they fall into a kind of a this, why should I do it, you will be
dark ditch from where they cannot come amazed, you will get the real picture of
out. It is just a few people whose ego is what you are doing. So you must keep
that they want to have some land as their yourself all the time in a state where you
own, but they die. Not only die, some of witness yourself, you see yourself that
The knowledge as I told you, pure
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Volume : XI Isue :5 & 6
May - June 1999
20
The Divine Cool Breeze
why I am doing this. What is the purpose. you been wise to do something or you
Sometimes could be some conditioning, have been just doing it because you are
could be some sort of psychological thing, identified with a particular type of life or
could be anything. But if you start a particular type of answer? So wisdom
watching carefully, why I am doing it, you is a thing that gives you first of all
will be amazed that your vibrations itself complete peace. If your wisdom is
will start telling you on your finger tips. developed then you become very
But sometimes, the vibrations are so peaceful, because whatever people may
superficially coming, Ah, I got the say, whatever they may do, whatever
vibrations, I am this, I am that! What is aggression they may do, whatever it is,
the reason, Why I am saying again and you are peaceful, and you see the stupidity
again though you are such a nice family of the other person, of the other nations
of mine and you are also much blessed and you understand why they are doing.
and we have so much of knowledge with This wisdom is such an important thing
us? We should be very wise. If there is no in human beings because animals do not
wisdom, we can never understand what have so much wisdom as we have.
we are doing.
Sometimes, of course, we have even less
than animals but still by experience, you
Now to develop this wisdom what
see, we have to learn that we have been
making mistakes. So many mistakes we
have committed so far. Now are we going
to commit more mistakes? Or are we
going to be wise? Wisdom is not apparent
have we to do? So every time they will
come and say, Mother how do we get
wisdom? What is the way to get the
wisdom? Wisdom you have already within
you. Shri Ganesha is already there who
gives you the wisdom, but you must take
to Shri Ganesha. There are people who
outside. You cannot say somebody is wise
while looking at that person. But in
vibrations you will know that person is
become so much addicted to Shri
Ganesha that they lose his identity extremely wise. He may speak, he may
not speak. If he speaks he will speak
completely. They become very slavish
about the whole thing and they just about something so deep, so wise and so
believe that they are very spiritual, they nice without hurting others. This kind of
are very great. All these false ideas are temperament if you develop is to become
no good. Does your Ganesha give you wise for every question. For example
some are very attached to their children.
So much attached that they forget that
wisdom? Now you must count how many
wise things have you done so far, where
they are part and parcel of this Divine
did you take a very wise decision? Have
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Volume : XI Isue 5 & 6
May- June 1999
21
The Divine Cool Breeze
force and they just are doing all kinds of
taken place about Sahaja Yoga, I must
things. The other day I met one lady
whose son was very sick. She took him
to the hospital and doctors gave him all
say, and in that you should see the wisdom
helps. Of course my attention is there
always, no doubt, but still you should not
take it for granted. You have to ask. One
day, you see, I was just sitting. I just
thought that I should telephone somebody
kinds of medicines and he became even
worse. Then she telephoned to me,
Mother I do not know what happened? I
went to the doctor and the doctor gave
in the Ashram of New York. I never
telephone there. So I found out the phone
number and telephoned and asked "is the
child alright?" So the leader there was
surprised because that boy had fallen in
him this and that treatment and the child
has become worse. But why did not you
ask me before? Why did you go to the
hospital first? Lack of wisdom. I am there.
Why don't you ask me.
the water and was in the water for quite
We had one case here in Cabella. One some time and he was all filled with water,
even his brain was filled with water. As
usual there was some doctor who said
Now the mother did not show any that he cannot survive and even if he
child who fell down and broke his arm.
wisdom. She took the child to the hospital
and the doctor said, tomorrow we are
going to operate her and put some
artificial arm, but the father was sensible.
Survives, his brain has so much water that
he cannot be normal. So I just said that
do not worry. I did not know. No body
told me. Do not worry, the boy will be
He said alright, tomorrow? Today I will
nght completely. So they were surprised
how I said so. Firstly how I knew that
take the child home. He brought the child
to me at night at about 3 0'elock. I said
the boy had fallen, there was some boy
alright. I put it right. Next day when he
took him to the hospital, the Doctor said,
like that and then they did not know how
"Now there is no need to operate because I said he will be alright! And he was
his arm is alright. See the differene. One alright. He was perfectly alright. So they
is worried. Immediately they will go to were surprised over my knowing about
the doctor instead of consulting me. it. How is it that Mother knows that there
asking me. They are Sahaja Yogis but they is a boy who is so sick. Here, I will say it
will go and ask the doctor to do is pure knowledge. You see my attention
something. When the doctor starts doing
something then they will come to me..
is always around you, always dealing
with you and how I know is this that
this attention of mine is global. So if
anything happens
to you, any
There are lots of miracles which have
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
Volume: XI lssue : 5& 6
May-June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
upsetting takes place, any, I should say,
deviation takes place, my attention is
within you. That is the level some people
are and I am not so sure about those who
get realisation are all so much filled with
pure knowledge. Some of them are but
not all of them. With experience they
learn. With meeting people they learn but
as the wisdom, pure wisdom is difficult
for them because they do not rely entirely
on the Parama Chaitanya. Everything
there. Immediately I know there is
something wrong somewhere and I do not
know how my attention goes to particular
place which makes its life better. It helps
I do not do anything about
people in need.
this attention but this attention is the
wisdom. The wisdom that spreads all
happens, just Parama Chaitanya knows
it. It understands, it organizes, it loves, it
does everything that is the energy it is. It
does everything and how it manages, how
because coincidences are really organised
by Parama Chaitanya!
over. With that wisdom, you know, what
is wrong with another person or any other
organization that is in Sahaja Yoga.
Everything you come to know. If you
want to know is different. It is just you
know like you spread out every where.
Forexample if you have to telephone then
you have to use the telephone but for me
I do not have to use the telephone, I just
As I told you yesterday the way the
rain was. The rain came and went away.
It was wisdom. Innately it knows I am
know. So this has come from a pure
sitting here, the programme is going to
innocent wisdom. The innocent wisdom
start, it stops. Flowers know me. You do
is just like a child. It is everywhere and it
communicates and it tells what is the
not know, when we have flowers they are
all this size. I do not do anything to them.
matter and what the problem is. Many
They start growing, growing, blast like
that! Now one would say, Mother how
do I know? Because they are natural. We
people have been cured with Sahaja Yoga.
Many have been cured. Now if they can
say, 'Mother, how did we get cured, what
have you done? Did you see our Chakras,
did you find out what is wrong with us?"
No, I have not. I have not but I leave it.
In my wisdom I leave it to Parama
Chaitanya to do the job. This is the point,
main point is that you can leave
everything to Parama Chaitanya in
your wisdom? If you cannot, then yet
you have not felt the real knowledge
are unnatural. We have taken so many
artificialities as part and parcel of life. See
all kinds of courtesies, these that, all that
softness is there. All these stupid practices
that we have adopted, sometimes keeps
us away from pure knowledge and when
there is no pure knowledge we do not
know anything, what is happening. You
just get frightened for small things, upset
for small things. I mean it is something
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 May- June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
23
Volume: XI Isue :5& 6
wisdom to leave everything to Parama
Chaitanya? After experiences also, like
there was one lady who was going in the
car. She found her car's brakes were
very surprising to see Sahaja Yogis
getting upset. Among the hundred people,
if supposing there is a problem; so if they
are Sahaja Yogis they have to just witness
and see. If you can not do that then you
are not a Sahaja Yogi. It is not like
practising; you know like they say if you
have to have the blessings of Shiva you
must say 108 times his names. That is not
the way. He does not like it. You see no
breaking. She did not know what to do
about! Now brakes are no more. How to
manage? It was in Germany. All the cars
were moving very fast and she did not
know what to do. So she put her head on
the steering wheel and she said that I
body likes that kind of a murmuring. You
leave it to Parama Chaitanya'. She said,
"She leaves it to Me? Alright, it is the
same. So by saying that what happened.
she said, 'Mother I do not know, when I
wrong idea that you go on taking the raised my head, I found my car was taken
rame of somebody and that Deity will on one side of the road and no body was
help you. First of all you have to become there'. All the cars were passing by but
wise enough to understand that you are a somehow or the other this car was taken
part and parcel of Parama Chaitanya. there, very nicely, by some force. So the
Everything will work out by that and it wisdom lies in understanding the working
works out so beautifully. Of course some of Parama Chaitanya how it guides you,
people have hard time. I do not say they how it helps you, how it preserves you,
do not have, but it is not hard because if how depending on Parama Chaitanya you
are one with Parama Chaitanya and can continue to be living very happy.
see somebody comes and takes your name
all the time near your door you will throw
him out. So that is not the way. It is a
you
you know that it is doing the job, you are
not feeling that hardness or sickness or
I think in Sahaja Yoga we have lost
anything. All the people write to me about very few Sahaja Yogis. They live for long
their problems. I do not know what to They do not die and if you ask their
say. You just say that do you believe in experience it is very amazing. How it
Parama Chaitanya? Alright, it knows. It works out? If they do not want to live
knows what is to be said. See, it can create they can pass also but if they want to live,
poetry, it can create music, it can create Parama Chaitanya takes over and you can
everything. But do you leave everything live long. But living long does not mean
to the Parama Chaitanya? This is the that you can go on bothering yourself as
second point in wisdom. Do you have to what you will do with your money, how
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI Isue :5& 6
May-June 1999
24
we will give to the doctors, we give it to
some civil people, what you call them,
engineers to do something. They can
make mistakes, they can create problems.
You leave it to Parama Chaitanya. It is
something so remarkable that in my own
life I have seen that at all the times it
will you live, what will be the source? All
these nonsensical things, worries come to
you. Alright, then the Parama Chaitanya
says alright, go on worrying. If you go
on worrying, alright go on worrying.
Does not matter that will happen?
Whatever has to happen will happen. But
Parama Chaitanya can interfere in case
we leave it to Parama Chaitanya. He said
works well.
I was building a house in Poona and
we had to put a slab, very very big slab,
needed about three hundred bags of
cement for that. So I got the cement and
I got the people but they said you start
early in the morning and you can finish
next morning, 24 hours. I said alright. So
many a times leave it to God, leave it to
God but God means, 'I do not know what
they mean by God'. God is Parama
Chaitanya. God means living Divine
Force that is working everything. So the
another way of looking at it is the wisdom
that we should understand that each and
every particle of this World is created by at about 5 O'clock I told let us go, the
Divine, by the Divine force; and this work is over. They said how do you
particle, everything is completely under know?I said I know, let us go. So imagine
the guidance and supervision of Parama it was going to finish after 12 hours, was
Chaitanya. Nothing can move unless and already finished and all the workers were
until Parama Chaitanya works out. It is walking about. Everybody said, "Mother
something so connected, globally so it is a miracle." How can such a big slab
much there, that people do not realise be laid in such a short time?" To make
what they are doing, what they should them understand, I said, you see,
have done. I mean on many scales you Hanumana must have done the job. All
find something happening. That these people, all these Deities are part and
supposing something is happening now parcel of that Parama Chaitanya. Now
in America. Just try to find out what you are worshipping the Mother. To
America has done to other countries? worship the Mother is the biggest thing
because all these Deities and everybody
Immediately you will get the answer. So
also it takes full care of the persons who
believe in Parama Chaitanya, who give
are Her Children, under Her Command,
under Her desire. There is a story as you
know, about Ganesha that the mother said
everything in the hands of Parama
that the one who goes round the Mother
Chaitanya. We give things to the police.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 The Divine Oool Breeze
Volume : XI Issue : 5& 8
May- June 1999
25
earth three time, I will give hima Present.
So Shri Ganesha thought in his wisdom
who is greater than my Mother? No one
just know it. So I am not saying that
develop your knowledge to that extent
that you can do it but your wisdom. If
you start using your wisdom, it will
always come handy. In any thing that you
do, think of the wisdom. My advice to
you
else because he knew that he cannot
compete with his brother who had got a
peacock for the conveyance. So he said
how can I go round and win over this
you is that as your Mother does the whole
present. So best is to take to wisdom. My
Mother is greater, is greater than
everything else. So he went round his
mother three times and he got the prize
as the other brother was just still moving
on. When he came back he found that the
work, loves all of you and cares for those
who have not even got realisation, you
should also try to create more people for
Sahaja Yoga. In that if you start behaving
in a manner and all the times saying you
are catching this, you are a Bhoot, you
are this, you are that! I never said that to
present is already lost.
any one. So you should not say like that.
That is no love. That is no understanding.
The understanding is that you were just
So again and again I am saying it is
the wisdom that helps. The wisdom to
leave everything to Parama Chaitanya for
a modern person, this is something very
difficult to understand. He cannot
calculate two plus two. It is so bad
the same as the person was and noW you
are knowledgeable. So you must use your
knowledge to correct that person, not to
put him down and that correction is also
not verbal. It is just through your
because of these computers and things
like that. It is absolutely hopeless as far
vibrations you can correct the other
as any mathematical calculations are
nerso
person.
needed. Now, I do not know how to
handle any computer or any calculator but
if you ask me just like that, "Mother, how
much it will be?" I will say so much and it
will be there. It will be there. I am so sure
about it. It cannot be anything else but
that and it works that way. Sometimes,
of course, if I want to tell some wrong
thing just to mislead the person then I may
Most of the Sahaja Yoga work,
sometimes I have seen stops because we
are very methodical, become like great
teachers, start telling them stories and
then they get fed up. So when you are
handling other people, as I said, we have
to spread the knowledge, very important.
We cannot keep it to ourselves. But it is
say something, but normally I know it is
that, but I know, not like the way we
not for any ambition, for any leadership,
for any kind
of recognition. We use our
know. I just know it. That is what it is.
wisdom, our knowledge to help others
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue :5 & 6
May-June 1999
26
The Divine Cool Breeze
heart you have a beautiful image of a
out of love, not for any recognition, not
for any position, nothing. Just we want
person who is very very pure, you cannot,
you cannot do anything mentally and from
your heart if you have to do, your heart
to do it because we love them. I am sure
this will work out very effectively and the
person who will be helped or the persons
who will be helped will be just bound to
you because they find the true knowledge.
But supposing somebody comes to you
and says, I know the true knowledge. You
may be knowing it. But I have to know
what you know. Then you ask that
person, he will give you a big lecture. You
say, No that is not the thing, just smile,
that is not the thing. The thing is that true
knowledge is a part and parcel of your
being. It is just within you. It is not
some sort of a concrete stuff that you have
read or you have understood but it just
has become a light within you. That light
is there. It is not necessary for you to be
has to be very clean and extremely wise.
This is that point one has to jump into,
that is, to make your heart wise. For
example to get attached to some one too
much, identify with some one, shows that
your heart is not clean. It has so many
bondages. Open your heart fully and that
is why they say Goddess resides in the
heart, in the central heart. She resides in
the central heart because she is so
balanced. She resides in the central heart,
a Shakti, and She gives you all that you
want. Within you She settles down as
many things you know the Shalokas
which say that She is settled within us
like knowledge, settled within us as
memory, She is settled within us as sleep.
very well educated or to be very
Also She is settled within us as illusion
intelligent or to be very highly placed. Not
necessary. It is how your heart is cleansed.
In the heart it resides.
"Bhranti'. She is the one who puts us into
illusions because we are not yet fully
perfect. We have to become 'Paripakava',
Imagine all other knowledge resides
in the brain while the pure knowledge
resides in the heart! Very surprising! We
means absolutely matured. Till we are
matured this Mother herself puts you into
illusions and plays around so that you
do not know that actually our heart moves
learn to be wise. So one should
the head.
understand that she is playing around you
and you should try to be very careful and
There are seven Auras around the
not to be falling into Her 'Maya'. Because
if she puts you in the 'Maya' you will go
round and round and reach no where.
heart which control the brain in such a
manner that we act in the hands of the
Parama Chaitanya. Unless and until, your
heart is clean, unless and until in your
So this power of Bhranti is also very
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 27
Volume: XI Issue :5 & 6
May- June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
depend on Parama Chaitanya. Also there
is a habit of many people to put the blame
on others, like I got caught up from this
person and caught up from that person.
You are caught up by yourself. All such
ideas are of no use. Face yourself. find
important. This illusion, you can call it or
you can call it thing by which she creates
a drama in which you become like a stupid
man being found out. So this stupidity
and all that can be removed by this Bhranti
that she creates. This power of Bhranti is
because of human beings, as they are, they
will not understand something straight
forward. So it has to go round and round
till they reach a point to understand that
it was the play of the Mother that brought
our about yourself and you have to
perfect yourself. It is so important
because at this juncture.of the time people
think that something great is going to
happen. I do not know. Two thousand
years, according to them, will be
something great. But I do not know,
them to this shore of wisdom. So for us
it is important to see that so much has
been done by Parama Chaitanya for us.
because it is all man made. All these two
thousand years and three thousand years
is man made. I myself feel, as predicted
by many, that possibly because of your
understanding and your wisdom, I am
sure, something great may happen in this
World and things may be brought to a
proper level of understanding of
spirituality. Because this is the last
judgement and in this last Judgement you
have to play a very vital role which, I am
The Mother has done so much for us.
Now what are we going to do ourselves
to get all these powers that She has given
us to become completely enlightened and
developed. What have we done so far?
Nothing to be done as such but to develop
a kind of a deep devotion, deep
understanding and that depth is possible.
absolutely possible, because now you are
on your way to that perfection.
sure, you can do if you decide to achieve
something for the future.
So today in Cabella is that last Puja
and I want to tell you as a Mother that
you all should depend on Parama
Chaitanya. That is very important to
May God Bless You.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume XI Issue:5 & 6
May - June 1999
28
Adi Shakti Puja Seminar (1998)
(A Report)
p.m. First we heard a sitar player followed
by his wife, a famous sarod player. She
had also performed at the Birthday
celebrations this year. This lasted until
about 3 a.m. Shri Mataji urged all of the
y the grace of Shri Mataji, the
Sahaja Yogis could worship Her
in Her form of Shri Adi Shakti
on the weekend of June 19-21 in
Cabella. This puja was organized by the
Dutch, Belgian, Spanish, and yogis to develop an appreciation for this
Scandinavian yogis. They had a difficult wonderful music. She commented that in
task because the hangar had to be brought these modern times, Indian people have
down from Cabella near the Castle to a lost interest in their own musical heritage,
very nice place called Albera near the and that only through Sahaja Yoga would
river, about 3 km outside the village. On this great music continue on.
Thursday morning there was no hangar Then the program of the organizing
in sight, but by Saturday all the Sahaja countries started. They cut all the solo
Yogis could enjoy a nice evening program performances, but it still lasted until 4.30
with Shri Mataji.
a.m. Shri Mataji praised the Spanish for
their unique and intricate use of rhythm.
There were many bhajans and also a very
nice Bharat-Natyam dance from the
Belgian Sahaja Yogis. All the ladies are
taking dance lessons now and they had
created a collective dance to the music
of Sahaja bhajans. Shri Mataji also
commented that to entertain each other
is a quality of the Divine. When we finally
went to bed the roosters were already
waking the hens!
Since this was the first puja in the new
Two miracle photos were taken: one of
the hangar site before the hangar was set
up, and one after the hangar was in place.
In the new place, there is enough parking
for all the cars and shady places to rest
or eat. The river is 100 metres away and
the yogis spent most of the time foot
soaking or even body soaking. It is also
outside of the village, so one is not so
much tempted to have cappuccino or ice
cream. We spent a whole weekend just
with Sahaja Yogis.
location, there were some moments of
tremendous chaos. At times during the
The hangar was finished quite late on
Saturday evening and so the program
with Shri Mataji started around 11.30
weekend, life seemed like an enormous
board game with each move somehow
miraculously working out at the last
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue:5&6
May- June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
29
Dutch yogis. Shri Mataji left at
approximately I a.m. Because of the late
hour, those travelling in the night packed
moment to smoothly lead to the next
event.
The puja was announced for 7 p.m. and and left rather quickly. The yogis who had
Shri Mataji arrived a little after 9 p.m. the opportunity to sleep in the hangar
Uncle Guido started by describing the were blessed with the blissful atmosphere
events from the tour of Russia. Shri filled with vibrations that gently lulled
Mataji had asked him to speak about it. them to sleep. The peaceful atmosphere
In Russia there is a very famous physicist of the puja stayed with us through the
who can scientifically prove that Shri night and into the next morning. As we
Mataji is the source of all vibrations and rose, gathering our belongings, we could
ultimately, of everything. Shri Mataji still feel that wonderful feeling of security
continued to tell about this Russian
scientist in Her talk, and mentioned for
the first time that She is writing another
book which will be ready sometime soon.
wrapping around us with the confidence
that even the smallest details of our lives
were being effortlessly managed. How
wonderful to feel the peace and joy of
walking in the Shadow of the Devi!
The puja was serene but powerful. One
very memorable gift was a giant windmill
festively painted and decorated by the
Lakshmi Ward, Germany
and Nancy Kumar,USA
Shri Mataji explains Sahaja Yoga
ou have seen this last part of the Now our Sahaja Yoga is that we are
dance which was when Udho all in love with each other. We just love
went to see the women of each other and this is what is in this
Brindavan, Gopis, who were all dance which she (the dancer) shows. I
completely engrossed about Shri Krishna. must say, to very subtle point, she brought
So he said that you should take to Yoga, it out and that is what we have to know
you should take to Gyana, to knowledge. that Sahaja Yoga is nothing but love.
It is very dry idea. I think very dry idea. Love, among ourselves, absolutely pure
love. We say in Sanskrit, Nirvajaya
They said no, we don't like to do yoga. frar, You don't expect anything,
We are already one with Him, we are in
His body and He is in our body. We are
you just love, and this love is the one
which is real yoga.
absolutely one, so there is no need for us
to take to yoga.
May God Bless You.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30
May-June 1999
Volume:XI Issue :5 &6
The Divine Cool Breeze
News from Around the World
NEWS FROM SOUTH AFRICA
(the suburb formerly reserved for Xhosa
people). We had a TV interview and a
At the Grahamstown Arts Festival, South
Africa, the Sahaja presentations which number of newspaper articles written by
had been planned worked out better than
we had hoped for: a large number of was happening the same week that Shri
people received realization and a very Mataji was giving programs in London
good time was had by all the Sahaja Yogis
and about people from all the many
cultures of the four rainbow nations. This
and it is perhaps no accident that the first
who came. But it was the unplanned
events which gave the week magic. For group of British settlers in South Africa
ten days in July the whole town is given
over to this arts festival, and people come Most of the visiting Sahaja Yogis stayed
from all over the world, especially at a farmhouse in the countryside, some
founded Grahamstown.
30km from the town. So the whole
Southern Africa.
program turned into a collective get-
By South African standards a large together. We had a havan, and much
number of Sahaja Yogis supported our
presentations at the festival. A British singing and dancing. The ladies from
Sahaja Yogi kindly sponsored two ladies Soweto were the stars when it came to
from Sowelo, near Johannesburg, to
come and help us with people who only programs or even standing on the side of
spoke indigenous African languages; a
giving realization. Wherever they went,
whether at the stall, giving prearranged
the road when the car bringing them into
French yogini came all the way from
Europe, and about 30 other Sahaja Yogis
from all over South Africa travelled the
long distance to be with us. We had a
stall in the high street, a room wiiere we
had a Sahaja exhibition and played
town one day broke down, people felt
cool breezes and joy, and received
realization. They were an example for all
of us with their warmth, commitment and
total trust in the power of Mother as the
Holy Spirit.
bhajans leading to realization being given.
We had two introductory programs with
bhajans and dancing in the local township
At the first township program, which was
conducted in Xhosa, after the newcomers
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue: 5&6
The Divine Cool Breeze
May- June 1999
31
got their realization most of the young
to visit their island. Their invitation was
had
people who had come decided that as we
had sung for them in Indian languages and
English, they should sing to us in Xhosa.
They treated us to stirring rendering of
our national anthem, Nkosi Sikilele
Africa, which means God Bless Africa
and includes a line which says, "Come
Holy Spirit, please come to Africa.
presented to Her. Since then, Nikhil and
Raani have been having a lot of success
with their programs.
They had a major public program this
summer in which 350 or more seekers got
their self-realization. The hall was packed
by 6.00 p.m. which is when the program
was scheduled to start. It is
very unusual
On many occasions during the festival we
felt She was here, blessing us and helping
to create a new South Africa which truly
expresses the joyful, creative and fulfilling
qualities of the left swadhishthan. Thank
You, Mother. With greetings from the
for Arubans to be on time! The vibrations
were very strong and almost everyone felt
the cool breeze. The Colombian Sahaja
Yogis who had come down to help out
with the program were quite amazed at
the response. Everything, every detail
worked out so perfectly and
spontaneously. After the program a lay
from a local radio station (she had
Sahaja Yogis of South Africa.
-Linda Williams, South Africa
attended the programs on both days)
called and said she would like us to talk
NEWS FROM ARUBA, WEST
INDIES
about Sahaja Yoga on her talk show the
following weekend. Another seeker who
Here is some wonderful news from the
tìny Caribbean island of Aruba. A Sahaja
Yogi couple, Nikhil and Raani Varde,
have been living there for a while, and
they have been trying to spread Sahaja
Yoga in their island. Last year, when Shri
Mataji was visiting Los Angeles, they sent
an invitation (via e-mail) to Shri Mataji
had come for the program offered us a
t
larger hall for the weekly follow-ups at
half the rent? Jai Shri Mataji!
-Nikhil and Raani Varde, Aruba
E-mail: nitya@setarnet.aw
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Volume: XI Issue 5& 6
May-June 1999
32
The Divine Cool Breeze
Creative Expressions
is now widely available in the US and
NEW CD-CHILDREN OF THE LIGHT
Canada through stores like Tower, HMV
and Borders. It can also be special
Dancing in Divine Love CD/audio-tape ordered from any record store, if it
was released at Krishna Puja this year in doesn't happen to be in stock, by telling
Cabella. This production was personally the salesperson the artist's name, the
named by our Divine Mother and has name of the recording (Point of Balance),
beautiful vibrations. In the recording of the record label (A-Records) and the
these tracks we strongly felt that our catalogue number (AL 73124). The
Divine Mother was here producing and release has been a bit delayed in most of
The long-awaited Children of the Light,
arranging the tracks.
Europe but was expected to be available
there widely by the end of August, if not
sooner. It is eurrently available in Japan.
The production was recorded in
Vancouver, Canada by the Vancouver
Collective. It includes very nice versions
of Jago Kundalini Ma and Vishwa
Vandita, as well as a Russian bhajan Issue
too. In Asia (including Australia) it was
scheduled for release in September.
For updates on the progress of the CD,
Hristos and a 16 minute music score set
to read reviews, and get information on
with poems written by Sahaja Yogis from
live appearances, anyone who's interested
visit Steven's
around the world.
web site
can
For more information or to order, contact (www.stevenkirby.com) or the record
anyone in the Vacouver Collective and/ company web site (www.challange.nl). A
or Clayton Carrigan at E-mail: Ssample review from Jazz Times: "Point
carrigan @ netеот.ca
of Balance is an entire album of beautiful,
meaningful compositions that sound as
refreshing and striking now as Pat
Metheny's Bright Size Life did 22 years
ago. Kirby is one of the most promising
new composers and players on the
modern jazz scene today."
NEW CD-POINT OF BALANCE
American Sahaja Yogi and jazz guitarist/
composer Steven Kirby's CD of original
compositions entitled Point Of Balance
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 33
Volume : XI Issue :5 & 6
May-June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
heavy on our minds at first. However as
soon as we began working, a new
dimension began to evolve. We again
found fresh things and new depths to the
play, and are beginning to realize that just
THEATRE OF ETERNAL VALUES
UPDATE
It has probably been a while sSince many
of you have heard about what Theatre of
Eternal Values has been up to, so we
thought we'd give you an update and souls, in the same way Shri Mataji's work
share with you some of our adventures. has an organic element. In order for
as we are constantly evolving as realized
The Long Gap After a successful tour vibrations to flow and for us to become
of schools and the general public in better actors/instruments we have to
Austria and Germany in October and Surrender to change and enjoy working
November'97, we left for our own the play again and again.
countries, sad to say goodbye, but in need The Joy of Togetherness After a week
of financial and physical recuperation!
of rehearsal we headed for the streets of
Vienna. During the Edinburgh Festival last
One month passed. OK, a bit of a rest
summer we developed a street parade to
after two years of touring. Two months
attract attention for the play and distribute
leaflets. This involves costumes, make-up,
passed. Yes, still nice to earn some money.
Three months... four months. for all of
us the gap was becoming too long and music and lots of fun-even in the rain!
there was an urgent need to come On the evening of our first performance
together again to spread víbrations
through theatre.
in Akzent Theatre many people came and
the response we received was extremely
Six months later, thanks to Our Mother's encouraging. The joy of performing
blessings and the tireless work of Martin together again and experiencing the
and Sita, TEV members are getting on tremendous vibrations on stage was
planes, walking, swimming, roller- incredible for all of us. Catherine, our
skating, rowing to Australia to begin director, was in the audience and she told
another tour of The Imaginary Invalid.
us that the faces of the public were
transformed during the play-some even
Rehearsing Again We all feel extremely left dancing,
blessed and happy to be together again
working in Shri Mataji's theatre company, We experience a tremendous rush of
but the idea of making the play fresh and vibrations during the performances and
have received many letters from students
rehearsing for the millionth time weighed
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Volume: XI Isue :5&6
May-June 1999
34
The Divine Cool Breeze
thanking us for giving them such
enjoyable theatre. Some have even
mentioned that they felt something
indescribable during the show. Jai Shri
Mataji!
avenues of European and other
supporting agencies are labyrinthine and
it is a long process. In the meantime, the
company would like to feel that there was
an opportunity for Sahaja Yogis
worldwide to contribute to the running
After this evening in Theatre Akzent we
also performed for schools during the day
as well as evening performances for
adults. Our feelings of unity seemed to
grow with each performance and our final
night was magic. We felt like Shri Mataji
expenses and costs of putting on the next.
production.
Ideally, TEV would like to have a
representative in all those countries where
performances could be given. Such yogis/
yoginis should be interested in what the
held us in a vacuum of vibrations on the
company in endeavouring to achieve, alert
to the possibilities of performances and
stage. We could only surrender and let
Her run the show!
Being Looked After Where to start? We
are staying in Feichtenbach Ashram for
donations and contributions which can
then be forwarded to the appropriate
the second time and feel once more
account. In larger countries, regional
completely at home and relaxed. We are
representatives may be appropriate.
always looked after extremely well and
can hardly begin to thank the yogis Shri Mataji has identified the TEV project
as one which has Her wholehearted
care. We have been so much supported support. It's now up to us to realize Her
by Austria and realize how hard it is to desires for it through our own desire. In
look after such a big group. Despite this the first instance, please respond to lan
we are always received with open arms Maitland-Hume,E-mail immh@holy
road.ed.ac.uk or fax 441361 810741, if
enough for all their love, support and
wherever we go.
you would be interested in becoming a
Funding and Local Representation
Throughout the run of The Imaginary making a donation or regular contribution
Invalid TEV has been very generously of any amount to help with the TEV
national/regional representative and/or
supported by the collectives of those
work, so that the company can plan ahead
countries hosting the play when there has
been a shortfall in receipts. Negotiations
with confidence.
for longer-term funding continue, but the
Victor has sent an E-mail to all the leaders
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-36.txt 
 35
May- June 1999
Volume: XI Issue : 5&6
The Divine Cool Breeze
so if anyone is interested in helping with
funding, etc. they can contact their July 12-16. This seminar is a great
leaders. The most immediate way to opportunity for people to learn about
contribute to the next production would theatre and enjoy acting together-
be to collect money in every country and professional or beginner.
A TEV seminar was held after Guru Puja,
transfer it to the Austrian TEV account.
It is hard to express what it is like to do
this work, only to say how much joy and
satisfaction are gained when vibrations
flow and transform an audience. We bow
again and again to our Divine Mother for
Next Until very recently we were all
prepared
Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's
Dream. However, Shri Mataji has
suggested that we should go to India with
rehearsing
to
start
her blessings, and pray that we become
clear instrumments to do Her work. We
Charlie's Aunt. We are all exeited to start
work on a new play and have decided to
develop a TEV package. This will involve
rehearsing more than one production at
a time so that different acts can be offered
hope to make this a regular bulletin to
keep all of you aware of your activities
and of forthcoming collective events. Jai
Shri Mataji and lois and lots of love from
to theatres.
your brothers and sisters from TEV.
Some of you may remember the clowning
act at Sahasrara Puja in'97. Shri Mataji
ISRAEL-A DIVINE MIRACLE!
mentioned her appreciation of this form A new dimension of spirituality has been
set in motion on the holy land of Israel.
Under the auspicious attention of our
Divine Mother, yogis from Israel and
There are so many countries that we need other parts of the world spent three full
and want to visit. Shri Mataji has also days enlightening the thirsty seekers of
asked us to go to America, so we are this land blessed with great prophets and
of theatre, so we have decided to prepare
a clown's play for our next tour as well.
preparing this for next year. There is also
a festival in South Africa next July. The
the divine incarnation of Lord Jesus
Christ.
Yogis there are trying to raise funds for
The scene of action was in one of Israel's
biggest fairs on alternative living where
Sahaja Yoga had a stand. A
us to go and perform in the communities,
Shri Mataji has expressed Her concern
over the lack of native South Africans and
of 13
group
yogis did the divine work of giving non-
stop self-realization. The innocent people
of Israel waited patiently in four rows to
a community play might be a good way
of giving realization en masse. Australian
Yogis have also asked us to come.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Volume: XI Iue: 5& 6
May June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
36
the bio-feedback stand to see if there was
get their self-realization, each of them
a significant change in his state. The result
was five points positive over a normal
human being. There were many others
who just felt completely relaxed and
peaceful after their realization.
asking if it would be possible somehow
for them to relax, become peaceful, free
from stress, and stop thinking. In only a
few minutes they found out that it was
so simple and Sahaja. Even the Sahaja
Yogis found that it was very simple to
give self-realization, probably due to the Later on during a beautiful journey around
deep seeking of the people and the divine the country we had more opportunities to
attention of Shri Mataji. Approximately giIve realization on our way. The turning
300-400 people got realization each
day. Due to time constraints we just gave
self-realization and requested the people once Lord Christ walked over the water.
to come to the follow-up program to At the end of the seminar we had a Havan,
learn about Sahaja Yoga. To our which was very clearing and powerful.
complete surprise more than 90 seekers Later on we learned that the peace
are now attending the follow-up agreement in Israel was signed shortly
point of the Israel tour was the two-day
seminar on the Lake of Galileo, where
programs.
after we finished our seminar.
Some of us had very interesting
Postscript: The fair brought a lot of people
and interest to Sahaja. In Tel Aviv, after
the fourth meeting we still have about 50
to 60 people. There are some good
reactions and some sincere interest. In
experiences at the fair. One man
explained after his realisation that he
experienced a cool spiral of wind moving
up his spine in a clockwise direction.
Another person asked a yogi if he could
help him to come out of his depression.
He had just measured his bio-feedback
Haifa, there are still about 20 people and
we also just started in Jerusalem.
Shantanu Chatterjee, Austria
at another stand at the same fair, with a
very negative result. The yogi very
lovingly assured him that Sahaja Yoga
has helped many to come out of their
SAHAJA ASTHMA RESEARCH
YIELDS REMARKABLE RESULTS
THREE YEAR STUDY OF SAHAJA YOGA TO FOLLOW
depressions. This person was so
surprised with his own transformation
shortly after his realization that he
thanked the yogi and again went back to
The asthma research program in Australia
continues, with some remarkable results
emerging. Here is the story of one patient
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: XI Isue 5&6
May- June 1999
37
who has finished his 16-weck program
doctors have been granted permission to
of Sahaja Yoga treatments and has been
conduct a three year, multifaceted
research program on Sahaja Yoga.
assessed.
At the beginning of the program his
asthma was so severe that he was unable
to do many of the lung function tests at
all. The basic tests that he did do indicated
The plan is to conduct a number of clinical
trials, as well as specialized studies such
as blood-borne biochemical markers,
heart rate, blood pressure, brain-mapping
ete. The bulk of this research will be
that he was of the very worst category.
Even room air alone would trigger an
funded by the university and associated
hospitals.
asthma attack if he breathed too hard!
At the Sahaja Yoga program he took to
meditation like a fish to water. At the end
Our first project will probably be a trial
of Sahaja Yoga in the treatment of about
of the 16 sessions we assessed him. To one hundred sufferers of chronic
our surprise, he now used almost no
headache. This will be conducted under
medication whatsoever! His asthma was
the auspices of the University of New
so much better that not only had his lung
South Wales and the Australian Institute
function almost doubled, but there was
of Neurological Sciences.
no trace of asthma in his system.
The tremendous progress that is being
There are a number of patients of the trial
who have experienced other positive
substantial changes. As a result of the
asthma researeh, the Australian Sahaja
made in these fields will become powerful
support for the progress of Sahaja Yoga.
-Sydney, Australia
1999 PUJA SCHEDULE
Adi Shakti/Kundalini Puja 18-20 June.
Cabella. hosted by Belgium.
Holland, Spain, Sweden, Denmark,
Finland, Norway.
Australia, Far East, Russia, India.
. Navaratri Puja 15-17 October
Cabella, hosted by UK. Switzerland.
Poland, Ukraine.
Guru Puja 23-25 July. Cabella, hosted
by Italy.
Virata Puja 3-5 September, Cabella.
hosted by North & South America.
Diwali Puja 12-14 November.
Delthos-Greece. hosted by France.
Portugal. Africa.
Christmas Puja 25 December,
Ganapatipule, international.
Ganesha Puja and weddings 24-26
September, Cabella, hosted by
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-39.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May-June 1999
38
Völume :XI Isue: 5&6
Dr. U.C. Rai Tours Europe
Being a Fellow of the World Health
Organization, Prof. Rai was Visiting
taly, Austria, Belgium and Holland
salute Prof. Dr. Umesh C. Rai. In
I
July this year, Prof. Dr. Umesh Professor at the Institute of Brain
C. Rai visited four European countries: Research, Zurich; Physiology
Italy, Austria, Belgium and Holland. Prof. Department, Oxford University:
Rai is the Director of the International Middlesex Hospital medical School,
Sahaja Yoga Research Centre, Navi London; and Cardiovascular Department,
Mumbai, India, founded by Her Holiness Leeds University, Leeds (U.K.). He has,
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi in 1996. This in addition, received the Hari Om Ashram
research and health centre is the only Alembic Awards for research in Basic
hospital in the world where disease are Medical Science in India and the Vladimir
cured by Cosmie Vibrations developed Vernidzky Award in Moscow in 1997 for
through the practice of Sahaja Yoga. On his research in Sahaja Yoga and the use
his visit, he not only shared his knowledge of Cosmic Vibrations to regenerate cells
of holistic medicine and modern medicine, in cases of Type I diabetes mellitus.
but was much appreciated for the In 1984. Prof. Rai heard a lecture of Shri
simplicity and humility of his great heart. Mataji on Sahaja Yoga but was not
convinced about the flow of the subtle
Prof. Rai is in the topmost ranks of the
cool breeze from the palms and
of
top
Indian medical world and is a pioneer in the head of individuals getting Self
the field of holistic medicine. He was Realization through Sahaja Yoga. As
President of the Association of
such, he took the permission of Her
Physiologists and Pharmacologists of
Holiness to do research on Sahaja Yoga
India, Delhi; Chairman, Post-graduate to verify its claims. Accordingly, a
Research Committee of Lady Hardinge
Medical College, Delhi University; and
Fellow of the International Medical taken up jointly by the Physiology
systematic research study was organized.
Three doctoral research projects were
Sciences Academy. He is also Prof.
Department of Lady Hardinge Medical
College and Associated Hospitals in New
Delhi: one on the "Physiological effects
Emeritus of the Mahatma Gandhi Mission
Medical College, Kalamboli, Navi
Mumbai.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-40.txt 
 Volume :XI Isue : 5 & 6
May-June 1999
69
The Divine Cool Breeze
even cancer. One has to take medicine all
of Kundalini Awakening by Sahaja Yoga,"
one on "The effeet of Sahaja Yoga in the
Management of Idiopathic Epilepsy." In
addition, for research on epilepsy, there
was a collaboration with the Defence
Institute of Physiology and Allied
Sciences in Delhi. The doctoral thesis on
through one's life: Also, many
psychosomatic diseases are treated by
transquilizers that not only cause
dependency but also mental problems if
taken for a long time.
Prof. Rai has 62 research papers to his
the first two research projects were duly
approved by Delhi University for M.D.
degrees, and third one on epilepsy was
credit and has delivered lectures about the
medical benefits of Sahaja Yoga in Russia,
England, Europe, Australia, U.S.A.,
Japan, Hong Kong, China, Thailand and
Mexico. He said that there was a positive
response from the doctors of modern
medicine in most of the above countries.
They have started appreciating that
Sahaja Yoga Meditation and the
techniques of clearing the subtle chakras
could be quite useful in the management
approved for a Ph.D. degree.
Prof. Rai said that the data collected:
during these research studies are of such
far-reaching relevance that they could
revolutionize our understanding of the
human psyche, or psychopathology, and
of therapeutie processes. They have
actually enlightened medical sciences in
the understanding of the autonomic of psychosomatic diseases.
nervous system and particularly of the
parasympathetic nervous system. Some We in Italy had a strong desire to know
observations are highly significant for the about this unique method of treatment
discipline of psychiatry and represent a
challenge to the current Newtonian morning, when I started reading the
Cartesian paradigm of Western seience of
body that belongs to mind. This has Umesh C. Rai would be in Milan on July
prevented present-day doctors from
understanding the psyche of human
beings and thereby many illnesses of this Turin on the 23rd. Talking about Yoga in
era which are psychosomatic cannot be Medicine at the public medical conference
cured by modern medicine. Such common in Milan, Prof. Rai said that the first piece
diseases are high blood pressure.
bronchial asthma, migraine, depressive Yoga belongs to the Indus Valley
psychosis, anxiety neurosis, angina, civilization, which dates back to the 3rd
idiopathic epilepsy, diabetes mellitus and
from Dr. Rai. A miracle happened. One
paper, I was surprised to see that Dr.
14th and 15th. Vienna on the 16th and
17th, Brussels on the 20th and 21st, and
of evidence available to anyone about
millennium B.C. But Sahaja yoga is an
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Volume:XIIssue :5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
40
May-June 1999
ideal yoga for modern times because it
touches the physical, mental, social and
Citing reasons for the sudden shift in the
West towards alternative methods, Prof.
spiritual aspects of one's health. And
Sahaja Yoga can be experienced on our
central nervous system.
Rai said that doctors are rethinking their
strategy of treating high blood pressure,
as there has been no breakthrough and
patients have to take medicine throughout
their life. In the U.S., 50 million people
When he was asked what changes
occur in people after practising Sahaja
Yoga for about 12 weeks, Prof. Rai said
are estimated to have high blood pressure
and only 34 million know it. Out of this,
only 27 million seek treatment and only
that there is a statistically significant
decrease in the adrenaline
50 per ent of those seeking treatment
neurotransmitter (as is evident from
decreased VMA), blood lactic acid. achieve normal blood pressure. Based on
heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood research data in high blood pressure case
pressure. There is also a increase in at Lady hardinge Medical College in New
Galvanic Skin Resistance (GSR) and Delhi, Prof.. Rai said that hypertensive
alpha activity of the brain. All these patients who practised Sahaja Yoga along
findings confirm that Sahaja Yoga with anti-hypertensive drugs became
produces profound physical and
normal in 16 weeks' time. They stopped
taking drugs and could maintain normal
mental relaxation and decreases
blood pressure simply by doing Sahaja
Yoga.
sympathetic activity. In other words it
means that an individual becomes
stronger and the stress and strain of
Another group of hypertensive patients
hectir life does not affects his health.
who were only on drugs and did not do
The data of the above parameters Sahaja Yoga could not beeome normal
and had to take drugs (maintenance dose)
to keep their blood pressure within
recorded in people practising Sahaja Yoga
for more than two yearS revealed that
normal limits.
their control values were at least 40 per
cent to 50 per cent less than those of
Prof. Rai has also written a book, Medical
subjects not doing Sahaja Yoga at all. Science Enlightened, in which he has
These lower values put them in a better
position, and thereby protect them from
juxtaposed Sahaja Yoga with medicine for
the prevention and treatment of
the bad effects of stress and strain on the
psychosomatic diseases, including its role
body, keeping them healthier than people
who are not practising Sahaja Yoga.
in heart disease, cancer and AIDS.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Volume: XI issue:5&6
The Divine Cool Breeze
May-June 199s
41
Meditation do not only apply to the
physical, but also to the mental, social and
spiritual aspects. In fact, with the practice
of Sahaja Yoga, the individual undergoes
notjust an improvement in health. but also
Prof. Rai gave examples of patients who
had recently been cured ät the
International Sahaja Yoga Research and
Health Centres: two Americans, one with
dilated cardioma, and one with depressive
psychosis; a Belgian man with high blood
pressure; a South African man with
Asthma; and an Indian lady who was
cured of infertility due to a cystic ovary.
On being asked how Sahaja Yoga works,
Prof. Rai said it is difficult to explain but
an internal transformation which leads
him to become more cooperative and
more sociable, with this also applying to
behavioural disorders connected to stress.
The press has shown interest in the
as per research data, it modulates the message of Professor Rai. Several articles
secretions of neurotransmitters, which
came out in the countries he visited and
further act as neuro-immune modulators others are awaiting publication this
and thereby even help to treat immune autumn. In Italy and Austria, he gave
mediated diseases. Moreover, the interviews on the radio (Radio Popolare
vibrations developed by Sahaja Yoga are
self-organizing, self-regenerating any
rejuvenating, and cure various diseases received her self-realization from Prof.
where moder medicine is helpless.
and Blue Danube Radio, respectively).
The Milanese journalist Tiziana Rici
Rai. A few Viennese jounalists who
helped at a conference of Prof. Rai's at
the United Nations asked to receive their
On the basis of these results, it
possible to confirm that the daily practice
was
self-realization and then decided to meet
at the same place every first Monday of
the month to meditate together with other
representatives of UNO.
of Sahaja Yoga was an effective treatment
for arterial hypertension, angina and
myocardial coronary. Once the patient's
blood
pressure returned to within normal
limits, it could be maintained just with It was also very interesting to see the
meditation! "In all types of ailments," interest shown by the medical profession,
explained Prof. Rai, "curing the most
serious cases depends on three factors: specifically arTranged. One example was
what energy has been awakened, and how the large number of doctors at the
much effort the patient puts into his own conference in Turin, thanks to the efforts
self-healing.
for whom the July meetings were
of the local Sahaja Yogis who placed
posters in hospitals and health centres. At
The beneficial effects of Sahaja Yaga the end of this conference a scientific
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Volume XI Issue:5& 6
42
May-June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
debate followed, with the particularly Dr. Rai, after leading the meditation,
noteworthy participation of Dr. Bruno replied to many questions form Yogis.
Bruni, head of the Department of
Diabetes at the most important hospital In Europe, the next visit of Prof. Rai is
in Turin, La Molinette. He stated his eagerly awaited, knowing that the
appreciation for the results obtained techniques of treating the chakras can be
through Sahaja Yoga methods and further studied in the light of his
foresaw great possibilities in the synergy experience. On the other hand, those who
between orthodox and yoga treatments. went to the Hospital at Belapur, Navi
At the end of the conference, 14 doctors Mumbai (which Shri Mataji considers a
expressed their intention to deepen their precious gem in the tapestry that She has
knowledge of these new yoga techniques
woven in India) have benefited greatly in
which re-stabilize the energy balance, their health and strength. The doctors of
leading to a healthy psychosomatic state.
Several of them asked if they could
the health centre, under the guidance of
Prof. Rai, have used Sahaja Yoga
techniques in full awareness of the union
of mind, body and spirit.
receive their Self-Realization straight
away.
Thank You Professor Rai, thank you
beloved Shri Mataji.
And the Sahaja Yogis? Those who had
anxiously awaited the arrival of Prof. Rai
to talk about big and small problems of
their own or their families were surprised
Paola Capudi, Italy
Some Questions and Answers:
to find someone who was more than a
professor Rai with Sahaja Yogis
Belgium, July 22, 1998
doctor, who was a very great Yogi. They
were honoured to be able to meditate
collectively with this calm and powerful
Can one work with a candle on a cold
personality. The more fortunate were able
to ask advice directly from Dr. Rai. In
Belgium. some 40 Sahaja Yogis had
individual meetings with him and
received, apart from valuable advice, his
appreciation for the level of the Belgium
collective which, he said, "will certainly
succeed in saving its country." Then there
liver?
Dr. Rai answered by insisting that one
should never use fire on the right side and
also not on the central channel. Fire is
reserved for the left side and when the
left side is cleared out, the right side is
lighter.
were many collective meetings in which
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-44.txt 
 Volume: XI Issue: 5&6
May-June 1999
43
The Divine Cool Breeze
About thyroid problems:
Swadhisthana, and it is impossible to
vibrate these herbs, even if you put
them in front of Our Holy Mother's
This is caused by the imbalance of the
right and left channels, Vishuddhi and
picture.
Agnya. Clearing of these chakras and
channels is very helpful in treating thyroid Commenting on this, Dr. Rai said that
problems.
preliminary research on the effect of
Sahaja Yoga on cancer is very
About food:
encouraging. It has been seen that the
practice of Sahaja Yoga and the activation
of the Centre Heart produce more natural
To vibrate food is not enough to
neutralize pesticides. If possible, one can
killer cells which can kill the cancer cells
eat organic vegetables and fruit.
in our body. As such, Sahaja Yoga can
Alzhemer's disease:
prevent the occurrence of cancer and also
nelps in the treatment of cancer. One
should not follow any system blindly. If a
It is a sickness affecting the neurons and
is an incurable disease. Vibrations can
person finds that his Mooladhara or
Swadhishthana chakras are blocked, then
it is clear that this system does not suit
improve the condition.
Mental Problems:
you.
They should be treated in a Sahaja Yoga
Hospital, like the Health Centre in Navi
Milan, July 14, 1998
Mumbai.
Ii is possible that a person can have both
left side and right side problems?
We were very much surprised to hear
about "Ayurvedie" doctors who are
established in Luxembourg, Zurich and
Holland, who have treated some cancer
Dr. Rai said that a person may be left-
sided and then suddenly go to the right
side. In the morning you find patients on
patients with a certain kind of "ayurvedic
the left side, but in the afternoon when
medicine," so-called Pancha-Karma. The
doctors have a guru called Maharishi and
they follow Transcendental Meditation.
you see the same patient, you find him
on the right side. When you need to treat
the right side, you have to use water, ice
or footsoaking in cool water. You can do
They give herbs as medicine called
Amruta, which come from a factory in
New Delhi. Their treatments badly
both the treatments, but not at the same
time. When the left side is more, then treat
and
attack the
Mooladhara
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Volume:XI Issue:5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
44
May-June 1999
the left side first; when the right side is
a statement unless and untilI
to make
more, then treat the right side first. One
know exactly how much detachment
has to find out which is the root cause of
the disease, whether it is the left side or
the right side, and whichever side is the
root cause should be treated first.
there is and where, in which part of the
retina the detachment is there, what the
state of the chakras is and which are
blocked. Then only is it possible to say
how much you
can be benefitted. Do not
What about those who suffer from take it lightly, because it is something
depression, hallucinations, and have
been taking some medications?
quite serious and one should take the
appropriate steps to get it treated. You
should get to the opthamologist so that
the diagnosis can be made, and then show
it to an expert Sahaja Yogi and take his
opinion and only then start the treatment.
It should not be left as is for a long time.
Many cases have come to our Centre and
practically all have been cured. Sahaja
Yoga is one of the best ways to treat cases
of depressive psychosis. Here in Milan, it
may be very difficult because it requires
a very drastic type of treatment. It may
Treatment of asthma attacks:
not be possible for you to cure yourself
by doing yourself clearing the chakras
Asthmatic attacks are a right heart
because you are not in that state of problem. Clearing the right heart and
thoughtless awareness. The person who
is doing the clearing should be able to feel
the vibrations and for the patient himself
putting ice on the liver are general
treatments. If you find that you are not
benefitted by these techniques, then come
it is not possible.
to the Centre to see what other
permutations and combinations are
affecting you and then the treatment
depends on that. If the asthmatic crisis is
But if somebody who can feel the
vibrations, treats him and he the
treatment in the morning and the evening,
think there is no reason why he should
not be cured.
gets
very serious, you should do whatever the
doctor suggests.
If it is not Status-Asthmaticus, then with
Sahaja Yoga you can be easily cured. This
has been shown in the research study on
asthmatics at Sucheta Kriplani Hospital
in Lady Hardinge Medical College, New
Problems of the retina:
We have to see the degree of the
detachment of the retina, but with Sahaja
Yoga many patients with retinal
detachment have benefitted. It is difficult
Delhi.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Valume XI issue :586
May June 199e
The Divine Cool Breeze
45
About food:
give Self-Realization and then start
treating. In doing so, sometimes they treat
Prof. Rai said that it is important to eat a
diet rich in fibre. People who eat only
chicken, ham, sausages, eggs, etc., and
someone with a very badly caught Left
Swadhishthana and Ekadesha Rudra who
has been diagnosed with cancer.
very few vegetables are more prone to
develop colon caneer. People who eat
more butter, fried things and a lot of eggs
develop arteriosclerosis, which makes
If the Sahaja Yogi is not deep in Sahaja
Yoga and adequate precautionary
measures are not taken to treat such a
case, then one catches and develops
cancer. Shri Mataji has said, if I remember
them more prone to develop angina, high
blood pressure and heart attacks. As per
the Sahaja Yoga hypothesis of H.H. Shri
Mataji, left-sided people should eat more
proteins and right-sided people should eat
more carbohydrates.
correctly, that in general. cancer and
schizophrenic patients should not be
treated by Sahaja Yogis. It should be
advisable to refer such patients to the
International Sahaja Yoga Research &
How do you explain a Sahaj Yogi getting
sick and dying of cancer?
Health Centre.
The full address is: International Sahaja
Yoga Research & Health Centre, plot No.
Normally, a Sahaja Yogi remains mostly
in good health and is able to prevent many
psychosomatic diseases and many
1, Sector 8, C.B.D. Belapur, Navi
Mumbai, India 400614.
epidemic diseases. The reason for this is
very simple. By doing Sahaja Yoga, the
defence mechanism of the body becomes
stronger and that prevents the occurrence
SAHAJA YOGA MEDICAL
CONFERENCE IN MEXICO CITY
With the blessings of our Holy Mother,
of diseases, including cancer. However,
at the same time, it is not surprising to
the Sahaja Yoga medical conference from
September 2-4 was a joyful event, with
see a Sahaja Yogi once in a while sick
with eancer. The reason is very simple. the important participation of Sahaja
Sahaja Yogis are very compassionate and medical doctors from three continents.
loving people. Being in Collective Before the Conference we had a Havan
Consciousness, if they find a person Mexico City, and Ganesha Puja was held
at Cuernavaca, a city to the south of
suffering from an illness that is not cured
after the Conference.
by the doctors of modern medicine, they
immediately offer their help. First they
On September 2, the Faculty of Medicine
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-47.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume: XI Issue 5 & 6
46
May-June 1999
doctors, researchers and students came
to the podium to congratulate him and to
talk on the possibility of joint projects on
of the National University of Mexico
(UNAM) received Prof. Dr. U.C. Rai for
a conference on the "Role of Sahaja
Meditation in Medicine." Medical
different areas of interest, and asked to
doctors, academicians, university
know more on his research.
students and researchers attended this
After hearing what Prof. Rai explained
about Sahaja Yoga, Dr. Viesca explained
how Mexican Indians believed in working
on four centres of energy in the body to
cure illnesses. The exchange of
medical conference, presided by Dr.
Carlos Viesca, Chief of the Department
of History of Medicine of the Faculty, Dr.
Graciela de la Lama, former Ambassador
of Mexico to India and Director of the
House of India in Mexico, and Dra. experiences aroused the possibility of
more exchanges of
experiences in the near future which could
Graciela Vazquez-DiazJ., Co-Chairman
of the Conference.
presenting
be the basis for a joint project with India
or other countries with the same interest.
Participants were in total silence for more
than an hour, looking at the graphics of
medical case studies, and hearing his
explanations on how diseases have been
diminished or cured by Sahaja Yoga. Prof.
Rai told the delegates that high blood
pressure, bronchial asthma, epilepsy,
migraine, and a host of other
psychosomatic diseases for which there
On September 3, Dr. Rai gave a second
public conference at the District of
Coyoacan, to the South of Mexico City.
The audience responded with great
interest, asking him numerous questions.
When one person asked for the
experience of awakening the Kundalini,
Dr. Rai finished to explain the substantive
aspects of Sahaja Yoga and how its
founder and master, Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi has spread it in more than 70
is no cure in modern medicine now can
be cured at the International Sahaja Yoga
Research and Health Centre. This centre,
located in New Mumbai, India, was
founded by Her Holiness Mataji Shri countries. After Dr. Rai gave the
Nirmala Devi in 1996. This Centre is Realization, everyone raised their hands
unique in the whole world, where no to show that they had felt the cool breeze
medicines are given and treatment to
over their heads, and were invited to a
follow-up program for the following
patients from all over the world is done
week.
only by vibrations.
After the conference finished, medical On Friday, September 4. Dr. Rai
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-48.txt 
 Volume: XI Issue: 5&6
May-June 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
47
addressed the Mexican Sahaja collective,
supported by Sahaja medical doctors who
Graciela Vazquez-Dias, Mexico City
SAHAJA YOGA MEDICAL
had come to the Medical Conference.
Edgar Patarroyo from Colombia CONFERENCE AT NIH IN
demonstrated his great capacity to WASHINGTON, DC
interpret the two conferences into For the first time, the value of Sahaja
Spanish, and directed the Sahaja cleansing Yoga has been recognized by a major
techniques during the workshop. Other scientific institution in the United States
Sahaja doctors in attendance were Henry in an historic event. On September 9,
Forero, also from Colombia, Pepe Suero 1998, the prestigious National Institutes
from Spain and Chanda his wife who is a of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Maryland
medical doctor from India.
(a suburb of Washington, D.C.) was the
The TV channel PCTV, that transmits to site of a day-long medical conference on
an audience of a million people in Mexico Sahaja Yoga. The internationally-
and Latin America, inaugurated a new renowned medical physiologist and
program called "New Horizons for the Sahaja Yogi, Prof. Dr. U.C. Rai presented
Millennium", with a special program on
Sahaja Yoga. They interviewed Dr. Rai. the physiological effects and medical
the other Sahaja medical doctors, and the benefits of Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja representative in Mexico.
the findings of 12 years of research into
During the conference, Dr. Rai showed a
video recording of interviews with
The Sahaja Medical Conference in
patients from the USA, UK, Mexico.
Mexico has opened a new chapter for the
treatment of psychosomatic diseases
between the Faculty of Medicine of the
Germany, Brazil, Russia and India who
were treated at the health centre and were
National University of Mexico and the healed. NIH host Dr. George Patrick,
International Sahaja Yoga Research and Ph.D., Chief of Recreational and
Health Centre. It has also awakened great
Rehabilitation Therapy, thanked Dr. Rai
interest in the general public on the for his excellent presentation and
explained why Sahaja Yoga, besides
philosophy and practice of Sahaja Yoga.
tackling health problems from stress to
cardiovascular disease, was important to
the work of the research giant. Calling
Sahaja Yoga "complementary medicine.
Dr. Patrick spoke of the NIH's
May our Holy Mother continue blessing
Sahaja Yoga in Mexico, and favour this
small collective with established yogis
from other countries.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-49.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI issue : 5 & 6
May-June 1999 48
understanding of the necessity to continue
studying the mind-body effect in healing
he arrived in Washington, DC from the
medical conference in Mexico City, he
gave a talk to the yogis who had gathered
for the Ganesha Puja seminar in nearby
Maryland. (This talk will be reported in
the next issue.) The atmosphere was
charged with excitement. As we
anticipated the upcoming NIH
conference, the yogis could feel that we
were part of history in the making.
and to introduce effective new methods.
"NIH believes in energy medicine and
complementary medicines and sees the
powerful role of spirituality in the healing
process," he said. "Sometimes healing
doesn't necessarily mean a cure, but it
does mean making people whole. Sahaja
Yoga helps that process along and we like
what we see," he concluded.
The next day, he graciously agreed to two
A report about the conference aired on a
20-minute videotaped interviews about
his work at the Sahaja Yoga Research and
local cable news program that night. The
five-minute piece was the second story
of the evening, and showed Sahaja Yoga
in a positive light. The journalist
Health Centre. These interviews will be
edited and made available for programs,
cable TV and radio projects. Later, in
New York, Dr. Rai gave another
question-and-answer session on medicine
and Sahaja Yoga. Throughout his stay,
he was gracious, generous and eager to
do what he could to assist the growth of
Sahaja Yoga in America.
interviewed several members of the
audience, including some who had been
treated at the Centre. The journalist even
got her realization during the conference.
Despite his busy schedule, Dr. Rai gave
the Sahaja Yogis many opportunities to
meet with him and benefit from his
knowledge and experience. Shortly after
-Mary Yelesin, USA
