The Divine Cool Breeze Volume :XI IsSue :1& 2 Jan.-Feb. 1899 . those who want to grow shouid meditate everyday. Whatever time you come home, may be in the morning, may be in Ihe evening, any time. You will know that you are meditating when you can get into thoughtless awareness. Your reaction then will be Zero. Looking at somelhing you just look at it, you will not react because you are thoughtiess. You won't react. When that reaction is not there, then every thing, you will be surprised, is Divine, because reaction is your Agnya's problem. Once you are absolutely thoughtlessly aware, you are one with the Divine. So much so that Divine takes over every activity, every moment of your life and looks after. You feel completely secured, one with the Divine and enjoy the blessings of Divine.

 In this Issue: India Tour 1997 1 News from Around the World 15 Shri Adi Shakti Puja-1998-Cabella 17 Hydrabad Puja Pravachan 25 Prayer 27 Guru Puja-1998 29 Edited by 3 Yogi Mahajan : V.J. Nalgirkar Published by 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Jan - Feb. 1999 Volume XI Issue 182 The Divine Cool Breeze India Tour 1997 his Year's India Tour began bhajan session, talked animatedly about in the capital city of Delhi. life and Sahaja Yoga in our own countries Gradually over the first few days and just enjoyed each other's company of December, yogis from around the The sense of collectivity and family was world arrived at the now familiar scout taking shape. camp in the Nizamuddin area Direct from our lhectic lives at home, it was striking During this time, we established the routine of daily meditations at 5:30 a.m., to many of uIs how quiekly we slowed down to India Tour pace, how strong the which we kepr throughout the tour. Each vibrations were and how easy it was to day, after meditation, we would have stay thoughtless. It was a great blessing announcements related to the day's events to set our feet once again on the Yoga or some aspect of our stay in India. Russel Briggs, the tour leader, was very thorough in keeping us informed and prepared for Bhoomi, Mother India. Slowly in those first days we made new acquaintances, got back in touch with old Our journey. As many of us were in India for the first time, a careful review of the friends, and settled in to the life that we practicalities oflife on the India Tour was would be living for the next month. Many provided in those first morning meetings. people took the opportunity of having a few flexible days in a big city to shop for One of the memorable events of these days for many people was a trip to Agra kurtas, saris and gifts. The campfire which has become a familiar gathering place to see the famous Taj Mahal The during the cold evenings at the scout outstanding event of the week was the camp was lit each night, and each night the crowd around it grew On the first chance to sit at the feet of our Divine night one found a few chairs around the Mother for the first time on the tour, as fire, mostly occupied by local yogis She gave realization to tens of thousands talking quietly with one another. By the of people. Some of the great Sahaja last night at the camp the scene was quite musicians, along with the spontaneously different; more than 100 yogis from every formed international bhajan group, country imaginable joined in a rousing performed for the audience as it grew Delhi public program, where we had the

 Jan - Feb. 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 1 & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze witness in less than ideal circumstances. over the hour or so before Shri Mataji's arrival. Shri Mataji was radiant, and it was In the heat of the midday sun, we lugged hundreds of bags, some quite heavy, a a tremendous moment for all of us. To our great surprise and delight, after finishing Her talk, Shri Mataji turned to through crowds of thousands of people. the India Tour group and spoke to us in All the while the clock was ticking-we English, as if it were just an intimate were very close to our departure time. gathering of the family of yogis with their Mother. She looked at us with such love formed to hand luggage across the vast and appreciation that we were all really number of tracks more quickly. The local moved, and filled with gratitude. Many a police were objecting vehemently, and the heart melted into the divine flow of love yogis were running off the tracks to avoid in those moments. Shri Mataji told us that oncoming trains, then reassembling to She regretted not being able to travel with continue working. The pressure of time us on the tour and gave us Her blessings and the heat made it very tough but finally for a great journey. As She left the hall, it all the bags and all the people were on was hard not to wish that She would be the train and we were off and running. great distance up and down staircases, In the end a huge chain of yogis was with us throughout the tour, as in the old Once on the train we discovered that days. Yet at the same time it was clear we were about 105 people on one car that She would in reality be very much and about 65 on the other. And of course, with us. most people found that their bags were On the next day we faced our first not on the same car as they were! So, we collective test: travelling. We had settled comfortably into the routine at our camp in Delhi and we might have been quite content to stay there enjoying the collectivity and the hospitality of the Delhi yogis. But it was time to begin our had a night of training in detachment, tolerance and collectivity. We later looked back on this whole experience as part of the adventure and as essential to building the closeness and camaraderie of the group. journey. The process of moving 170 yogis and their belongings by bus to the Delhi train station, and getting all of these people and things onto the two cars we had booked on a public train before our Nagpur We arrived in Nagpur, needless to say, a bit tired and ragged. We had no idea that within a short time we would be departure time proved to be a gruelling ordeal. our first opportunity to try to transported to a realm of tremendous joy,

 Jan - Feb 1999 Valume XI Issue 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze and an atmosphere so divine that we would feel completely fresh again and in significant places in Shri Mataji's life. complete comfort The Nagpur yogis Baba Mama was our tour guide, giving took care of our every need, right from we spent in Nagpur was our tour of us first-hand reminiscences of Shri having the baggage transported for us to Mataji's early days in the freedom our temporary home in Nagpur to the last movement and even earlier. We visited moments of our stay Baba Mama had Shri Mataji's grade school and stood in arranged that we would be greeted at our the courtyard where She played camp with live Shehnai music and fragrant badminton with Her school friends, flowers, cool drinks, places to rest and surrounded by the rooms where She and an atmosphere of attended Her classes. We travelled along tremendous love. We were immediately the road where She had wallked daily to shower, aware of the many years that Shri Mataji school. We stood outside the apartment had spent in this beautiful city (She had where the family had lived while Shri even speni time in the very room where Mataji was in the underground the men were sleeping) as the vibrations movement, and while Her father was imprisoned We drove past the place were tremendous. Each night in Nagpur we were treated where the police had interrogated Shri to Ganapatipule-style music programs, complete with the hospitality of Baba Mama, the sounds of Nirmal Sangeet the British flag in protest, for which he Sarita, dancing to qawwalis, Indian elassical music recitals, and performances Mataji cruelly during the independence movement. We saw the court building where Shri Mataji's father had torn down was arrested and jailed för 19 months. We stood by the gate where, in protest against by the Nagpur Academy students. There was a steady flow of enjoyment and bliss enjoyed by all, and the Nagpur yogis kept us completely comfortable the British, Shri Mataji had once laid down in the road to prevent buses from entering with students Our last stop on this tour was a small temple to Mother Mary in a wooded area where Baba Mama said that Shri Mataji On one of the mornings in Nagpur we moved to the local centre for a puja followed by a havan. Shri Mataji had requested that we perform puja and havan in each city, and we very much enjoyed Baba Mama said that Shri Mataji had used to come to meditate. They often took walks together to this place and this first one found great peace in this place. We were For many of us the highlight of the time all deeply moved by this tour, by the

 Volume : XI Isue :1& 2 Jan-Feb. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze a small lodge and dinner for us on top of tremendous vibrations in these places and a large hill. While it rained in the darkness outside, we packed into a small room and by the depth with which Baba Mama related these stories, as only he could have began a spontaneous bhajan session which was so powerful and so blissful that done. After this tour of Nagpur we stopped we were all amazed. It went on for several for a tour of Baba Mama's house, a hours, but it felt like no more than a few beautiful home designed by Shri Mataji. One could see similarities to the design minutes. We later found out that Shri Rama had spent time in this area during of Pratishthana. Before we left, all the his exile. It must have been His presence yogis gathered around Baba Mama in the living room and he called Shri Mataji on the phone. This was a beautiful moment that we were still feeling. As this magical portion of the evening came to end, we proceeded to the city of Ramtek, where for all of us. Shri Mataji sent us Her blessings through Baba Mama, and we left feeling very happy and moved by the endless richness of our experience in this a late night program of music and gift giving took place. The yogis of Ramtek were incredibly gracious and had worked for months to prepare for our brief visit. historic city. Our experience in Nagpur and Ramtek was tremendous and undoubtedly we all Our next stop was a short visit to the site of the Nagpur music academy, still remain grateful for this time. Late that under construction. Baba Mama gave us night we boarded our train at the Nagpur station (in a much more organized and relatively trouble-free manner than on the previous journey) and travelled toward a tour of the land, and told us about the planned layout and method of instruction at the school. This beautiful environment will undoubtedly bring forth great artists Hyderabad. in years to come. The school is dedicated to Shri P.K.Salve, father of Shri Mataji Hyderabad and Baba Mama. We arrived at Hyderabad station to That evening we took buses to an area outside a small city called Ramtek. We were supposed to have a picnic by the large lake there, but we were running late, another wonderfully warm welcome. All the baggage handling and transportation was organized by the local yogis so as to minimize the work for those of us on the it was almost dark when we arrived, and tour. Shri Mataji had suggested that we pouring rain. The local yogis had arranged send our large bags straight from Nagpur

 Jan - Feb 1999 Valume XI IsSue: 1&2 The Divine Cool Breeze to Ganapatipule, so that we could avoid repeating the experience we had at the and several of the Western yogis were Delhi station. As a result, we were interviewed. program received national TV coverage, travelling light, which made the trip easier The havan and puja in Hyderabad were very powerful. Arun Goel led us in a Dehradun style havan, which was on us as well as giving our hosts (who insisted on handling the bags throughout the rest of the tour) less strenuous work extremely detailed in protocol, and was tremendously powerful. At the end of the havan, Arun invited everyone to dance We were taken by bus to a beautiful palace in Secunderabad where we stayed in a number of rooms throughout the building, Our meals and programs were held in permanent pendals adjacent to moments when one feels like one has the palace. The metal roofs of the pendals often resounded with the footsteps of danced around th fire, and the men frolicking monkeys, who lived in the further away from it Looking around one surrounding trees. around the huge fire, and a time of tremendous joy unfolded-one of those entered the gates o paradise. The ladies could see nothing bui purity, joy, childlike enjoyment and serenity on the faces of Our stay in Hyderabad was highlighted by a trip to a Mugal fort, and several tremendous music programs. These every one present A.ier the music died down, a short but powerful puja was performed. programs included a fabulous dance performance depicting the early life of Krishna, Hyderabad is the City of Pearls, where pearls are sent for finishing and where a lot of pearl jewellery is created. At the end of our stay a local yogi who has a business selling pearl jewellery came to the camp and set up a table to display his vocal tremendous Shri performances by a local yogi named Subramaniam, a sitar recital, a wonderful tabla recital, and the world debut of the local leader, singing after two months of Jessons There were many inspired wares This generated a lot of interest moments during these concerts We ended our stay with an emotional good-bye ceremony, one of many we were to experience, in which everyone thanked everyone else with great feeling We attended a lovely public program where perhaps 3,000 people got their realization. Our international bhajan group sang and local yogis led the and mutual admiration. It was time for with a special appearance by another beautiful chapter of the journey program, the Indian leader, Arun Goel. The to end

 6. Jan - Feb. 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze Mataji's puja was held on the 1991 tour. Madras is in a tropical climate, very warm and humid. There is beautiful, lush Although never as difficult as the departure from Delhi, the process of getting everyone and all the luggage on the train was always a challenge, particularly because we were on a public train and we never knew exactly when the tropical vegetation, and there is a weather pattern unique to this kind of climate. On a sunny day, huge storm clouds can rush in, sprinkle rain on the city and dissipate very quickly, leaving the sky blue and the sun shining once again. This can happen train would arrive or where our two cars would be. The departure times were not at all within our control. A number of several times a day. times locals boarded our cars and we had a tough time explaining that these were private cars; we had to assertively (but diplomatically, of course!) claim our territory. By this time, however, the collective had become quite close and we packed with activities, as it was in each all knew the routine. Mutual respect. city. The highlights of the stay there cooperation and patience, along with a generous dose of humour, kept it all working remarkably smoothly. The train The yogis in Madras were extremely generous, and showed great care for the group on the tour. The program was fairly included a trip to an ancient temple by the sea, which had been one of seven. The others had all been washed away over the ages. We were also treated to a dance journeys were a chance to rest and, more performance, and a very successful public importantly, to have long hours to get to know one's brothers and sisters, to work program. on one another and to enjoy the landscape On our last day in Madras we again of India together. The mutual care and performed a tremendous Dehradun-style support at every level which was shared throughout the tour was given time to (who has promised to put out a pamphlet unfold and express itself on these detailing the protocol of havan). The journeys. havan under the direction of Arun Goel powerful havan and puja combination again took us very much deeper. Madras Immediately following the havan and We arrived in Madras to another puja we said brief, heartfelt good-byes enthusiastic welcome. Again the local and both guests and hosts expressed their yogis helped us to get our bags moved gratitude forthe time that our Mother had and took us by bus to our home, a large given us together. Only through Shri pavilion very close to the place where Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga could we find

 Jan - Feb. 1999 1&2 Voluma XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze yogis (our numbers had grown by this time)! ourselves in such a unique and joyous divine setting The India Tour collective boarded the Ôn our first day there some people took the chance to shop for necessities We were treated to the very unique and buses and headed for the Madras station and the trip to Cochin in the state of Kerala delicious food of the region, which we continued to enjoy throughout the stay there. They make very mild, liver-friendly food using rice and a lot of vegetables with delicious sauces. As the day wore on, we began to clear our things from the hall to prepare for the evening program and public program which would be held Cochin Although many of us felt that the trip to Cochin was going to be difficult, it turned out to be very smooth. Our train cars had to be detached from the train in the middle of the night and later attached the to another train, this was managed without any major problem The evening program began with a beautiful welcome from the Kerala yogis to the yogis on tour. We were very Cochin is another tropical coastal town, on the west coast of southern India sweetly welcomed and we could feel that it meant a tremendous amount to the local It is a resort town with many hotels and tourist resorts along the shore The weather is hot and extremely humid Palm trees and other tropical vegetation grow densely throughout the area The phrase tropical paradise suits Cochin well. We stayed in a large hall in the middle of a residential neighbourhood, defined by Small quiet streets. yogis to have the international collective come to Kerala and Cochin. It is extremely difficult for them to spread Sahaja Yoga in this region, mostly due to the dominating influence of Christian churches in the South (Madras also faces a lot of Christian conditioning amongst the local people). The Kerala yogis had deep desire that our presence there would help to work things out and focus the In this small centre there are only six Sahaja Yogis. and in the state of Kerala there are about ten more, who came to attention of the divine on their region. They ended their greeting to us with heartfelt welcome song. help out during our stay. Incredibly, this small group of extremely dedicated people was able to host and provide a beautiful time to nearly two hundred This program led directly into the

 Jan - Feb. 1999 Volume : XI Isue : 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze where the boats were docked, and walked public program. The hall was full for the a small distance through a lovely village public program, but most of the space was occupied with the India tour group. The number of new people was not great, but to the docks. We boarded the boats, about 30 people to each boat, and set off on our journey. The boats were old tourist boats, and offered us the option of sitting on decks at the top of the boats, or on the program was very beautifully and humbly presented, and after the realization session a number of the new people stayed behind to be worked on. The bhajan group benches in the covered lower levels. Both venues offered beautiful views and fresh sang a few of the slower, more meditative cool breezes which we found very songs to help the new people to go deeper. Early the next morning we performed revitalizing, as the climate on land was a havan, again in the Dehradun style. very hot and humid. The following four hours were Although Arun Goel was not with us, he had left notes on the performance of magical. The vibrations were extremely strong, and we were convinced that Shri Mataji's attention was very much on us during our excursion. We talked, havan. The havan was very powerful. The cumulative effect of these frequent havans and pujas was great and many of us were aware by this time that a great deal off meditated, foot-soaked off the side of the boat and generally just completely relaxed and enjoyed ourselves. One yogi even Later in the morning we went on one decided to go for the total immersion of the truly memorable adventures of the experience, ending up in the water after tour: a boat trip through the back waters slipping while climbing on the side of the of Cochin. Shri Mataji had specifically boat. All along the shore we saw requested that we take a four hour long beautiful, idyllic fishing villages, from trip through these inland waterways, which locals smiled broadly and waved during which we should offer vibrated at us. There were dense tropical water to this unique system of channels. landscapes, dense with lush vegetation. We had filled empty drinking water Lovely flowers which blossomed on the bottles with water and put them before water's surface decorated our way. As we cleansing had taken place within us. progressed through our journey, those of Shri Mataji's picture the night before, so us who had the vibrated water would in the morning we were armed with good supply of vibrated water for our mission. from time to time offer some into the backwaters on which we travelled. The tour had been very busy so far We took a short bus ride to the area CO

 Jan - Feb: 1999| XI Issue:1& 2 Molume The Divine Cool Breeze the trip to Bangalore The yogis in Cochin were tremendously hospitable and devoted to the spreading of Sahaja Yaga. while we enjoyed it all, it was a non-stop progression from one program to the next, interspersed with packing, travelling and organizing ourselves There was They asked that all the Western Sahaja rarely a chance to rest and relax, and this Yogis give bandhans and shoe beat on boat ride was exactly that-four hours their behalf, so that Sahaja Yoga might of relaxation and rest in the beauty of grow in this difficult but beautiful region India's southwest coast. Meanwhile, we Bangalore were servinga subtler purpose, as well- spreading vibrations at Shri Mataji's We arrived in Bangalore late in the request. evening, quite tired from our journey We were revived by the enthusiasm of our welcome, many of the local yogis came to greet us and to help us with our bags. We were taken by bus to a beautiful hall made mostly from white marble, which was to be our home during our stay. The building was on a hilltop well outside the city, in a quiet residential area That evening, as we prepared to leave our Cochin home, a huge thunderstorm came in flashing lightning and unleashing torrents of rain on the area The storm was so strong that it delayed our departure slightly. During this delay we had a collective meditation of tremendous depth and power. It felt as though Shri Vishnumaya was doing some very strong The Bangalore yogis had arranged a dance program for us for that evening. The dance was in the folk style of dancing cleansing of the area We later realized that Shri Mataji must have had us go out on the water early in the day so that the vibrated backwaters could evaporate and provide the moisture for a vibrated storm known as Kathakali, in which the dancers wear huge ornate masks, making the characters larger than life and very dramatic in appearance. Significantly, the yogis had arranged for a performance of by evening, A vast amount of vibrated rain fell on the region, not only purifying the area, but also demonstrating to us how we work together in cooperation with the the story of how the Devi defeated Mahishasura in battle, from the Devi divine Mahatmyam. The current-day incarnation of that demon is today based not far from Bangalore, and the performance served to bring our attention and the divine Finally we boarded our buses in the still-pouring rain. By the time we reached the station the rain had stopped and we moved toward our familiar train cars and attention oto the destruction of this

 Jan - Feb 1999 10 Volume : XI Issue : 1 & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze which involved painting with a string negativity. dipped in paint rather than a brush. For Another highlight of our stay was a each painting the yogis suggested a deity very powerful public program, at which the keynote speech was given by Yogi as the subject. Mr. Sharma requested that Mahajan. At several of the programs on we sing a bhajan in praise of the deity. He would complete his painting just as the tour, including this one, video we completed our bhajan. He seemed to projectors had been brought in so that the audience could see Shri Mataji and paint and to move with the flow of the receive realization from Her directly. But music and the vibrations, and it was very moving to watch. The paintings were beautiful and we enjoyed watching this as the Maya would have it, the equipment failed in each city and yogis were forced newly realized artist as he experienced the inspiration of the divine vibrations. to give the realization themselves, which they did with great humility and respect. He also seemed quite moved by the experience. His creations that day included portraits of Shri Ganesha, Shri Shiva, Shri Jagadamba and Shri Jesus, an abstract landscape, a fine portrait of the On our last day in Bangalore we had a very deep havan and puja, which were organized in a particularly collective way by the local yogis. After the puja we were graciously presented with gifts of incense Madras centre leader and our tour leader and small wooden elephant statues by the Russell together (no bhajans local yogis. By now we had grown accompanied these last two), and as a accustomed to the generosity and deep finale, a portrait of Shri Mataji with the open-heartedness of the Indian yogis who were our hosts. We were grateful to all of them, and in Bangalore we were again Mataji surrounded by the planets and theme Sitting in the Heart of the Universe. The painting depicted Shri stars, and won enthusiastic approval from very moved by the love we were shown. the audience of yogis. Immediately after the puja and gift- giving we were treated to a very unusual As the afternoon drew to a close, it was time for another heartfelt good-bye, presentation. A well-known artist of India, a Mr. Sharma, came to do a demonstration as the India Tour moved on toward of his work for us. He seemed to be a Ganapatipule via Miraj. very humble and inspired man, and had Miraj and Beyond taken his realization just the day before During the demonstration he painted on From the beginning of the tour we had large sheets of paper using a technique joked that, judging by the name, Miraj

 Jan-Feb. 1999 1. Volume : XI issue :1&2 The Divine Cool Breeze might be a place where we would encounter the maximum amount of maya a light, joyful excitement filled the air We Fortunately, this did not turn out to be arrived after dark at the camp. As our the case We arrived at this small buses pulled into the camp, people began sense of anticipation grew amongst us and to spot friends, acquaintances, husbands, Maharashtrian town in the extreme heat wives and children from the bus windows of midday, We all got off the trains, and Great reunions were just moments away! made sure all of our belongings were also Once the buses found their final parking spots we were able to greet the waiting loved ones. It was particularly beautiful with us, realizing that this had been our final train journey From the train platformm we seemed to be in an almost desert to the busy train stations we had encountered elsewhere. Looking around, to see the reunions of parents with their children who had been attending the school in Talnoo, near Dharamashala. we saw not a soul and really had no idea about what we were supposed to do. For We spent most of that evening settling a moment, we prepared ourselves to face in and finding places to sleep. Along the way many of us got the chance to visit With friends and family joining us for the half tour. It was a new era of the India Tour for those of us who had been a part of the close family of the full tour, Now our family had expanded to include the maya we had been joking about, but within a few minutes we were surrounded by yogis from Kolhapur and other nearby cities, who took complete care in getting our baggage moved and getting us to our buses Soon we were gathered in shady spots by the station, sipping cold drinks and thousands of people, and it was almost a loading our bags on top of the buses. rarity to spot someone from the full tour group! But the power of numbers was evident in the vibrations and it was great to be with the even larger international collective. Our bus trip was about six hours in total, and passed very quickly with bhajan singing, visiting and naps. After a short time we were taken to a building by the road where lunch had been arranged for us It seemed miraculous to find such a On the first full day we spent in Ganapatipule we began what became something of a routine: early morning meal waiting for us along the way. Again, the Indian yogis had gone to great trouble to ensure our comfort. meditation in the pendal, followed by announcements, country meetings, a trip to the beach for a foot soak, shoe beat or Ganapatipule As we approached Ganapatipule, a swim, and breakfast. During the day

 Jan - Feb. 1999 12 Volume : XI Issue : 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze people tended to rest, spend time in the just at midnight, to wish Her a merry pendal or in a shady grove of palm trees Christmas. where it was relatively cool. People The next day was puja day, and again practised music to be offered in the evening programs and took care of we were blessed to be in the presence of various communications and projects that our Mother. The general message was were easily handled in the international about getting over the ego and conditioning, to get to the pure love which was the power of Shri Jesus Christ, and which must be our power as wel. The puja was followed by the giving of national presents, after which Shri Mataji collective environment. On that first day Shri Mataji arrived in Ganapatipule. Although we did not see Her on that day, Her arrival was a . tremendous event for all of us. We had took Her leave. been in India for three weeks or more, After Shri Mataji's departure we had and had not seen Her since Delhi. We were the opportunity to enjoy watching as deeply looking forward to being in the dozens of our brothers and sisters had divine presence of the Adi Shakti once their engagements announced. It was a more. pleasure to see these matches literally made in heaven, and to see the joy and the surrender of the new couples. It is difficult to encapsulate Ganapatipule in a short description, but a few of the highlights should be mentioned. We were fortunate enough to be able to attend a second music program at at the evening music program. Nirmal which Shri Mataji was present, on the Sangeet Sarita performed, as did the 27th. It was an evening of bhajans sung We first saw Shri Mataji on Christmas eve, Nagpur Academy students and a well known qawwali singer, a lady who had Indian artists, and of Indian classical performed at the previous year's seminar. music. Arun Apte ended the program Shri Mataji was particularly impressed with a powerful recital of vocal music. with the Nagpur students and how they One could really feel that Shri Mataji was had learned Indian music, which should working on us through this divine music. take many years to grasp, in a matter of Shri Mataji Herself commented that the months. She commented that it must be music had made Her feel very happy. by several national groups and by various through Sahaja Yoga that this could be achieved. The evening ended with Christmas carols, offered to Shri Mataji with the preparations for the weddings. On the 28th, the day was occupied

 Jan - Feb 199s 13 Volume XI ssue 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze various countries sang in national groups, and an international group of bhajan singers gave rousing renditions of familiar songs. It was a moving and joyous family gathering, marking the end of our stay in The haldi ceremonny was performed in and around a small pendal in the camp. It was fun to meet the soon-to-be-married people and enjoy their excitement, their nervousness or their calm, and the auspicious atmosphere surrounding the Ganapatipule event. That evening Shri Mataji met with The next morning we prepared to the grooms, then came to the pendal to speak to the ladies who performed a short leave amidst great confusion as to who Gauri Puja to Her The weddings should be on which buses and which buses themselves were very beautifully were going where Some people were performed, and the couples looked truly going straight to the airport, others divine and full of the bliss of their Mother's returning to their Indian home towns, stil others were going to Kalwe It was an blessings. For many of us who had been married in previous years it was beautiful unmanageable scene for mere mortals. to attend the ceremony and be reminded fortunately the divine managed it all and, of the incredibly high ideals represented somehow, everyone got on a bus and by our marriages in Sahaja Yoga Shri ended up where they were supposed to Mataji left immediately following the go. The trip was long but very enjoyable, ceremony, and as it was a dark (moonless) as again, we were together, and who night, people did not stay up as late as they might normally have done on the wedding night. could ask for more? Kalwe We arrived in Kalwe in the evening, On the last day in Ganapatipule we and did little more than eat and go to bed. We awoke the next morning to the last day of the India Tour It was difficult to enjoyed many of the beauties of the place, with no real scheduled activities. People visited the swayambhu, meditated in the believe It seemed that we had only just arrived, and yet as if we had been together for ages We had grown, we had changed pendal or in a shady spot, played cricket on the beach, swam, and just enjoyed the company of the vast collective. The new married couples had time to spend and we had felt our hearts expand with together and we all enjoyed the glow the love of the collective, a reflection of surrounding the newly-created families the love of our Mother. We had formed That evening a wonderful bhajan session strong bonds with new brothers and took place in the pendal. Yogis from sisters, bonds which would last all our

 Jan - Feb. 1999 14 Volume : XI Issue : 1 & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze was a profound moment, and as we sang lives. We had grown into the culture of Sahaja Yoga. Now it was almost time to take all of this love, all of these vibrations our last aarti on the tour there at Shri Mataji's feet, somehow the whole experience of our month in India seemed and all of this beautiful Sahaja culture to complete itself. back to our countries to let our growth bear new fruit at home. One last major National gifts were presented to Shri Mataji after the puja, and soon our divine Mother made Her departure. Many of us event remained: puja to Shri Mataji, scheduled for late that morning. Shri Mataji arrived in a car which stayed in the pendal for some time, drove up the centre aisle between the men meditating and absorbing the powerful and the ladies in the audience and right vibrations. up to the stage. She radiated divinity as always, and it was an honour to be again Upon leaving the pendal, many of us realized that there was only enough time in Her presence. Shri Mataji spoke briefly in Hindi, in Marathi and in English. The puja was Shakti Puja, and a central theme left in the day to organize ourselves for our own departures. For the rest of the of the English part of the talk was the day we packed and prepared for our trips respect for the wife, who represents the home, and in the frenzy of the departure shakti of the family. Shri Mataji also of buses headed for the airport, tried to warned us to be vigilant in protecting the get in all the last farewells, hugs and back dharma of our family lives. The puja was slaps we could, Suddenly we were on the buses and headed home. very brief. Bhajans were sung as Shri Mataji's feet were washed and decorated. I am sure that many of the yogis attended this year's tour feel as I do. that we were incredibly blessed to be thereB After Shri Mataji was fully decorated, people began to take photos and the atmosphere became a bit unfocussed that we experienced a kind of collective People were talking to one another as if love which we will never forget and which the puja were completely over. Shri made us better people and better yogis, Mataji then requested that we be silent and that we are for ever grateful to Shri Mataji for this beautiful time, and for the and suck in the vibrations. The pendal privilege of being a part of this divine became absolutely silent, and with deen desire, we tried to absorb the divine love family. -Steve Wollenberger, USA which Shri Mataji was pouring forth. It

 Jan - Feb. 199 15 Volume XI Issue t& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze World from Around the News Florida TV Update that moment was that our leader had sent a fax to Shri Mataji the day before about some other matter, but mentioning also the upcoming TV interview. So when, at the beginning of the interview, we put our attention at Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet, imagining Her in beautiful Cabella, we felt such strong vibrations that we were the series of a half-hour interviews about Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga on TV in Florida, USA, is progressing and the producer of the show is very excited to continue interviewing us. concerned for a moment that it would be The second interview was scheduled difficult to speak! Everything went very and we were prepared with video clips of Shri Mataji's lectures, backup material smoothly This show will be on the air three times and the like Then the producer called and in the beginning of June, and will reach a potential audience of 500,000 people. The interviewer was quite impressed and asked great questions. She is coming to get her Self-Realization in a few days. By the way! Thank you, Shri Mataji, for all your blessings! Thank you, dear brothers. and sisters, for all your support and asked if it would be possible to record the third show together with the second, because someone else had cancelled a slot! Caught by surprise, we started thinking, "What could the third topic be? What video material can we edit within hours that would be broadcast quality?" enlightened attention! Then we thought of the obvious-why not give them Self-Realization? After all, this is what Sahaja Yoga is all about, isn't it? So we got hold on a broadcast-quality video of a meditation with Shri Mataji and told the producer we were ready. The Sahaja Yogis of Florida Sahaja Programs in Singapore nar On April 14th, we had our first Both shows were recorded in 'one go' without cuts and the vibrations were advertised program in Singapore in the heart (downtown) of the city of Singapore. We had booked a room that tremendous! What we did not know at

 Jan - Feb. 1999 16 : 1 & 2 Volume : XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze held 70 people, not knowing what the unexpected gift from Shri Mataji that came to light. Our daughter, who turned 13 on April 15th, talked beautifully about turnout would be. The meeting was to start at 7:30 p.m. and at 7:20 there were 90 people and no place to sit. All the floor Sahaja Yoga to the many seekers that space was taken and people still kept on were present. (We were short-handed, as arriving. With a last-minute flurry of you can imagine.) At one point, we activity to find a bigger room, we finally turned around to see our little Radhika started around 8 p.m. and by then there surrounded by a group of four Chinese men and women, all listening raptly about the beauty of the cool breeze and how were 120 people. And more people kept coming in during Shri Mataji's video. easy it is to feel it. They all kept nodding whole-heartedly. She has learned to speak After so many years in America, this was a dream come true. We were so very well and very simply about Sahaja- the fruits of all those years in Dharamsala. All the uncles and aunties in America who know her would have been very proud moved that silently we kept thanking Shri Mataji in our hearts. The program was fantastic-such wonderful people, so simple and humble. Very well-educated, too. One of Sir C.P. Srivastava's nephews to see her. As if that was not enough, the last and his wife attended, and another couple of days have been hectic with more than 20 calls inquiring about Sahaj gentleman was a colleague of Sir C.P's during his tenure at the Shipping Corporation of India. Some of the people had gotten realization in India, but having moved to Singapore, didn't know how to continue. One lady, who had got her realization in Perth at Shri Mataji's techniques, vibrations, etc. One man said he felt vibrations all day and all night and was wondering if that was normal... lucky fellow! I assured him that it was a great blessings that he could feel so easily. program a few years ago hugged me, thanking us profusely for having come to Singapore. She had been praying to Shri Mataji for a collective here, and after two long. long years, her prayers were answered, she said. You can all imagine As I reflect on what is happening here, our Holy Mother's words keep ringing in my ears-that Americans have to spread Sahaja Yoga globally. That is the responsibility of America. The world is eager and waiting for America to take on its real role in the spiritual awakening of mankind. how we felt. No words can describe the joy. We are still flying high, though it has been a couple of days. -Dave and Madhuri Dunphy, As a parent, there was another Singapore

 Jan- Feb. 1999 17 Volume XI Issue: 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze Shri ADI Shakti Puja - 21-6-98 Cabella of my photographs, specially, the one where lot of energy is coming out of my n Russia, the people, somehow, are very open minded. Not only that, the scientists specially, are very open minded and they were suppressed very much. So, they tried to find out the subtler Sahasrara when we are on a boat. So he said, she is the source of all the cosmic energy, and that's what the Adishakti is. things. Not oniy finding out about She is the one who creates everything. chemicals or about some physical The whole atmosphere that we know of is very artificial But when you properties of the light. but they wanted to go into the subtler side and they had found out already a great deal of understand what She has done - the first knowledge about the auras around the thing She does is to (in my book also I hands, auras around the body They had done so much of research, and was like to tell you) that Her first, we should accepted all over the world, their findings say, manifestation is on the left hand side. Now, this gentleman was a specialist, 1 That is the Mahakali's manifestation. So think, because he is a very very well have written down about it but I would She comes on the Mahakali's system, the left hand side and that is where She known person and he is holding a very created Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is created because of His purity, His innocence and auspiciousness. This had to be created before She created the universe, So first thing She does is to create Shri Ganesha and She settled down. Then She goes up. off course in the body of the virata, and big position He was saying that he has to run 150 organisations. Very humble and very nice person, and when he came out with this discovery, I was happy in a way because scientifically. if it is proved , then no body can challenge it. He has already written a book, with all the algebraical complications of what he wanted to prove, and he said, beyond the consciousness there is a vacuum, and in there She goes round and goes up on the right hand side in the other way, and there She creates all the universes, as you call them Bhuwanas'-one universe. There are that vacuum only you can know the reality And once all this becomes the fourteen Bhunwanas means this many many universes make one Bhuwana And reality it is a science. And that is how it is made into science. He showed so many She creates all these things on the right

 Jan - Feb. 1999 Volume : XI isue : 1 & 2 18 The Divine Cool Breeze hand side. Then She goes up and then She another book that I am going to write descends down creating all these now. I mean, I have mostly finished but chakras-Adi chakras or the pithas. She there are some more chakras to be dealt comes down, makes all these pithas and with). Now with this happening, you see then She settles as the Kundalini we can one thing is there that whatever I write, say, Kundalini is a part of it. The rest of now people won't doubt. They will know the work is much more than this. So all it is a scientific fact and that whatever I the residual energy means after going through all this journey, then She comes round and She goes as Kundalini. Because say is a fact. Now to believe in the Mother, the Adishakti was impossible. Specially you of this Kundalini and the chakras, She will be amazed that christian religion creates an area which we call as the somehow or other avoided it, the mentioning of the Mother. Then the chakras in the body. Now first She creates these chakras in the head we call them Islam, that also avoided the mentioning of the Mother. There is complet negation towards the Mother. But only Indian philosophy had the Mother, and the Indians are actually Shakti worshippers. So this is how it was kept up and brought to this position now that people have got the pithas of the chakras, and then She comes down and creates these chakras which are in the body of virata. Now once this has happened then She creates human beings but not directly, through the evolutionary process - She goes through. and that is how the evolution starts, and full idea as to Mother Principle that has worked out everything. On this Mother principle in India people are very sure that it is Mother who does everything. And thus we have in India many, we should then it stats developing from the minute small little microscopic organisms in the water and then it starts evolving. So when She creates water and She creates all the universes, She chooses this mother earth say, 'Swayambhus' means the things that as the best place to play her evolutionary process. And there She makes this little microscopic thing. (off course I have example we know in Maharashtra we written all about it, and when my book are created out of the Mother Earth. For Mahakali's place, have got Mahasaraswati, Mahalaxmi and also we will be released you can see that how have got a place for the Adi Shakti. Some people who have been to Nasik, must have seen a Chaturshindi (How many first hydrogen, carbon and oxygen and all of these things got mixed up, and how nitrogen comes into play, and how a living people have been to Chaturshindi out of process starts. All this, I have done in my

 Volume XI isue 1&2 Jan-Feb: 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze freedom they have, it is such a turmoil in this world, and people who were incharge of affairs, they were very very cruel and had no feelings for the other people. And this happened so many times on this you? It is good). So, this Chaturshindi represents the Adishakti, which is the fourth dimension of this power which gives you the ascent, and ultimately through Maha Lakshmi Channel only you get your realisation All this is a process- all was created by the power of Adishakti. It is a tremendous task Though previous earth. Now, Sahaja Yoga has started. Once Sahaja Yoga has started, we have Sahaja Yogis who are now receiving the blessings nature to ereate was very easy The of the Adishakti directly. But still I must Mother earth is one with the Adishakti, say among Sahaja Yogis also we don't the whole atmosphere is one with the have people whom I would call as very Adishakti, all the elements are one with well matured They are Sahaja Yogis. ones were not difficult because there, for So She could create all that the Adishakti some of them are just because it is a fashion, may be it should be better from without any difficulties But when human beings came-they got their freedom. That is the only species which fell into the their angle, or from their selfish angle or whatever it is. It is a very wrong thing. If you are in Sahaja Yoga you must know now you are responsible for the whole world. You are the only people who have come forward, you are the only people who have achieved something and then their own right that they are there, this is at this juncture you should behave in a their own achievement and they are the manner that behoves a big saint or a owners of everything This started realised soul. But sometimes you find working in their mind so much that they them behaving in such a manner - it is invaded other countries, they destroyed shocking sometimes. They have no so many people, and they never felt bad respect for themselves, or for others, and their whole attitude is very funny Some thinking about aggressing others, of them are money oriented, some of them maya' of thinking and of having ego in it. With this ego, 'maya' worked on them, I should say, and they forgot about the principle that created this universe. They took it for granted. They felt that this is about it All their lives they have been controlling others, and doing all kinds of harmful things. But they never even are power oriented, and those who are power oriented are more dangerous, I think, than money oriented. Because those who are power oriented, try to bring such bad name to Sahaja Yoga. They are thought or never did introspection to see that what we are doing is very very wrong and it should not be done. Because of the

 Jan Feb 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 20 Volume XI Issue: 182 very insulting, dominating and horrible people. Their whole attitude is to achieve people. Everybody should understand and know how many people we have given 15 realisation. We have to think about it. power in Sahaja Yoga, and they try all tricks to achieve that power But for sonme What have we done for Sahaja Yoga? time they look all right, after some time Once I was travelling by plane and, I saw you will find they will disappear from the a lady sitting next to me. She was so hot, field of Sahaja Yoga. It is a very big she is a disciple of a guru. Very proud of cleansing process going on. You must understand that you have come in the field him. Then she started telling me all about him. I was amazed that-look at this. of very high consciousness where you are in contact with the Divine Now here if woman, she hasn't got anything from him and she was just saying I have given so much money to him, I have done this thing to him, and all those things. But she had nothing and despite that she was talking you behave like ordinary people who have no divinity within them, how long will you continue like this. So this is very important that you should try to meditate and evolve yourselves and become really very good Sahaja Yogis. In some places we are very very lucky, in some countries we are very very lucky, but in some countries I find to me as stranger person about the guru. But in Sahaja Yoga I have seen people are rather shy They don't want to talk about Sahaja Yoga openly to others which is a very wrong thing you are doing because you are responsible for this You the people are just deaf and dumb, they can't understand Sahaja Yoga, For my programme they do come and afterwards have been given realisation. Of course, you were seeking, every thing is all right but all of you must try to give realisations just they disappear. I think Sahaja Yogis to others. I must say that somehow men are responsible for this. The way they go have been more dynamic, and working it about, the way they want to do Sahaja out, the women in Sahaja Yoga are not work is not Sahaja Must be something yet coming upto that level as they should definitely wrong with the whole thing, and They have to be more sensible about it, that is why it is not working out the same and they have to work it out. They can way as it is working out in many places. do it but only trouble is, I think, they have certain minor problems about which they are worried. Always I get letters from ladies saying this is wrong, that is wrong complaining all the time. I am so fed up of their letters now that I think they are useless, to read them also. So I have to tell you all, that it is important that men So I have to tell you that all this is there, that Adi Shakti is there, and all this is happened through Adi Shakti But now the further work has to be done through you people Because you are the channels. you are the ones who have to transform

 Jari - Feb. 1999 21 Volume : XI IsSUe: 182 others, talking about the defects of Sahaja Yoga. I would say it is still a very preliminary things that have happened because they are dynamic, women should be much more because they are Shakti, and I am a woman. So I find that the men are more sort of, active and dynamic before, and it should stop now. about Sahaja Yoga and I don't know what Now as it is, once this book is out all over the world, it will be known about our work. We will not be challenged any more but still we have to see for ourselves that if we have achieved this kind of recognition then we should be upto that, is the reason why wome are not? They can transform so many people, they can do so much good to others, they can bring so much love and compassion because this love and compassion is a quality of a Mother, of a woman, and if the women our capability should be upto that, we don't have that quality, it is useless to be should not be lagging behind. For a woman All the time if you are busy example if you ask some Sahaja Yogis, about your useless things like fashions or specially Sahaja Yoginis, they don't know THE faces and all that then the time is all wasted. You have a short time now, you got your realisation and you must decide what have you done so far, what have you much about Sahaja Yoga, they don't know about chakras, they don't know any thing, about the deities, nothing they know, how can they be Sahaja Yogis. You achieved so far. have to know all about it. Only thing that you don't realise that it is not outside that you are a Sahaja Yogi but it is inside Inside you have to have that kind of an understanding of the chakras, and of Sahaja Yoga how it works, how it helps. Now, supposing if I am the source of that energy which you know very well I am, But I would say that in Sahaja Yoga I have found, there are all kinds of funny ideas growing in Like they prescribe eertain rituals, they will talk about it, and kind of a power orientation is there. They want to oppress others, and they want to take over and frighten people, and behave then you achieve yours also a kind of a in such a manner as if they are very good. perfection about dealing with people and bringing them to Sahaja Yoga It is a very important work you have to do is to bring Sahaja Yogis in Sahaja Yoga What I find that some people are very much still lagging behind and it is very surprising that they live in that country, they are part Some of them start saying that "Mataji said so", this is Mataji's idea By their own power orientation they manufacture things and talk like that but ask them how many have you given realisation? First thing is you must determine his positivity. how many have you given realisation He is just talking about others, criticising and parcel of that country and they are

 Jan - Feb 199 22 Issue 1 & 2 Xi Volume The Divine Cool Breeze are doing-which in India, which is a poor not bothered. Under these circumstances country, one cannot even think of such things happening around you. So find out what is wrong, where and how you can correct these things. If you can help them, actually, now as I have told you I am going to start some sort of organisations that will do good to human beings, but you all can join also. You can also start in they will be blamed that why didn't you find out the ways and methods of convincing at least to your countrymen. So Sahaja Yoga at the brink of growth cannot grow only with one country, two countries All the countries have to be brought into Sahaja Yoga All the people that you could call, into Sahaja Yoga will be a very good idea, and then we have books to convince people. You have to your own countries something like that. But first, you have to get rid off of talk to them about it. But, what 1 find your ego. That once happens to you then only your attention would be steady, and about Sahaja Yogis is that once they start spreading Sahaja Yoga also, their ego comes up. And they think they are very this ego is very simple for you because great Sahaja Yogis, they are great leaders you worship Christ. And the Christ is the all this kind of stupid ideas walk into their one who was settled on the Agnya chakra. heads which is wrong You have to just You all worship Christ, but that humility think in a very humble manner, the more of Christ is not there. Just a opposite of you have, the more you become humble. it. It has happened everywhere that whatever is preached in the religion Like a tree wvhen laden with fruits bends down In the same way you have to be people did just the opposite of that. For very humble But that humility is example, in Hindu religion, I would say sometimes very difficult because the Hindu Philosophy is that in everybody culture of the west is not humble culture: resides the spirit: Now, in everybody if there is a spirit then how can you have different caste systems, and how can you have somebody higher and lower. Other- way round, now-Christ has said that you have to forgive, forgive everyone, and you haveto humble down, and that's what one finds that among Christians they don't know humility, they have no idea of It is a culture of aggression, culture of domination so far they have heen nothing. because of domination they could go all over the world, they could achieve so many things. What have they achieved? Nothing In their own countries if you see there is drug addiction. Why should people take to drugs so much. Then all kinds of sinful things they do which I don't humility. Men are like that, women are like that and the men and women they want to mention But you know what they

 23 Jan Feb, 1999 Volume XI Issue 1&2 The Divine Cool Breeze very very humble, and people take me for granted I don't do anything, 1 do not want to punish you, I don't want to do anything-but you yourself get punished, you yourselfbecome useless if you do not look after yourself and grow yourself have gone for fighting There is no question of anybody being humble. peaceful and all that. So it is very artificial they are showing off that they are very philanthropist and all that. But inside in their heart I deon't find there is any love. there is any compassion in the real sense of the word. So when we are dealing with the reality they have to know that we This finding is so great and this man had never known me before He is very learned but he is very humble, and what cannot just go on with things which are he told me that "just imagine I am sitting before the creator of this world and still I u artificial, which are befooling others. But we have to really become that Once you become that, when you are really like that am very normal". I said what should - then only you have done the job for happen to you, what do you think. He which you are born at this juncture of said, "Mother, it is a big thing to realise blossom times. Otherwise you could have that I am sitting before you, and that you been born earlier, and could have been are here". I said it is good that you don't something different. But you are specially feel my presence so oppressive, so born. So you realise your value, realise yourself what you are, and try to understand, have self respect and try to just felt the love, just felt the compassion, That's what it is. We have to know that we should have just love and compassion. do things which are very important as Sahaja Yogis. Off course, you are doing a job, you are doing other things. But you will be amazed if you do the work of heart To say something to hurt someone, Sahaja Yoga - you will find more time Compassion and love for ourselves in the way, that should not harm any body's is every sinful. But some people enjoy that for every thing. Once you start doing very much, they think they are very clever, God's work, God does your work and Il is not so. When you talk to someone that's how you will be amazed how you you must say something which is very soothing and good. Another thing is a temper that a slightest thing here and Now it is for you to go back and there, they get into temper. Now this has See for vourself Now the Adi to be told, this temper. that you keep Shakti herself has come But I am very quiet Ihave nothing to do with you. That simple to look at, in my behaviour I am is one thing Then there are people who get so much time to do the right thing introspect.

 Jan-Feb. 1999 Volume XI lssuD:182 The Divine Cool Breeze so sweetly. This is something surprising. how these people in Russia, have achieved that capability to become. And, are very subtly. I should say, power oriented. Very subtle. They have tricks and trades by which they know how to I think in the West Russia is the country which will achieve very great height in spirituality. And that means they will be the most powerful people. Let us see what you are doing in your own country? And how you are going to work it out. See. there are so many things you can do very easily if you see for yourself that you are the instrument of the divine. And then your temperament will change, the nature will change, you will become a very very sweet person, likeable person, and control others. What are you going to gain out of it? What is youIr gain? By doing all these things what will happen? In these worldly things you might be little bit popular, little bit having a position or something. But what is it, after all? That is not going to help you. What is going to help you the most, is to make yourself a perfect channel for Sahaja Yoga: To be a perfect Channel, in that you will be amazed how you will be happy So would say for you people who are in the I west, I would say you must develop everybody will think that this is a saint humility. It is very important. I was walking around. surprised in Russia itself the people are not only humble but such dedication, such Whatever is the discovery is not a So that's all I have to say about this dedication, unbelievable They don't even discovery for me, but discovery for the whole world. And I am sure, once it is established, and is exposed to the whole world, things will change for you and for me also. raise their eyes to me I don't know how they got this idea., This is not after the discovery but even before that. They are so nice and so humble, and so full of love, and even the children brought me small small presents. you know just to give me May God Bless You!

 Jan Feb 1999 Volume: XI issue 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze Hydrabad Puja Pravachan by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 25-02-90 am joyed to see all of you. I did not achieve power and there are some others even imagine that in Hydrabad so who are in search of the God Almighty. many people have become Sahaja Those who are keen to know the Parama Yogis Mixing up of different type of will be the first to come to Sahaja After people is the characteristic of Hydrabad. getting established in Sahaja Yoga one is Now we have to approach Sahaja Yoga at times pained to see the slow in a new way. It is important to know that Sahaja spreading. But we should Salhaja Yoga is Truth and we are firmly understand that a living thing develops Footed in it. We have to, therefore, discard slowly; e g: slow growth of a tree, the untrue, otherwise we cannot attain blooming of a few at first and gradually purity. Matter-of-fact-untruth is an illusion and we should decide to get out of it With just pure desire for this end No one will get realized by just saying our awakened Kundalini puts us in a state Until it happens we can give false of pace many flowers on it. Sahaja Yoga is a living process, we cannot force it on anyone. certificate to none And we cannot say it where we could discern as to what is Truth for certain that every one will get realization, for a number of reasons many and what untruth, and we start longing to attain only the Truth Giving up all our people do not get realized There are some who think that for Sakhshatkara misconceptions we have to take to Truth. Gita's line that Birth will decide your one had to do Tapasya in the Himalayas. How could it be so easy now? For want of self confidence they fail to believe it. They do not have the capacity to see that it is the blossom time and realization cast" is incorrect because Vyasa, the writer of Gita. was himself the son of a fisherwoman, no one knew who his father was. How could he write such a thing as this? It is said that Ya Devi Sarava could be got emmasse Bhuteshu Jyoti Rupen Samsthita It After realization when one is connected means that the innate Shakti (Devi) is the cast of a human being Some people wish with the Parama Chaitanya, one comes to know that the Parama Chaitanya does to attain material wealth, some desire to

 26 Jan - Feb. 1999 Volume: XI Issue: 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze note of the qualities and inherent beauty of others. It will serve double purpose i e. beautify our personality and remove fault of others. We have to remember that everything for us, we get detached and become Akarmi Nothing worries us. On coming to Sahaja Yoga, due to short- sightedness in the beginning one considers oneself the doer, Slowly, as one gets experienced, one understands that, man does nothing. Parama Chaitanya does everything Everything gets done smoothly Some-times, if something goes others are not separated form their-selves and as such we should correct their faults with the power of Divine love. Love is Truth and Truth is Love. One who uses the power of love ascends very high With open hearts you have to see people with love This is how against our desires, even then we should not think that God has not helped us In fact we could neither think nor do more than God, so we have to accept that you develop individually and collectively We should be beware of the person who Parama Chaitanya has done the appropriate and what is coming up is very is not collective. Listening to the ill of others is a guilt in Sahaja Yoga. We should beautiful. observe how softly we could speak and how much power of forgiveness we possess, We should regard all Sahaja There are two aspects about whom a Sahaja Yogi has to be very careful- Firstly through individual meditation we should know our faults: the state of our Yogis as our relatives: The Second aspect of Sahaja Yoga is the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga and its instrument, whether we are Right Sided or Left Sided? Which of our Chakras are spreading. We should have the knowledge that which finger of hand or foot indicates obstructed. By putting our attention on the photograph we could know all this Then in meditation we should clear all the negativity. In Sahaja Yoga Meditation system is very easy. Sitting up for 10-15 minutes in the mornings and evenings we can meditate. After clearing ourselves we the catches of which chakras, which catch could cause which disease and how could it be cured. How could we cure others and all concerned knowledge about Kundalini we must acquire Ladies, being should get into collectivity. Opening of Shaktis, must attain this Knowledge With heart is essential for this: A narrow- the help of this knowledge, ladies will be able to understand Sahaja Children and minded person could never be collective We should not put our attention on the their behavioural pattern. Achievement of faults of others-for by doing so these short comings grab us. We should take this knowledge is most important. Spreading of Sahaja Yoga is another

 Volume : XI Issue 1& 2 27 The Divine Cool Breeze Jan -Feb, 1999 to, wholeheartedly, help Sahaja Yoga ventilation the room could not be airy, in spread. There are some Sahaja Yogis who the same way if you do not pass on the keep dreaming all the times the heaven experience of Sahaja to others; do not of Sahaja Yoga down on the whole of the help them, do not give them self- Globe Such Sahaja Yogis become sans realization; do not spread Sahaja Yoga, questions and they always remain in the state of bliss A great responsibility has fallen on our shoulders: the responsibility of building up a pure-hearted society in which we could place our faith and remain significant thing. As without cross- then you, yourself cannot progress When a tree grows, its branches should also grow and number of people should sit under the shade of these branches. It is the case of an ordinary tree; and you are established in that faith. the Banyan Trees. Therefore, you have May God Bless You All! A humble prayer at the Lotus Feet of Sakshat Skri Adi Shakti Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah! We all the Sahaja Yogis of the world seek your divine permission to start a Negativity Quit-World' movement to be able to enshrine Your Divine Vision of Global Transformation heralding the 'New Age-Satya Yuga O! Devi Goddess Almighty please redeem this world from all the negativities. badhas and bhoots which are engulfing this world and ensnaring the seekers of truth from getting to reality and having Your ever beautiful, loving, compassionate darshan, which is the only hope of ultimate peace, joy and fulfilment of our evolution on earth. Today we the Sahaja Yogis of the world command in the name of the Divine Mother of the Universe. Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi to all the negativities, badhas and bhoots to just quit this world. Quit! Quit ! Quit ! Alcoholism Drugs Tobacco

 Volume XI isue :1& 2 Jan-Feb. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Negativity against the principle of innocence Perversions Homosexuality Lesbianism Child Abuse Immorality False Gurus All the false religions of this world Blind faith in Science Unworthy politicians Fundamentalism Fanaticism Negativity trying to destroy nature, the living habitat of saints Materialism Corruption Racism Fascism All the false sects and cults All the negative people managing the press and falsifying the truth All the negativities still lingering within us and all the other negativities that may have been omitted in this list due to negativity of ignorance in us. Rupam dehi Jayam dehi Yasho dehi Sahaja Yog dehi Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah!

 Jan- Feb, 199 Volume XI Isue 1&2 The Divine Cool Breeze Guru Puja -1998 Today we have assembled here to do disturbed These disturbing qualities the Guru Puja. The word Guru comes comes from our deficiency in our gravity A person who has gravity doesn't get depressed neither gets excited nor gets overly enthusiastic nor is he very sad or from One which is magnetie. The person who is magnetic, One which attracts the attention of the seekers This is the Guru unhappy So, he is in the centre, he is in the centre of his. But how do we become the Guru? That is very important for Sahaj Yogis to understand. Many have felt that they are Gurus, they have tried to behave in a funny manner and have lost their Guru position. First and foremost things for Sahaja Yogis, it is important that they Also it means that heavy ness or you can say a person who is very steady, who is very deep, who has the knowvledge and who can act like the Mother Earth. For the power of magnetism in the Mother Earth. For the power of magnetism in the mother Earth also is called as magnetic but is Sanskrit- Gurutvakarshan means the attraction of the heavyness of the must have introspection. They must Mother Earth but actually it is a power watch themselves. Ifa person runs about of the Mother Earth that makes us stand changing because of fashion has come, properly on our legs when it is rotating because people have suppressed them or with such a tremendous speed. Otherwise have asked them. Just to please people we would be all thrown away with that cheap values if a person changes then he velocity that she is moving. We are still attached or we are one in our balance is himself properly on the values of Sahaja only because she has gravity. This gravity Yoga. Without introspection you will not cannot be a Guru He has to station know. You will never remember what you has to be in a Guru Gravity means a kind of a serious understanding of oneself and one's own responsibilities. So. a Guru has to be very steady have done wrong nor will you think of what you have to do right but that is only possible if you go on improving yourself In these moderm times people are very mobile. All the time agitated, all the time saints have praised their Guru. For getting disturbed They meet people who example, we have a very great saint are nor of any quality then they get Gyaneshwara in India. He has written First and foremost thing is all the great

 30 dan Feb. 1999 Volume: Xi Issue: 182 The Divine Cool Breeze complete chapter about the Guru, in English they have translated as Preceptor, India who came to one of the ladies who was a Sahaja Yogini and he said that my Guru has sent me a word that Adishakti Guru is the preceptor and what he has done is a great thing He says you are not to challenge the Guru otherwise you can never become a Guru, for name sake you might be but you are not Secondly, you can never misbehave, you can never be rude, arrogant and you cannot show your temper to a Guru. If that is so that means is going to come and stay with you Is it true? She said, Yes! She is going to stay with me, so what? He said, my Guru has told me that you go and request her and if She could come to our ashram. She said,I will ask Mataji. I don't know This fellow came to a programme and he saw me, a house wife! He said, this cannot be you are not a Guru, you are still on a very low level personality. It is very.clearly said that if you try to say against other Gurus who are of a real Gurus, who are very that Guru but when I came in, he saw and when 1 did self realisation that everybody's Kundalini was awakened, he high calibre then also you are not a Guru was so surprised and he prostrated himself before me But I would say that you all have now Now, his Guru was living in got vibrations, you all have got vibratory awareness When you have vibratory awareness, you are capable of finding about everyone. Now you need not talk about your own understanding about a person but try to face that person directly and tell that person this is the problem the ancient times never used to leave their and ask him to change: But in Sahaja Yoga we have something more than other pillow. They never left their Takiya'. I Gurus had Other Gurus were very-very said, alright, I don't mind I'lI come to Amarnath, is a very famous religious place in the Himalyas and this fellow lived in a place called Ambarnath. So, he asked me, Mother, will vou come to my ashram? I said, why not- because these gurus in seat, they called Takiya' means the strict. They used to carry a stick in their your ashram. So, I went there, this Guru hand, a big stick which they used for fell at my feet and he was very-very walking or hitting their disciples. They respectful and then we came back home used to hit their disciples in such a bad and this fellow started telling me if you manner that the disciple was literally don't tell my Guru I would like to tell frightened of the Guru. you that I have got a very bad Agnya Can you cure Mother? 1 said, why no! I Tl give you an example of a Guru I will. So, I went back to this Guru again came across. One fellow was there in and I said, why didn't you cure his Agnya.

 Jan - Feb 1999 31 Volume XI Issue : 1&2 The Divine Cool Breeze that his Guru came back and he put me He said, why? Why I should cure? Who cured my Agnya? I worked out myself I hanging on a well and he used to every had to introspect, find out and I cured my own Agnya and why should I cure his the water, ten times he did it. I asked, but Agnya? Let him work! Let him get to this otherwise he will be a spoiled man. I because he found me smoking a cigarette, was quite surprised and he said you do it my goodness! So, I asked his Guru, I said, because you are a Mother. You are why do you do such horrible things to nothing but love and that's why you are doing all this for others but not me No don't do like this, they will never rise, they Guru will open the Agnya of his disciples. I said, then why are you a Guru? He said, them and the more you forgive the worse because we have to guide them and if they they become and they will show no ascent have their Agnya badly caught up if their at all. So, you have to be very strict with attention is not alright, I'am not bothered them, please don't spoil them all the time. about it. It is their duty to introspect find and crimb the ladder which I have he say so! He said, Mother, if you give time lower the rope so I would go into He said, why did he do such a cruel thing your disciples? He said, otherwise if you will never come up You go on forgiving and I was really surprised that how could I can only them everything free, you give them put before them Sol am Guru, give them the ladder to climb up. It is they who should work very hard, it is they who should introspect, it is they who should everything so easily, they will never value their self realisation I said, it's not so. You have to give them a chance, you have find out. Why should I help them to such an extent that you open their Agnya. I said, alright, you allow me to open his What she does? She sprouts the seeds, Agnya, if you don't mind He said, you then the trees come up then after that she are a Mother. do what you like! I have Hives them the fruits and she sees that the to allow them to rise and to allow them to become something like Mother Earth. nothing to say: if you want to do that, fruits are ripened She does all that but they are no trees you see, they are human beings and they have freedom to become devils also. I said, alright, if they are devils 1 can manage them. You just see how I you will spoil them. you spoil them Let him do at his own otherwise you will be spoiling him. I said, as you are also spoiled that you don't open anybody's Agnya, yes, but whatever position I have achieved is a permanent one So, 1 opened his can manage them. If they are devils they will remain devils. You cannot change Agnya. them. So, he argued with me and when he met Sahaja Yogis, he asked them how Then this fellow on his way told me

 Jan - Feb. 1999: 32 Volume XI Issue 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze many of you are willing to give lives for Shri Mataji? Do you know what She has given you? They said, yes we do. So they came to me and told Mother he wanted doesn't have this pure desire, he has some other desires then absolutely useless. Like some people come to Sahaja Yoga, I have seen, they want to make a us to give life for you. I said, that's not name out of themselves, they become necessary. it's not necessary because he used to ask his disciples perhaps great masters of everything, they want to dominate everything. That is not I met many like him who were very important. There are some people who strict Gurus, complete obedience was try to make money in Sahaja Yoga, a way needed, complete humility, complete of making money, that also absolutely low wrong and not only that but, is very level that they want to make money out of Sahaja Yoga Then there are people who just come here for some politics surrender was needed A word against Guru was not tolerated but even you could not answer, you could not show any tamper to a Guru. Now, I have met They go on saying things here and saying things there. All these things are not going to give you any ascent, what so ever. You people who are like that, sometimes. Then stopped talking to them, that's it If they want to improve they can improve, if they don't want to improve you cannot force them to improve but according to these Gurus there should be a great fear in their mind that they should be so frightened that they should behave themselves. have come here only to achieve a great life of spirituality, of becoming a Guru. Now, also this politics business is quite a lot. People try to enjoy the position of a leader. So, they try to keep that position in a very special way There's no need. If Now, we expect so much from the Guru that he is your father, mother. he is your friend everything. He is a pure you are a leader because you are a great s master, you will remain. Nobody can challenge you, nobody can throw you and person who just wants your ascent, we wants to look after you, he wants to guide such fear Sahaja Yoga is a yoga in which you, wants to protect you and takes you fear doesn't play any part. There's no fear to the life of spirituality and this is the way a Guru has to work out but wliat is expected of the disciple is even much worse The disciple has to be absolutely a pure person He should have a pure doing. Are you an absolutely a humble desire to become a spiritual person, If he person? Do you do whatever is told to one should not get disturbed with any for you. Only thing for your ascent, it is necessary that you introspect Try to find out what you have been

 Jan - Feb. 1999 33 XI Issue 1& 2 Volurme The Divine Cool Breeze you? Supposing. I tell somebody just go them will become speedy. Everybody starts running scattered Why? I am to, say some place He may not go, will come and tell me, Mother, you know this going, you are not going but it happens. Like that if you tell somebody that you have to go to a function or for some felicitation, people start jumping and that's a very modern disease, it was happened, that happened, some excuse, he may not go but that's not being good. If you have been told to go to that place. about there must be some meaning and you have not before So, they start seeing that we are getting late, getting upset but if you to go. You have to obey if you are not obedient then vou cannot become a Guru go. on worrying like that you don't go beyond time and when you go beyond time, you control time Time is with you, all the time Wherever you go, it happens. hecause if you can not obey, how can, others obey you? This obedience is not for any personal gain of Guru, not at all but for your gain only. for your education, for your ascent. So, if such a view is taken then what happens that you start getting all the qualities of a Guru I will give you an example of that. We had a little girl in Cabella who fell down and she broke her hand very badly. I was about to leave for America. I had come out of my room. When I saw the child I said, alright, doesn't matter I will cure Firstly, a Guru cannot be a fitssy man, first and foremost thing I want this house, I want that thing, I can't like this, I can't this child first. They said, no Mother, but like that. If a person who doesn't know your plane. I said, it's alright, forget it. how to get detached from all these habits, So, I got the child, treated the child and she wäs alright and after I think half an hour I left for the airport and you will be amazed to hear that, that aeroplane was out of order which was going to New York. So, this plane is out of order then they said, alright you can go by another plane which goes to Washington with the same ticket. I said, very good idea, give me that and I went by that so that i reached Washington which is a very-very nice airport to arrive because there's no problem of customs, there's no crowd, he cannot be a Guru. How can he ascend? Of course, I mean you have to try that you get rid of all these habits. They are funny habits which make you miserable. doesn't make others miserable, as it makes you miserable No habit should cling to a GurI First and foremost is that he has to be beyond time. He should not worry about time. Many a times I have seen people if they have to go to airport for example, something enters into their body They become speedy suddenly, even if I have to go. I am going and all of

 Jan - Feb. 1999 34 Volume XI ISue : 1&2 The Divine Cool Breeze nothing All people go to New York. I jumping and he creates problems for don't know why? They should all go to himself and his family. Washington, it's very surprising. I discovered for myself that I wish I had Then the left sided is a person, which we call as the Tamoguni. The right side not gone by that horrible plane to go to is Rajoguna and the left side is one which is Tamoguna "Tamo' means darkness New York. Like that everything works out and the times come what is good for Such a man is afraid of darkness, but he you becomes a very intriguingly, very crooked person. He always tries to trouble people in a very crooked manner, not openly, while the right sided man is openly a It is such a lot of experience of mine which I can tell you that to worry about time itselfis a headache. If you leave it to this divine power and believe it then Hitler but this one, the second one, the one we call as Tamoguni is the one who tries to trouble others very well. Rajoguni has a opinion of his own about everything. He goes on forcing it on to others, other person but if you see his own life he is in complete misery. He cannot carry on with people, cannot talk with people and there's a very big gap between himself, his spirit and his being. everything works out for your good and if it does not, you must know that it is your testing. You must accept, you must learn to accept because whatever you have fixed up for yourself as something very great is not. So, what is the greatest thing you have to achieve, your detachment then you become Gunateeta means, as you know we have three gunas within us. One is, that's called as The second type the Tamogunis are Satvaguna, is the best but there are two the ones who end up with all kind of other gunas which are as you know that left sided and right side. Either you are a right sided person or a left sided person, These two gunas within us are of no importance. Supposing, you are a right sided person. Then what happens to you, you become overactive. Overactivity gives you fatigue, gives you all kinos of diseases which you have seen and you have to cure right side. Such a person is extremely speedy, he cannot sit in one place for two minutes, is all the time diseases. Even the right sided people get lot of diseases but the left ones get pshychosomatic Psychosomatic diseases are very dangerous and not curable by human doctors. So, you have to take to Sahaja Yoga but again you go to the right or to the left. This is not a very good attitude, I think, towards life that you get bound by one of these gunas or you are all the time like a pendulum moving from left to right, right to left. So, you have to

 Jan - Feb. 1999 35 Volume XI Isue 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze be a steady person. For that you all have to meditate. I know immediately a person who meditates and I know, who does not meditate. You will yourself know a another generation is there which is of no use. I met some of them when I was in Haridwar and I told them what are you doing here in the Himalayas? They said, person who meditates It's a question of we don't want to face human beings. They 10-15 minutes but that you must do every are useless people, they are good for night and moming about five minutes nothing. You do anything for them they meditation, then you develop your go on troubling you, we don't want to be balance, you develłop your tenacity, you develop your body in such a manner that become Guru? If you cannot manage it can stand lots of nonsense It can bear them, if you cannot get out the troubles with them. So, I said, why have you lots of things. Then you are not left with desires, what food should you eat? When they are giving you and out of all those things and remain in your peace then what's the use of becoming a Guru? He said we have had enough of it. Some of you should eat? Whom you should please? Nothing of the kind. You yourself of age and all them were over 100 years that but I said, what't the use? Your life is of no use, you are staying here alone somewhere in the Jungles. He said, the become such a sweet person that everybody is pleased and understands that one has to be like you. The people see you and you become like a model. People tigers, the snakes all of them know us that start following vou. that means you become a Guru In this way you get rid of these two habits that you have of left and right side. we are great, they don't trouble us but these human beings torture us, we don't want to go there because they are very ambitious or they are very negative. Something is wrong with the human beings. None of them have reached a perfect state. So. I was surprised how they are not at all willing to come down and be with us and be a part and parcel of us. They said, alright Mother, you have Now. Satvagunis are the people who believe in the rightousness but when they are righteous they contempt for others who are not righteous. They go on saying things to such people so, they can develop a kind of temperament so they become aloof. They can ge to Himalayas sit there come, you are a Mother, you can tolerate all this and you can work it out but not we We are out of it, we don't want to go and not meet anybody Get out of the society, get out of all your relations back. everyone and just establish yourself as a big Guru somewhere This kind of They have lots of power, they can

 36 Jan - Fab 1999 Volumie XI Issue 1& 2 The Divine Cool Breeze control the nature, they can do so many you? What is the wrong path you are taking? Overnight you have seen people give up but still there are many. I should say, subtle things, we stick on to them. First thing that happens to you is that you start finding what's wrong with your own people, of your own nation. things but they said, its easy to control a snake than to control a human being. Today they might behave in a particular manner, suddenly they will become horrible. You don't know these human beings. how uncertain they are What uncertain quality they have. I said, there is a way of putting them right. First give them realisation. In the light of the spirit they can see how they are doing wrong I am amazed you see when the English got realisation they started telling me about the English, when Italians got realisation they started telling me about the Italians. If you tell Italians that this Italian fellow did this he said, Italians after all Mother, what will they do! They are things. 99% people will know what's going wrong with them, where are they missing the point! They will start seeing themselves. just like this you know. He himself is an Italian but immediately he said. Same with Spirit is like a mirror where you see yourself clearly and you start changing the Russians I have seen, it's very yourself There's no introspection needed surprising that they start telling you about when you have your spirit awakened You what's wrong with the Russians. All of can watch yourself, you can see for them are quite alike. Even Indians, they yourself clearly as soon as you become a developed or evolved Sahaja Yogi and They are Indian people Mother, they are that is one point one should see if it has doing like this. I was surprised that they happened. If you can see something themselves being Indians also how are with you, if you can find out what they immediately telling me about the sorts of defects you have, if you can Indians. Many things I have come to detach yourself from those defects and if know about these countries, actually will say, after all this is Indian, you know. wrong you can understand that all these through the Sahaja Yogis only. When the attachments and defects and habits are Sahaja Yogis tell me. I am amazed that pulling you down then only you can leave them but that only happens when you have this mirror of yourself shining through When this light comes to you, you see for yourself, what is wrong with they are not identified with their country, they are not identified with anyone, even their own family they are not identified. If they find something wrong, they will tell me Mother, my father is like that, my

 Jan - Feb. 1999 37 Volume Xi issue: 1&2 The Divine Cool Breeze these things that you can see and that is mother is like that IS how you can save others who are getting drowned into the ocean of darkness, into That is how you get detached when you start seeing and are not identified If the ocean of misidentification, only when you are above all this but mostly what happens is this that you are identified. You you are not identified with all these things then you become a free person, you have the freedom, you become a person who are identified how can I do it? How can I is not attached to anyone because he is father or she is your mother or a save? your sister or anyone This attachment is a very The countries where Sahaja Yoga has spread where there have been people who are not identified with those countries and dangerous one also. With the family attachment we have lost many Sahaja Yogis because their family was funny, they got lost. They coundn't get out of it. We think that they have to help all these countrymen to come up, to join in. For that tremendous patience and love is necessary. As you know this cosmic power as they call it, they say, I am the source, Actually, it is the power of love of divine, and such a love doesn't demand anything, doesn't want anything but it acts, it works For example, if you love somebody you would not like to do something to displease that person. Of course there are some Sahaja Yogis who do things which 1 really don't like but I never show I just keep quiet but normally don't say that you detach yourself from your family or get out of it but in a subtle way you should understand what are they up to? And what they are doing? All these subtle understanding about everyone doesn't give you any right also to criticise them. You should see for yourself what's wrong with you? You know all these subtleties, you criticise such a person is such but you also have the same problems with you. That's why you get detachment only possible through this introspection through the mirror of your spirit if a person has love for someone he wouldn't do anything to displease or to trouble that person or in anyway hurt. So, the spiritual life is very important to a person than anything else on this Without that development within you, Earth because such a person has been seeking. He has been seeking the truth, he has been seeking the reality and once you cannot become collective. In collectivity what happens is that you feel for others. You understand others You may not show off but inside yourself you know Supposing, somebody you know the reality you don't want to cling on to something which is not reality. You want to be a pérson who is above all

 Feb 1999 38 Volume XI issue: 182 Jan The Divine Cool Breeze achieving a great state of spirituality, such people are to be helped at any cost. I know some of them have gone to very has done lots of funny things with you, doesn't matter but gradually you will see he will change, gradually he will become better because he realises that whatever he has been doing, has not been a correct thing to do. He will not only feel guilty, that's not the way but he will say I should correet. Why did I do like this? I should not have done. Gradually he will improve wrong gurus and they have suffered. They have a bad Agnya, they have all kinds of things, doesn't matter. You should try to help them. If they can listen to you, if they can understand what you are telling them I'm sure it would work out. It is worked but for that you should have a great sense out so much as you can see that in the of forgiveness, great sense of foreign countries where I was just an understanding. Under circumstances Indian, how people have taken it, how people also misbehave because they had they have understood me and how they no training how to be alright? None to be have become Sahaja Yogis of such a great humble? They misbehave because in their value and level. culture perhaps there is nothing but just We never had so many saints in the anger and arTogance and it is regarded something great Also they misbehave, olden days, never Only one saint would sometimes as they come from such be born and he would be tortured. There families where only arrogance is taught So, you can't help. Such people are to be forgiven again and again and see that they change because I have a faith that all collective? How to be nice to each other? human beings can be made into beautiful Because later on when you become the flowers of fragrance, all the human beings Guru, when you have to guide the people, but I know there are some difficult ones you will know what are the problems of Why? because they don't want. If they don't want, if they don't have the pure collectivity perfect and once you learn were not so many to help each other and to protect each other. So collectivity is to be learnt very well. How to be the collectivity. Also, you will know how to overcome that. How to make desire, you cannot force it on them. that thing, you will be amazed that you have mastered the art of being a Guru. So, forget it They are difficult peorle, forget about them but those who want, I would like to see so many of you those who have a great desire which is absolutely pure Desire not for money, not becoming a real Guru, real masters not only in your jobs, in your talents but in. for position, not for anything but for your own life. People should say that such

 Jan - Feb 1999 Volume: XI IssuO : 1&2 The Divine Cool Breeze absurd the way sometimes I find some and such person is a real Guru. For that as I said, you must learn obedience, complete obedience Should not question Sahaja Yogis are so anxious to assert themselves as leaders. It's not correct. the guru Whatever is told to you, you So many times I have explained to must do. Though in Sahaja Yoga I do not say that. Today is the first time I am saying it because I find so many of you you that your own development, your own correction, your own position in Sahaja Yoga will say what you are! fall a little short of becoming perfect. You don't have to sacrifice anything, I have told you. You don't have to give up Whatever others may say doesn't matter What you say about yourself is the reality and you must face yourself for that 1 families or anything and do odd things would say specially for the ladies. Fm a just to show that you are perfect But it's woman and I have worked very hard all something, a state within yourself, which these years and as a woman I must tell you have to establish, where you become you that all the ladies should try because extremely humble, obedient and you will they always say we are shaktis but in their be growing with this light, 1 am sure. Once you understand the importance then you life I don't see there's any work done as shaktis, Only they are sort of dependants all the time on Sahaja Yoga They have will dedicate yourself to become a personality of a rare quality. It's the to stand up in their own freedom, they easiest thing to be because that's the most have to be independent and they should comfortable way of living in life. No use fighting, no use quarrelling, no use trying to show off and all that. The care of have right ideas about everything I'm sure if the ladies come up that way, our Sahaja Yoga will spread very much. Men are working much more for Sahaja Yoga than women are I can understand everyone, the suggestion of care is very much satisfying for others. Little care here and there People like it and that only because they have families, they have children, this, that but the most important comes from a very noble soul who bothers thing is that once you take to active Sahaja Yoga then your children also come about small small things, about whatever others need. It's not for your own up well, the families are also looked after advancement, it's not for your own sort After all there is this divine power which looks after all of you. You must believe that this divine power, thinks, uınderstands, it organises. Above all, it of leadership whatever you may call or for your own positions but it's for your own ascent, for your higher life that you give up all these ideas of leadership It's

 40 Jan-Feb. 199g Volume XI Issue : 1&2 The Divine Cool Breeze understanding about spreading Sahaja Yoga All of you should put your mind to it If women can't go out, they can loves you. This divine power has to be understood that it is now your own and that you are in the realm of this divine power where you won't have any write down something, they can write problems, whatsoever. If you leave things about their spiritual ascent or about to the divine power, it will all work out. As you know about the scientist who whatever their experiences are So, in any case all those who have got miraculous found out about me. I have to just say photographs, they should send it over that he asked me that how is it this that here, This gentleman is coming here in September and he is going to analyse all of them. So, it would be very nice of you if you can send it. Also, you write down so many hearts are made here? I said people were singing the song, "Sitting in the heart of the Universe' so, this many hearts have come up but he said, still does have about your different experiences you had in Sahaja Yoga That will be also a good idea. He told me that he would like this power hear? I said, no. It's me only 1 can hear I was hearing the song and then to publish a book, and now the time has come for us to publish our miracles that have taken place. All of you have had that power organises everything It's something to be understood very well that the power within you, what you have. Lunderstands and understands you also. It some experiences or miracle. So I have to request you to send it as soon as possible, written well in English language or in Hindi language or Marathi because way of power which is your own IS power but you cannot control it. It knows about you wherever you are falling, when you are doing wrong, the same power I don't understand other languages protects you and loves you, like a Mother please don't send me in other languages. it will correct you and bring you to the We will have to appoint somebody to translate in 14 languages, typical thing. and right path So. I would request you to send that. I'm I think now a new century is starting and so many things have to happen and sure today's lecture you will again go ill of you must decide that you will do this or that whatever is your through it and understand it and work it out May God Bless You!!!

 "Once you start doing God's work, God does your work and that's how you will be amazed how you get so much time to do the right thing."



----------------------

1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume :XI IsSue :1& 2
Jan.-Feb. 1899
. those who want to grow shouid meditate everyday. Whatever time you
come home, may be in the morning, may be in Ihe evening, any time. You
will know that you are meditating when you can get into thoughtless
awareness. Your reaction then will be Zero. Looking at somelhing you just
look at it, you will not react because you are thoughtiess. You won't react.
When that reaction is not there, then every thing, you will be surprised, is
Divine, because reaction is your Agnya's problem. Once you are absolutely
thoughtlessly aware, you are one with the Divine. So much so that Divine
takes over every activity, every moment of your life and looks after. You
feel completely secured, one with the Divine and enjoy the blessings of
Divine.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
India Tour 1997
1
News from Around the World
15
Shri Adi Shakti Puja-1998-Cabella
17
Hydrabad Puja Pravachan
25
Prayer
27
Guru Puja-1998
29
Edited by
3 Yogi Mahajan
: V.J. Nalgirkar
Published by
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
Volume XI Issue 182
The Divine Cool Breeze
India Tour 1997
his Year's India Tour began bhajan session, talked animatedly about
in the capital city of Delhi. life and Sahaja Yoga in our own countries
Gradually over the first few days and just enjoyed each other's company
of December, yogis from around the The sense of collectivity and family was
world arrived at the now familiar scout taking shape.
camp in the Nizamuddin area Direct from
our lhectic lives at home, it was striking
During this time, we established the
routine of daily meditations at 5:30 a.m.,
to many of uIs how quiekly we slowed
down to India Tour pace, how strong the which we kepr throughout the tour. Each
vibrations were and how easy it was to day, after meditation, we would have
stay thoughtless. It was a great blessing announcements related to the day's events
to set our feet once again on the Yoga or some aspect of our stay in India. Russel
Briggs, the tour leader, was very thorough
in keeping us informed and prepared for
Bhoomi, Mother India.
Slowly in those first days we made new
acquaintances, got back in touch with old
Our journey. As many of us were in India
for the first time, a careful review of the
friends, and settled in to the life that we
practicalities oflife on the India Tour was
would be living for the next month. Many
provided in those first morning meetings.
people took the opportunity of having a
few flexible days in a big city to shop for
One of the memorable events of these
days for many people was a trip to Agra
kurtas, saris and gifts. The campfire which
has become a familiar gathering place to see the famous Taj Mahal The
during the cold evenings at the scout outstanding event of the week was the
camp was lit each night, and each night
the crowd around it grew On the first chance to sit at the feet of our Divine
night one found a few chairs around the Mother for the first time on the tour, as
fire, mostly occupied by local yogis She gave realization to tens of thousands
talking quietly with one another. By the of people. Some of the great Sahaja
last night at the camp the scene was quite musicians, along with the spontaneously
different; more than 100 yogis from every formed international bhajan group,
country imaginable joined in a rousing performed for the audience as it grew
Delhi public program, where we had the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
Volume : XI Issue : 1 & 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
witness in less than ideal circumstances.
over the hour or so before Shri Mataji's
arrival. Shri Mataji was radiant, and it was
In the heat of the midday sun, we lugged
hundreds of bags, some quite heavy, a
a tremendous moment for all of us. To
our great surprise and delight, after
finishing Her talk, Shri Mataji turned to through crowds of thousands of people.
the India Tour group and spoke to us in All the while the clock was ticking-we
English, as if it were just an intimate were very close to our departure time.
gathering of the family of yogis with their
Mother. She looked at us with such love formed to hand luggage across the vast
and appreciation that we were all really number of tracks more quickly. The local
moved, and filled with gratitude. Many a police were objecting vehemently, and the
heart melted into the divine flow of love yogis were running off the tracks to avoid
in those moments. Shri Mataji told us that oncoming trains, then reassembling to
She regretted not being able to travel with continue working. The pressure of time
us on the tour and gave us Her blessings and the heat made it very tough but finally
for a great journey. As She left the hall, it all the bags and all the people were on
was hard not to wish that She would be the train and we were off and running.
great distance up and down staircases,
In the end a huge chain of yogis was
with us throughout the tour, as in the old
Once on the train we discovered that
days. Yet at the same time it was clear
we were about 105 people on one car
that She would in reality be very much
and about 65 on the other. And of course,
with us.
most people found that their bags were
On the next day we faced our first
not on the same car as they were! So, we
collective test: travelling. We had settled
comfortably into the routine at our camp
in Delhi and we might have been quite
content to stay there enjoying the
collectivity and the hospitality of the Delhi
yogis. But it was time to begin our
had a night of training in detachment,
tolerance and collectivity. We later looked
back on this whole experience as part of
the adventure and as essential to building
the closeness and camaraderie of the
group.
journey. The process of moving 170 yogis
and their belongings by bus to the Delhi
train station, and getting all of these
people and things onto the two cars we
had booked on a public train before our
Nagpur
We arrived in Nagpur, needless to say,
a bit tired and ragged. We had no idea
that within a short time we would be
departure time proved to be a gruelling
ordeal. our first opportunity to try to
transported to a realm of tremendous joy,
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Jan - Feb 1999
Valume XI Issue 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
and an atmosphere so divine that we
would feel completely fresh again and in significant places in Shri Mataji's life.
complete comfort The Nagpur yogis Baba Mama was our tour guide, giving
took care of our every need, right from
we spent in Nagpur was our tour of
us first-hand reminiscences of Shri
having the baggage transported for us to Mataji's early days in the freedom
our temporary home in Nagpur to the last movement and even earlier. We visited
moments of our stay Baba Mama had Shri Mataji's grade school and stood in
arranged that we would be greeted at our the courtyard where She played
camp with live Shehnai music and fragrant badminton with Her school friends,
flowers, cool drinks, places to rest and surrounded by the rooms where She
and an atmosphere of attended Her classes. We travelled along
tremendous love. We were immediately the road where She had wallked daily to
shower,
aware of the many years that Shri Mataji school. We stood outside the apartment
had spent in this beautiful city (She had where the family had lived while Shri
even speni time in the very room where Mataji was in the underground
the men were sleeping) as the vibrations movement, and while Her father was
imprisoned We drove past the place
were tremendous.
Each night in Nagpur we were treated where the police had interrogated Shri
to Ganapatipule-style music programs,
complete with the hospitality of Baba
Mama, the sounds of Nirmal Sangeet the British flag in protest, for which he
Sarita, dancing to qawwalis, Indian
elassical music recitals, and performances
Mataji cruelly during the independence
movement. We saw the court building
where Shri Mataji's father had torn down
was arrested and jailed för 19 months. We
stood by the gate where, in protest against
by the Nagpur Academy students. There
was a steady flow of enjoyment and bliss
enjoyed by all, and the Nagpur yogis kept
us completely comfortable
the British, Shri Mataji had once laid
down in the road to prevent buses from
entering with students
Our last stop on this tour was a small
temple to Mother Mary in a wooded area
where Baba Mama said that Shri Mataji
On one of the mornings in Nagpur we
moved to the local centre for a puja
followed by a havan. Shri Mataji had
requested that we perform puja and havan
in each city, and we very much enjoyed Baba Mama said that Shri Mataji had
used to come to meditate. They often
took walks together to this place and
this first one
found great peace in this place. We were
For many of us the highlight of the time all deeply moved by this tour, by the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Volume : XI Isue :1& 2
Jan-Feb. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
a small lodge and dinner for us on top of
tremendous vibrations in these places and
a large hill. While it rained in the darkness
outside, we packed into a small room and
by the depth with which Baba Mama
related these stories, as only he could have
began a spontaneous bhajan session
which was so powerful and so blissful that
done.
After this tour of Nagpur we stopped
we were all amazed. It went on for several
for a tour of Baba Mama's house, a
hours, but it felt like no more than a few
beautiful home designed by Shri Mataji.
One could see similarities to the design
minutes. We later found out that Shri
Rama had spent time in this area during
of Pratishthana. Before we left, all the
his exile. It must have been His presence
yogis gathered around Baba Mama in the
living room and he called Shri Mataji on
the phone. This was a beautiful moment
that we were still feeling. As this magical
portion of the evening came to end, we
proceeded to the city of Ramtek, where
for all of us. Shri Mataji sent us Her
blessings through Baba Mama, and we left
feeling very happy and moved by the
endless richness of our experience in this
a late night program of music and gift
giving took place. The yogis of Ramtek
were incredibly gracious and had worked
for months to prepare for our brief visit.
historic city.
Our experience in Nagpur and Ramtek
was tremendous and undoubtedly we all
Our next stop was a short visit to the
site of the Nagpur music academy, still remain grateful for this time. Late that
under construction. Baba Mama gave us
night we boarded our train at the Nagpur
station (in a much more organized and
relatively trouble-free manner than on the
previous journey) and travelled toward
a tour of the land, and told us about the
planned layout and method of instruction
at the school. This beautiful environment
will undoubtedly bring forth great artists
Hyderabad.
in years to come. The school is dedicated
to Shri P.K.Salve, father of Shri Mataji
Hyderabad
and Baba Mama.
We arrived at Hyderabad station to
That evening we took buses to an area
outside a small city called Ramtek. We
were supposed to have a picnic by the
large lake there, but we were running late,
another wonderfully warm welcome. All
the baggage handling and transportation
was organized by the local yogis so as to
minimize the work for those of us on the
it was almost dark when we arrived, and
tour. Shri Mataji had suggested that we
pouring rain. The local yogis had arranged
send our large bags straight from Nagpur
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Jan - Feb 1999
Valume XI IsSue: 1&2
The Divine Cool Breeze
to Ganapatipule, so that we could avoid
repeating the experience we had at the and several of the Western yogis were
Delhi station. As a result, we were interviewed.
program received national TV coverage,
travelling light, which made the trip easier
The havan and puja in Hyderabad were
very powerful. Arun Goel led us in a
Dehradun style havan, which was
on us as well as giving our hosts (who
insisted on handling the bags throughout
the rest of the tour) less strenuous work
extremely detailed in protocol, and was
tremendously powerful. At the end of the
havan, Arun invited everyone to dance
We were taken by bus to a beautiful
palace in Secunderabad where we stayed
in a number of rooms throughout the
building, Our meals and programs were
held in permanent pendals adjacent to moments when one feels like one has
the palace. The metal roofs of the pendals
often resounded with the footsteps of danced around th fire, and the men
frolicking monkeys, who lived in the further away from it Looking around one
surrounding trees.
around the huge fire, and a time of
tremendous joy unfolded-one of those
entered the gates o paradise. The ladies
could see nothing bui purity, joy, childlike
enjoyment and serenity on the faces of
Our stay in Hyderabad was highlighted
by a trip to a Mugal fort, and several
tremendous music programs. These
every one present A.ier the music died
down, a short but powerful puja was
performed.
programs included a fabulous dance
performance depicting the early life of
Krishna,
Hyderabad is the City of Pearls, where
pearls are sent for finishing and where a
lot of pearl jewellery is created. At the
end of our stay a local yogi who has a
business selling pearl jewellery came to
the camp and set up a table to display his
vocal
tremendous
Shri
performances by a local yogi named
Subramaniam, a sitar recital, a wonderful
tabla recital, and the world debut of the
local leader, singing after two months of
Jessons There were many inspired wares This generated a lot of interest
moments during these concerts
We ended our stay with an emotional
good-bye ceremony, one of many we
were to experience, in which everyone
thanked everyone else with great feeling
We attended a lovely public program
where perhaps 3,000 people got their
realization. Our international bhajan
group sang and local yogis led the and mutual admiration. It was time for
with a special appearance by another beautiful chapter of the journey
program,
the Indian leader, Arun Goel. The to end
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 6.
Jan - Feb. 1999
Volume : XI Issue : 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mataji's puja was held on the 1991 tour.
Madras is in a tropical climate, very warm
and humid. There is beautiful, lush
Although never as difficult as the
departure from Delhi, the process of
getting everyone and all the luggage on
the train was always a challenge,
particularly because we were on a public
train and we never knew exactly when the
tropical vegetation, and there is a weather
pattern unique to this kind of climate. On
a sunny day, huge storm clouds can rush
in, sprinkle rain on the city and dissipate
very quickly, leaving the sky blue and the
sun shining once again. This can happen
train would arrive or where our two cars
would be. The departure times were not
at all within our control. A number of
several times a day.
times locals boarded our cars and we had
a tough time explaining that these were
private cars; we had to assertively (but
diplomatically, of course!) claim our
territory. By this time, however, the
collective had become quite close and we packed with activities, as it was in each
all knew the routine. Mutual respect. city. The highlights of the stay there
cooperation and patience, along with a
generous dose of humour, kept it all
working remarkably smoothly. The train
The yogis in Madras were extremely
generous, and showed great care for the
group on the tour. The program was fairly
included a trip to an ancient temple by
the sea, which had been one of seven. The
others had all been washed away over the
ages. We were also treated to a dance
journeys were a chance to rest and, more
performance, and a very successful public
importantly, to have long hours to get to
know one's brothers and sisters, to work
program.
on one another and to enjoy the landscape
On our last day in Madras we again
of India together. The mutual care and
performed a tremendous Dehradun-style
support at every level which was shared
throughout the tour was given time to (who has promised to put out a pamphlet
unfold and express itself on these detailing the protocol of havan). The
journeys.
havan under the direction of Arun Goel
powerful havan and puja combination
again took us very much deeper.
Madras
Immediately following the havan and
We arrived in Madras to another puja we said brief, heartfelt good-byes
enthusiastic welcome. Again the local and both guests and hosts expressed their
yogis helped us to get our bags moved gratitude forthe time that our Mother had
and took us by bus to our home, a large given us together. Only through Shri
pavilion very close to the place where Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga could we find
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
1&2
Voluma XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
yogis (our numbers had grown by this
time)!
ourselves in such a unique and joyous
divine setting
The India Tour collective boarded the
Ôn our first day there some people
took the chance to shop for necessities
We were treated to the very unique and
buses and headed for the Madras station
and the trip to Cochin in the state of
Kerala
delicious food of the region, which we
continued to enjoy throughout the stay
there. They make very mild, liver-friendly
food using rice and a lot of vegetables
with delicious sauces. As the day wore
on, we began to clear our things from the
hall to prepare for the evening program
and public program which would be held
Cochin
Although many of us felt that the trip
to Cochin was going to be difficult, it
turned out to be very smooth. Our train
cars had to be detached from the train in
the middle of the night and later attached
the
to another train, this was managed
without any major problem
The evening program began with a
beautiful welcome from the Kerala yogis
to the yogis on tour. We were very
Cochin is another tropical coastal
town, on the west coast of southern India
sweetly welcomed and we could feel that
it meant a tremendous amount to the local
It is a resort town with many hotels and
tourist resorts along the shore The
weather is hot and extremely humid Palm
trees and other tropical vegetation grow
densely throughout the area The phrase
tropical paradise suits Cochin well. We
stayed in a large hall in the middle of a
residential neighbourhood, defined by
Small quiet streets.
yogis to have the international collective
come to Kerala and Cochin. It is
extremely difficult for them to spread
Sahaja Yoga in this region, mostly due to
the dominating influence of Christian
churches in the South (Madras also faces
a lot of Christian conditioning amongst
the local people). The Kerala yogis had
deep desire that our presence there would
help to work things out and focus the
In this small centre there are only six
Sahaja Yogis. and in the state of Kerala
there are about ten more, who came to
attention of the divine on their region.
They ended their greeting to us with
heartfelt welcome song.
help out during our stay. Incredibly, this
small group of extremely dedicated
people was able to host and provide a
beautiful time to nearly two hundred
This program led directly into the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
Volume : XI Isue : 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
where the boats were docked, and walked
public program. The hall was full for the
a small distance through a lovely village
public program, but most of the space was
occupied with the India tour group. The
number of new people was not great, but
to the docks. We boarded the boats, about
30 people to each boat, and set off on
our journey. The boats were old tourist
boats, and offered us the option of sitting
on decks at the top of the boats, or on
the program was very beautifully and
humbly presented, and after the realization
session a number of the new people stayed
behind to be worked on. The bhajan group
benches in the covered lower levels. Both
venues offered beautiful views and fresh
sang a few of the slower, more meditative
cool breezes which we found very
songs to help the new people to go deeper.
Early the next morning we performed revitalizing, as the climate on land was
a havan, again in the Dehradun style.
very hot and humid.
The following four hours were
Although Arun Goel was not with us, he
had left notes on the performance of magical. The vibrations were extremely
strong, and we were convinced that Shri
Mataji's attention was very much on us
during our excursion. We talked,
havan. The havan was very powerful. The
cumulative effect of these frequent havans
and pujas was great and many of us were
aware by this time that a great deal off meditated, foot-soaked off the side of the
boat and generally just completely relaxed
and enjoyed ourselves. One yogi even
Later in the morning we went on one decided to go for the total immersion
of the truly memorable adventures of the experience, ending up in the water after
tour: a boat trip through the back waters slipping while climbing on the side of the
of Cochin. Shri Mataji had specifically boat. All along the shore we saw
requested that we take a four hour long beautiful, idyllic fishing villages, from
trip through these inland waterways, which locals smiled broadly and waved
during which we should offer vibrated at us. There were dense tropical
water to this unique system of channels. landscapes, dense with lush vegetation.
We had filled empty drinking water Lovely flowers which blossomed on the
bottles with water and put them before water's surface decorated our way. As we
cleansing had taken place within us.
progressed through our journey, those of
Shri Mataji's picture the night before, so
us who had the vibrated water would
in the morning we were armed with
good supply of vibrated water for our
mission.
from time to time offer some into the
backwaters on which we travelled.
The tour had been very busy so far
We took a short bus ride to the area
CO
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Jan - Feb: 1999|
XI Issue:1& 2
Molume
The Divine Cool Breeze
the trip to Bangalore The yogis in Cochin
were tremendously hospitable and
devoted to the spreading of Sahaja Yaga.
while we enjoyed it all, it was a non-stop
progression from one program to the
next, interspersed with packing, travelling
and organizing ourselves There was They asked that all the Western Sahaja
rarely a chance to rest and relax, and this Yogis give bandhans and shoe beat on
boat ride was exactly that-four hours their behalf, so that Sahaja Yoga might
of relaxation and rest in the beauty of grow in this difficult but beautiful region
India's southwest coast. Meanwhile, we
Bangalore
were servinga subtler purpose, as well-
spreading vibrations at Shri Mataji's
We arrived in Bangalore late in the
request.
evening, quite tired from our journey We
were revived by the enthusiasm of our
welcome, many of the local yogis came
to greet us and to help us with our bags.
We were taken by bus to a beautiful hall
made mostly from white marble, which
was to be our home during our stay. The
building was on a hilltop well outside the
city, in a quiet residential area
That evening, as we prepared to leave
our Cochin home, a huge thunderstorm
came in flashing lightning and unleashing
torrents of rain on the area The storm
was so strong that it delayed our
departure slightly. During this delay we
had a collective meditation of tremendous
depth and power. It felt as though Shri
Vishnumaya was doing some very strong
The Bangalore yogis had arranged a
dance program for us for that evening.
The dance was in the folk style of dancing
cleansing of the area We later realized
that Shri Mataji must have had us go out
on the water early in the day so that the
vibrated backwaters could evaporate and
provide the moisture for a vibrated storm
known as Kathakali, in which the dancers
wear huge ornate masks, making the
characters larger than life and very
dramatic in appearance. Significantly, the
yogis had arranged for a performance of
by evening, A vast amount of vibrated rain
fell on the region, not only purifying the
area, but also demonstrating to us how
we work together in cooperation with the
the story of how the Devi defeated
Mahishasura in battle, from the Devi
divine
Mahatmyam. The current-day incarnation
of that demon is today based not far from
Bangalore, and the performance served
to bring our attention and the divine
Finally we boarded our buses in the
still-pouring rain. By the time we reached
the station the rain had stopped and we
moved toward our familiar train cars and
attention oto the destruction of this
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Jan - Feb 1999
10
Volume : XI Issue : 1 & 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
which involved painting with a string
negativity.
dipped in paint rather than a brush. For
Another highlight of our stay was a
each painting the yogis suggested a deity
very powerful public program, at which
the keynote speech was given by Yogi as the subject. Mr. Sharma requested that
Mahajan. At several of the programs on
we sing a bhajan in praise of the deity.
He would complete his painting just as
the tour, including this one, video
we completed our bhajan. He seemed to
projectors had been brought in so that the
audience could see Shri Mataji and paint and to move with the flow of the
receive realization from Her directly. But
music and the vibrations, and it was very
moving to watch. The paintings were
beautiful and we enjoyed watching this
as the Maya would have it, the equipment
failed in each city and yogis were forced
newly realized artist as he experienced
the inspiration of the divine vibrations.
to give the realization themselves, which
they did with great humility and respect.
He also seemed quite moved by the
experience. His creations that day
included portraits of Shri Ganesha, Shri
Shiva, Shri Jagadamba and Shri Jesus, an
abstract landscape, a fine portrait of the
On our last day in Bangalore we had a
very deep havan and puja, which were
organized in a particularly collective way
by the local yogis. After the puja we were
graciously presented with gifts of incense Madras centre leader and our tour leader
and small wooden elephant statues by the Russell together (no bhajans
local yogis. By now we had grown accompanied these last two), and as a
accustomed to the generosity and deep finale, a portrait of Shri Mataji with the
open-heartedness of the Indian yogis who
were our hosts. We were grateful to all
of them, and in Bangalore we were again Mataji surrounded by the planets and
theme Sitting in the Heart of the
Universe. The painting depicted Shri
stars, and won enthusiastic approval from
very moved by the love we were shown.
the audience of yogis.
Immediately after the puja and gift-
giving we were treated to a very unusual
As the afternoon drew to a close, it
was time for another heartfelt good-bye,
presentation. A well-known artist of India,
a Mr. Sharma, came to do a demonstration as the India Tour moved on toward
of his work for us. He seemed to be a Ganapatipule via Miraj.
very humble and inspired man, and had
Miraj and Beyond
taken his realization just the day before
During the demonstration he painted on
From the beginning of the tour we had
large sheets of paper using a technique joked that, judging by the name, Miraj
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Jan-Feb. 1999
1.
Volume : XI issue :1&2
The Divine Cool Breeze
might be a place where we would
encounter the maximum amount of maya a light, joyful excitement filled the air We
Fortunately, this did not turn out to be arrived after dark at the camp. As our
the case We arrived at this small buses pulled into the camp, people began
sense of anticipation grew amongst us and
to spot friends, acquaintances, husbands,
Maharashtrian town in the extreme heat
wives and children from the bus windows
of midday, We all got off the trains, and
Great reunions were just moments away!
made sure all of our belongings were also
Once the buses found their final parking
spots we were able to greet the waiting
loved ones. It was particularly beautiful
with us, realizing that this had been our
final train
journey From the train platformm
we seemed to be in an almost desert to
the busy train stations we had
encountered elsewhere. Looking around,
to see the reunions of parents with their
children who had been attending the
school in Talnoo, near Dharamashala.
we saw not a soul and really had no idea
about what we were supposed to do. For
We spent most of that evening settling
a moment, we prepared ourselves to face
in and finding places to sleep. Along the
way many of us got the chance to visit
With friends and family joining us for the
half tour. It was a new era of the India
Tour for those of us who had been a part
of the close family of the full tour, Now
our family had expanded to include
the maya we had been joking about, but
within a few minutes we were surrounded
by yogis from Kolhapur and other nearby
cities, who took complete care in getting
our baggage moved and getting us to our
buses Soon we were gathered in shady
spots by the station, sipping cold drinks
and
thousands of people, and it was almost a
loading our bags on top of the buses.
rarity to spot someone from the full tour
group! But the power of numbers was
evident in the vibrations and it was great
to be with the even larger international
collective.
Our bus trip was about six hours in
total, and passed very quickly with bhajan
singing, visiting and naps. After a short
time we were taken to a building by the
road where lunch had been arranged for
us It seemed miraculous to find such a
On the first full day we spent in
Ganapatipule we began what became
something of a routine: early morning
meal waiting for us along the way. Again,
the Indian yogis had gone to great trouble
to ensure our comfort.
meditation in the pendal, followed by
announcements, country meetings, a trip
to the beach for a foot soak, shoe beat or
Ganapatipule
As we approached Ganapatipule, a swim, and breakfast. During the day
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
12
Volume : XI Issue : 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
people tended to rest, spend time in the just at midnight, to wish Her a merry
pendal or in a shady grove of palm trees Christmas.
where it was relatively cool. People
The next day was puja day, and again
practised music to be offered in the
evening programs and took care of we were blessed to be in the presence of
various communications and projects that our Mother. The general message was
were easily handled in the international about getting over the ego and
conditioning, to get to the pure love
which was the power of Shri Jesus Christ,
and which must be our power as wel.
The puja was followed by the giving of
national presents, after which Shri Mataji
collective environment.
On that first day Shri Mataji arrived in
Ganapatipule. Although we did not see
Her on that day, Her arrival was a
.
tremendous event for all of us. We had took Her leave.
been in India for three weeks or more,
After Shri Mataji's departure we had
and had not seen Her since Delhi. We were
the opportunity to enjoy watching as
deeply looking forward to being in the dozens of our brothers and sisters had
divine presence of the Adi Shakti once
their engagements announced. It was a
more.
pleasure to see these matches literally
made in heaven, and to see the joy and
the surrender of the new couples.
It is difficult to encapsulate
Ganapatipule in a short description, but a
few of the highlights should be mentioned.
We were fortunate enough to be able
to attend a second music program at
at the evening music program. Nirmal which Shri Mataji was present, on the
Sangeet Sarita performed, as did the 27th. It was an evening of bhajans sung
We first saw Shri Mataji on Christmas eve,
Nagpur Academy students and a well
known qawwali singer, a lady who had Indian artists, and of Indian classical
performed at the previous year's seminar. music. Arun Apte ended the program
Shri Mataji was particularly impressed with a powerful recital of vocal music.
with the Nagpur students and how they One could really feel that Shri Mataji was
had learned Indian music, which should working on us through this divine music.
take many years to grasp, in a matter of Shri Mataji Herself commented that the
months. She commented that it must be music had made Her feel very happy.
by several national groups and by various
through Sahaja Yoga that this could be
achieved. The evening ended with
Christmas carols, offered to Shri Mataji with the preparations for the weddings.
On the 28th, the day was occupied
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Jan - Feb 199s
13
Volume XI ssue 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
various countries sang in national groups,
and an international group of bhajan
singers gave rousing renditions of familiar
songs. It was a moving and joyous family
gathering, marking the end of our stay in
The haldi ceremonny was performed in and
around a small pendal in the camp. It was
fun to meet the soon-to-be-married
people and enjoy their excitement, their
nervousness or their calm, and the
auspicious atmosphere surrounding the Ganapatipule
event. That evening Shri Mataji met with
The next morning we prepared to
the grooms, then came to the pendal to
speak to the ladies who performed a short leave amidst great confusion as to who
Gauri Puja to Her The weddings should be on which buses and which buses
themselves were very beautifully were going where Some people were
performed, and the couples looked truly going straight to the airport, others
divine and full of the bliss of their Mother's returning to their Indian home towns, stil
others were going to Kalwe It was an
blessings. For many of us who had been
married in previous years it was beautiful unmanageable scene for mere mortals.
to attend the ceremony and be reminded fortunately the divine managed it all and,
of the incredibly high ideals represented somehow, everyone got on a bus and
by our marriages in Sahaja Yoga Shri ended up where they were supposed to
Mataji left immediately following the go. The trip was long but very enjoyable,
ceremony, and as it was a dark (moonless) as again, we were together, and who
night, people did not stay up as late as
they might normally have done on the
wedding night.
could ask for more?
Kalwe
We arrived in Kalwe in the evening,
On the last day in Ganapatipule we
and did little more than eat and go to bed.
We awoke the next morning to the last
day of the India Tour It was difficult to
enjoyed many of the beauties of the place,
with no real scheduled activities. People
visited the swayambhu, meditated in the
believe It seemed that we had only just
arrived, and yet as if we had been together
for ages We had grown, we had changed
pendal or in a shady spot, played cricket
on the beach, swam, and just enjoyed the
company of the vast collective. The new
married couples had time to spend and we had felt our hearts expand with
together and we all enjoyed the glow the love of the collective, a reflection of
surrounding the newly-created families the love of our Mother. We had formed
That evening a wonderful bhajan session strong bonds with new brothers and
took place in the pendal. Yogis from sisters, bonds which would last all our
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
14
Volume : XI Issue : 1 & 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
was a profound moment, and as we sang
lives. We had grown into the culture of
Sahaja Yoga. Now it was almost time to
take all of this love, all of these vibrations
our last aarti on the tour there at Shri
Mataji's feet, somehow the whole
experience of our month in India seemed
and all of this beautiful Sahaja culture
to complete itself.
back to our countries to let our growth
bear new fruit at home. One last major
National gifts were presented to Shri
Mataji after the puja, and soon our divine
Mother made Her departure. Many of us
event remained: puja to Shri Mataji,
scheduled for late that morning.
Shri Mataji arrived in a car which stayed in the pendal for some time,
drove up the centre aisle between the men meditating and absorbing the powerful
and the ladies in the audience and right vibrations.
up to the stage. She radiated divinity as
always, and it was an honour to be again
Upon leaving the pendal, many of us
realized that there was only enough time
in Her presence. Shri Mataji spoke briefly
in Hindi, in Marathi and in English. The
puja was Shakti Puja, and a central theme
left in the day to organize ourselves for
our own departures. For the rest of the
of the English part of the talk was the day we packed and prepared for our trips
respect for the wife, who represents the home, and in the frenzy of the departure
shakti of the family. Shri Mataji also of buses headed for the airport, tried to
warned us to be vigilant in protecting the get in all the last farewells, hugs and back
dharma of our family lives. The puja was
slaps we could, Suddenly we were on the
buses and headed home.
very brief. Bhajans were sung as Shri
Mataji's feet were washed and decorated.
I am sure that many of the yogis
attended this year's tour feel as I do. that
we were incredibly blessed to be thereB
After Shri Mataji was fully decorated,
people began to take photos and the
atmosphere became a bit unfocussed
that we experienced a kind of collective
People were talking to one another as if love which we will never forget and which
the puja were completely over. Shri made us better people and better yogis,
Mataji then requested that we be silent and that we are for ever grateful to Shri
Mataji for this beautiful time, and for the
and suck in the vibrations. The pendal
privilege of being a part of this divine
became absolutely silent, and with deen
desire, we tried to absorb the divine love
family.
-Steve Wollenberger, USA
which Shri Mataji was pouring forth. It
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 199
15
Volume XI Issue t& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
World
from Around the
News
Florida TV Update
that moment was that our leader had sent
a fax to Shri Mataji the day before about
some other matter, but mentioning also
the upcoming TV interview. So when, at
the beginning of the interview, we put our
attention at Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet,
imagining Her in beautiful Cabella, we felt
such strong vibrations that we were
the series of a half-hour interviews
about Shri Mataji and Sahaja
Yoga on TV in Florida, USA, is
progressing and the producer of the show
is very excited to continue interviewing
us.
concerned for a moment that it would be
The second interview was scheduled
difficult to speak! Everything went very
and we were prepared with video clips
of Shri Mataji's lectures, backup material
smoothly
This show will be on the air three times
and the like Then the producer called and
in the beginning of June, and will reach a
potential audience of 500,000 people. The
interviewer was quite impressed and
asked great questions. She is coming to
get her Self-Realization in a few days. By
the way! Thank you, Shri Mataji, for all
your blessings! Thank you, dear brothers.
and sisters, for all your support and
asked if it would be possible to record
the third show together with the second,
because someone else had cancelled a
slot!
Caught by surprise, we started
thinking, "What could the third topic be?
What video material can we edit within
hours that would be broadcast quality?"
enlightened attention!
Then we thought of the obvious-why
not give them Self-Realization? After all,
this is what Sahaja Yoga is all about, isn't
it? So we got hold on a broadcast-quality
video of a meditation with Shri Mataji
and told the producer we were ready.
The Sahaja Yogis of Florida
Sahaja Programs in
Singapore
nar
On April 14th, we had our first
Both shows were recorded in 'one go'
without cuts and the vibrations were
advertised program in Singapore in the
heart (downtown) of the city of
Singapore. We had booked a room that
tremendous! What we did not know at
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
16
: 1 & 2
Volume : XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
held 70 people, not knowing what the unexpected gift from Shri Mataji that
came to light. Our daughter, who turned
13 on April 15th, talked beautifully about
turnout would be. The meeting was to
start at 7:30 p.m. and at 7:20 there were
90 people and no place to sit. All the floor Sahaja Yoga to the many seekers that
space was taken and people still kept on were present. (We were short-handed, as
arriving. With a last-minute flurry of you can imagine.) At one point, we
activity to find a bigger room, we finally turned around to see our little Radhika
started around 8 p.m. and by then there
surrounded by a group of four Chinese
men and women, all listening raptly about
the beauty of the cool breeze and how
were 120 people. And more people kept
coming in during Shri Mataji's video.
easy it is to feel it. They all kept nodding
whole-heartedly. She has learned to speak
After so many years in America, this
was a dream come true. We were so
very well and very simply about Sahaja-
the fruits of all those years in Dharamsala.
All the uncles and aunties in America who
know her would have been very proud
moved that silently we kept thanking Shri
Mataji in our hearts. The program was
fantastic-such wonderful people, so
simple and humble. Very well-educated,
too. One of Sir C.P. Srivastava's nephews
to see her.
As if that was not enough, the last
and his wife attended, and another
couple of days have been hectic with
more than 20 calls inquiring about Sahaj
gentleman was a colleague of Sir C.P's
during his tenure at the Shipping
Corporation of India. Some of the people
had gotten realization in India, but having
moved to Singapore, didn't know how to
continue. One lady, who had got her
realization in Perth at Shri Mataji's
techniques, vibrations, etc. One man said
he felt vibrations all day and all night and
was wondering if that was normal... lucky
fellow! I assured him that it was a great
blessings that he could feel so easily.
program a few years ago hugged me,
thanking us profusely for having come to
Singapore. She had been praying to Shri
Mataji for a collective here, and after two
long. long years, her prayers were
answered, she said. You can all imagine
As I reflect on what is happening here,
our Holy Mother's words keep ringing in
my ears-that Americans have to spread
Sahaja Yoga globally. That is the
responsibility of America. The world is
eager and waiting for America to take
on its real role in the spiritual awakening
of mankind.
how we felt. No words can describe the
joy. We are still flying high, though it has
been a couple of days.
-Dave and Madhuri Dunphy,
As a parent, there was another
Singapore
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Jan- Feb. 1999
17
Volume XI Issue: 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
Shri ADI Shakti Puja - 21-6-98 Cabella
of my photographs, specially, the one
where lot of energy is coming out of my
n Russia, the people, somehow, are
very open minded. Not only that,
the scientists specially, are very open
minded and they were suppressed very
much. So, they tried to find out the subtler
Sahasrara when we are on a boat. So he
said, she is the source of all the cosmic
energy, and that's what the Adishakti is.
things. Not oniy finding out about She is the one who creates everything.
chemicals or about some physical
The whole atmosphere that we know
of is very artificial But when you
properties of the light. but they wanted
to go into the subtler side and they had
found out already a great deal of understand what She has done - the first
knowledge about the auras around the thing She does is to (in my book also I
hands, auras around the body They had
done so much of research, and was like to tell you) that Her first, we should
accepted all over the world, their findings say, manifestation is on the left hand side.
Now, this gentleman was a specialist, 1 That is the Mahakali's manifestation. So
think, because he is a very very well
have written down about it but I would
She comes on the Mahakali's system, the
left hand side and that is where She
known person and he is holding a very
created Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is created
because of His purity, His innocence and
auspiciousness. This had to be created
before She created the universe, So first
thing She does is to create Shri Ganesha
and She settled down. Then She goes up.
off course in the body of the virata, and
big position He was saying that he has
to run 150 organisations. Very humble
and very nice person, and when he came
out with this discovery, I was happy in a
way because scientifically. if it is proved
,
then no body can challenge it. He has
already written a book, with all the
algebraical complications of what he
wanted to prove, and he said, beyond the
consciousness there is a vacuum, and in
there She goes round and goes up on the
right hand side in the other way, and there
She creates all the universes, as you call
them Bhuwanas'-one universe. There are
that vacuum only you can know the
reality And once all this becomes the
fourteen Bhunwanas means this many
many universes make one Bhuwana And
reality it is a science. And that is how it
is made into science. He showed so many
She creates all these things on the right
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
Volume : XI isue : 1 & 2
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
hand side. Then She goes up and then She another book that I am going to write
descends down creating all these
now. I mean, I have mostly finished but
chakras-Adi chakras or the pithas. She there are some more chakras to be dealt
comes down, makes all these pithas and with). Now with this happening, you see
then She settles as the Kundalini we can one thing is there that whatever I write,
say, Kundalini is a part of it. The rest of now people won't doubt. They will know
the work is much more than this. So all it is a scientific fact and that whatever I
the residual energy means after going
through all this journey, then She comes
round and She goes as Kundalini. Because
say is a fact.
Now to believe in the Mother, the
Adishakti was impossible. Specially you
of this Kundalini and the chakras, She
will be amazed that christian religion
creates an area which we call as the
somehow or other avoided it, the
mentioning of the Mother. Then the
chakras in the body. Now first She creates
these chakras in the head we call them
Islam, that also avoided the mentioning
of the Mother. There is complet negation
towards the Mother. But only Indian
philosophy had the Mother, and the
Indians are actually Shakti worshippers.
So this is how it was kept up and brought
to this position now that people have got
the pithas of the chakras, and then She
comes down and creates these chakras
which are in the body of virata. Now once
this has happened then She creates human
beings but not directly, through the
evolutionary process - She goes through.
and that is how the evolution starts, and
full idea as to Mother Principle that has
worked out everything. On this Mother
principle in India people are very sure that
it is Mother who does everything. And
thus we have in India many, we should
then it stats developing from the minute
small little microscopic organisms in the
water and then it starts evolving. So when
She creates water and She creates all the
universes, She chooses this mother earth
say, 'Swayambhus' means the things that
as the best place to play her evolutionary
process. And there She makes this little
microscopic thing. (off course I have example we know in Maharashtra we
written all about it, and when my book
are created out of the Mother Earth. For
Mahakali's place,
have
got
Mahasaraswati, Mahalaxmi and also we
will be released you can see that how
have got a place for the Adi Shakti. Some
people who have been to Nasik, must
have seen a Chaturshindi (How many
first hydrogen, carbon and oxygen and all
of these things got mixed up, and how
nitrogen comes into play, and how a living
people have been to Chaturshindi out of
process starts. All this, I have done in my
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Volume XI isue 1&2
Jan-Feb: 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
freedom they have, it is such a turmoil in
this world, and people who were incharge
of affairs, they were very very cruel and
had no feelings for the other people. And
this happened so many times on this
you? It is good). So, this Chaturshindi
represents the Adishakti, which is the
fourth dimension of this power which
gives you the ascent, and ultimately
through Maha Lakshmi Channel only you
get your realisation All this is a process-
all was created by the power of Adishakti.
It is a tremendous task Though previous
earth.
Now, Sahaja Yoga has started. Once
Sahaja Yoga has started, we have Sahaja
Yogis who are now receiving the blessings
nature to ereate was very easy The of the Adishakti directly. But still I must
Mother earth is one with the Adishakti, say among Sahaja Yogis also we don't
the whole atmosphere is one with the have people whom I would call as very
Adishakti, all the elements are one with well matured They are Sahaja Yogis.
ones were not difficult because there, for
So She could create all that
the Adishakti
some of them are just because it is a
fashion, may be it should be better from
without any difficulties But when human
beings came-they got their freedom. That
is the only species which fell into the
their angle, or from their selfish angle or
whatever it is. It is a very wrong thing. If
you are in Sahaja Yoga you must know
now you are responsible for the whole
world. You are the only people who have
come forward, you are the only people
who have achieved something and then
their own right that they are there, this is at this juncture you should behave in a
their own achievement and they are the manner that behoves a big saint or a
owners of everything This started realised soul. But sometimes you find
working in their mind so much that they them behaving in such a manner - it is
invaded other countries, they destroyed shocking sometimes. They have no
so many people, and they never felt bad respect for themselves, or for others, and
their whole attitude is very funny Some
thinking about aggressing others, of them are money oriented, some of them
maya' of thinking and of having ego in
it. With this ego, 'maya' worked on them,
I should say, and they forgot about the
principle that created this universe. They
took it for granted. They felt that this is
about it All their lives they have been
controlling others, and doing all kinds of
harmful things. But they never even
are power oriented, and those who are
power oriented are more dangerous, I
think, than money oriented. Because
those who are power oriented, try to bring
such bad name to Sahaja Yoga. They are
thought or never did introspection to see
that what we are doing is very very wrong
and it should not be done. Because of the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Jan Feb 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
20
Volume XI Issue: 182
very insulting, dominating and horrible
people. Their whole attitude is to achieve
people. Everybody should understand and
know how many people we have
given
15
realisation. We have to think about it.
power in Sahaja Yoga, and they try all
tricks to achieve that power But for sonme
What have we done for Sahaja Yoga?
time they look all right, after some time Once I was travelling by plane and, I saw
you will find they will disappear from the a lady sitting next to me. She was so hot,
field of Sahaja Yoga. It is a very big she is a disciple of a guru. Very proud of
cleansing process going on. You must
understand that you have come in the field
him. Then she started telling me all about
him. I was amazed that-look at this.
of very high consciousness where you are
in contact with the Divine Now here if
woman, she hasn't got anything from him
and she was just saying I have given so
much money to him, I have done this thing
to him, and all those things. But she had
nothing and despite that she was talking
you behave like ordinary people who have
no divinity within them, how long will you
continue like this. So this is very important
that you should try to meditate and evolve
yourselves and become really very good
Sahaja Yogis. In some places we are very
very lucky, in some countries we are very
very lucky, but in some countries I find
to me as stranger person about the guru.
But in Sahaja Yoga I have seen people
are rather shy They don't want to talk
about Sahaja Yoga openly to others
which is a very wrong thing you are doing
because you are responsible for this You
the people are just deaf and dumb, they
can't understand Sahaja Yoga, For my
programme they do come and afterwards
have been given realisation. Of course,
you were seeking, every thing is all right
but all of you must try to give realisations
just they disappear. I think Sahaja Yogis to others. I must say that somehow men
are responsible for this. The way they go have been more dynamic, and working it
about, the way they want to do Sahaja out, the women in Sahaja Yoga are not
work is not Sahaja Must be something yet coming upto that level as they should
definitely wrong with the whole thing, and They have to be more sensible about it,
that is why it is not working out the same and they have to work it out. They can
way as it is working out in many places. do it but only trouble is, I think, they have
certain minor problems about which they
are worried. Always I get letters from
ladies saying this is wrong, that is wrong
complaining all the time. I am so fed up
of their letters now that I think they are
useless, to read them also. So I have to
tell you all, that it is important that men
So I have to tell you that all this is
there, that Adi Shakti is there, and all this
is happened through Adi Shakti But now
the further work has to be done through
you people Because you are the channels.
you are the ones who have to transform
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Jari - Feb. 1999
21
Volume : XI IsSUe: 182
others, talking about the defects of Sahaja
Yoga. I would say it is still a very
preliminary things that have happened
because they are dynamic, women should
be much more because they are Shakti,
and I am a woman. So I find that the men
are more sort of, active and dynamic before, and it should stop now.
about Sahaja Yoga and I don't know what
Now as it is, once this book is out all
over the world, it will be known about
our work. We will not be challenged any
more but still we have to see for ourselves
that if we have achieved this kind of
recognition then we should be upto that,
is the reason why wome are not? They
can transform so many people, they can
do so much good to others, they can bring
so much love and compassion because
this love and compassion is a quality of a
Mother, of a woman, and if the women
our capability should be upto that, we
don't have that quality, it is useless to be should not be lagging behind. For
a woman All the time if you are busy example if you ask some Sahaja Yogis,
about your useless things like fashions or specially Sahaja Yoginis, they don't know
THE
faces and all that then the time is all
wasted. You have a short time now, you
got your realisation and you must decide
what have you done so far, what have you
much about Sahaja Yoga, they don't
know about chakras, they don't know any
thing, about the deities, nothing they
know, how can they be Sahaja Yogis. You
achieved so far.
have to know all about it. Only thing that
you don't realise that it is not outside that
you are a Sahaja Yogi but it is inside
Inside you have to have that kind of an
understanding of the chakras, and of
Sahaja Yoga how it works, how it helps.
Now, supposing if I am the source of that
energy which you know very well I am,
But I would say that in Sahaja Yoga I
have found, there are all kinds of funny
ideas growing in Like they prescribe
eertain rituals, they will talk about it, and
kind of a power orientation is there. They
want to oppress others, and they want to
take over and frighten people, and behave
then you achieve yours also a kind of a
in such a manner as if they are very good.
perfection about dealing with people and
bringing them to Sahaja Yoga It is a very
important work you have to do is to bring
Sahaja Yogis in Sahaja Yoga What I find
that some people are very much still
lagging behind and it is very surprising
that they live in that country, they are part
Some of them start saying that "Mataji
said so", this is Mataji's idea By their own
power orientation they manufacture
things and talk like that but ask them how
many have you given realisation? First
thing is you must determine his positivity.
how many have you given realisation He
is just talking about others, criticising
and parcel of that country and they are
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Jan - Feb 199
22
Issue 1 & 2
Xi
Volume
The Divine Cool Breeze
are doing-which in India, which is a poor
not bothered. Under these circumstances
country, one cannot even think of such
things happening around you. So find out
what is wrong, where and how you can
correct these things. If you can help them,
actually, now as I have told you I am
going to start some sort of organisations
that will do good to human beings, but
you all can join also. You can also start in
they will be blamed that why didn't you
find out the ways and methods of
convincing at least to your countrymen.
So Sahaja Yoga at the brink of growth
cannot grow only with one country, two
countries All the countries have to be
brought into Sahaja Yoga All the people
that you could call, into Sahaja Yoga will
be a very good idea, and then we have
books to convince people. You have to
your own countries something like that.
But first, you have to get rid off of
talk to them about it. But, what 1 find
your ego. That once happens to you then
only your attention would be steady, and
about Sahaja Yogis is that once they start
spreading Sahaja Yoga also, their ego
comes up. And they think they are very
this ego is very simple for you because
great Sahaja Yogis, they are great leaders you worship Christ. And the Christ is the
all this kind of stupid ideas walk into their one who was settled on the Agnya chakra.
heads which is wrong You have to just You all worship Christ, but that humility
think in a very humble manner, the more of Christ is not there. Just a opposite of
you have, the more you become humble. it. It has happened everywhere that
whatever is preached in the religion
Like a tree wvhen laden with fruits bends
down In the same way you have to be people did just the opposite of that. For
very humble But that humility is example, in Hindu religion, I would say
sometimes very difficult because the Hindu Philosophy is that in everybody
culture of the west is not humble culture: resides the spirit: Now, in everybody if
there is a spirit then how can you have
different caste systems, and how can you
have somebody higher and lower. Other-
way round, now-Christ has said that you
have to forgive, forgive everyone, and
you haveto humble down, and that's what
one finds that among Christians they don't
know humility, they have no idea of
It is a culture of aggression, culture of
domination so far they have heen nothing.
because of domination they could go all
over the world, they could achieve so
many things. What have they achieved?
Nothing In their own countries if you see
there is drug addiction. Why should
people take to drugs so much. Then all
kinds of sinful things they do which I don't
humility. Men are like that, women are
like that and the men and women they
want to mention But you know what they
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 23
Jan Feb, 1999
Volume XI Issue 1&2
The Divine Cool Breeze
very very humble, and people take me for
granted I don't do anything, 1 do not
want to punish you, I don't want to do
anything-but you yourself get punished,
you yourselfbecome useless if you do not
look after yourself and grow yourself
have gone for fighting There is no
question of anybody being humble.
peaceful and all that. So it is very artificial
they are showing off that they are very
philanthropist and all that. But inside in
their heart I deon't find there is any love.
there is any compassion in the real sense
of the word. So when we are dealing with
the reality they have to know that we
This finding is so great and this man
had never known me before He is very
learned but he is very humble, and what
cannot just go on with things which are
he told me that "just imagine I am sitting
before the creator of this world and still I
u
artificial, which are befooling others. But
we have to really become that Once you
become that, when you are really like that
am very normal". I said what should
- then only you have done the job for happen to you, what do you think. He
which you are born at this juncture of said, "Mother, it is a big thing to realise
blossom times. Otherwise you could have that I am sitting before you, and that you
been born earlier, and could have been
are here". I said it is good that you don't
something different. But you are specially feel my presence so oppressive, so
born. So you realise your value, realise
yourself what you are, and try to
understand, have self respect and try to
just felt the love, just felt the compassion,
That's what it is. We have to know that
we should have just love and compassion.
do things which are very important as
Sahaja Yogis. Off course, you are doing
a job, you are doing other things. But you
will be amazed if you do the work of heart To say something to hurt someone,
Sahaja Yoga - you will find more time
Compassion and love for ourselves in the
way, that should not harm any body's
is every sinful. But some people enjoy that
for every thing. Once you start doing very much, they think they are very clever,
God's work, God does your work and Il is not so. When you talk to someone
that's how you will be amazed how you you must say something which is very
soothing and good. Another thing is a
temper that a slightest thing here and
Now it is for you to go back and there, they get into temper. Now this has
See for vourself Now the Adi to be told, this temper. that you keep
Shakti herself has come But I am very quiet Ihave nothing to do with you. That
simple to look at, in my behaviour I am is one thing Then there are people who
get so much time to do the right thing
introspect.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Jan-Feb. 1999
Volume XI lssuD:182
The Divine Cool Breeze
so sweetly. This is something surprising.
how these people in Russia, have
achieved that capability to become. And,
are very subtly. I should say, power
oriented. Very subtle. They have tricks
and trades by which they know how to
I think in the West Russia is the country
which will achieve very great height in
spirituality. And that means they will be
the most powerful people. Let us see what
you are doing in your own country? And
how you are going to work it out. See.
there are so many things you can do very
easily if you see for yourself that you are
the instrument of the divine. And then
your temperament will change, the nature
will change, you will become a very very
sweet person, likeable person, and
control others. What are you going to
gain out of it? What is youIr gain? By
doing all these things what will happen?
In these worldly things you might be little
bit popular, little bit having a position or
something. But what is it, after all? That
is not going to help you. What is going
to help you the most, is to make yourself
a perfect channel for Sahaja Yoga: To be
a perfect Channel, in that you will be
amazed how you will be happy So
would say for you people who are in the
I
west, I would say you must develop everybody will think that this is a saint
humility. It is very important. I was walking around.
surprised in Russia itself the people are
not only humble but such dedication, such Whatever is the discovery is not a
So that's all I have to say about this
dedication, unbelievable They don't even
discovery for me, but discovery for the
whole world. And I am sure, once it is
established, and is exposed to the whole
world, things will change for you and for
me also.
raise their eyes to me I don't know how
they got this idea., This is not after the
discovery but even before that. They are
so nice and so humble, and so full of love,
and even the children brought me small
small presents. you know just to give me
May God Bless You!
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Jan Feb 1999
Volume: XI issue 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
Hydrabad Puja Pravachan
by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 25-02-90
am joyed to see all of you. I did not achieve power and there are some others
even imagine that in Hydrabad so who are in search of the God Almighty.
many people have become Sahaja Those who are keen to know the Parama
Yogis Mixing up of different type of will be the first to come to Sahaja After
people is the characteristic of Hydrabad. getting established in Sahaja Yoga one is
Now we have to approach Sahaja Yoga at times pained to see the slow
in a new way. It is important to know that Sahaja spreading. But we should
Salhaja Yoga is Truth and we are firmly understand that a living thing develops
Footed in it. We have to, therefore, discard slowly; e g: slow growth of a tree,
the untrue, otherwise we cannot attain blooming of a few at first and gradually
purity. Matter-of-fact-untruth is an
illusion and we should decide to get out
of it With just pure desire for this end No one will get realized by just saying
our awakened Kundalini puts us in a state Until it happens we can give false
of
pace
many flowers on it. Sahaja Yoga is a living
process, we cannot force it on anyone.
certificate to none And we cannot say it
where we could discern as to what is Truth
for certain that every one will get
realization, for a number of reasons many
and what untruth, and we start longing to
attain only the Truth Giving up all our
people do not get realized There are
some who think that for Sakhshatkara
misconceptions we have to take to Truth.
Gita's line that Birth will decide your
one had to do Tapasya in the Himalayas.
How could it be so easy now? For want
of self confidence they fail to believe it.
They do not have the capacity to see that
it is the blossom time and realization
cast" is incorrect because Vyasa, the writer
of Gita. was himself the son of a
fisherwoman, no one knew who his father
was. How could he write such a thing as
this? It is said that Ya Devi Sarava
could be got emmasse
Bhuteshu Jyoti Rupen Samsthita It
After realization when one is connected
means that the innate Shakti (Devi) is the
cast of a human being Some people wish
with the Parama Chaitanya, one comes
to know that the Parama Chaitanya does
to attain material wealth, some desire to
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 26
Jan - Feb. 1999
Volume: XI Issue: 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
note of the qualities and inherent beauty
of others. It will serve double purpose i e.
beautify our personality and remove fault
of others. We have to remember that
everything for us, we get detached and
become Akarmi Nothing worries us.
On coming to Sahaja Yoga, due to short-
sightedness in the beginning one
considers oneself the doer, Slowly, as one
gets experienced, one understands that,
man does nothing. Parama Chaitanya
does everything Everything gets done
smoothly Some-times, if something goes
others are not separated form their-selves
and as such we should correct their faults
with the power of Divine love. Love is
Truth and Truth is Love.
One who uses the power of love
ascends very high With open hearts you
have to see people with love This is how
against our desires, even then we should
not think that God has not helped us In
fact we could neither think nor do more
than God, so we have to accept that
you develop individually and collectively
We should be beware of the person who
Parama Chaitanya has done the
appropriate and what is coming up is very
is not collective. Listening to the ill of
others is a guilt in Sahaja Yoga. We should
beautiful.
observe how softly we could speak and
how much power of forgiveness we
possess, We should regard all Sahaja
There are two aspects about whom a
Sahaja Yogi has to be very careful-
Firstly through individual meditation we
should know our faults: the state of our
Yogis as our relatives:
The Second aspect of Sahaja Yoga is
the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga and its
instrument, whether we are Right Sided
or Left Sided? Which of our Chakras are
spreading. We should have the knowledge
that which finger of hand or foot indicates
obstructed. By putting our attention on
the photograph we could know all this
Then in meditation we should clear all
the negativity. In Sahaja Yoga Meditation
system is very easy. Sitting up for 10-15
minutes in the mornings and evenings we
can meditate. After clearing ourselves we
the catches of which chakras, which catch
could cause which disease and how could
it be cured. How could we cure others
and all concerned knowledge about
Kundalini we must acquire Ladies, being
should get into collectivity. Opening of Shaktis, must attain this Knowledge With
heart is essential for this: A narrow-
the help of this knowledge, ladies will be
able to understand Sahaja Children and
minded person could never be collective
We should not put our attention on the their behavioural pattern. Achievement of
faults of others-for by doing so these
short comings grab us. We should take
this knowledge is most important.
Spreading of Sahaja Yoga is another
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue 1& 2
27
The Divine Cool Breeze
Jan -Feb, 1999
to, wholeheartedly, help Sahaja Yoga
ventilation the room could not be airy, in spread. There are some Sahaja Yogis who
the same way if you do not pass on the keep dreaming all the times the heaven
experience of Sahaja to others; do not of Sahaja Yoga down on the whole of the
help them, do not give them self- Globe Such Sahaja Yogis become sans
realization; do not spread Sahaja Yoga, questions and they always remain in the
state of bliss A great responsibility has
fallen on our shoulders: the responsibility
of building up a pure-hearted society in
which we could place our faith and remain
significant thing. As without cross-
then you, yourself cannot progress When
a tree grows, its branches should also
grow and number of people should sit
under the shade of these branches. It is
the case of an ordinary tree; and you are
established in that faith.
the Banyan Trees. Therefore, you have
May God Bless You All!
A humble prayer at the Lotus Feet of
Sakshat Skri Adi Shakti Shri Mataji Shri
Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah!
We all the Sahaja Yogis of the world seek your divine permission to start a
Negativity Quit-World' movement to be able to enshrine Your Divine Vision of Global
Transformation heralding the 'New Age-Satya Yuga
O! Devi Goddess Almighty please redeem this world from all the negativities.
badhas and bhoots which are engulfing this world and ensnaring the seekers of truth
from getting to reality and having Your ever beautiful, loving, compassionate darshan,
which is the only hope of ultimate peace, joy and fulfilment of our evolution on earth.
Today we the Sahaja Yogis of the world command in the name of the Divine
Mother of the Universe. Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi to all the
negativities, badhas and bhoots to just quit this world.
Quit!
Quit !
Quit !
Alcoholism
Drugs
Tobacco
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Volume XI isue :1& 2
Jan-Feb. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Negativity against the principle of innocence
Perversions
Homosexuality
Lesbianism
Child Abuse
Immorality
False Gurus
All the false religions of this world
Blind faith in Science
Unworthy politicians
Fundamentalism
Fanaticism
Negativity trying to destroy nature, the living habitat of saints
Materialism
Corruption
Racism
Fascism
All the false sects and cults
All the negative people managing the press and falsifying the truth
All the negativities still lingering within us
and all the other negativities that may have been omitted in this list due to
negativity of ignorance in us.
Rupam dehi Jayam dehi Yasho dehi Sahaja Yog dehi Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh
Namah!
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Jan- Feb, 199
Volume XI Isue 1&2
The Divine Cool Breeze
Guru Puja -1998
Today we have assembled here to do disturbed These disturbing qualities
the Guru Puja. The word Guru comes
comes from our deficiency in our gravity
A person who has gravity doesn't get
depressed neither gets excited nor gets
overly enthusiastic nor is he very sad or
from One which is magnetie. The person
who is magnetic, One which attracts the
attention of the seekers This is the Guru
unhappy So, he is in the centre, he is in
the centre of his. But how do we become
the Guru? That is very important for Sahaj
Yogis to understand. Many have felt that
they are Gurus, they have tried to behave
in a funny manner and have lost their Guru
position. First and foremost things for
Sahaja Yogis, it is important that they
Also it means that heavy ness or you can
say a person who is very steady, who is
very deep, who has the knowvledge and
who can act like the Mother Earth. For
the power of magnetism in the Mother
Earth. For the power of magnetism in the
mother Earth also is called as magnetic
but is Sanskrit- Gurutvakarshan means
the attraction of the heavyness of the must have introspection. They must
Mother Earth but actually it is a power watch themselves. Ifa person runs about
of the Mother Earth that makes us stand changing because of fashion has come,
properly on our legs when it is rotating because people have suppressed them or
with such a tremendous speed. Otherwise have asked them. Just to please people
we would be all thrown away with that cheap values if a person changes then he
velocity that she is moving. We are still
attached or we are one in our balance is himself properly on the values of Sahaja
only because she has gravity. This gravity Yoga. Without introspection you will not
cannot be a Guru He has to station
know. You will never remember what you
has to be in a Guru Gravity means a kind
of a serious understanding of oneself and
one's own responsibilities. So. a Guru has
to be very steady
have done wrong nor will you think of
what you have to do right but that is only
possible if you go on improving yourself
In these moderm times people are very
mobile. All the time agitated, all the time saints have praised their Guru. For
getting disturbed They meet people who example, we have a very great saint
are nor of any quality then they get Gyaneshwara in India. He has written
First and foremost thing is all the great
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30
dan Feb. 1999
Volume: Xi Issue: 182
The Divine Cool Breeze
complete chapter about the Guru, in
English they have translated as Preceptor,
India who came to one of the ladies who
was a Sahaja Yogini and he said that my
Guru has sent me a word that Adishakti
Guru is the preceptor and what he has
done is a great thing He says you are not
to challenge the Guru otherwise you can
never become a Guru, for name sake you
might be but you are not Secondly, you
can never misbehave, you can never be
rude, arrogant and you cannot show your
temper to a Guru. If that is so that means
is going to come and stay with you Is it
true? She said, Yes! She is going to stay
with me, so what? He said, my Guru has
told me that you go and request her and
if She could come to our ashram. She
said,I will ask Mataji. I don't know This
fellow came to a programme and he saw
me, a house wife! He said, this cannot be
you are not a Guru, you are still on a very
low level personality. It is very.clearly said
that if you try to say against other Gurus
who are of a real Gurus, who are very
that Guru but when I came in, he saw
and when 1 did self realisation that
everybody's Kundalini was awakened, he
high calibre then also you are not a Guru
was so surprised and he prostrated
himself before me
But I would say that you all have now
Now, his Guru was living in
got vibrations, you all have got vibratory
awareness When you have vibratory
awareness, you are capable of finding
about everyone. Now you need not talk
about your own understanding about a
person but try to face that person directly
and tell that person this is the problem the ancient times never used to leave their
and ask him to change: But in Sahaja
Yoga we have something more than other pillow. They never left their Takiya'. I
Gurus had Other Gurus were very-very said, alright, I don't mind I'lI come to
Amarnath, is a very famous religious
place in the Himalyas and this fellow lived
in a place called Ambarnath. So, he asked
me, Mother, will vou come to my ashram?
I said, why not- because these gurus in
seat, they called Takiya' means the
strict. They used to carry a stick in their your ashram. So, I went there, this Guru
hand, a big stick which they used for fell at my feet and he was very-very
walking or hitting their disciples. They respectful and then we came back home
used to hit their disciples in such a bad and this fellow started telling me if you
manner that the disciple was literally don't tell my Guru I would like to tell
frightened of the Guru.
you that I have got a very bad Agnya
Can you cure Mother? 1 said, why no! I
Tl give you an example of a Guru I will. So, I went back to this Guru again
came across. One fellow was there in
and I said, why didn't you cure his Agnya.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Jan - Feb 1999
31
Volume XI Issue : 1&2
The Divine Cool Breeze
that his Guru came back and he put me
He said, why? Why I should cure? Who
cured my Agnya? I worked out myself I hanging on a well and he used to every
had to introspect, find out and I cured
my own Agnya and why should I cure his the water, ten times he did it. I asked, but
Agnya? Let him work! Let him get to
this otherwise he will be a spoiled man. I because he found me smoking a cigarette,
was quite surprised and he said you do it my goodness! So, I asked his Guru, I said,
because you are a Mother. You are why do you do such horrible things to
nothing but love and that's why you are
doing all this for others but not me No don't do like this, they will never rise, they
Guru will open the Agnya of his disciples.
I said, then why are you a Guru? He said, them and the more you forgive the worse
because we have to guide them and if they they become and they will show no ascent
have their Agnya badly caught up if their at all. So, you have to be very strict with
attention is not alright, I'am not bothered them, please don't spoil them all the time.
about it. It is their duty to introspect
find and crimb the ladder which I have he say so! He said, Mother, if you give
time lower the rope so I would go into
He said,
why did he do such a cruel thing
your disciples? He said, otherwise if you
will never come up You go on forgiving
and
I was really surprised that how could
I can only them everything free, you give them
put before them Sol am Guru,
give them the ladder to climb up. It is they
who should work very hard, it is they who
should introspect, it is they who should
everything so easily, they will never value
their self realisation I said, it's not so.
You have to give them a chance, you have
find out. Why should I help them to such
an extent that you open their Agnya. I
said, alright, you allow me to open his What she does? She sprouts the seeds,
Agnya, if you don't mind He said, you then the trees come up then after that she
are a Mother. do what you like! I have Hives them the fruits and she sees that the
to allow them to rise and to allow them
to become something like Mother Earth.
nothing to say: if you want to do that,
fruits are ripened She does all that but
they are no trees you see, they are human
beings and they have freedom to become
devils also. I said, alright, if they are devils
1 can manage them. You just see how I
you will spoil them. you spoil them Let
him do at his own otherwise you will be
spoiling him. I said, as you are also spoiled
that you don't open anybody's Agnya,
yes, but whatever position I have achieved
is a permanent one So, 1 opened his
can manage them. If they are devils they
will remain devils. You cannot change
Agnya.
them. So, he argued with me and when
he met Sahaja Yogis, he asked them how
Then this fellow on his way told me
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999:
32
Volume XI Issue 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
many of you are willing to give lives for
Shri Mataji? Do you know what She has
given you? They said, yes we do. So they
came to me and told Mother he wanted
doesn't have this pure desire, he has some
other desires then absolutely useless.
Like some people come to Sahaja
Yoga, I have seen, they want to make a
us to give life for you. I said, that's not
name out of themselves, they become
necessary. it's not necessary because he
used to ask his disciples perhaps
great masters of everything, they want to
dominate everything. That is not
I met many like him who were very important. There are some people who
strict Gurus, complete obedience was try to make money in Sahaja Yoga, a way
needed, complete humility, complete of making money, that also absolutely
low
wrong and not only that but, is very
level that they want to make money out
of Sahaja Yoga Then there are people
who just come here for some politics
surrender was needed A word against
Guru was not tolerated but even you
could not answer, you could not show
any tamper to a Guru. Now, I have met
They go on saying things here and saying
things there. All these things are not going
to give you any ascent, what so ever. You
people who are like that, sometimes. Then
stopped talking to them, that's it If they
want to improve they can improve, if they
don't want to improve you cannot force
them to improve but according to these
Gurus there should be a great fear in their
mind that they should be so frightened
that they should behave themselves.
have come here only to achieve a great
life of spirituality, of becoming a Guru.
Now, also this politics business is quite a
lot. People try to enjoy the position of a
leader. So, they try to keep that position
in
a very special way There's no need. If
Now, we expect so much from the
Guru that he is your father, mother. he is
your friend everything. He is a pure
you are a leader because you are a great
s
master, you will remain. Nobody can
challenge you, nobody can throw you and
person who just wants your ascent, we
wants to look after you, he wants to guide such fear Sahaja Yoga is a yoga in which
you, wants to protect you and takes you fear doesn't play any part. There's no fear
to the life of spirituality and this is the
way a Guru has to work out but wliat is
expected of the disciple is even much
worse The disciple has to be absolutely
a pure person He should have a pure doing. Are you an absolutely a humble
desire to become a spiritual person, If he person? Do you do whatever is told to
one should not get disturbed with any
for you. Only thing for your ascent, it is
necessary that you introspect
Try to find out what you have been
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
33
XI Issue 1& 2
Volurme
The Divine Cool Breeze
you? Supposing. I tell somebody just go them will become speedy. Everybody
starts running scattered Why? I am
to, say some place He may not go, will
come and tell me, Mother, you know this
going, you are not going but it happens.
Like that if you tell somebody that you
have to go to a function or for some
felicitation, people start jumping
and that's a very modern disease, it was
happened, that happened, some excuse,
he may not go but that's not being good.
If you have been told to go to that place.
about
there must be some meaning and you have
not before So, they start seeing that we
are getting late, getting upset but if you
to go. You have to obey if you are not
obedient then vou cannot become a Guru
go. on worrying like that you don't go
beyond time and when you go beyond
time, you control time Time is with you,
all the time Wherever you go, it happens.
hecause if you can not obey, how can,
others obey you? This obedience is not
for any personal gain of Guru, not at all
but for your gain only. for your education,
for your ascent. So, if such a view is taken
then what happens that you start getting
all the qualities of a Guru
I will give you an example of that. We
had a little girl in Cabella who fell down
and she broke her hand very badly. I was
about to leave for America. I had come
out of my room. When I saw the child I
said, alright, doesn't matter I will cure
Firstly, a Guru cannot be a fitssy man,
first and foremost thing I want this house,
I want that thing, I can't like this, I can't
this child first. They said, no Mother, but
like that. If a person who doesn't know
your plane. I said, it's alright, forget it.
how to get detached from all these habits,
So, I got the child, treated the child
and she wäs alright and after I think half
an hour I left for the airport and you will
be amazed to hear that, that aeroplane
was out of order which was going to New
York. So, this plane is out of order then
they said, alright you can go by another
plane which goes to Washington with the
same ticket. I said, very good idea, give
me that and I went by that so that i
reached Washington which is a very-very
nice airport to arrive because there's no
problem of customs, there's no crowd,
he cannot be a Guru. How can he ascend?
Of course, I mean you have to try that
you get rid of all these habits. They are
funny habits which make you miserable.
doesn't make others miserable, as it
makes you miserable No habit should
cling to a GurI First and foremost is that
he has to be beyond time. He should not
worry about time. Many a times I have
seen people if they have to go to airport
for example, something enters into their
body They become speedy suddenly,
even if I have to go. I am going and all of
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
34
Volume XI ISue : 1&2
The Divine Cool Breeze
nothing All people go to New York. I jumping and he creates problems for
don't know why? They should all go to himself and his family.
Washington, it's very surprising. I
discovered for myself that I wish I had
Then the left sided is a person, which
we call as the Tamoguni. The right side
not gone by that horrible plane to go to
is Rajoguna and the left side is one which
is Tamoguna "Tamo' means darkness
New York. Like that everything works
out and the times come what is good for
Such a man is afraid of darkness, but he
you
becomes a very intriguingly, very crooked
person. He always tries to trouble people
in a very crooked manner, not openly,
while the right sided man is openly a
It is such a lot of experience of mine
which I can tell you that to worry about
time itselfis a headache. If you leave it to
this divine power and believe it then Hitler but this one, the second one, the
one we call as Tamoguni is the one who
tries to trouble others very well. Rajoguni
has a opinion of his own about everything.
He goes on forcing it on to others, other
person but if you see his own life he is in
complete misery. He cannot carry on with
people, cannot talk with people and
there's a very big gap between himself,
his spirit and his being.
everything works out for your good and
if it does not, you must know that it is
your testing. You must accept, you must
learn to accept because whatever you
have fixed up for yourself as something
very great is not. So, what is the greatest
thing you have to achieve, your
detachment then you become Gunateeta
means, as you know we have three gunas
within us. One is, that's called as
The second type the Tamogunis are
Satvaguna, is the best but there are two
the ones who end up with all kind of
other gunas which are as you know that
left sided and right side. Either you are a
right sided person or a left sided person,
These two gunas within us are of no
importance. Supposing, you are a right
sided person. Then what happens to you,
you become overactive. Overactivity
gives you fatigue, gives you all kinos of
diseases which you have seen and you
have to cure right side. Such a person is
extremely speedy, he cannot sit in one
place for two minutes, is all the time
diseases. Even the right sided people get
lot of diseases but the left ones get
pshychosomatic Psychosomatic diseases
are very dangerous and not curable by
human doctors. So, you have to take to
Sahaja Yoga but again you go to the right
or to the left. This is not a very good
attitude, I think, towards life that you get
bound by one of these gunas or you are
all the time like a pendulum moving from
left to right, right to left. So, you have to
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
35
Volume XI Isue 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
be a steady person. For that you all have
to meditate. I know immediately a person
who meditates and I know, who does
not meditate. You will yourself know a
another generation is there which is of
no use. I met some of them when I was
in Haridwar and I told them what are you
doing here in the Himalayas? They said,
person who meditates It's a question of we don't want to face human beings. They
10-15 minutes but that you must do every are useless people, they are good for
night and moming about five minutes nothing. You do anything for them they
meditation, then you develop your go on troubling you, we don't want to be
balance, you develłop your tenacity, you
develop your body in such a manner that become Guru? If you cannot manage
it can stand lots of nonsense It can bear them, if you cannot get out the troubles
with them. So, I said, why have you
lots of things. Then you are not left with
desires, what food should you eat? When
they are giving you and out of all those
things and remain in your peace then
what's the use of becoming a Guru? He
said we have had enough of it. Some of
you should eat? Whom you should
please? Nothing of the kind. You yourself
of age and all
them were over 100 years
that but I said, what't the use? Your life
is of no use, you are staying here alone
somewhere in the Jungles. He said, the
become such a sweet person that
everybody is pleased and understands that
one has to be like you. The people see
you and you become like a model. People
tigers, the snakes all of them know us that
start following vou. that means you
become a Guru In this way you get rid
of these two habits that you have of left
and right side.
we are great, they don't trouble us but
these human beings torture us, we don't
want to go there because they are very
ambitious or they are very negative.
Something is wrong with the human
beings. None of them have reached a
perfect state. So. I was surprised how
they are not at all willing to come down
and be with us and be a part and parcel of
us. They said, alright Mother, you have
Now. Satvagunis are the people who
believe in the rightousness but when they
are righteous they contempt for others
who are not righteous. They go on saying
things to such people so, they can develop
a kind of temperament so they become
aloof. They can ge to Himalayas sit there
come, you are a Mother, you can tolerate
all this and you can work it out but not
we We are out of it, we don't want to go
and not meet anybody Get out of the
society, get out of all your relations
back.
everyone and just establish yourself as a
big Guru somewhere This kind of
They have lots of power, they can
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 36
Jan - Fab 1999
Volumie XI Issue 1& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
control the nature, they can do so many you? What is the wrong path you are
taking? Overnight you have seen people
give up but still there are many. I should
say, subtle things, we stick on to them.
First thing that happens to you is that you
start finding what's wrong with your own
people, of your own nation.
things but they said, its easy to control a
snake than to control a human being.
Today they might behave in a particular
manner, suddenly they will become
horrible. You don't know these human
beings. how uncertain they are What
uncertain quality they have. I said, there
is a way of putting them right. First give
them realisation. In the light of the spirit
they can see how they are doing wrong
I am amazed you see when the
English got realisation they started telling
me about the English, when Italians got
realisation they started telling me about
the Italians. If you tell Italians that this
Italian fellow did this he said, Italians after
all Mother, what will they do! They are
things. 99% people will know what's
going wrong with them, where are they
missing the point! They will start seeing
themselves.
just like this you know. He himself is an
Italian but immediately he said. Same with
Spirit is like a mirror where you see
yourself clearly and you start changing the Russians I have seen, it's very
yourself There's no introspection needed surprising that they start telling you about
when you have your spirit awakened You what's wrong with the Russians. All of
can watch yourself, you can see for them are quite alike. Even Indians, they
yourself clearly as soon as you become a
developed or evolved Sahaja Yogi and They are Indian people Mother, they are
that is one point one should see if it has doing like this. I was surprised that they
happened. If you can see something themselves being Indians also how are
with you, if you can find out what they immediately telling me about the
sorts of defects you have, if you can Indians. Many things I have come to
detach yourself from those defects and if know about these countries, actually
will say, after all this is Indian, you know.
wrong
you can understand that all these through the Sahaja Yogis only. When the
attachments and defects and habits are Sahaja Yogis tell me. I am amazed that
pulling you down then only you can leave
them but that only happens when you
have this mirror of yourself shining
through When this light comes to you,
you see for yourself, what is wrong with
they are not identified with their country,
they are not identified with anyone, even
their own family they are not identified.
If they find something wrong, they will
tell me Mother, my father is like that, my
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 1999
37
Volume Xi issue: 1&2
The Divine Cool Breeze
these things that you can see and that is
mother is like that
IS
how you can save others who are getting
drowned into the ocean of darkness, into
That is how you get detached when
you start seeing and are not identified If
the ocean of misidentification, only when
you are above all this but mostly what
happens is this that you are identified. You
you are not identified with all these things
then you become a free person, you have
the freedom, you become a person who
are identified how can I do it? How can I
is not attached to anyone because he is
father or she is your mother or a
save?
your
sister or anyone This attachment is a very
The countries where Sahaja Yoga has
spread where there have been people who
are not identified with those countries and
dangerous one also. With the family
attachment we have lost many Sahaja
Yogis because their family was funny, they
got lost. They coundn't get out of it. We
think that they have to help all these
countrymen to come up, to join in. For
that tremendous patience and love is
necessary. As you know this cosmic
power as they call it, they say, I am the
source, Actually, it is the power of love
of divine, and such a love doesn't demand
anything, doesn't want anything but it
acts, it works For example, if you love
somebody you would not like to do
something to displease that person. Of
course there are some Sahaja Yogis who
do things which 1 really don't like but I
never show I just keep quiet but normally
don't say that you detach yourself from
your family or get out of it but in a subtle
way you should understand what are they
up to? And what they are doing? All these
subtle understanding about everyone
doesn't give you any right also to criticise
them. You should see for yourself what's
wrong with you? You know all these
subtleties, you criticise such a person is
such but you also have the same problems
with you. That's why you get detachment
only possible through this introspection
through the mirror of your spirit
if a person has love for someone he
wouldn't do anything to displease or to
trouble that person or in anyway hurt.
So, the spiritual life is very important
to a person than anything else on this Without that development within you,
Earth because such a person has been
seeking. He has been seeking the truth,
he has been seeking the reality and once
you cannot become collective.
In collectivity what happens is that
you feel for others. You understand
others You may not show off but inside
yourself you know Supposing, somebody
you know the reality you don't want to
cling on to something which is not reality.
You want to be a pérson who is above all
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Feb 1999
38
Volume XI issue: 182
Jan
The Divine Cool Breeze
achieving a great state of spirituality, such
people are to be helped at any cost. I
know some of them have gone to very
has done lots of funny things with you,
doesn't matter but gradually you will see
he will change, gradually he will become
better because he realises that whatever
he has been doing, has not been a correct
thing to do. He will not only feel guilty,
that's not the way but he will say I should
correet. Why did I do like this? I should
not have done. Gradually he will improve
wrong gurus and they have suffered. They
have a bad Agnya, they have all kinds of
things, doesn't matter. You should try to
help them. If they can listen to you, if they
can understand what you are telling them
I'm sure it would work out. It is worked
but for that you should have a great sense out so much as you can see that in the
of forgiveness, great sense of foreign countries where I was just an
understanding. Under circumstances Indian, how people have taken it, how
people also misbehave because they had they have understood me and how they
no training how to be alright? None to be have become Sahaja Yogis of such a great
humble? They misbehave because in their value and level.
culture perhaps there is nothing but just
We never had so many saints in the
anger and arTogance and it is regarded
something great Also they misbehave, olden days, never Only one saint would
sometimes as they come from such be born and he would be tortured. There
families where only arrogance is taught
So, you can't help. Such people are to be
forgiven again and again and see that they
change because I have a faith that all collective? How to be nice to each other?
human beings can be made into beautiful Because later on when you become the
flowers of fragrance, all the human beings Guru, when you have to guide the people,
but I know there are some difficult ones you will know what are the problems of
Why? because they don't want. If they
don't want, if they don't have the pure collectivity perfect and once you learn
were not so many to help each other and
to protect each other. So collectivity is
to be learnt very well. How to be
the collectivity. Also, you will know how
to overcome that. How to make
desire, you cannot force it on them.
that thing, you will be amazed that you
have mastered the art of being a Guru.
So, forget it They are difficult peorle,
forget about them but those who want,
I would like to see so many of you
those who have a great desire which is
absolutely pure Desire not for money, not
becoming a real Guru, real masters not
only in your jobs, in your talents but in.
for position, not for anything but for
your own life. People should say that such
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-40.txt 
 Jan - Feb 1999
Volume: XI IssuO : 1&2
The Divine Cool Breeze
absurd the way sometimes I find some
and such person is a real Guru. For that
as I said, you must learn obedience,
complete obedience Should not question
Sahaja Yogis are so anxious to assert
themselves as leaders. It's not correct.
the guru Whatever is told to you, you
So many times I have explained to
must do. Though in Sahaja Yoga I do not
say that. Today is the first time I am
saying it because I find so many of you
you that your own development, your
own correction, your own position in
Sahaja Yoga will say what you are!
fall a little short of becoming perfect. You
don't have to sacrifice anything, I have
told you. You don't have to give up
Whatever others may say doesn't matter
What you say about yourself is the reality
and you must face yourself for that 1
families or anything and do odd things would say specially for the ladies. Fm a
just to show that you are perfect But it's woman and I have worked very hard all
something, a state within yourself, which these years and as a woman I must tell
you have to establish, where you become you that all the ladies should try because
extremely humble, obedient and you will they always say we are shaktis but in their
be growing with this light, 1 am sure. Once
you understand the importance then you
life I don't see there's any work done as
shaktis, Only they are sort of dependants
all the time on Sahaja Yoga They have
will dedicate yourself to become a
personality of a rare quality. It's the to stand up in their own freedom, they
easiest thing to be because that's the most have to be independent and they should
comfortable way of living in life. No use
fighting, no use quarrelling, no use trying
to show off and all that. The care of
have right ideas about everything I'm
sure if the ladies come up that way, our
Sahaja Yoga will
spread very much. Men
are working much more for Sahaja Yoga
than women are I can understand
everyone, the suggestion of care is very
much satisfying for others. Little care here
and there People like it and that only
because they have families, they have
children, this, that but the most important
comes from a very noble soul who bothers
thing is that once you take to active
Sahaja Yoga then your children also come
about small small things, about whatever
others need. It's not for your own up well, the families are also looked after
advancement, it's not for your own sort
After all there is this divine power
which looks after all of you. You must
believe that this divine power, thinks,
uınderstands, it organises. Above all, it
of leadership whatever you may call or
for your own positions but it's for your
own ascent, for your higher life that you
give up all these ideas of leadership It's
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-41.txt 
 40
Jan-Feb. 199g
Volume XI Issue : 1&2
The Divine Cool Breeze
understanding about spreading Sahaja
Yoga All of you should put your mind
to it If women can't go out, they can
loves you. This divine power has to be
understood that it is now your own and
that you are in the realm of this divine
power where you won't have any write down something, they can write
problems, whatsoever. If you leave things about their spiritual ascent or about
to the divine power, it will all work out.
As you know about the scientist who
whatever their experiences are So, in any
case all those who have got miraculous
found out about me. I have to just say photographs, they should send it over
that he asked me that how is it this that here, This gentleman is coming here in
September and he is going to analyse all
of them. So, it would be very nice of you
if you can send it. Also, you write down
so many hearts are made here? I said
people were singing the song, "Sitting in
the heart of the Universe' so, this many
hearts have come up but he said, still does
have
about your different experiences you
had in Sahaja Yoga That will be also a
good idea. He told me that he would like
this power hear? I said, no. It's me only 1
can hear I was hearing the song and then
to publish a book, and now the time has
come for us to publish our miracles that
have taken place. All of you have had
that power organises everything It's
something to be understood very well that
the power within you, what you have.
Lunderstands and understands you also. It
some experiences or miracle. So I have
to request you to send it as soon as
possible, written well in English language
or in Hindi language or Marathi because
way of power which is your own
IS
power but you cannot control it. It knows
about you wherever you are falling, when
you are doing wrong, the same power I don't understand other languages
protects you and loves you, like a Mother please don't send me in other languages.
it will correct you and bring you to the We will have to appoint somebody to
translate in 14 languages, typical thing.
and
right path
So. I would request you to send that. I'm
I think now a new century is starting
and so many things have to happen and sure today's lecture you will again go
ill of you must decide that you will do
this or that whatever is your
through it and understand it and work it
out
May God Bless You!!!
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-42.txt 
 "Once you start doing
God's work, God does
your work and that's how
you will be amazed how
you get so much time to
do the right thing."
