The Divine Cool Breeze March - April, 1999 Valume : XI Issue : 3 देवी प्रपन्नार्तिहरे प्रसीद प्रसीद मात्तगतोऽ खिलस्य। प्रसीद विश्वेकवरी पाहि विज्व स्वमीखरी देवी चराचरस्य ।। (Devi Mahatamyam) "O Devi, you who remove the sufferings of your devotees, be gracious. Be propitious, O Mother of the whole world. Be gracious, O Mother of the Universe, protect the universe. Thou art, O Devi, the ruler of all that is moving and unmoving.

 In this Issue: Editorial 1 Musical Evening Talk, Delhi- 16-12-98 Shri Rama Navami Puja - 5-04-98 Christmas Puja-Ganapatipule - 25-12-98 11 Shri Krishna Puja - 16-8-98 20 Shri Ganesha Puja 32 Taik after the Marriages 42 E Yogi Mahajan Edited by : V.J. Nalgirkar Published by 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Volume XI Issus The Divine Cool Breeze Mar- Apr. 1999 Editorial The 76th Birthday of our Divine bhajans. I want to correspond with you Mother is the dawning of the and other Indian Sahaja Yogis to golden millennium prophesied by exchange ideas, songs, etc. So, please John of Jerusalem in the 10th Century give them my address and show them my A.D. All the things he prophesied have photograph I will be very happy to come to passing the life of Sahaja Yogis. receive your letter. You can talk to me We need no longer regard them as every thing concerning Sahaja yoga, miracles and coincidences but through bhajans. Now, I want to tel you a our Vibratory Awareness recognise them testimony concerning Shri Ganesha that as the blessings of our Divine Mother. took place in Benin. We have a Sahaja Each one of us is experiencing this at yogi who is doing gardening, and he said, every level of our life. We are absolutely a guardian in my enthralled by them and are able to feel garden. Shri Ganesha I choose as a how much our Divine Mother loves us guardian to keep my garden". And he and how closely she cares for each one entrusted his garden to Shri Ganesha by of us This is not only felt by those who "I don't want to put the ceremony that you know. have had her personal darshana but also by thousands of Sahaja Yogis who never ever saw Her For instance on 18th Few weeks after, robbers came in his garden, but they saw a giant who hit them to blood. Few days after they returned in the garden and had been hit to blood again. So after, they went to see the January 1999, we received the following letter from a Sahaja Yogi, from a country called Benin in, West Africa. owner, then asked him whom he put in his garden? And he responded nobody, without knowing that they were robbers: "Benin is a small West African Country about 12,600 kilometre square with 5 million people. In Benin we started practising Sahaja Yoga in 1995. We are about 4000 yogis and every week more than 30 persons have their self-realisation. We have two centers in Benin. I am Choir Mr. Mahajan, this is the end of my testimony. Next time I will tell you another one. I want to leave you hoping that I will receive your letters and receive Singer. I like bhajans especially Indian's from my brothers and sisters in India a

 Volume XI Issue : 3 & 4 Apr. 1999 Mar The Divine Cool Breeze of Her glory. In that consciousness there lot of letters." is no space for geed, jealousy and fear. These ghosts lurking from the past reigned at a low level of consciousness Lando MilleFort C/546 MAISON AHOUANSOU Rue De Quidah when we had misidentified ourselves. Cotonou Having realised our true identity we rise Benin to a higher realm. We can become as vast W. Africa as the expanse of our consciousness till stage comes when we become pure (Jai Shri Mataji. Milleforlando) A similar episode occurred in Rahuri consciousness. in 1980 in the farm of Late Dhumal. Some Robbers had entered his farm and they in achieving such a stage of collective were beaten by a person who nobody had consciousness. Then all individual and seen before. Of course Late Dhumal knew collective problems are spontaneously that it was Shri Bhairav and narrated it resolved. This is precisely what John of The key to the golden millennium lies to us. Jerusalem said, "Diseases will be cured before they are manifested and everybody will cure themselves and each other. Man will have understood that he has to help himself to stay upright; and after the day We are most blessed to be always protected by our Divine Mother. There is no doubt about it and it has registered in our consciousness. However, the golden Millennium envisages that we become fully conscious of our position as the spirit. When the consciousness is his of reticence an avarice man will open heart and his purse to the poor; he will define himself curator of human species and so, finally a new era will begin." fully established we truly become vehicles of the spirit and enjoy the new millennium (Yogi Mahajan)

 Mar- Apr 1999 Volume XI Issue 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze Musical Evening, 16-12-98, Delhi Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Expression of Five Elements on a Sahaja Yogi) your self realisation, it is clearly written down after self realisation, you have to grow. Grow into perfect being and then have been telling them that the style of Indian knowledge is very different from the Western mind. In the West, you see, if you say something, then they you can see for yourself what he has said want to have an experimental approval. or they have said is the truth. So the They will go to the scientists or to other approach is different. In one way if you people who are equipped with knowledge start going through science, through this, to know what they said in these books is through that, you cannot reach anywhere true or not. They will even judge Christ. and moreover your growth is hampered. They would even judge Moses, They So, what you have to do is to go to this would judge everybody as if they are the knowledge through believing in what they most intelligent and the most capable have said. Whatever Christ has said, you have to believe, whatever Mohammad has people. They will write books after books said, you have to believe, whatever Guru Nanak has said, you have to believe, whatever Gyandeva has said, you have to believe. Now you have to believe like that because you are not of that spiritual level. So accept it. Now do not try to analyse it. Everything you try to analyse and in that analysis you get lost. So once you are a realised soul of that level and then you grow into your fullness, what you call Sampuran, then only you will know whether whatever they have said is true or not and then you can find out. It is very easy, then, to know whatever is said is true or not. For Sahaja Yogis now against them disclosing as if they are those people who have said something, have said out of their mind or something. It is never accepted normally and if it is accepted they become absolutely fanatics. So, now according to Indian style of understanding is that first of all if a great Rishi or great Muni or a great saint has said something, then he has said it, while you have to just listen to that because you are not equally the same, Whatever he has said is his own experience, his own knowledge and you have no business to judge him or to say this is not true, that is not true. You accept it and once you get

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 Mar Apr. 1999 But from that Word comes, according to Indian Philosophy, another thing what we call as 'Bindu' or we can say Word it is very easy to find out if something is real or unreal, if it is truth or untruth, it is love or hatred. Only through vibrations becomes Naad, is a sound. And then it you can do. becomes the Bindu means one small dot, But going beyond that, I may say, and then from this dot all these five beyond that one has to know what are these vibrations and what are they made of. What is the subtle force which is elements start coming one after another. The first element that comes out is light, "Tej'. Light is the first element that behind these vibrations. We call it Parama Chaitanya, alright. Parama Chaitanya, so what. What happens to you when you get comes out. So the essence of the first element is light. We call it Tej, Tejas. It is parama Chaitanya, is something to be written, of course, in Sanskrit but we understood, the subtlety. should understand that how the light pervades Sahaja Yoga so much and you As I said, we are made of five see the light everywhere. So the first elements, alright? So when you get your element which is light and you can say in awakening, when the Kundalini reaches English the light's subtle thing is, we can Sahasrara and opens out your fontanelle say, enlightenment, you can say. But bone area, you become one with the enlightenment has another meaning. So Divine power. Then this Divine power itself starts flowing through you. A we can say it is Tej, Tej. For example a person who gets realisation has a face which is very radiant. So you can say the radiance. The radiance is the subtlety of the light. So this radiance starts showing connection is established. Now when it starts flowing through you, this Shakti starts flowing through you. Then what happens? The subtle part we should understand. The subtle part is like this- itself and with that radiance people get That these five elements, we are made impressed and they start thinking of, these vibrations gradually start something special about this personality breaking into the subtler form of which which has a radiance. Now you have seen they are made. So the first thing such a my photographs also wherever they are, person has, is the you see, as it is said many a times you find lots of light on me. that word is God, said also in the Bible, That is nothing but the light in me is giving on your face. Radiance starts expressing . the word is God. Now what is this Word? radiance because the light becomes Word is a silent, you can say, silent subtler. When the light becomes subtle in commandment We can call it like that. me, light is one of the elements. When it

 Mar- Apr. 1999 Volume : XI Issue 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze not it, to soften the face. But this is the becomes subtle then it gives radiance and water in us, gives us that luster, that nourishment to make our skin very soft so this is the subtle growth within you that takes place. Your faces also start shining. They too have radiance and they and that softness of the skin becomes very too have a kind of a different complexion, visible. This is the minimum of minimum, I would say. This radiance is to be I would say. But then a person who is a understood, is the subtle of the light of realised soul becomes very soft person, very delicate. When he talks to some which we are made, light in the gross body, in his voice there is warmth or I manner. should say there is where to have that Then after this from the light comes flow, watery flow and coolness of the water. So that is another subtle thing that should be expressed in your behaviour, the second thing, which we call as Vayu in Sanskrit, meaning the air. So the air that we have which is gross air, what is subtle of air is the cool breeze that you get. The cool breeze is the subtle of that air. So the subtle of what you understand as cool breeze is what we call vibrations, the subtle of that is air; which is a part on your skin, on your dealings with others, that you should be like the water, which is mobile, which is cooling, which is soothing, which is cleansing. So this also becomes a part and parcel of your being, once you become a realised soul. and parcel of our making. So this cool breeze is the second thing that you start With this water you have also another thing which we call it as Agni, means the fire. So you also have fire but it is a very silent fire. It does not burn anybody but it burns all the wrong things within you. Whatever wrong things you have it burns and it burns the wrong things in other people also. For example, a person comes getting subtler and subtler. When your growth takes place, all these subtle things start expressing themselves. It is not only that you get vibrations but you get the cool breeze and that is the subtler of air that has been. Then comes the Water. We are also with a great anger towards me. What happens with the fire that is there. Moreover, a made of water. What is the subtle of water is (Sometimes English language, you know, becomes little short ofexpressions) but they call it, I mean which makes the skin, hard skin soft. The skin becomes soft. This is another sign of a realised soul that this anger becomes cooler realised soul cannot get burnt, fire cannot burn, the burning cannot come to him. It is very important to understand. Also if you are doing something wrong, it may but if you are a good Sahaja that his, there is some cream they use, is burn you

 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 Mar Apr. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze this subtlety of the Mother Earth works. Mother Earth is the one who is giver of Yogi and I should say, perfect Sahaja Yogi, fire will never burn you. We have an example of Sita Ji that she went into the fire but nothing burnt. So this is what virtue to all these flowers and to all these trees and to all that. But it also plays a big part in us. It is not only the Mother one has to understand, understand that once you get to the subtleties of the fire. Earth that exists without our connection and we do not respect the Mother Earth. We have polluted it. We have done all kinds of things, we have removed the trees and we have made a mess out of So the fire and the water both of them become sort of Divine. For example, the water which you touch, water you drink, whatever, you put your hand in the water, the water becomes vibrated. Means What? The subtleties of the water comes in it, the coolness, curing power also her. But she is our Mother and so many subtle things of this Mother Earth come into us. One of them is gravity. A person becomes very attractive, not in the comes in that water. So when it becomes physical sense but in the spiritual sense. subtler, all these powers start showing Such a person attracts others. If'it attracts which you can see for yourself. You do them, they feel that something is special not have to experiment. about this person. This is one of the qualities of the Mother Earth. If she had Then lastly is the Mother Earth, It is most important. The Mother Earth. There is a photograph you might see which was taken in Russia in Dacha where the not kept us attracted we would have fallen out with her movement and also other qualities of the Mother Earth start manifesting within us. We become very, I Kundalini is in the Mother Earth. They have shown clearly. It is there and it is should say, extremely tolerant and patient. the Mother Earth which shows. For But if you are not tolerant, if you are hot example, I have seen flowers. If you keep tempered and all that, then Mother them in my room, they blossom. They can Earth's principle is not expressed in you. become very big like that, never people Look at the Mother Earth. How much have seen such big flowers, sometimes she tolerates our nonsense, how many they say. I am doing nothing I am just Wrong things we do against her, but still sitting down. What happens to the she tolerates. flowers? You see now there this principle of the Mother Earth works. It is a mother begin with. Upto a point, he tolerates. In Sri Ganesha's quality is to tolerate, to that gives you all the nourishment and the same way we too become extremely makes you grow healthy, and this is how tolerant, patient and forgiving., This is the

 Mar- Apr. 1999 Volume : XI Issue 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze minimum of minimum that should happen Yogis are still writing to me that my to all the Sahajayogis who have husband is fighting with me, my son is vibrations, I have told you all the things like this, my mother is like this. All the that are expressed in your vibrations. It it time, you see, letters after letters come is a thing to be understood that what you have become now is something very just see to your subtleties, work it out. to me. You are a Sahaja Yogi. Now you great, it has not happened to others, it They think I am here to solve their has not happened to somebody who is problems, their family problems, their jobs not being a Sahaja Yogi. You see the and all. I am not here for that. I am here people who go to Church or to Mosque to give you self realisațion and the or to Temple. See their faces. Look at understanding that whatever you have them. How do they look like? They have got, you must accept as a challenge, take not got any thing from the Temple, they it up as a challenge and you will be have not got any thing from the Mosque, amazed, how you will be helped and how they have not got any thing from any one you will get the results! of these places where they go to worship. Sahaja does not mean only that you So, that is artificial. That has become get spontaneous realization. It also means something, I should say, without any connection with the reality. Only after realisation you are connected with reality and you can get the understanding of all these subtleties working through you. that you get spontaneity. The whole nature gets spontaneity. All these subtle things that I have told you, they also get spontaneity and they work it out. Of course, there are Angels and there are Ganas who are helping you but you need Why I am telling you this, because I want you to know and recognize yourself, not worry about them just now. Main to understand what you are, what you thing is you must realise what you are, have got. Once you recognise yourself what have you got and how much you and understand yourself you can do a lot. have faced it, you have got it and how it First of all to say that I am a Sahaja Yogi has worked? I have seen every time I just itself, it should be very much with self have a little problem or something, confidence and as a self confident person immediately it works. It works in such should find out what have I done as quarters and in such people that I never Sahaja Yogi? What can I do as Sahaja expected. Everything works out but Yogi? Some Sahaja Yogis have done wonders. They have done such a lot of for your growth, for your understanding work of Sahaja Yoga, while some Sahaja that you are a Sahaja Yogi. You have whatever works out is for your good, is

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XI Issue: 3 & 4 Mar- Apr. 1999 entered into the Kingdom of God but this you have to develop. powers and you can do wonders. So I bless you all, please develop those subtle things within you. They are already there. You do not have to do anything Only understand and locate. Thank you very much. Also, introspection can tell you that you are working out all those things or not. If you take to introspection; you will be surprised to see, that you have these Shri Rama Navmi Puja (The text of the talk given by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi on the oceassion of a short puja performed at Noida House on April 05, 1998, Shalivahana Shaka 1920) A s compared to Maharashtra noon, like Shri Rama, in Chhindwara, Navratri of Chaitra month of Madhya Pradesh. Chhindwara is situated Shalivahana Shaka (Dynasty) in east-west and south-north directions from Pratipada to Navami is celebrated where two lines meet. This date of birth with more grandour in North India. In is as per calendar based on lunar months. Maharashtra the birth of Shri Krishna But as per the calendar based on solar (Shri Vitthala i.e. Shri Krishna as a King) months, Shri Mataji's birthday was due is celebrated with religious fervour as on the first day of the first month i.e. Gokulashtami' Shri Vitthala was the Chaitra month of Shalivahana Shaka eighth incarnation of Lord Vishnu. He 1845. In Maharashtra the first day of incarnated (was born) at 12:00 midnight Chaitra is known as Gudi Padwa. This Shri Rama, the seventh incarnation of happens to be the birthday of Shri Mataji Lord Vishnu, was born at 12:00 noon on as well as the day of coronation of King the ninth day of Chaitra month. This day Shalivahana. Now Shalivahana Shaka is called as Ram Navami. 1920 commences from March 28, 1998 Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi also as Chaitra Pratipada, the first day of the incarnated on March 21, 1923 at 12:00 first month.

 Mar- Apr. 1999 Volume : XI Issue 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze who stood on 'Dharma', intervened and Shri Ram was the ideal husband where as Shri Sitaji was an ideal wife and the Children born to them, known as Lav and averted the fight between the father and the sons. Kusha, were also the ideal sons. Shri Shri Rama in his own way, acted in Rama wanted to establish the high ideas life as if he were acting in a drama, to be emulated by humanity. Socrates, as you all know called him A Benevolent forgetting that he was a Divine King' incarnation. But later on, when he incarnated as lord Shri Krishna, he was alive of his powers and used them diplomatically and punished all the Rakshasas one by one. Actually all the events that occurred in the life span of Shri Rama like Ahilaya Uddhar', "Moksha' to (Adiwasi woman Shabri), Killing of Bali, who was the king of monkeys, who was doing Adharma, Shri Rama was also a great Devi as well as the killing of Ravana because Bhakta i.e. devotee of Shakti. Before he kidnapped Shri Sitaji, to establish the attacking Sri Lanka he performed Devi rule of 'Dharma'. Actually, Shri Rama Puja for which he needed a Brahmin for was 'Dharmatita i.e. Beyond Dharma. But conducting various rites (sanctified acts) strictly speaking, Dharma was in born in to please the Devi. He then sent for him i.e. he should be called Ravana the king of Sri Lanka, who was a 'Dharmasthita' ( aa He was the Brahmin and Devi Bhakta. He readily responded and helped Shri Rama in performing the puja of the Devi with all embodiment of Dharma. To uphold the maryadas of the throne he renounced Shri Sitaji (who was very nine types of rites. Had Shri Rama been of a cunning dear to him), simply because people doubted her despite her crossing the fire disposition, he could have killed Shri (Agnipariksha). Shri Sitaji herself also left Shri Rama, in a way in the end after Maryada Purshottama' (A righteous bringing up her children nicely, who had acquired all Vidyas and had mastered the irresponsible act. They were enemies but art of Archery, so much so that they while performing the puja the enemity defeated their own uncle Shri Laxmana was completely forgotten. and ultimately Shri Rama had to come to fight with them to free the horse of disciple) Shri Hanumana was an ideal 'Ashwamedh Yaganya' But Shri Sitaji disciple to be emulated by all the Sahaja Ravana then and there but he was a person). He did not do such a mean and Even his sevaka (most obedient

 Mar - Apr. 1999 10 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze taken in Bombay. Yogis. He was of great powers. He is an innocent personality of a very high order, always keen to perform the task set out for him by Shri Rama. Later on also He appeared during the incarnation of Shri Vishnu as Shri Krishna and used to ride So character of all these great personalities are to be emulated by all Sahaja Yogis in their life styles to achieve their ascent in Sahaja Yoga. May all of you follow such great characters and be successful in achieving the high ideals of on the top of the chariot of Shri Krishna. He is known as 'Chiranjeev', an eternal human behaviour. You should bestow being, one of the seven eternal personalities. He also comes and helps me and performs all the tasks assigned to him. He is always present in all my pujas and on one occasion he had been visible in love and compassion on each other and on the people you come across in your lives and become ideal Sahaja Yogi brothers and sisters. May God bless you all with eternal blessings. vibratory form, in one of the photographs

 11 Mar- Apr. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume :XI issue : 3 & 4 Christmas Puja-Ganapatipule 25-12-98 Talk by Her Holiness Mata Ji Shri Nirmala Devi (Blessing of Thoughtlessness) I have read a book about Him saying irst I will speak in English language F and then in Hindi. Today, long that he came to Kashmir where he met time back, Christ was born You one of my forefathers Shalivahana. Its all know the story of his birth and of all very interesting because it is all in Sanskrit and the writer probably did not know Sanskrit. So he has given everything in He is the one who has given us a model Sanskrit language which is not very of Sahajayoga. For he did not live for congenial, 1 am sure, to the Western himself, in no way, but he lived för öthers, neople. Thank God he did not know working out the Agya Chakra. He may English otherwise it would have been very be Divine, He may be very powerful but dangerous. It is, written in that, that He the sufferings he had to go through this World is so cruel that they do not asked Christ; Why have you come to understand spirituality, they do not India' ? So He said, "This is my country, Lunderstand the spiritual greatrness. Not that is why I have come here where only that but there are many factors which people respect spirituality. But I live attack spirituality. They have always done it. Every saint has suffered a lot but, I think among people who do not understand spirituality at all," His conversation with Christ has suffered the most. him is very very interesting because As you know, He was endowed with Shalivahana said that there is more reason all the powers of Sri Ganesha as He is the that you should go back to your country reincarnation of Sri Ganesha, The first of and teach them Nirmal Tatwam i.e. the them was his Innocence. He was the Principle of Purification. He went back Eternal Child, we should say That he After 3 and half years, He was crucified. could not understand the cruelty and I personally think that the big difference between the Western execution hypocrisy of this stupid World. Still, if you understand, what can you do about it? But with great courage, he took birth in the country where people had no idea of spirituality. and the Indian is that, in the West, killing is a very great profession. On the slightest pretext they kill people. Anybody who is a saint was killed or they called him a mad

 - Apr. 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 Mar 12 The Divine Cool Breeze hospitals, no doctors. So, his attention was drawn to people who were suffering physically. Also mentally he tried to prepare them. There are so many beautiful cap. This is the best way to avoid spirituality. While in India if a saint says anything then he is not challenged. Never, But they believe in it because he is a saint, he is a much higher personality than we are. Though there were very nasty people around and they tortured them but as a whole the public, the people respected them. If there are false Gurus normally sermons on the mount. In a way, that time, people were not so materialistic. So they listened to him. You cannot say how many understood? It is very important that if you are not a realised soul then it is difficult to they do not stay in this country because they know that they will be found out. understand spirituality. The one who is Also, they are so money oriented that they go to America or to some foreign country and settle down there to make money. talking about spirituality and the one who is listening to it, both of them have to have This is one of the science, one should say. minimum of realisation. So from his beautiful life that I have seen, we have to learn that unless and until we are realised This may be one of the reasons why Christ was born in a very very ordinary family. He had no proper bed to sleep as souls, we will be torturing the spirit of Christ. We have seen its happening. Al those who talk of Christ, He has said it a child also. It is all described where He slept, how His Mother lived in a place very clearly- You will be calling me where there were cows and cows. It was Christ- Christ, I won't recognize you. to show that spirituality does not need Very clearly he has said it. I do not know any luxury, does not need any pomp and why they did not remove it from the Bible! show. It is a power within, it is a glow It means those who will talk and preach and the light within which shows and dress up to show off that they are automatically. You do not have to do spiritual in the name of Christ, He will not recognize them. It is as simple as that. not have any sense of money and other And this time now when it is the last judgement, He is going to judge the whole World on the basis of spirituality which anything to show it. Such a person does things as possessions. He was bothered about people who means vibrations. were suffering physically, even the lepers and he tried to cure them. He tried to help His judgement has already started. I have seen it. You can see, in so many countries things are just disappearing. All so many people who were sick physically because at that time there were no

 Mar- Apr. 1999 13 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze treasure of this countries spirituality. their ego, all their aggressiveness, all their cruelties are being challenged. Those who did wrong in the War also are taken to task. So, in the history also those who Instead of taking to spirituality, where are they going? have done wrong to any community, to They may not be Christians but they respect Christ. They respect Bible. I must tell you, it is a fact. People do not know. They are not Christians means in the sense that they are not baptised but they respect because they understand that there was so much of spirituality about Christ. He any people, they all will be taken to task. They had no business to be aggressive on people and to torture them. This is what is Sri Ganesha's principle acting through Sahajayoga. Christ did not say that but He did say that there will be the last judgement. was the personification of spirituality. On one side He was very kind and That is the beauty of Indians that if compassionate, on the other side, He was somebody is a Hindu or a Muslim, makes really Sri Ganesha because He took a no difference. There were many Muslims who were saints and Sufis in India. They are all respected by everyone whether they are Muslims or Hindus. So for Christ hunter to hit the people who were selling things in the temple. You cannot have business in the name of religion. What a big thing it is to understand! But the Christians did not follow that. They did not. I do not know where have they gone. no body has any objection at all. On the contrary you saw yesterday how they were all happy, because they are realised souls, but even if they are not, in this country Christ is very much respected. They cannot understand. How can they As we have Mahatma Gandhi who talked of spirituality and nothing else, Adhyatam all the time, but his successors scrutinize the life of Christ ? How can they judge him and how can they make vulgar films about him? This they can not who came, put Him somewhere with his spirituality and started a new world, new bear because the respect that they have for spirituality exists very much, more ideas and a new style of life. Those who are supposed to be his followers are now than it exists outside because in the name wanting to have many pubs and also all kinds of things. Can you imagine ? This Congress was started by Mahatma Gandhi and the Congress walas are all of Christ people have done such a lot of wrong. Such a lot of killings have been done. All kinds of wrong things have been accepted. With all this one does not understand how they have judged Christ. doing all this. Where are they going to lead? The beauty of this country is, the

 Volume : XI Issue 3 & 4 14 Mar Apr. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze For example, what I saw in England, I I was shocked that if some body dies, they know what holiness is. Now of course, they are becoming very modern and Americanised but still they know what is drink. If somebody is born, they drink. Drinking is the only way they have relationships. How can you drink? I asked them. He said, "Why?" Christ created wine. I said, when? In a wedding. I said, "In a Wedding"? That was not wine. That wrong, what should not be done. With Sahaja Yoga, now, I am very happy to say that the foreign Sahajayogis also have become very beautiful. I am surprised because in their culture there is no spirituality, but I do not know how was just the juice of grapes, the grapes that they grew there. We called it Drakshas in our language. How can that they all left all that nonsense and have come out like lotuses beautifully with such beautiful fragrance of spirituality. This is something a miracle. Everybody be wine? It has to be first fermented. It has to be rotten. How can that be? So this is the biggest Dharma to drink. says, Mother, we cannot believe it. How could that have happened ? How could But in India we know, though no body has said anything against drinking, but we know that drinking is a sinful thing. You see it every day. Everybody knows that if you drink you become absolutely out of your mind. There is nothing to be said on a religious platform but everybody knows what drinking is. Not that people abroad you manage this ? I would say that it is the blessing of Christ. They saw how people are working out in the name of Christ in a very degraded manner and they developed a kind of an awareness that definitely something wrong with this. This is not Christ. This is not His holy life they do not know. They also know but are depicting. It is something else and that is how I think in the West there is a greater somehow it has become a fashion. Even in our country it has now been introduced. I do not know how after independence people have started drinking! In every party they drink, also in the name of Christ on Christmas day. It is such an insult to his beautiful holy life. So when they came on this earth perhaps all their powers of urge, greater ascending-force. Yesterday, somebody came and told me, Mother there is no collective meditation. I was very happy to hear it. What is most important is meditation in Sahajayoga, no doubt about it. But the holiness were destroyed. The very good thing about Indians is that atleast they foreigners do meditation much more than Indians do. Very surprising and foreign men and women are very highly equipped, I must say, as far as spirituality is respect. They respect a holy place. That is something good about them and they

 Mar- Apr. 1999 Volume XI Issue : 3 & 4 15 The Divine Cool Breeze Now we have people here who are concerned, especially Russians. I was surprised that in America, they told me, Mother, these Americans are not interested in spirituality but still their one leg is in the water, where age old problems Sahajayogis. I said, "Why? They do not still exist. And this is the ruin of our have that respect for you. They do not country. We cannot combine together. We meditate, Those who do not meditate are cannot be friends with each other: Of course, not in Sahajayoga, I must say, it they made all the Americans to meditate: has been solved very well. But if you see, I do not know why in this Eastern block, even at the time of Christ, He had people, particularly (Bulgarians) problems with his disciples, especially Russians, Romanians, how they have something happened with Peter and he is taken to Sahajayoga so much! Of course the one who, say, satan reacted in them they had the curse of communism on because I think people fall into the group them. May be that they felt that they have of Satanic forces and he said that he missed something in life and they went removed the Satanic Devils from many deep down into themselves and that is people and put them in the pigs. It is true. how they have achieved it. But I have to There is a Satanic force which is working very strong. The more we develop security of spirituality the more they will not Sahajayogis. I said, "I agree." and tell Indians that they have to meditate. Indians have one or two very bad qualities and one of them is groupism. For develop. example if they are Brahmins, they will sit together, if they are Kayasthas, they in the West and in a different form in the will sit together If they are Banias, they East but I would like to tell them to be will sit together If that is not so then by careful, how to find out the Satanic another name they will group together. Forces in the West? You may not be This is the worst curse of my country, affected by that because you are realised because once you start grouping together, souls but you will have to fight it. You you can never see the good of others and will have to fight it. For example, you can never see the bad of yourself racialism. These grouping together can bring a lot of problems in this country The Satanic force is in a different form Racialism is still very powerful, very very powerful and you have to fight racialism through marrying people who belong to other races. But still I find it difficult to marry a black person to a white At the time of Christ they had very different types of people. Either they were interested in spirituality or they were not.

 Mar - Apr. 1999 16 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze person. It is an impossible situation. If I immorality. Immorality is so much try that I do not know what happens. accepted in the West. All kinds of immoral Once we had such a marriage, I must tell behaviour is there in that country. Like you, and a white lady, French lady was they say that all these immoral people vote married to a blackman. Instead of this for somebody, he becomes the President French Lady dominating, this black man dominated. So, I was quite surprised, you matter. All kinds of immorality is allowed. know, how could that be. So the reason of America. That is alright, does not But that is absolutely against Christ. was, I think, he was taking the revenge, Absolutely. People do not understand that may be the respite. So first of all immorality will lead them to a kingdom tremendous love and affection has to which, I do not know what to callI, grow between the people. This colour is so skin deep, it has nothing to do with the love inside, nothing. It is so skin deep. Thank God in our country you can have a wife who will be very dark and the because it is even worst than animal kingdom! And they are so immoral that they listen to people like Froud as if they have no brains. They have no spirit to take note of such a man. Only after husband will be very fair or vi-ce ver-sa Sahajayoga, model of Christ life you can but they never look at that from that have. Whatever is passed is over and angle. 1 do not think that this exists in finished. Today, now you are realised souls and morality is your strength. Forget this country, but we have another kind, you see, just it is a typical human problem that he discriminates through ego which, I must say, Christ has tried to fight your about the past and, I am sure, you can get many more people under the banner of Sahaja Yoga, if you lead a very very moral life. ego. He was born in a very humble family and He was not a white skinned man. No. At the same time, another very bad In your language he was brown but in Indian language He was black. When it enemy we have is our Anger. So they are very proud. They will say, I will now get angry, you know, I am very angry. They are not ashamed about it and they go on comes to spirituality, you just see the enlightened one. You do not see what colour they have of the skin. It is very sayıng that I am very angry as if it is not very superficial but this is one of the enemies of the Western life, I think, which wrong to say I am very angry'. And they say, I hate you. I mean, imagine any Indian language if they use this word it would be meaning I am committing sin. So, all this aggressiveness comes from anger. If must be found. Materialism is another one but the worst of all which is agaist Christ, is

 Mar- Apr. 1999 17 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze somebody has to be angry, he should be angry with himself. Best is to get rid of can also use our fingers to express ourselves, our hands to communicate, But to communicate vibrations, you have to anger. You can pull your hair, you can bite yourself, you can use your pillow to have vibrations, otherwise you cannot hit yourself. That may be the best way of feel another one. If you are at the Agya level, means you are mental, absolutely mental. Then your vibrations also are taking out your anger. But see for what are you angry. Sometime it is absolutely useless, sometimes it has no meaning, sometimes, it is absolutely maddening, stupid. But as long as you stop saying 'I am very angry', that is it. That is the time that you should know that you are falling down completely. dwindling in the sense that you do not know what really they are saying. You canot judge your vibrations because these vibrations are mental. They will say, "Mother, we asked the vibrations." I said, "Really?". But you do not have any vibrations; how can you ask the vibrations; Its very common thing, we asked the vibrations. We found from the vibrations. It is not possible because you are just mental. So Christ did not talk of all the subtle things I have been talking to you because that was left to me. Without realisation how can you talk about subtler things. You cannot. Now what Christ has done is to put Last time I told you about the vibrations. What is it, what does it stand you away from the mental level. That is the most difficult. I am surprised those who follow Christianity have the worst mental possession. They are mentally (Tejas), of water (Jal) and Prithvi, Agni. absolutely like, I do not know what to But I did not tell you of one, very special tell, like the fog of Delhi. We read like one, which is, in English language you mad, we listen to people like mad, we like call it, Ether. But Ether is the energy those who give us feed for our mental which is managed by another Tanmatra, brain. They are so mental, so we call it Akash. It is specially today, argumentative, things go up in their because it is Christ who has sacrificed his intelligence that you have to just say, for and how you get the subtle energy which we call as 'Tanmatra', of our light life to open our Agya Chakra, that we have reached that state of Akash. Without "alright, Namaskar." You cannot fight their mental attitude. That is why Christ him it would not have been possible. We is to be worshipped by people who are can have general communication, like we so very mental; and this mental nonsense can talk to people, we can say things, we has given such a sense of superiority to

 18 Mar Apr. 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze you become absolutely shocked and stunned. So the best thing for all of you people. Whatever we do, what is wrong, what is wrong? They cannot correct is to become thoughtless. That is the themselves because until and unless you cross his limit of mental being, you cannot see yourself, you cannot introspect. You cannot see yourself. You will see others. These Sahaja Yogis are like this, Sahajayoga is like that, all kinds of things. blessings of Christ. That is what He worked it out for you and, I am sure, if you want to work it out then do not pay attention to others. Do not react, just do not react. Everything they will see they will react. What is the need? What is the But you cannot see yourself because the whole thing is mental. This mental attitude should be completely curbed use? What are you going to do with that reaction? This reaction creates nothing but ripples of thoughts in your mind, I have told you hundreds of times. Now you through the help of our Lord Jesus Christ. But He is also mental, in your brains. Christ is also mental. Now what to do ? have to become absolutely thoughtless, after this Puja. If that happens, I think The one who broke the mental attitude is we have achieved a lot. also a mental. You have made him into That is the biggest blessings Christ has mental, like a statue of stone. So firstly we have to tell ourselves, now do not given you which you should really enjoy. Then only this Akash Tatva in you will work. And how it works through your think, do not think, do not think, do not think, four times, and then you can rise above. This is very importamt. attention. It works with me as you know. With my attention I work out many In meditation you have to go beyond things. How? Just my attention has the mind and thanks to Christ that he is become thoughtless, just thoughtless. It sitting at the Agya to finish off this goes, wherever it goes it works, but if nonsense of mental being. I think people you put your attention for thought all the should stop reading also, perhaps, may time, for thinking, then it does not do the be. Even my lecture becomes mental. work which it is supposed to do What to do? I mean every thing that goes Attention works marvellously, if you are into their head becomes mental, thoughtless, otherwise it does not. So it somehow, and then they ask me has to rise from your ownself than from questions, Mother, did you say this way? others, to the higher level of humanity, I said, I said it to make you thoughtless, where you are in communication with the just to stun you. I did not say this to sit sky which we can call it as the Tanmatra down and analyse. No. No. I said this that or the Essential or the essence of Ether.

 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 19 Mar- Apr. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze pay attention; you can pay attention and you can work it out. In this attention you do not feel what you have got, what you are standing, what you are wearing, what others are doing. No, nothing. Now, you are one with yourself and it is a life full of With Ether you can have television, you can have telephone. It is miracle otherwise. But with this Tanmatra, sitting down here you can do the job. It works. Just attention works. I know that. You also know very well. You do not have to ask me to put the attention. You just put humour, so much of humour, so much of joy, so much of happiness that you do not care for anything that normally people the attention, it will work. The very important thing that you have got, I think that is the first thing, once care for. So as it is, now Sahaja Yoga has worked in so many countries and I am so very proud of you, very proud, and now it is also going to African countries. It's you have no problem, but we start manifesting from the earth element and then from the Agni element and then from the Jala (water) element and then we come to Tejas and the face starts shining. very great satisfaction for me, and you all can do it. You all can work it out. Only But lastly we get this thoughtless awareness by which our attention is thing become thoughtlessly aware. As the blessings of Christ, if it works, you will be absolutely enjoying yourself. absolutely free to do some special work. But if you are all the time thinking, then this poor attention is so busy, so very busy. May God Bless You. You do not have to ask me, Mother please

 Volume : XI Issue 3 & 4 Mar - Apr. 1999 20 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI KRISHNA PUJA Discourse (Pravachana) by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Cabella 16-8-1998 Today we are going to have Shri Krishna Puja. It is a very important thing about the power of Shri Krishna that gives colour is not suited for Krishna Puja. They should have had another colour for this Krishna Puja So, this goes on from one you a witness state. This is very important also because in these days of Kali Yuga and complete confusion of value system, all kinds of turmoil makes very complex conditions to exist The state of witnessing is only possible through meditation to reach the stage of thoughtless awareness Its combined together. to another, to another, but that means this conditioning is built up within us. All our problems of our conditioning are really horrible. For example, racialism. We have racialism; in America it is very much more, you can feel it, though they don't say. But if you go, say, from Italy youI feel it. If you go from India also you can feel it. Now, why this racialism? What is the reason? Why do we react to this kind of horrible hatred for another community or another colour, which is only skin deep. Now, with rationality you might be able our ego or through our conditioning, to explain 0 God! these people, they are otherwise there is no way to react. absolutely useless or they have come to Anything, now for example, there is a our country and are just troubling us. All beautiful carpet here. As soon as I look these conditionings are there, but if you at it, if I use my ego, I will start thinking see when they talk of immigrants, the now, from where did they get it? How Americans must know that they are much they paid for it ? This is the first immigrants, all of them. America never was their country and they threw away with it. Anger can come in. Why did they all the Red Indians, took away their land bring such a nice earpet ? What was the and very nicely they are the owners of need to put it here? Goes on like that, one America. But the reaction is for those after another. Now, in my conditionings who are not of white complexion, they are all to be condemned, tortured Now, Now, the witness state is such a state where you just do not react. If you react then the problem starts. It's very simple thing to understand that we react through reaction, Then you can go even further if I see these things I would say that this

 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 21 The Divine Cool Breeze Mar- Apr. 1999 So, this kind of conditioning is like a if they are by nature violent then also this conditioning of violence comes in. Then plague and moves from one country to they start killing each other. They have another country where some people think killed ruthlessly so many people thinking they are superior and make people look that they have a right to go into any inferior and the people also are there who country and kill everyone and take the accept these kind of situations, accept this land, that is not their own. Actually land kind of a position, where they are doesn't belong to anybody as such, but supposed to be equal. I would say take nobody has right to go and occupy it and throw away the people who do not belong been celebrated by Americans and to that country. Yesterday, was the the example of America, because this has because Krishna is the ruler, Krishna is independence day of India and I have seen the ruler of America. He himself was a the flag going up, our national flag and dark person, himself was on the black the British flag going down. All that has side. In the same country, where he rules, happened after so much of struggle, so the another great thing is that they don't much of sufferings of the people because realize that if all the black or the Asians they came to India, landed nicely there get out of that country now, I don't know, and became the masters. So, this is also a what will happen to them? All their sports kind of a conditioning that comes in a collective way, that you go into anybody's Then if you want to also see the music, country, throw away the people from because these black people, though they there or sort of occupy that place and have black colour, which is alright, as you become the masters. It's like going into have white, they have black colour, but somebody's house, that belongs to they have a voicê which the white people somebody, and throw away the people don't have. They can sing so well that no who are inside and nicely settle there as white people can compete with them, if the owners and the masters because they the full justice is done to the colour. Now, have better intelligence, perhaps the if you take out the Asians all doctors, all cunningness is more in them. With that nurses, all architects, all accountants, all cunnningness if the white people think of them will disappear. Now, what will they can rule the black people then it is remain? are managed by the blacks. If you want to see any American sport, 99% are black. not where you can develop a witness state You have to understand that colour has [can you take the baby out, why is she crying, must be thirsty. Alright] nothing to do, nothing to do with your intelligence, with your value system, with

 Mar - Apr. 1999 Volume: XI Issue 3 & 4 22 The Divine Cool Breeze your spirit. We are here to achieve our spirituality. The spirit doesn't understand colour because it is so superficial and it very sinful to do that. Even the slightest violence is sinful and this kind of a violence in the eyes of Shri Krishna is absolutely to be punished very well. Now, is so very cruel to condemn someone for this comes through ego. You think because you belong to one clan, another clan you can kill or something like that, a the colour. Same now is happening as the reaction. Every action has a reaction. So what happens is that you find the blacks are reacting. They are reacting and their funny idea comes in into human mind and reaction can be very dangerous. Every you decide that you have a right to kill day I read their reactions are coming up another person. One may say this comes so badly, not only in America, but all over from hatred but hatred is an outcome of they are now thinking they must rise and ego. When the ego starts acting, it collects oppose this domination. But in their own all these things like hatred, also country where they have people of possessiveness, anger, violence. All these different colours, little variation I think, start coming out of the ego which actually blinds the person. You become blind to they are all black people but little variation the fact that there is no need to have violence, no need to hate someone, no need to kill anyone because of this ego may be, so they form groups and they start cutting each other's throats. I have seen on the television how ruthlessly they kill! that is there. Now, one may say Mother how does this ego build up in everyone? I don't know what the difference of colour is, but somehow they have formed Of course, mostly it is due to reactions, also it is due to the conditionings. If the groups and this group will go and kill that and that group will come and kill this. child is told from the childhood that you should hate these people, they are to be It's not like Kaurava and Pandva, it's not two types of people, absolutely opposite, it's not that the negative and the positive is there, it's not. They are all negative whether they are white or black and they start quarrelling and fighting with each other. Now this violence is growing so much, I think, violence is the only weapon hated, they are wrong people, they are bad people, they just start doing that. When they grow up they start showing that hatred is now like a cactus, growing very big and is killing others. There's no justification for this kind of a behaviour by human beings. If they are human beings they have to have human qualities and that is possible only if he learns how to just witness and not they use now to express themselves. You see here something happens somewhere there you find they explode bombs and kill so many innocent people. It's very-

 23 Volume XI Issue : 3& 4 Mar- Apr. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze to react. For example, you see two cocks you can do it. Something wonderful. 1 are fighting, you enjoy that Two cocks remember I was not very old at that time are fighting, people are enjoying One but we were living in a house very close cock dies, they are very happy as if one to the secretariat, where they had a strike which died had killed his parents or did and they were asking for separate ! Mahasrashtra or something. So, the police was standing there and by the order of the Chief Minister they were shooting at every one who was coming. Anyone who passed through that road, they were shooting they were enjoying a shooting game, all of them. I saw this and I just couldn't bear it. I just went down, went something like that Very surprising Now is Spain. even now, there are this bull fights going on. Every year six bull fights, every year, and the hall contains more than ten times we have here, and is always full and now their women have taken to fight the bulls. Now, if the bull is not killed they allow the bulls to go on the street and kill people. This kind of a down and asked the police to stop it. They violent enjoynent is still lingering into the stopped, you will be amazed, they minds of the people. It is so sad to see stopped. Then I carried those people who people who are now talking of humanity. were wounded, up in my house, took out talking of peace, talking of joy, are still their bullets and all that, called the enjoying these violent acts. Either they ambulance and saved them. But for that are doing or they want to watch. So, then you go to these films and things that are being created of a horrible violence and people enjoy it Enjoy such films and such films are again created, one thing was there, I was in a state of witnessing, where you become fearless. There is no fear at all once you learn how to have the state of witnessing, because when you are not witnessing you get disturb, you get upset, you get you may join also this wrong type. But if you are in a state of witnessing, that itself is a power and that witnessing state helps excited, Now, if you really become a witness state, if you are in a witness state then what will happen ? If you watch any such things that are happening, it will subside. If you are in a witness state and if that level then no accident will take place in you to win over so many difficulties of other people. your side. Even if there's an accident then you can save the person, you can help the person very actively That's in a very small scale, but even in a very large scale There's a Chinese story about a saint. So, one king brought his cock to him and said you train my cock in such a way that he should win. He said, alright. So he kept

 Mar - Apr. 1999 24 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze the cock of the king for one month and criticise then it will go on like this and it when the show started, different cocks will never stop. It's not that. Once you came from different places and they all watch the thing yourself, only just watch, started fighting. This cock just stood up your attention itself is enlightened now. and was watching, just watching and With that enlightened attention you can other cocks got such a fright! They just watch and stop the nonsense that is couldn't understand how this fellow is not there. But we are always conscious that disturbed! He is just watching, he is we are something great and we have to standing, he is doing nothing. So they all do this, we have to do that. Under these disappeared from the arena and he was circumstances what happens is that you declared as the successful one. So, this is become another problem; because what the best way to bring nonviolence. In can you do? You can't do anything but violent places you go and stand steadily. what you can do is to watch. By watching face it, all the things that are happening and by just seeing things as they are you and that witness state acts, acts and stops really develop a very different state of that kind of a violence that is going on. being. Firstly all such people who are just But witness state is not a mental state, it is a state of a spiritual ascent where witness, what happens to them is very you become a witness. Best way to interesting that their memory loss is much practice witness state is not to criticise less because whatever they see becomes like a picture to them, like we can say, any one, not to criticise. I have seen people who are all the time criticising they can tell you even the colour, the others. They can not criticise themselves folding, everything. Whatever they see is so they start criticising others. So much so much in their mind like a photo and so, that they don't even see what's wrong they can tell you exactly what they have with them. They don't even say what seen and your memory is not lost. While wrong they have done to others because if you react on to everything, your they think they have a right to criticise memory becomes horrible. People are so others and they enjoy this criticism very much habituated with reacting, like I well. Actually, there's nothing to be know of one gentleman, he had a habit of criticised. You just watch and see for reacting and I was going with him in the yourself. That's all is your right. You have no right to criticise anyone or anything. advertisement, every name of every shop, But some people think, if you do not car. So, he was reading every every thing, every person. He was just

 Volume: XI issue 3 & 4 Mar- Apr. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 25 if they go away from Germany they will prosper again, so, why not kill them I telling me what is that, what is that, this. that I was wondering, look at this gentle man, he is talking so much, what will mean to such an extent that you can not happen to him? But ultimately I found that all such people, who are all the time reacting, actually have senile decay or may be they become forgetful, very forgetful. But this is not the only loss we have with this kind of a people. When they even see much tilms, you can not see anything ofthat nature that Hitler did But he did it, and people who followed him also did it, without feeling any hitch as if it was a matter of great pleasure or a joy or may be it's a duty. How could they get duty bound to such a horrible thing like are formed into a collective they can be very dangerouus because with that kind of killing thousands and thousands of Jews! a nature they have to do something. They What Jews had done to them, they could must do something because after all they have corrected it Why did they indulge are combined together for a purpose, for, into such kind of violence ? And they we can say. some reactions which all of wanted to finish all the Jews of the world. them have built up. In small things, in big It can be very-very dangerous because things you will find people do like that once you start loosing your witness state, and some people who are very much, very you can fall into negative collectivity. Thus much developed in this kind of behaviour this negative collectivity acts, acts in such can collect lots of people and do any a bad manner that all the conflicts of the amount of harm to others. I would get world, all the problems of the world the picture of Hitler. For nine years this perhaps, are related with this fellow was watching what wrongs Jews are doing. He wouldn't watch what So, as Sahaja Yogis, what should we Germans are doing? What wrong they are do ? We should not react, we should not doing to the society? At that time society react. If you see something wrong. also was very bad because they were alright, you meditate on that, you having all kinds of licentiousness. Now meditate. If you find anything wrong he was noting down these Jews are like happening, alright, you meditate on that. this, they do this, they take money, they If somebody is unkind to you, at that lend money, all kinds of things he got into moment do not react. Afterwards when his head. As a result of that he built up a that person is quietened you tell him or reaction into him that we must somehow tell her because at that time he is so volatile or she is volatile, if you tell, nothing will happen. Gradually I don't say or other see that these people go away from Germany. But then he thought even

 Mar 26 Volume XI Issue : 3 & 4 Apr. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze her eight children just to get sympathy always you can win over such people, but gradually you may be able to make them understand what is wrong. It's wrong to do things which they have been doing. In a way you see the reaction to anything from others. You think of such horrible things people are doing. Now, if you want others to have reaction, you do this, that they want which is stupid also can be very self others to see you, to react, to I don't destroying. Like some people have built in reactions, like you have seen this Mr. Clinton behaving. I mean you can't know, to give you importance, you can say. But what's the use of such an empty understand a man of his stature, of his importance. But people are seeking and it is a very common disease of modern level should have such reactions. But life. All the time, how you should look, must be from his childhood or I don't how you should appear, how you should know how he built it up. Now, he is in trouble. Very shameful. This also is' 1 walk, everything is so stupid! And think perhaps., comes from a very great indulgence into reactions. Why should you react to a woman, I can't understand, very different. None of them are copies, or to a man ? And this is one of the biggest no doubt. Even in the nature you find problems of today's culture specially in leaves of trees, they are so unique you all the developed countries, that all the time men are looking at women, women So, that's how human beings are created, are looking at men. For what ? Perhaps, differently. They are made like that. One they look at women because they want wastage of energy. God has created human beings very can not match them with another leave. has to accept, whatever you are is alright. to see how many women are looking at Why do you want to look like another them or they look at men, perhaps, may person? This kind of reaction is extremely be that how many men, are looking at stupid, I think, that we are spoiling our them. Why ? Why is this happening energy and life for something absolutely because they have some inferiority worthless. Now, you being Sahaja Yogis, complex in them or that they want to your worth is great. You have come here attract the attention of everyone. I mean to emancipate human beings from these horrible things are done these days to silly ideas and foolish ways, the way people are behaving. I don't know whom attract the attention of others, to get the sympathy of others. I mean of the level of your awareness, where it goes, you will be amazed! Like, they say one lady killed to pray but suddenly our attention has become very diversified. Our reactions have become very-very funny. One

 e 3 & 4 27 Mar- Apr. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume XI issue doesn't know why people react like that start from it. When you see yourself, you and then why do we worry about what will be amazed, how admiring you are! people react. All these things are not only How happy you are! Now, if you go on individual level but also on a collective beyond that, a little more, then you don't level. As a result, you see new kind of think of both these things. You just value system has been created Now, for become thoughtless and you just stand a Mother, say for example, she will boast up as a person who is respected, whose of how many men are running after her company is wanted, who is loved and who or she would think she is a great actress. I don't know what they think of towhat people react, what they say about themselves and the way they talk about yon, what they think ahout you? You themselves is something surprising. If she should just introspect and see for is a Mother, she has to be a good Mother yourself. After sometime you don't need is cared for So, one should not worry as even introspection. It is a kind of state I'm talking about where Shri Krishna told Arjuna that I will not fight so, in between me and the army-my army-you have to select So, Kaurava said we will take your and she has to look like a Mother But they are so much engrossed or they are so much standing on the basis that they have to be extremely attractive, they have to be the queens or I don't know what. What a position they want to have! Same with the men See, if you have something within you, if there is any quality within you, if there is anything that can qualify you as a great man, it will be showing. You don't have to advertise, you don't army, you give us your army and we will strengthen our army but Arjuna said I don't want army, I want you. You don't want to fight, it's alright because though he will be there in a witness state only, he won't be fighting, but his power will act He doesn't have to fight, he doesn't have to do anything, but his own power which is outwardly silent, but will act and that is how we will win the war. have to pamper it, nothing, it will be showing, So, that indifference if you have towards public opinion I think you can achieve a lot. Most of the frustrations will disappear So, this power of witnessing you all should develop Try to develop it that when you are reacting, stop reaction, stop reaction about everything You will be In Sahaja Yoga also I have seen people who want to show off a lot. I know who does that But they should know that once you do not react to outside you start reacting to inside and introspection will amazed, you will find yourselfa very-very powerful persön in the sense you will have

 28 XI 1Issue 3 & 4 Apr. 1999 Mar Volume The Divine Cool Breeze no ambitions, you will have no desires, that you are in that great state of you will have no special fondness or witnessing. But if you are very ambitious, anything but just you are witnessing the even in Sahaja Yoga I have known people drama. It's very interesting to witness also who are very ambitious, they want to because then you understand the humour become leaders. I don't know what else! behind everything, you understand the Actually, it's all a myth, all mythical things stupidity behind everything, you they want to get to and worry their heads understand also how people have been about mythical things. Once you learn so violent and you just laugh at it. You how to witness, you will know the myth, do not get upset, excited, nothing. Just you will know the absurdity, you will laugh at it. After sometime you will be know the maya. So, to overcome the amazed your witness state will increase problems of personality the best thing is and when in the collective, all of you, have to witness. Practice witnessing that witness state you can do wonders everything, before talking, practice without doing anything, without saying witnessing, before giving any comments, anything, without acting. Only your just start witnessing. It's a very-very presence itself can work it out. I don't satisfying attitude. say that it will have effect on everyone; In Shri Krishna's life, the greatest no, can't say, but most of the people. Any power was that he was a witnessing personality; without doing anything, without taking a sword in his hand, without talking about fighting, he is the person who is in that state, he is the one who brings peace, he brings joy. I will tell you the story of a Sahaja Yogi one who has helped Pandvas to win the who was going to another island, he was living in an island, for Sahaja Yoga work and he found the whole sky was covered with very black clouds, thundering clouds. So, he just looked at them like this and he said, "wait till I come back. war. Not only this, but through his Gita he has tried to tell us what we have to do to win the war over evil. Whole of Gita is the witness state he described about. If you read Gita now from this angle, you will be amazed to find that everywhere he is like a witness describing everything, whatever is this and he will tell you how, how this witness state has helped him to understand also human beings. He is a I'm going to do Mother's work". He went to another island, he did the programme, everything happened and when he came back, he wanted to sleep and suddenly it started raining and thundering. Even the man who was, we should say, not such a nature understands, nature understands

 Mar- Apr. 1999 Volume: XI Issue : 3 & 4 29 The Divine Cool Breeze whatever you have done, He has written it very well but to understand him one should again have the witness state to see big businessman because first he told you how to become Sthitapragya. Sthitapragya is the ome who is in witness what he has written about Karma Then „State. If you see all these verses on the he has written about Gyana. Gyana means where you know, but that doesn't mean Sthitapragya, iS nothing but a person who is in witness state, how he lives! how hu you go on reading books, never. Gyana means to know what you are! is happy! How he looks at things! It is interesting, very interesting. First he describes that, not like a shop keeper who That means you have to be a Sahaja will first describe the bad thing, but he Yogi by which you know so many things through vibrations. Gyana doesn't mean reading books. By reading books you become more ignorant. So, Gyana means that you must know yourself. If you do not know yourself, you do not know starts with the best Then he goes down to other things and tell you that whatever are the three aspects: The first he talks about is Karma and many people get stuck at that point that whatever Karmas we are doing we will get the Punyas out anything. So, it comes to that you must get your self realisation, You must know of it. But he IN not, he didn't say that. If you know him then you will kmow he never meant that. What he serys is that whatever your self. It is the second thing he has said. Lastly, he talks about Bhakti. Bhakti is devotion. That too is another trick of Karmas yon have to do, you can do it but lecve the results to the divine power. Shri Krishna the way he has described Bhakti. Now, you find people on the street Hare Rama, Hare Krishna' singing. In one word he has concluded, he says you must do Ananya Bhakti. Ananya means Results are from the divine power. Now, may be, some people think that they have got money because they have done good Karmas and start doing all kinds of bad Karmas with that money! He didn't say that. He said. leave the results to the when there is not the other, that means when you have submerged yourself into the Divine. You are one with the Divine divine power because divine power knows best what is for you and se, if you think you have done something good, you then you should do Bhakti, otherwise I have served somewhere, the poor, you don't accept it He says that if you give have done something really good for the. women or anything, the result of that you flowers, 1 will accept. I will accept but leave it at the feet of divine power Means for him real Bhakti is only possible when that you don't build up an ego for you become one with the Divine me some leaves or some fruits or some

 30 Mar Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 Apr. 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze the love, the love of this old lady living Otherwise it's just a show. So, the third Bhakti part also comes after self in the forest. Her love which was realisation. Now in the Bhakti you see important. there is no value he has? How much you So, when you want to give something paid for it and how you bought? It is not important. For that a great example is of also, it is your love, not how much you Shri Rama when he went to the jungles, pay ? What value you have spent ? Nothing. It is the love with which you do it and that love should be evident. If such things can happen; even with Shri Krishna There was an old lady, from the scheduled cast, means she was one of the Bhilni as they call it, these people live in the jungles. So, she brought some berrys and offered it to Shri Rama and she said that I have tasted all of them and they are not sour. the same thing happened. He went to, they called them Hastinapur, those days, where this Kauravas were living and the king was Duryodhana and he asked him, All of them I have tasted. Now, after tasting something, in India people call it unworthy, not to be eaten. I mean we can you come and stay with us and have food. He said, no, no I'll not be able to come. not taste something we have to give to He goes to another person, Vidura, who somebody else, not done, according to was the son of a maid servant, because Indian culture. Shri Rama took it, he took Vidura was a realised soul. He was a it and he said 'what beautiful fruits!' I realised soul and so he went and ate in his house where he had cooked very have never eaten such fruits. So, simple food. Because he was a realised Lakshmana got very angry; he said, you stupid woman, you have eaten these fruits, and that's what you have given to soul, to him he was the best to have food with him. So, your value system should be based on such things like love. Where you can get love you should be attached to that person where you get a realised soul you should be attached to that and not to worldly people who think no end of themselves and think they are great. They may be but to you, as Sahaja Yogis, is the love of people which should be respected, should be understood and to Shri Rama. Why did you do that? So, Sita was watching, so she asked him why don't you give me some of these fruits. He gave, she said, my God ! What nice fruits these are! I have never eaten such good fruits. So, then Lakshmana also, his temper came down, and he said can you not give me some ? She said, why? You were so angry, why should I give it to you? Ultimately, she gives him that fruit. So, What did he see in those fruits was be felt. But if you have no witness state

 31 Mar- Apr 1999 3 & 4 Volume XI Issue The Divine Cool Breeze person is spiritual and that's how you then you will see how much money this will stick to such a person. You will not man has got ? How many cars he has got? What clothes he is wearing? All go for artificial things, but a genuine personality that is there. these considerations will be there, but in a witness state you will understand May God Bless You All ! Thank that you will get vibrations from this person, you will understand that You!!

 Mar - Apr. 1999 Volume XI issue 3 32 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI GANESHA PUJA Pravachana By Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Cabella- 05-09-1998 Today we are going to worship Shri grabbed the people. In India we have you never heard of it, we don't know. Of Ganesha I think I have told a lot about Shri Ganesha and his nature, but still so many of us have not yet realised what are his powers and what he wants. First and foremost thing is that to respect Shri Ganesha is to understand the importance of Chastity. Chastity is not only for the women, it is more for the course some of the men are very very ruined people and they cann't help it unless and until they are put into jail. But for a Sahaja Yogi it is very important to look after our chastity. As I told nou yesterday, it is not necessary to find a girl for yourself or a boy for yourself It is also against the rules of chastity. I am not saying that you should allow only your parents to decide, but let the Sahaja Yoga decide, because you are Sahaja Yogis, you are born after the image of Ganesha who ultimately becomes Christ men to observe. If you have self respect in the real sense of the word you will take to chastity without any difficulties, but if you have no self respect then you run after something which is very low, of a very degrading quality. So it is very important that chastity must be respected, must be understood and must be imbibed. This So what should be your attitude towards chastity is very important. The most important thing that if we get hold on our chastity level then Sahaja Yoga is habit of not observing the proper protocol of the chastity develops from childhood and we have to be very careful. When we very very difficult and it doesn't give you that blessing as you should have. You saw people from Romania and also from Ukraine were singing so beautifully, One of the reasons is that basically they are very very humble people, they are humbled down, so much so that they have given up nonsensical ideas about sex life are in a Ganesha state we should not take to such horrible things I don't know from where people get the ideas, As you see today in the whole world there is a crisis of chastity. In the west specially we have heard of so many cases of child abuse. In a temple of God one should not even take the name of this dirty disease which has

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XI issue : 3 & 4 33 Mar- Apr 1999 and all that. So the humility will teach you power of Ganesha can only be manifested that you are not having your self respect. if you are wise because he is the giver of In Islam they stressed a very big wisdom. But people don't understand importance to chastity, very much, and what this wisdom is, its a big problem. this went to such an extent that Intelligence so-called is not wisdom. It Mohammed Saheb said that you can have can make you very cunning, very five wives or four wives but you don't aggressive and sometimes very subtle have women who are prostitutes Once person who can go on deceiving people, this chastity starts leaving us we don't telling lies, doing all kinds of things and mind anything under the circumstances. believing in themselves that they are very We have seen results of that working out very successful. Success is never the in many people who are very highly criteria of a Sahaja Yogi. Success placed and these highly placed people Sahaja Yoga think that they are something great and surrendering of oneself to Sahaja Yoga. they can overcome the binding of Jesus That is seldom to be found unless and Christ and they can do what they like, go until you meditate every day. Its very subtle means very on misbehaving with women who are important that you must meditate: Those under them. They may do it secretly, they who do not meditate will be lost to Sahaja may do it anyway, but Ganesha watches Yoga Because wisdom could only grow that and he punishes them for what they through your inner inspiration. You can are doing. Its a terrible thing to go into have this inner inspiration only if the these kind of ventures which are not the power of Shri Ganesha manifests. He is fields of Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis first the giver of your wisdom. In the wisdom of all steady their eyes because it is what you do is to find solutions. Solutions concerned with the power of Jesus Christ. which are peaceful, which are satisfying, But in all the Christian nations, I have which are soothing. seen, people have wandering eyes, very surprising when Christ is their leader, they worship Christ. go to Church, sing the praise of Christ, and they have wandering a whirl wind and many people had to eyes all over These wandering eyes He is the one who takes you to task also, like yesterday I was told there was suffer little bit because of the wind that came and blew off your tents. There is no need to have tents in cannot be representative of the chastity of Christ. this climate What is the need? I don't understand, but they cannot live without a tent, you see. I can Now the second point is that the

 Mar - Apr. 1999 34 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze your wisdom and find out if it is wise to be like that? With this practice you will reduce your temper absolutely, you will reduce your lust, you will reduce your guilt very much; because once you start sleep outside very nicely on the street also. So there is no need to, sort of fuss about, all these things, to bring the whole household here; there is no need. We should not be afraid of discomfort. If you understanding that there is no wisdom in want to have very comfortable life and feeling guilty your guilt will disappear. Also the worst thing is that we have a great desire to have this or that, to indulge into all kinds of greed. This greed becomes zero as soon as you understand wisely that there is no need; otherwise all you cann't suffer any discomfort, you are no good for Sahaja Yoga. In olden days people used to go to Himalayas, stand on one leg, and they didn't get rea They couldn't get realisation while you lisation. all have got realisation! So one should not try to make oneself very very sort of the time you will be thinking about a lordly person. There is no need to care yourself, about your health, about your for comfort. I can live in comfort and I children, about your house, whatever is can live anywhere, at this age also. So supposed to be yours. But the death what you have do is not to practice proves that nothing belongs to you. You asceticism but to become an ascetic. have come alone and you have to go alone. This is the wisdom which is to be Practising means trouble but if you just become an ascetic from within then you don't bother about these little little things. here and there. But our style is still through your spirituality. Then the moulded by outside world. We haven't greatest thing that happens is the joy. Joy got our own world then we are going as of the dancing of Shri Ganesha. Like a the fashion the wisdom disappears. I child you see him dancing, how joyous imbibed. You can not practice it, you cannot force it but it is to be imbibed he feels and you also feel! In the same way a little child being born within you never tell anybody that you don't have this fashion or that fashion or anything. and you start behaving like a small child. Normally it has no sense of lust, greed, nothing. It knows how to share. So this is the position we say that you become a gana, the army of Shri Ganesha. They are Its your wisdom which will teach you. Wisdom will teach you how to regulate yourself because you have come here to ascend, to achieve a great special place in the realm of spirituality. I must stress again on the power of wisdom. Before doing anything you should just appeal to ganas; they are very powerful and they do all the work of the world. They live in this world but all their source of energy

 The Divine Cool Breeze Mar- Apt 1999 35 Volume XI Issue go deep into your spirituality. This aim of getting into spirituality, I think you all So Shri Ganesha is the Onkara. He is know, you see, but you do not work out. the first deity created by the Goddess I have told you last time that your because he is auspicious. So first attention has to be inside not outside and auspiciousness is created for our good you should not react All these procedures We are auspicious because of Shri help vou to be wise, to be sensible But Ganesha. Some people create problems the sensible person who is just sensible is from the Devine. in the house. They are always creating problems out of nothing They are not auspicious pecople. Those who are peace makers, those who are loving, are the as far as his own comforts are concerned, money is concerned, all his own health is concerned, everything encompassing him, is not wise person. He is not wise. If you ones who are blessed by Shri Ganesha see a little child who is properly brought What is the wisdom in fighting? You should find out what is the wisdom in fighting. Why are we fightings? For what things? For small small things! Things that up, of course he will always bother about other people. He will find out what others need, what can make them happy. In his all simple methods he will try to please others but not to gain any favour or to show off that he is very generous. But in vou can yourself correct! Why should you fight? If you have a fighting nature, that means Ganesha is against you. Your Ganesha is against you. Your Ganesha is sleeping. That power is no with you. There is no wisdom in it. In this world all the real sense of the word collectivity gives him joy. Today I am going to tell you those great people who have been something more about this collective nature that comes to you through Shri respected, since centuries have been very very wise people. Not hot tempered. Not Ganesha's efforts or we can say his people who were quarrelling Not people powers. Somebody told me that Eienstein who were having lust as the aim of their has already made a story like that, it is a life. Such people will be never discovery that if you all become cool, that remembered by the progeny. But that's is under Shri Ganesha's blessings, then not so important, you as Sahaja Yogis are we all become one. That's his theory, but we also had Philward here who established that when you cool down the You are here on this earth to Helium gas, all the molecules or you can very important. emancipate the whole of humanity. So what should be the aim of your life is to call them atoms, they start moving in a collective way Otherwise they are hitting

 Volume XI Issue 36 Mar Apr. 1999 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze to be the same style. I have seen people when they come for the Pujas, so many each other, they are beating each other and they are running helter-skelter. In the same way when we have Shri Ganesha's blessings within us, in the real sense of the word, with our wisdom then what of them, how they enjoy each others company, how they try to help each other! Somebody who is, say in Russia or say in happens? We become very much evolved Bulgaria, anywhere, he will write to me Sahaja Yogis. Evolved Sahaja Yogis about the problem he has. So somebody means they have become one. One means from America, without I tell him, without what. One means that they all live for each I inform him, without any information, other. They enjoy each other, they see immediately writes to me, Mother such comfort of each other. For example the and such person is there in Russia, will people who are very rich, people who are you be able to send that person to very poor, people who are sick, people America?" Most of the time it happens who are healthy, all of them combine like this. I don't tell them, I never ask together as one. In Sanskrit it is called them. Even if I ask suddenly there will be Ekakarita. They become one. And this response from so many people, from so oneness shows in your celebrations, when many countries. Mother this is the you all come here you try to help each problem, alright, we will go and do it. other all the time. I have seen nobody For that I must say Austrians are very minds helping each other. I have seen sensitive people in this respect, in this Ekakarita. They went all the way to want to hurt any one. On the contrary Jerusalem, you know, to help the people, to get them realised. I wanted to go to people enjoying each other. They do not they want to be helpful and sensible with each other. Most of your leaders, I have chosen, are very wise, who avoid problems, who do not get into panics. Most of them, I should say. When even Jerusalem but this bombing business may not allow me to go. But the Jerusalem people, I found them to be much more collective because they came to Egypt. I said, 'why have you come here? 'Make friends with the Muslims of Egypt.' Just imagine, I was surprised how could they come here. "No just to make friends. They you people try to destroy Sahaja Yoga, they know you are doing it. So to find out this Ekakarita you have to go deep down into yourself by which you will feel are Muslims so we want to make friends that you are all one, weather you are here or you are in Japan or in America, with them. anywhere. You all think the same way, all help the same cause and you try So making friendship without any you

 Mar- Apr. 1999 37 Volume: XI Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze ulterior motive, without any gain is one exposed. This is the time of exposure that of the signs of your Ekakarita. Not only they will loose that great faith on which that you are satisfied with other Sahaja they are working out. All these will have Yogis but you want to bring other Sahaja to just disappear. This is false idea about Yogis in. So many have done that. This is superiority of any religion. How can a something so nourishing. Now as you are religion be superior to another one which being enlightened, you get another person is created by the effort of Shri Ganesha's who is enlightened. Its very great joy auspiciousness. giving. If you give realisation to one person you feel very happy. So many write me Mother now we have got thirty another religion or you fight another persons, twenty persons' and they are creed or you say that this is a lesser race very happy about it that, we have got so many Sahaja Yogis. But doing that, one ideas they drop out This doesn't remain should not develop the ego then you go any more because all these ideas have against Ganesha because Christ you know created problems. Say, in America they He doesn't like it. Egoistical people He first hated the blacks, now the blacks are doesn't like, and He is Shri Ganesha So hating the whites. Its a big turmoil going he doesn't like such people who out of Its not auspicious at all that you fight or we are a higher race. All these false on. Then we have also in India, we had people who were supposed to be untouchables. They were tortured, they their ego want to create an organisation of their own and try to dominate others. This kind of people they don't like. Both of them are the same. There is complete were troubled and they did lot of wrong things, which they should have never done. Its not written in the Shastras. Ekakarita between them. In the same way we too develop that special quality of Because of that now they are acting Ekakarita We forget about so called against the socalled touchables and religions that we have. See now, how they putting them right in their own places. are fighting? All the religions which are So this brings in conflict. Shri Ganesha outside are fighting among themselves. is the one when He gives you wisdom, They are dishonest, they are doing all you understand that nobody is superior kinds of wrong things, you know it very to another person. You are all made by well. Every day its in the newspaper that God and whatever is made by God is you hear about what wrongs they are auspicious and beautiful. Once you start doing. They are little bit successfül but understanding that, this Ekakarita spreads not for a long time because they will be outside also. It spreads to other people,

 38 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 Apr. 1999 Mar The Divine Cool Breeze its not just because of a certain social understanding and social upliftment that than to see to others. You have to you try to be good to others, no. It is meditate and meditate on Shri Ganesha. from inside, inside you do it. Try to correct your own Shri Ganesha Sit on the ground and meditate. Now when we run away from the Mother Earth and we don't touch her, we don't respect This Ekakarita first must work in the family. Its very important. The family which is disturbed all the time cannot her, in a way we don't respect Shri Ganesha. He was made out of Mother create children who are in the state of Earth. He controls the Mother Earth. He Ekakarita. That's why always tell them that don't fight. In the family they are controls all the five elements. Not only that, but He controls you. I liked the film yesterday where they showed a Ganesha walking about with another person who was telling don't do this and don't do this. Its a very beautiful film because it fighting! They can not be Sahaja Yogis. If there is such a fight its better to get out of such a family. So we have sanctioned also divorce. Any man who is flirting with other women or doing wrong things we have asked him to get out of Sahaja Yoga. The reason is, one bad apple can spoil suggests that Ganesha is always there to tell you not to do it. But if you do it then you develop all kind of horrible diseases, many apples. So such a man or such a woman should be kept out of Sahaja Yoga all kinds of horrible faces, all kinds of completely, so that there is a better family family problems. Also you can develop relationship. This is very important in national problems. So this is so important Sahaja Yoga. Your family relationship to understand that such a feeling of, I should be absolutely perfect. I cann't should say, very inauspicious characters understand, if you can't enjoy the are to be avoided. I can't understand how company of your wife, then what are you can people feel so bad about small small going to enjoy in this world? If you can children, some two year old child, some not enjoy the bliss of your family life, you five year old child. If you see a child, even can not enjoy anything else. This very a photograph of a child you feel like close relationship of husband and wife is loving that, you feel like kissing that child. thrown apart because of Ganesha's If the children can not be respected how problem only. If the Ganesha was alright, can you understand the value of Shri there would have been a perfect union, Ganesha. See how sweet they are! How perfect understanding between husband sweetly they behave! They understand and wife. But that means there is definitely you, they understand me. I know even the small children, very small, newly born something wrong with the Shri Ganesha.

 39 Mar- Apr 1999 Volume : XI issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze children understand me. So there is of themselves! Their Ganesha is innately with in them, is built in, a kind of absolutely ruined and finished. All such feeling of understanding the love. To people are such leaders of nations, and understand the love also is very difficult people try to follow them in their own for egoistical people. Because they love way, though they may do something themselves, they don't love anybody else secretly! Doesn't matter, people know Or if they love somebody it is out of lust, about it, because in auspiciousness if you may be greed, may be some sort of a are loosing, the whole world comes to association. But love for love sake is only know somehow It will all be exposed possible if your Shri Ganesha is properly because Satya Yuga has come. In this new Yuga, there is light of the truth within us. And this truth can expose all that is We have come so far, we have so nonsensical they have been doing. cleaned out and kept. many Sahaja Yogis all over the world. Of course I worked very hard, I must say, Now truth is the quality of Shri but you also have supported me very Ganesha himself He is the one who is much. I am thankful to you. It is not giving us truth in our brain, it comes to possible in this Western World specially us through Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ has where there is no consideration of worked so much, He has done so much. Ganesha's principle that you people But look at the condition of the people should come out so well and accept who are supposed to be following him. Sahaja Yoga, as a life for yourself. In Look at the way they are behaving. Let Sahaja Yoga, the most important thing is us atleast show that if you follow Ganesha to worship Shri Ganesha with in you and and Jesus Christ you are in the image of that personality which is something so very spiritual. Spiritual life is the giver of the quality of Shri Ganesha with in you. Its very soothing, its very peace giving, joy. You can not get joy out of anything else but spirituality. You can get some satisfaction, you can get some ego, you its very security creating power. If your Ganesha is alright, nobody can touch you, nobody can destroy you, nobody can upset you, because He is the one who is might feel that something great, but the the giver of peace. The world peace is only way you can get the inner peace and disturhed because we have not joy is Shri Ganesha's manifestation on all worshipped Shri Ganesha, I have seen people in very big positions, incharge of chakras. When you are in a proper state military, incharge of that, not inchaarge on those chakras. you get the joy and that the Chakras He manifests on all the

 40 Mar - Apr. 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze joy comes to you through Shri Ganesha. These days people are writing horrible forgiven, but Shri Ganesha at a point, books, horrible things. Also, there are when sees people are forgiving, tries to some who are trying to write a very sweet punish. That the limiting point where He things about Shri Ganesha's principle of thinks its not proper to forgive such and understanding, principle of His such person, So for Christ, to forgive is auspiciousness. Very sweetly! I have seen alright, but for Ganesha, He has to expose some people have written some very very and punish the person. So in a way you sweet stories about Him. Its not only the have to know that Christ is very great love stories. Upto a point alright they because He gives us the forgiving power created so many love stories. Now and Shri Ganesha is very powerful something beyond that one has to go. And because He limits our forgiving power. beyond that is this Ganesha principle, We may forgive, anyone, we may say that which is of complete peace, of complete I would like to forgive, but we don't know joy and of understanding of love. The if Shri Ganesha will allow to that extent value of pure love, of giving and also of and Christ accepts that? Because they are taking it. Anyone who gives you the pure the same, they are like the two sides of love should be understood in the right one coin. So we can not depend too much way. I, yesterday, knew that Shri Ganesha on the forgiveness power of Christ has gone off a little bit. I don't know why because there is Ganesha always sitting He was like that? But one has to there and He has in hand, you have seen, understand that there must be some a very powerful weapon. He is the one people within us who do not follow the who is just peace, who is coolness, who principle of Shri Ganesha, and that's why gives you coolness after realisation. You power. Christ has said that you will be these troubles are there. get the cool breeze because of Shri So with sincere heart and a sincere Ganesha, because it is Brahma-Chaitanya, mind if you ask blessings of Shri Ganesha, no doubt, but the one who emits it is Shri He is always ready to give. But if you Ganesha. He cools you down, He brings don't listen to him and if you destroy your you down to very cool, makes you chastity, in anyway, He will punish you, satisfied and a person with complete He will not spare you. He doesn't have calmness. With that calmness you the idea of sparing. At the level of Christ becomes all one. This Ekakarita is only He thought of forgiving you. But established, oneness is established, forgiving doesn't mean that any sin can be forgiven. No. Its a kind of a controlling whatever country you may be proud of, whatever country you may be living in,

 41 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 Mar- Apr 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze you will see the bad things in that country and he got the present. This shows one thing, that speed is nat the way of success. will not be identified with the bad. This You have to slow down your speed. Apart is the greatest thing of this Satya Yuga from that you have to understand what is that it exposes and you do not support the most important thing, as he understood something that is wrong, which is being the most important thing is to love your done as an aggression. You don't accept Mother, to respect your Mother and know it. And once you don't accept that then that She is the Highest, She is the Greatest. you start becoming one with the people That is how he has been expressed within who are one with you and they all believe ourselves. Once that happens your in the same thing. Their ideas are the spirituality grows. I hope you will work it same, their thinking is the same, their joy out this way now like Shri Ganesha and is the same and they enjoy each other start Ekakarita. 1 don't like people writing very much. They become one and this letters against the leaders, against this man, oneness has to be established fully in against that man. That's not good, there Sahaja Yoga. Some people who are only is no need if you first can be forgiving and interested in making money, who are keeping one with each other. Try to get interested in getting a good crowd or more people and more people. You can some sort of a thing of a very low level, not separate anyone as saying that they are condemned, they are no good Try to get them with forgiveness, with your sense of chastity things will improve. So this exclusiveness also should be given up, which perhaps comes from a kind of a sense of insecurity, I think. It is Shri Ganesha, if there are wrong type of people he drives them out. So don't get frightened of them and don't get upset with them. Try to be one and try to be more attracting people to yourself. keeping them to you, and you will try to improve that. You can not. Those who are in Sahaja Yoga to find wives for themselves or husbands for themselves are finished. This spirituality grows with humility and the humility of Ganesha is told by his venture. Once when His Mother asked him that the one who will go round the earth three times, I will give him a present. So Ganesha thought who is greater than my Mother, not this earth. He had a small little rat on which He used to travel. This shows that He was so trying to manage them and look after humble; on a rat He could travel. No them. I hope you will all now meditate after this to develop your Ganesha qualities and develop that power of Chastity and also of peace and security. pressure on the rat. And while His brother Kartikeya had a peacock, which could fly. He knew he can not go round the world and compete with his brother. So he went round his mother three times May God Bless You,

 Mar - Apr. 1999 42 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XI Issue : 3 & 4 (Shri Ganesh Puja) Talk after the Marriages were performed they don't know what is the joy of a t was such a joyous and a beautiful occasion that we all enjoyed it married life. If you do not want to enjoy, its alright. Its like a cake, if you 'don't eat you don't eat. But to be sensible and to be acting according to the Divine Laws you should stick on properly with great excitement and great enthusiasm. There are so many marriages in Sahaja Yoga who have been extremely successful They have got children who are born realised, very beautiful children and they have all the families coming to Sahaja Yoga by seeing how the marriages have taken place. I have to give some notes to you that the husband should not think that Lthoroughly and all the brides and bridegrooms look so very happy. It gives me great pleasure and I bless you from my heart. Only. I would say that after marriage try to make a loving, successful marriage. It is very important. For example we saw from one country there were six to seven girls who misbehaved and took a divorce. Because of this kind of thing we have banned that country practically because we think that there is something wrong with these ladies that they have broken, one after another, so because he has married he has a right to dominate the wife, always to sit on her head. Of course, in the west they don't do it but in India they do it very much. many marriages. So must be their empty ego or may be something like that. It has been our experience. Also there are some other countries also. From there are, we find, some very bad instances of They are very very aggressive men. On marriages we have had. So what I said the contrary in the west I find that women that if you don't want to marry, don't are much more aggressive than the men marry. But in Sahaja Yoga it is not for are, which is something I can't yourself or for your wife that you are understand. And because of this some marrying but you are marrying for Sahaja times the marriages fail. There is no need Yoga. So when you fight, quarrel or do to aggrees any one. Need not trouble all nonsense you are only harming the anyone. If it is absolutely incorrigible, if name of Sahaja Yoga. So you have to it is not at all possible to carry on, we enjoy each others love, each others have, in Sahaja Yoga, sanctioned feelings and the joy of a married life. I divorces. But it is a shameful thing. I do have seen some people are so stupid that not like it, to have divorces and then not

 43 Mar- Apr. 1999 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze you very- much, he will take you away from wrong things. I know its such a blissful thing to be married in Sahaja Yoga but there are some stupid women or stupid men who do not want to enjoy their married life. In that case we will agree to have them divorced but once they are to enjoy the life. So you should get into a beautiful romantic mood now and enjoy your wives and enjoy your husbands and don't start quarrelling from the first day. Now, if you indulge into divorces you bring actually bad name to your family up-bringing, then you bring bad name to your country and as a result other girls divorced we will not allow them to marry in Sahaja Yoga. That is for definite. We don't want to marry anyone who has divorced. If they have divorced with proper reason, its alright, but just for the sake of divorcing if you want to have a who want to get married from your country, because of my experience of such girls who have destroyed their married life, I don't like to marry anyone from that country. It has become nowa practice that w kind of a special treatment, you will not. So I have to tell you that as far as Sahaja we see about six seven years now, ho the marriages have been working out. So if you want to discard completely all the decency and the beauty of Sahaja Yoga marriage then it would have been better Yoga is concerned divorce is out of bounds but in case you want to fight, you want to trouble, you want to destroy you should have decided not to marry. Because there is no obligation on us, as such, its more the obligation on you that you should get a good wife or a good husband. Despite everything supposing others lives, then of course divorce is done. I would request you now to enjoy the company of your wife or your husband. It is for enjoyment that we have started marrying people from this country to that country. Yesterday, I told you that to do it, do not just think of a divorce you don't organise your marriages because I have seen people in the West because we are not responsible. Let us are always thinking at the time of organise your marriages. If you start like marriage how to get divorce. But its a this, all kinds of funny problems will start very shameful thing. Its a very wrong as they have mostly in the western society. thing. It shows no Sahaja life. If you are Because they come here, they want to real Sahaja Yogis, you should be able to select a girl or they select the girl from you don't want to accept it or don't want carry on with your wife or with your their own centres. That means in the husband in a very loving Sahaja manner. Its the blessing of Ganesha on you. He centre they are not meditating but trying to find out a girl or a boy. This kind of a nonsense we want to stop. So if you want will protect your married life, he will help

 Volume XI Issue 3 & 4 Apr 1999 Mar The Divine Cool Breeze hard for you with all this we have done, with such scrutiny, with such understanding, and you should not make to marry in Sahaja Yoga you don't have to find out your own bride or your bridegroom, because we want to see how us miserable for nothing at all. So I again and again request you that you be in a very happy, mood now. I am very happy, I bless you from my heart and I am sure your marriages will work out. But don't be hasty, take it easy. Everything is to be taken easy, first of all, and see, gently work out your marriage. May God Bless You. Thank You. your vibration match and how this works out. Despite that also marriages fail. But invariably I have seen when the marriages are fixed by themselves they fail. Its just like any other marriage. So the best thing for you is to now make a compromise with yourself that you are not going to be stupid and you are not going to waste your married life I have been crying, you see, with your smoke. So I worked very We have a custom now that the raise your hands. Say, I give you about bride and bridegroom receive their ten minutes to compose a couplet in food in one plate and they feed each any language you want to. In which other. So. the first the girl, the bride, the name of the bride and bridgroom has to give the morsel in the mouth of is there. So the bride does that and the man does that. Then all your life. married life, you don't call your husband by name. Its something great that you are not to call your husband by name but you have to say. I don't know in English . Darling That is, I don't know what that is but thats how, according to us in Indian way we the husband. She should be very i naughty to give a very big one, alright. | Then the boy, the bridgroom has to give the morsel in the mouth of his bride with love. Now also there is a you | can do that. Its very simple though that ! you have to take the name of your wife eustom in India I dont know if or your husband in a couplet, its like call him the master. And also in Maharashtra they call it 'a turban in this and if you can do it, some people i you just compose it now and you can the hook'.

 Shri Mataji, Thank you very much for realisation. Thank you very much for making us understand how great we are! Thank you very much for bringing all the blessings of the Divine. Thank you very much for raising us higher, much higher than from where we were. Thank you very much for sustaining us to improve ourselves and correct ourselves. Thank you very much, Mother, that you have incarnated on this earth, taken your birth and working so hard for all of us.



----------------------

1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
March - April, 1999
Valume : XI Issue : 3
देवी प्रपन्नार्तिहरे प्रसीद
प्रसीद मात्तगतोऽ खिलस्य।
प्रसीद विश्वेकवरी पाहि विज्व
स्वमीखरी देवी चराचरस्य ।।
(Devi Mahatamyam)
"O Devi, you who remove the sufferings of your devotees, be gracious. Be propitious, O
Mother of the whole world. Be gracious, O Mother of the Universe, protect the universe.
Thou art, O Devi, the ruler of all that is moving and unmoving.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Editorial
1
Musical Evening Talk, Delhi- 16-12-98
Shri Rama Navami Puja - 5-04-98
Christmas Puja-Ganapatipule - 25-12-98
11
Shri Krishna Puja - 16-8-98
20
Shri Ganesha Puja
32
Taik after the Marriages
42
E Yogi Mahajan
Edited by
: V.J. Nalgirkar
Published by
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Volume XI Issus
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mar- Apr. 1999
Editorial
The 76th Birthday of our Divine
bhajans. I want to correspond with you
Mother is the dawning of the and other Indian Sahaja Yogis to
golden millennium prophesied by exchange ideas, songs, etc. So, please
John of Jerusalem in the 10th Century give them my address and show them my
A.D. All the things he prophesied have photograph I will be very happy to
come to passing the life of Sahaja Yogis. receive your letter. You can talk to me
We need no longer regard them as every thing concerning Sahaja yoga,
miracles and coincidences but through bhajans. Now, I want to tel you a
our Vibratory Awareness recognise them testimony concerning Shri Ganesha that
as the blessings of our Divine Mother. took place in Benin. We have a Sahaja
Each one of us is experiencing this at yogi who is doing gardening, and he said,
every level of our life. We are absolutely a guardian in my
enthralled by them and are able to feel garden. Shri Ganesha I choose as a
how much our Divine Mother loves us guardian to keep my garden". And he
and how closely she cares for each one entrusted his garden to Shri Ganesha by
of us This is not only felt by those who
"I don't want to put
the ceremony that you know.
have had her personal darshana but also
by thousands of Sahaja Yogis who never
ever saw Her For instance on 18th
Few weeks after, robbers came in his
garden, but they saw a giant who hit them
to blood. Few days after they returned in
the garden and had been hit to blood
again. So after, they went to see the
January 1999, we received the following
letter from a Sahaja Yogi, from a country
called Benin in, West Africa.
owner, then asked him whom he put in
his garden? And he responded nobody,
without knowing that they were robbers:
"Benin is a small West African Country
about 12,600 kilometre square with 5
million people. In Benin we started
practising Sahaja Yoga in 1995. We are
about 4000 yogis and every week more
than 30 persons have their self-realisation.
We have two centers in Benin. I am Choir
Mr. Mahajan, this is the end of my
testimony. Next time I will tell you
another one. I want to leave you hoping
that I will receive your letters and receive
Singer. I like bhajans especially Indian's
from my brothers and sisters in India a
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Volume XI Issue : 3 & 4
Apr. 1999
Mar
The Divine Cool Breeze
of Her glory. In that consciousness there
lot of letters."
is no space for geed, jealousy and fear.
These ghosts lurking from the past
reigned at a low level of consciousness
Lando MilleFort
C/546 MAISON AHOUANSOU
Rue De Quidah
when we had misidentified ourselves.
Cotonou
Having realised our true identity we rise
Benin
to a higher realm. We can become as vast
W. Africa
as the expanse of our consciousness till
stage comes when we become pure
(Jai Shri Mataji. Milleforlando)
A similar episode occurred in Rahuri consciousness.
in 1980 in the farm of Late Dhumal. Some
Robbers had entered his farm and they in achieving such a stage of collective
were beaten by a person who nobody had consciousness. Then all individual and
seen before. Of course Late Dhumal knew collective problems are spontaneously
that it was Shri Bhairav and narrated it resolved. This is precisely what John of
The key to the golden millennium lies
to us.
Jerusalem said, "Diseases will be cured
before they are manifested and everybody
will cure themselves and each other. Man
will have understood that he has to help
himself to stay upright; and after the day
We are most blessed to be always
protected by our Divine Mother. There
is no doubt about it and it has registered
in our consciousness. However, the
golden Millennium envisages that we
become fully conscious of our position
as the spirit. When the consciousness is
his
of reticence an avarice man will
open
heart and his purse to the poor; he will
define himself curator of human species
and so, finally a new era will begin."
fully established we truly become vehicles
of the spirit and enjoy the new millennium
(Yogi Mahajan)
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Mar- Apr 1999
Volume XI Issue 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
Musical Evening, 16-12-98, Delhi
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(Expression of Five Elements on a Sahaja Yogi)
your self realisation, it is clearly written
down after self realisation, you have to
grow. Grow into perfect being and then
have been telling them that the style
of Indian knowledge is very different
from the Western mind. In the West,
you see, if you say something, then they you can see for yourself what he has said
want to have an experimental approval. or they have said is the truth. So the
They will go to the scientists or to other approach is different. In one way if you
people who are equipped with knowledge start going through science, through this,
to know what they said in these books is through that, you cannot reach anywhere
true or not. They will even judge Christ. and moreover your growth is hampered.
They would even judge Moses, They So, what you have to do is to go to this
would judge everybody as if they are the knowledge through believing in what they
most intelligent and the most capable have said. Whatever Christ has said, you
have to believe, whatever Mohammad has
people. They will write books after books
said, you have to believe, whatever Guru
Nanak has said, you have to believe,
whatever Gyandeva has said, you have
to believe. Now you have to believe like
that because you are not of that spiritual
level. So accept it. Now do not try to
analyse it. Everything you try to analyse
and in that analysis you get lost. So once
you are a realised soul of that level and
then you grow into your fullness, what
you call Sampuran, then only you will
know whether whatever they have said
is true or not and then you can find out.
It is very easy, then, to know whatever is
said is true or not. For Sahaja Yogis now
against them disclosing as if they are those
people who have said something, have
said out of their mind or something. It is
never accepted normally and if it is
accepted they become absolutely fanatics.
So, now according to Indian style of
understanding is that first of all if a great
Rishi or great Muni or a great saint has
said something, then he has said it, while
you have to just listen to that because you
are not equally the same, Whatever he
has said is his own experience, his own
knowledge and you have no business to
judge him or to say this is not true, that is
not true. You accept it and once you get
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
Mar
Apr. 1999
But from that Word comes, according to
Indian Philosophy, another thing what we
call as 'Bindu' or we can say Word
it is very easy to find out if something is
real or unreal, if it is truth or untruth, it is
love or hatred. Only through vibrations
becomes Naad, is a sound. And then it
you can do.
becomes the Bindu means one small dot,
But going beyond that, I may say,
and then from this dot all these five
beyond that one has to know what are
these vibrations and what are they made
of. What is the subtle force which is
elements start coming one after another.
The first element that comes out is
light, "Tej'. Light is the first element that
behind these vibrations. We call it Parama
Chaitanya, alright. Parama Chaitanya, so
what. What happens to you when you get
comes out. So the essence of the first
element is light. We call it Tej, Tejas. It is
parama Chaitanya, is something to be written, of course, in Sanskrit but we
understood, the subtlety.
should understand that how the light
pervades Sahaja Yoga so much and you
As I said, we are made of five see the light everywhere. So the first
elements, alright? So when you get your element which is light and you can say in
awakening, when the Kundalini reaches English the light's subtle thing is, we can
Sahasrara and opens out your fontanelle say, enlightenment, you can say. But
bone area, you become one with the enlightenment has another meaning. So
Divine power. Then this Divine power
itself starts flowing through you. A
we can say it is Tej, Tej. For example a
person who gets realisation has a face
which is very radiant. So you can say the
radiance. The radiance is the subtlety of
the light. So this radiance starts showing
connection is established. Now when it
starts flowing through you, this Shakti
starts flowing through you. Then what
happens? The subtle part we should
understand. The subtle part is like this- itself and with that radiance people get
That these five elements, we are made impressed and they start thinking
of, these vibrations gradually start something special about this personality
breaking into the subtler form of which which has a radiance. Now you have seen
they are made. So the first thing such a my photographs also wherever they are,
person has, is the you see, as it is said many a times you find lots of light on me.
that word is God, said also in the Bible, That is nothing but the light in me is giving
on your face. Radiance starts expressing
.
the word is God. Now what is this Word?
radiance because the light becomes
Word is a silent, you can say, silent
subtler. When the light becomes subtle in
commandment We can call it like that.
me, light is one of the elements. When it
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Mar- Apr. 1999
Volume : XI Issue 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
not it, to soften the face. But this is the
becomes subtle then it gives radiance and
water in us, gives us that luster, that
nourishment to make our skin very soft
so this is the subtle growth within you
that takes place. Your faces also start
shining. They too have radiance and they
and that softness of the skin becomes very
too have a kind of a different complexion, visible. This is the minimum of minimum,
I would say. This radiance is to be I would say. But then a person who is a
understood, is the subtle of the light of realised soul becomes very soft person,
very delicate. When he talks to some
which we are made, light in the gross
body, in his voice there is warmth or I
manner.
should say there is where to have that
Then after this from the light comes
flow, watery flow and coolness of the
water. So that is another subtle thing that
should be expressed in your behaviour,
the second thing, which we call as Vayu
in Sanskrit, meaning the air. So the air
that we have which is gross air, what is
subtle of air is the cool breeze that you
get. The cool breeze is the subtle of that
air. So the subtle of what you understand
as cool breeze is what we call vibrations,
the subtle of that is air; which is a part
on your skin, on your dealings with
others, that you should be like the water,
which is mobile, which is cooling, which
is soothing, which is cleansing. So this
also becomes a part and parcel of your
being, once you become a realised soul.
and parcel of our making. So this cool
breeze is the second thing that you start
With this water you have also another
thing which we call it as Agni, means the
fire. So you also have fire but it is a very
silent fire. It does not burn anybody but
it burns all the wrong things within you.
Whatever wrong things you have it burns
and it burns the wrong things in other
people also. For example, a person comes
getting subtler and subtler. When your
growth takes place, all these subtle things
start expressing themselves. It is not only
that you get vibrations but you get the
cool breeze and that is the subtler of air
that has been.
Then comes the Water. We are also
with a great anger towards me. What
happens
with the fire that is there. Moreover, a
made of water. What is the subtle of water
is (Sometimes English language, you
know, becomes little short ofexpressions)
but they call it, I mean which makes the
skin, hard skin soft. The skin becomes
soft. This is another sign of a realised soul
that this anger becomes cooler
realised soul cannot get burnt, fire cannot
burn, the burning cannot come to him. It
is very important to understand. Also if
you are doing something wrong, it may
but if you are a good Sahaja
that his, there is some cream they use, is
burn
you
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
Mar
Apr. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
this subtlety of the Mother Earth works.
Mother Earth is the one who is giver of
Yogi and I should say, perfect Sahaja
Yogi, fire will never burn you. We have
an example of Sita Ji that she went into
the fire but nothing burnt. So this is what
virtue to all these flowers and to all these
trees and to all that. But it also plays a
big part in us. It is not only the Mother
one has to understand, understand that
once you get to the subtleties of the fire.
Earth that exists without our connection
and we do not respect the Mother Earth.
We have polluted it. We have done all
kinds of things, we have removed the
trees and we have made a mess out of
So the fire and the water both of them
become sort of Divine. For example, the
water which you touch, water you drink,
whatever, you put your hand in the water,
the water becomes vibrated. Means
What? The subtleties of the water comes
in it, the coolness, curing power also
her. But she is our Mother and so many
subtle things of this Mother Earth come
into us. One of them is gravity. A person
becomes very attractive, not in the
comes in that water. So when it becomes
physical sense but in the spiritual sense.
subtler, all these powers start showing
Such a person attracts others. If'it attracts
which you can see for yourself. You do
them, they feel that something is special
not have to experiment.
about this person. This is one of the
qualities of the Mother Earth. If she had
Then lastly is the Mother Earth, It is
most important. The Mother Earth. There
is a photograph you might see which was
taken in Russia in Dacha where the
not kept us attracted we would have fallen
out with her movement and also other
qualities of the Mother Earth start
manifesting within us. We become very, I
Kundalini is in the Mother Earth. They
have shown clearly. It is there and it is should say, extremely tolerant and patient.
the Mother Earth which shows. For But if you are not tolerant, if you are hot
example, I have seen flowers. If you keep tempered and all that, then Mother
them in my room, they blossom. They can Earth's principle is not expressed in you.
become very big like that, never people Look at the Mother Earth. How much
have seen such big flowers, sometimes she tolerates our nonsense, how many
they say. I am doing nothing I am just Wrong things we do against her, but still
sitting down. What happens to the she tolerates.
flowers? You see now there this principle
of the Mother Earth works. It is a mother begin with. Upto a point, he tolerates. In
Sri Ganesha's quality is to tolerate, to
that gives you all the nourishment and
the same way we too become extremely
makes you grow healthy, and this is how
tolerant, patient and forgiving., This is the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Mar- Apr. 1999
Volume : XI Issue 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
minimum of minimum that should happen Yogis are still writing to me that my
to all the Sahajayogis who have husband is fighting with me, my son is
vibrations, I have told you all the things like this, my mother is like this. All the
that are expressed in your vibrations. It it time, you see, letters after letters come
is a thing to be understood that what you
have become now is something very just see to your subtleties, work it out.
to me. You are a Sahaja Yogi. Now you
great, it has not happened to others, it They think I am here to solve their
has not happened to somebody who is problems, their family problems, their jobs
not being a Sahaja Yogi. You see the and all. I am not here for that. I am here
people who go to Church or to Mosque to give you self realisațion and the
or to Temple. See their faces. Look at understanding that whatever you have
them. How do they look like? They have got, you must accept as a challenge, take
not got any thing from the Temple, they it up as a challenge and you will be
have not got any thing from the Mosque, amazed, how you will be helped and how
they have not got any thing from any one you will get the results!
of these places where they go to worship.
Sahaja does not mean only that you
So, that is artificial. That has become
get spontaneous realization. It also means
something, I should say, without any
connection with the reality. Only after
realisation you are connected with reality
and you can get the understanding of all
these subtleties working through you.
that you get spontaneity. The whole
nature gets spontaneity. All these subtle
things that I have told you, they also get
spontaneity and they work it out. Of
course, there are Angels and there are
Ganas who are helping you but you need
Why I am telling you this, because I
want you to know and recognize yourself, not worry about them just now. Main
to understand what you are, what you thing is you must realise what you are,
have got. Once you recognise yourself what have you got and how much you
and understand yourself you can do a lot. have faced it, you have got it and how it
First of all to say that I am a Sahaja Yogi has worked? I have seen every time I just
itself, it should be very much with self have a little problem or something,
confidence and as a self confident person immediately it works. It works in such
should find out what have I done as
quarters and in such people that I never
Sahaja Yogi? What can I do as Sahaja expected. Everything works out but
Yogi? Some Sahaja Yogis have done
wonders. They have done such a lot of for your growth, for your understanding
work of Sahaja Yoga, while some Sahaja that you are a Sahaja Yogi. You have
whatever works out is for your good, is
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XI Issue: 3 & 4
Mar- Apr. 1999
entered into the Kingdom of God but this
you have to develop.
powers and you can do wonders.
So I bless you all, please develop those
subtle things within you. They are already
there. You do not have to do anything
Only understand and locate. Thank you
very much.
Also, introspection can tell you that
you are working out all those things or
not. If you take to introspection; you will
be surprised to see, that you have these
Shri Rama Navmi Puja
(The text of the talk given by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
on the oceassion of a short puja performed at Noida House on April
05, 1998, Shalivahana Shaka 1920)
A
s compared to Maharashtra noon, like Shri Rama, in Chhindwara,
Navratri of Chaitra month of Madhya Pradesh. Chhindwara is situated
Shalivahana Shaka (Dynasty) in east-west and south-north directions
from Pratipada to Navami is celebrated where two lines meet. This date of birth
with more grandour in North India. In is as per calendar based on lunar months.
Maharashtra the birth of Shri Krishna But as per the calendar based on solar
(Shri Vitthala i.e. Shri Krishna as a King) months, Shri Mataji's birthday was due
is celebrated with religious fervour as
on the first day of the first month i.e.
Gokulashtami' Shri Vitthala was the Chaitra month of Shalivahana Shaka
eighth incarnation of Lord Vishnu. He 1845. In Maharashtra the first day of
incarnated (was born) at 12:00 midnight Chaitra is known as Gudi Padwa. This
Shri Rama, the seventh incarnation of happens to be the birthday of Shri Mataji
Lord Vishnu, was born at 12:00 noon on as well as the day of coronation of King
the ninth day of Chaitra month. This day
Shalivahana. Now Shalivahana Shaka
is called as Ram Navami.
1920 commences from March 28, 1998
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi also as Chaitra Pratipada, the first day of the
incarnated on March 21, 1923 at 12:00 first month.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Mar- Apr. 1999
Volume : XI Issue 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
who stood on 'Dharma', intervened and
Shri Ram was the ideal husband where
as Shri Sitaji was an ideal wife and the
Children born to them, known as Lav and
averted the fight between the father and
the sons.
Kusha, were also the ideal sons. Shri
Shri Rama in his own way, acted in
Rama wanted to establish the high ideas
life as if he were acting in a drama,
to be emulated by humanity. Socrates, as
you all know called him A Benevolent forgetting that he was a Divine
King'
incarnation. But later on, when he
incarnated as lord Shri Krishna, he was
alive of his powers and used them
diplomatically and punished all the
Rakshasas one by one.
Actually all the events that occurred
in the life span of Shri Rama like Ahilaya
Uddhar', "Moksha' to (Adiwasi woman
Shabri), Killing of Bali, who was the king
of monkeys, who was doing Adharma,
Shri Rama was also a great Devi
as well as the killing of Ravana because Bhakta i.e. devotee of Shakti. Before
he kidnapped Shri Sitaji, to establish the attacking Sri Lanka he performed Devi
rule of 'Dharma'. Actually, Shri Rama Puja for which he needed a Brahmin for
was 'Dharmatita i.e. Beyond Dharma. But conducting various rites (sanctified acts)
strictly speaking, Dharma was in born in to please the Devi. He then sent for
him i.e. he should be called Ravana the king of Sri Lanka, who was a
'Dharmasthita' ( aa He was the Brahmin and Devi Bhakta. He readily
responded and helped Shri Rama in
performing the puja of the Devi with all
embodiment of Dharma.
To uphold the maryadas of the throne
he renounced Shri Sitaji (who was very
nine types of rites.
Had Shri Rama been of a cunning
dear to him), simply because people
doubted her despite her crossing the fire disposition, he could have killed Shri
(Agnipariksha). Shri Sitaji herself also left
Shri Rama, in a way in the end after Maryada Purshottama' (A righteous
bringing up her children nicely, who had
acquired all Vidyas and had mastered the irresponsible act. They were enemies but
art of Archery, so much so that they while performing the puja the enemity
defeated their own uncle Shri Laxmana was completely forgotten.
and ultimately Shri Rama had to come to
fight with them to free the horse of disciple) Shri Hanumana was an ideal
'Ashwamedh Yaganya' But Shri Sitaji disciple to be emulated by all the Sahaja
Ravana then and there but he was a
person). He did not do such a mean and
Even his sevaka (most obedient
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Mar - Apr. 1999
10
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
taken in Bombay.
Yogis. He was of great powers. He is an
innocent personality of a very high order,
always keen to perform the task set out
for him by Shri Rama. Later on also He
appeared during the incarnation of Shri
Vishnu as Shri Krishna and used to ride
So character of all these great
personalities are to be emulated by all
Sahaja Yogis in their life styles to achieve
their ascent in Sahaja Yoga. May all of
you follow such great characters and be
successful in achieving the high ideals of
on the top of the chariot of Shri Krishna.
He is known as 'Chiranjeev', an eternal
human behaviour. You should bestow
being, one of the seven eternal
personalities. He also comes and helps me
and performs all the tasks assigned to him.
He is always present in all my pujas and
on one occasion he had been visible in
love and compassion on each other and
on the people you come across in your
lives and become ideal Sahaja Yogi
brothers and sisters. May God bless you
all with eternal blessings.
vibratory form, in one of the photographs
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 11
Mar- Apr. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume :XI issue : 3 & 4
Christmas Puja-Ganapatipule 25-12-98
Talk by Her Holiness Mata Ji Shri Nirmala Devi (Blessing
of Thoughtlessness)
I have read a book about Him saying
irst I will speak in English language
F
and then in Hindi. Today, long that he came to Kashmir where he met
time back, Christ was born You one of my forefathers Shalivahana. Its
all know the story of his birth and of all very interesting because it is all in Sanskrit
and the writer probably did not know
Sanskrit. So he has given everything in
He is the one who has given us a model Sanskrit language which is not very
of Sahajayoga. For he did not live for congenial, 1 am sure, to the Western
himself, in no way, but he lived för öthers, neople. Thank God he did not know
working out the Agya Chakra. He may English otherwise it would have been very
be Divine, He may be very powerful but dangerous. It is, written in that, that He
the sufferings he had to go through
this World is so cruel that they do not
asked Christ; Why have you come to
understand spirituality, they do not India' ? So He said, "This is my country,
Lunderstand the spiritual greatrness. Not that is why I have come here where
only that but there are many factors which people respect spirituality. But I live
attack spirituality. They have always done
it. Every saint has suffered a lot but, I think
among people who do not understand
spirituality at all," His conversation with
Christ has suffered the most.
him is very very interesting because
As you know, He was endowed with Shalivahana said that there is more reason
all the powers of Sri Ganesha as He is the that you should go back to your country
reincarnation of Sri Ganesha, The first of and teach them Nirmal Tatwam i.e. the
them was his Innocence. He was the Principle of Purification. He went back
Eternal Child, we should say That he After 3 and half years, He was crucified.
could not understand the cruelty and
I personally think that the big
difference between the Western execution
hypocrisy of this stupid World. Still, if you
understand, what can you do about it? But
with great courage, he took birth in the
country where people had no idea of
spirituality.
and the Indian is that, in the West, killing
is a very great profession. On the slightest
pretext they kill people. Anybody who is
a saint was killed or they called him a mad
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 - Apr. 1999
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
Mar
12
The Divine Cool Breeze
hospitals, no doctors. So, his attention
was drawn to people who were suffering
physically. Also mentally he tried to
prepare them. There are so many beautiful
cap. This is the best way to avoid
spirituality. While in India if a saint says
anything then he is not challenged. Never,
But they believe in it because he is a saint,
he is a much higher personality than we
are. Though there were very nasty people
around and they tortured them but as a
whole the public, the people respected
them. If there are false Gurus normally
sermons on the mount. In a way, that time,
people were not so materialistic. So they
listened to him. You cannot say how many
understood?
It is very important that if you are not
a realised soul then it is difficult to
they do not stay in this country because
they know that they will be found out.
understand spirituality. The one who is
Also, they are so money oriented that they
go to America or to some foreign country
and settle down there to make money.
talking about spirituality and the one who
is listening to it, both of them have to have
This is one of the science, one should say. minimum of realisation. So from his
beautiful life that I have seen, we have to
learn that unless and until we are realised
This may be one of the reasons why
Christ was born in a very very ordinary
family. He had no proper bed to sleep as
souls, we will be torturing the spirit of
Christ. We have seen its happening. Al
those who talk of Christ, He has said it
a child also. It is all described where He
slept, how His Mother lived in a place very clearly- You will be calling me
where there were cows and cows. It was Christ- Christ, I won't recognize you.
to show that spirituality does not need Very clearly he has said it. I do not know
any luxury, does not need any pomp and why they did not remove it from the Bible!
show. It is a power within, it is a glow It means those who will talk and preach
and the light within which shows and dress up to show off that they are
automatically. You do not have to do spiritual in the name of Christ, He will
not recognize them. It is as simple as that.
not have any sense of money and other And this time now when it is the last
judgement, He is going to judge the whole
World on the basis of spirituality which
anything to show it. Such a person does
things as possessions.
He was bothered about people who
means vibrations.
were suffering physically, even the lepers
and he tried to cure them. He tried to help
His judgement has already started. I
have seen it. You can see, in so many
countries things are just disappearing. All
so many people who were sick physically
because at that time there were no
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Mar- Apr. 1999
13
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
treasure of this countries spirituality.
their ego, all their aggressiveness, all their
cruelties are being challenged. Those who
did wrong in the War also are taken to
task. So, in the history also those who
Instead of taking to spirituality, where are
they going?
have done wrong to any community, to
They may not be Christians but they
respect Christ. They respect Bible. I must
tell you, it is a fact. People do not know.
They are not Christians means in the sense
that they are not baptised but they respect
because they understand that there was
so much of spirituality about Christ. He
any people, they all will be taken to task.
They had no business to be aggressive
on people and to torture them. This is
what is Sri Ganesha's principle acting
through Sahajayoga. Christ did not say
that but He did say that there will be the
last judgement.
was the personification of spirituality.
On one side He was very kind and That is the beauty of Indians that if
compassionate, on the other side, He was somebody is a Hindu or a Muslim, makes
really Sri Ganesha because He took a
no difference. There were many Muslims
who were saints and Sufis in India. They
are all respected by everyone whether
they are Muslims or Hindus. So for Christ
hunter to hit the people who were selling
things in the temple. You cannot have
business in the name of religion. What a
big thing it is to understand! But the
Christians did not follow that. They did
not. I do not know where have they gone.
no body has any objection at all. On the
contrary you saw yesterday how they
were all happy, because they are realised
souls, but even if they are not, in this
country Christ is very much respected.
They cannot understand. How can they
As we have Mahatma Gandhi who
talked of spirituality and nothing else,
Adhyatam all the time, but his successors
scrutinize the life of Christ ? How can
they judge him and how can they make
vulgar films about him? This they can not
who came, put Him somewhere with his
spirituality and started a new world, new
bear because the respect that they have
for spirituality exists very much, more
ideas and a new style of life. Those who
are supposed to be his followers are now
than it exists outside because in the name
wanting to have many pubs and also all
kinds of things. Can you imagine ? This
Congress was started by Mahatma
Gandhi and the Congress walas are all
of Christ people have done such a lot of
wrong. Such a lot of killings have been
done. All kinds of wrong things have been
accepted. With all this one does not
understand how they have judged Christ.
doing all this. Where are they going to
lead? The beauty of this country is, the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue 3 & 4
14
Mar Apr. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
For example, what I saw in England, I
I was shocked that if some body dies, they
know what holiness is. Now of course,
they are becoming very modern and
Americanised but still they know what is
drink. If somebody is born, they drink.
Drinking is the only way they have
relationships. How can you drink? I asked
them. He said, "Why?" Christ created
wine. I said, when? In a wedding. I said,
"In a Wedding"? That was not wine. That
wrong, what should not be done.
With Sahaja Yoga, now, I am very
happy to say that the foreign Sahajayogis
also have become very beautiful. I am
surprised because in their culture there is
no spirituality, but I do not know how
was just the juice of grapes, the grapes
that they grew there. We called it
Drakshas in our language. How can that they all left all that nonsense and have
come out like lotuses beautifully with
such beautiful fragrance of spirituality.
This is something a miracle. Everybody
be wine? It has to be first fermented. It
has to be rotten. How can that be? So
this is the biggest Dharma to drink.
says, Mother, we cannot believe it. How
could that have happened ? How could
But in India we know, though no body
has said anything against drinking, but we
know that drinking is a sinful thing. You
see it every day. Everybody knows that if
you drink you become absolutely out of
your mind. There is nothing to be said on
a religious platform but everybody knows
what drinking is. Not that people abroad
you manage this ? I would say that it is
the blessing of Christ. They saw how
people are working out in the name of
Christ in a very degraded manner and they
developed a kind of an awareness that
definitely something wrong with this. This
is not Christ. This is not His holy life they
do not know. They also know but
are depicting. It is something else and that
is how I think in the West there is a greater
somehow it has become a fashion. Even
in our country it has now been introduced.
I do not know how after independence
people have started drinking! In every
party they drink, also in the name of Christ
on Christmas day. It is such an insult to
his beautiful holy life. So when they came
on this earth perhaps all their powers of
urge, greater ascending-force.
Yesterday, somebody came and told
me, Mother there is no collective
meditation. I was very happy to hear it.
What is most important is meditation in
Sahajayoga, no doubt about it. But the
holiness were destroyed. The very good
thing about Indians is that atleast they
foreigners do meditation much more than
Indians do. Very surprising and foreign
men and women are very highly equipped,
I must say, as far as spirituality is
respect. They respect a holy place. That
is something good about them and they
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Mar- Apr. 1999
Volume XI Issue : 3 & 4
15
The Divine Cool Breeze
Now we have people here who are
concerned, especially Russians. I was
surprised that in America, they told me,
Mother, these Americans are not
interested in spirituality but still their one
leg is in the water, where age old problems
Sahajayogis. I said, "Why? They do not still exist. And this is the ruin of our
have that respect for you. They do not country. We cannot combine together. We
meditate, Those who do not meditate are cannot be friends with each other: Of
course, not in Sahajayoga, I must say, it
they made all the Americans to meditate: has been solved very well. But if you see,
I do not know why in this Eastern block, even at the time of Christ, He had
people, particularly (Bulgarians) problems with his disciples, especially
Russians, Romanians, how they have something happened with Peter and he is
taken to Sahajayoga so much! Of course the one who, say, satan reacted in them
they had the curse of communism on because I think people fall into the group
them. May be that they felt that they have of Satanic forces and he said that he
missed something in life and they went removed the Satanic Devils from many
deep down into themselves and that is people and put them in the pigs. It is true.
how they have achieved it. But I have to There is a Satanic force which is working
very strong. The more we develop
security of spirituality the more they will
not Sahajayogis. I said, "I agree." and
tell Indians that they have to meditate.
Indians have one or two very bad
qualities and one of them is groupism. For
develop.
example if they are Brahmins, they will
sit together, if they are Kayasthas, they in the West and in a different form in the
will sit together If they are Banias, they East but I would like to tell them to be
will sit together If that is not so then by careful, how to find out the Satanic
another name they will group together. Forces in the West? You may not be
This is the worst curse of my country, affected by that because you are realised
because once you start grouping together, souls but you will have to fight it. You
you can never see the good of others and will have to fight it. For example,
you can never see the bad of yourself racialism.
These grouping together can bring a lot
of problems in this country
The Satanic force is in a different form
Racialism is still very powerful, very
very powerful and you have to fight
racialism through marrying people who
belong to other races. But still I find it
difficult to marry a black person to a white
At the time of Christ they had very
different types of people. Either they were
interested in spirituality or they were not.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Mar - Apr. 1999
16
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
person. It is an impossible situation. If I immorality. Immorality is so much
try that I do not know what happens. accepted in the West. All kinds of immoral
Once we had such a marriage, I must tell behaviour is there in that country. Like
you, and a white lady, French lady was they say that all these immoral people vote
married to a blackman. Instead of this for somebody, he becomes the President
French Lady dominating, this black man
dominated. So, I was quite surprised, you matter. All kinds of immorality is allowed.
know, how could that be. So the reason
of America. That is alright, does not
But that is absolutely against Christ.
was, I think, he was taking the revenge, Absolutely. People do not understand that
may be the respite. So first of all immorality will lead them to a kingdom
tremendous love and affection has to which, I do not know what to callI,
grow between the people. This colour is
so skin deep, it has nothing to do with
the love inside, nothing. It is so skin deep.
Thank God in our country you can have
a wife who will be very dark and the
because it is even worst than animal
kingdom! And they are so immoral that
they listen to people like Froud as if they
have no brains. They have no spirit to take
note of such a man. Only after
husband will be very fair or vi-ce ver-sa Sahajayoga, model of Christ life you can
but they never look at that from that have. Whatever is passed is over and
angle. 1 do not think that this exists in finished. Today, now you are realised
souls and morality is your strength. Forget
this country, but we have another kind,
you see, just it is a typical human problem
that he discriminates through ego which,
I must say, Christ has tried to fight your
about the past and, I am sure, you can
get many more people under the banner
of Sahaja Yoga, if you lead a very very
moral life.
ego. He was born in a very humble family
and He was not a white skinned man. No.
At the same time, another very bad
In your language he was brown but in
Indian language He was black. When it
enemy we have is our Anger. So they are
very proud. They will say, I will now get
angry, you know, I am very angry. They
are not ashamed about it and they go on
comes to spirituality, you just see the
enlightened one. You do not see what
colour they have of the skin. It is very
sayıng that I am very angry as if it is not
very superficial but this is one of the
enemies of the Western life, I think, which
wrong to say I am very angry'. And they
say, I hate you. I mean, imagine any Indian
language if they use this word it would
be meaning I am committing sin. So, all
this aggressiveness comes from anger. If
must be found.
Materialism is another one but the
worst of all which is agaist Christ, is
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Mar- Apr. 1999
17
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
somebody has to be angry, he should be
angry with himself. Best is to get rid of
can also use our fingers to express
ourselves, our hands to communicate, But
to communicate vibrations, you have to
anger. You can pull your hair, you can
bite yourself, you can use your pillow to have vibrations, otherwise you cannot
hit yourself. That may be the best way of feel another one. If you are at the Agya
level, means you are mental, absolutely
mental. Then your vibrations also are
taking out your anger. But see for what
are you angry. Sometime it is absolutely
useless, sometimes it has no meaning,
sometimes, it is absolutely maddening,
stupid. But as long as you stop saying 'I
am very angry', that is it. That is the time
that you should know that you are falling
down completely.
dwindling in the sense that you do not
know what really they are saying. You
canot judge your vibrations because
these vibrations are mental. They will say,
"Mother, we asked the vibrations." I said,
"Really?". But you do not have any
vibrations; how can you ask the
vibrations; Its very common thing, we
asked the vibrations. We found from the
vibrations. It is not possible because you
are just mental.
So Christ did not talk of all the subtle
things I have been talking to you because
that was left to me. Without realisation
how can you talk about subtler things.
You cannot.
Now what Christ has done is to put
Last time I told you about the
vibrations. What is it, what does it stand
you away from the mental level. That is
the most difficult. I am surprised those
who follow Christianity have the worst
mental possession. They are mentally
(Tejas), of water (Jal) and Prithvi, Agni. absolutely like, I do not know what to
But I did not tell you of one, very special tell, like the fog of Delhi. We read like
one, which is, in English language you mad, we listen to people like mad, we like
call it, Ether. But Ether is the energy those who give us feed for our mental
which is managed by another Tanmatra, brain. They are so mental, so
we call it Akash. It is specially today, argumentative, things go up in their
because it is Christ who has sacrificed his intelligence that you have to just say,
for and how you get the subtle energy
which we call as 'Tanmatra', of our light
life to open our Agya Chakra, that we
have reached that state of Akash. Without
"alright, Namaskar." You cannot fight
their mental attitude. That is why Christ
him it would not have been possible. We
is to be worshipped by people who are
can have general communication, like we
so very mental; and this mental nonsense
can talk to people, we can say things, we
has given such a sense of superiority to
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 18
Mar
Apr. 1999
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
you become absolutely shocked and
stunned. So the best thing for all of you
people. Whatever we do, what is wrong,
what is wrong? They cannot correct
is to become thoughtless. That is the
themselves because until and unless
you
cross his limit of mental being, you cannot
see yourself, you cannot introspect. You
cannot see yourself. You will see others.
These Sahaja Yogis are like this,
Sahajayoga is like that, all kinds of things.
blessings of Christ. That is what He
worked it out for you and, I am sure, if
you want to work it out then do not pay
attention to others. Do not react, just do
not react. Everything they will see they
will react. What is the need? What is the
But you cannot see yourself because the
whole thing is mental. This mental
attitude should be completely curbed
use? What are you going to do with that
reaction? This reaction creates nothing
but ripples of thoughts in your mind, I
have told you hundreds of times. Now you
through the help of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But He is also mental, in your brains.
Christ is also mental. Now what to do ?
have to become absolutely thoughtless,
after this Puja. If that happens, I think
The one who broke the mental attitude is
we have achieved a lot.
also a mental. You have made him into
That is the biggest blessings Christ has
mental, like a statue of stone. So firstly
we have to tell ourselves, now do not given you which you should really enjoy.
Then only this Akash Tatva in you will
work. And how it works through your
think, do not think, do not think, do not
think, four times, and then you can rise
above. This is very importamt.
attention. It works with me as you know.
With my attention I work out many
In meditation you have to go beyond things. How? Just my attention has
the mind and thanks to Christ that he is become thoughtless, just thoughtless. It
sitting at the Agya to finish off this goes, wherever it goes it works, but if
nonsense of mental being. I think people you put your attention for thought all the
should stop reading also, perhaps, may time, for thinking, then it does not do the
be. Even my lecture becomes mental. work which it is supposed to do
What to do? I mean every thing that goes Attention works marvellously, if you are
into their head becomes mental, thoughtless, otherwise it does not. So it
somehow, and then they ask me has to rise from your ownself than from
questions, Mother, did you say this way? others, to the higher level of humanity,
I said, I said it to make you thoughtless, where you are in communication with the
just to stun you. I did not say this to sit sky which we can call it as the Tanmatra
down and analyse. No. No. I said this that
or the Essential or the essence of Ether.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
19
Mar- Apr. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
pay attention; you can pay attention and
you can work it out. In this attention you
do not feel what you have got, what you
are standing, what you are wearing, what
others are doing. No, nothing. Now, you
are one with yourself and it is a life full of
With Ether you can have television, you
can have telephone. It is miracle
otherwise. But with this Tanmatra, sitting
down here you can do the job. It works.
Just attention works. I know that. You
also know very well. You do not have to
ask me to put the attention. You just put
humour, so much of humour, so much of
joy, so much of happiness that you do not
care for anything that normally people
the attention, it will work.
The very important thing that you have
got, I think that is the first thing, once
care for.
So as it is, now Sahaja Yoga has
worked in so many countries and I am so
very proud of you, very proud, and now
it is also going to African countries. It's
you have no problem, but we start
manifesting from the earth element and
then from the Agni element and then from
the Jala (water) element and then we
come to Tejas and the face starts shining.
very great satisfaction for me, and you
all can do it. You all can work it out. Only
But lastly we get this thoughtless
awareness by which our attention is
thing become thoughtlessly aware. As the
blessings of Christ, if it works, you will
be absolutely enjoying yourself.
absolutely free to do some special work.
But if you are all the time thinking, then
this poor attention is so busy, so very busy.
May God Bless You.
You do not have to ask me, Mother please
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue 3 & 4
Mar - Apr. 1999
20
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
Discourse (Pravachana) by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Cabella 16-8-1998
Today we are going to have Shri
Krishna Puja. It is a very important thing
about the power of Shri Krishna that gives
colour is not suited for Krishna Puja. They
should have had another colour for this
Krishna Puja So, this goes on from one
you a witness state. This is very important
also because in these days of Kali Yuga
and complete confusion of value system,
all kinds of turmoil makes very complex
conditions to exist The state of witnessing
is only possible through meditation to
reach the stage of thoughtless awareness
Its combined together.
to another, to another, but that means this
conditioning is built up within us. All our
problems of our conditioning are really
horrible. For example, racialism. We have
racialism; in America it is very much
more, you can feel it, though they don't
say. But if you go, say, from Italy youI
feel it. If you go from India also you can
feel it. Now, why this racialism? What is
the reason? Why do we react to this kind
of horrible hatred for another community
or another colour, which is only skin deep.
Now, with rationality you might be able
our ego or through our conditioning, to explain 0 God! these people, they are
otherwise there is no way to react. absolutely useless or they have come to
Anything, now for example, there is a our country and are just troubling us. All
beautiful carpet here. As soon as I look these conditionings are there, but if you
at it, if I use my ego, I will start thinking see when they talk of immigrants, the
now, from where did they get it? How Americans must know that they are
much they paid for it ? This is the first immigrants, all of them. America never
was their country and they threw away
with it. Anger can come in. Why did they all the Red Indians, took away their land
bring such a nice earpet ? What was the and very nicely they are the owners of
need to put it here? Goes on like that, one America. But the reaction is for those
after another. Now, in my conditionings who are not of white complexion, they
are all to be condemned, tortured Now,
Now, the witness state is such a state
where you just do not react. If you react
then the problem starts. It's very simple
thing to understand that we react through
reaction, Then you can go even further
if I see these things I would say that this
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
21
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mar- Apr. 1999
So, this kind of conditioning is like a
if they are by nature violent then also this
conditioning of violence comes in. Then
plague and moves from one country to
they start killing each other. They have another country where some people think
killed ruthlessly so many people thinking they are superior and make people look
that they have a right to go into any inferior and the people also are there who
country and kill everyone and take the accept these kind of situations, accept this
land, that is not their own. Actually land kind of a position, where they are
doesn't belong to anybody as such, but supposed to be equal. I would say take
nobody has right to go and occupy it and
throw away the people who do not belong been celebrated by Americans and
to that country. Yesterday, was the
the example of America, because this has
because Krishna is the ruler, Krishna is
independence day of India and I have seen the ruler of America. He himself was a
the flag going up, our national flag and dark person, himself was on the black
the British flag going down. All that has side. In the same country, where he rules,
happened after so much of struggle, so the another great thing is that they don't
much of sufferings of the people because realize that if all the black or the Asians
they came to India, landed nicely there get out of that country now, I don't know,
and became the masters. So, this is also a what will happen to them? All their sports
kind of a conditioning that comes in a
collective way, that you go into anybody's Then if you want to also see the music,
country, throw away the people from because these black people, though they
there or sort of occupy that place and have black colour, which is alright, as you
become the masters. It's like going into have white, they have black colour, but
somebody's house, that belongs to they have a voicê which the white people
somebody, and throw away the people don't have. They can sing so well that no
who are inside and nicely settle there as white people can compete with them, if
the owners and the masters because they the full justice is done to the colour. Now,
have better intelligence, perhaps the if you take out the Asians all doctors, all
cunningness is more in them. With that nurses, all architects, all accountants, all
cunnningness if the white people think of them will disappear. Now, what will
they can rule the black people then it is remain?
are managed by the blacks. If you want
to see any American sport, 99% are black.
not where you can develop a witness state
You have to understand that colour has
[can you take the baby out, why is she
crying, must be thirsty. Alright]
nothing to do, nothing to do with your
intelligence, with your value system, with
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Mar - Apr. 1999
Volume: XI Issue 3 & 4
22
The Divine Cool Breeze
your spirit. We are here to achieve our
spirituality. The spirit doesn't understand
colour because it is so superficial and it
very sinful to do that. Even the slightest
violence is sinful and this kind of a
violence in the eyes of Shri Krishna is
absolutely to be punished very well. Now,
is so very cruel to condemn someone for
this comes through ego. You think
because you belong to one clan, another
clan you can kill or something like that, a
the colour. Same now is happening as the
reaction. Every action has a reaction. So
what happens is that you find the blacks
are reacting. They are reacting and their funny idea comes in into human mind and
reaction can be very dangerous. Every you decide that you have a right to kill
day I read their reactions are coming up another person. One may say this comes
so badly, not only in America, but all over from hatred but hatred is an outcome of
they are now thinking they must rise and ego. When the ego starts acting, it collects
oppose this domination. But in their own all these things like hatred, also
country where they have people of possessiveness, anger, violence. All these
different colours, little variation I think, start coming out of the ego which actually
blinds the person. You become blind to
they are all black people but little variation
the fact that there is no need to have
violence, no need to hate someone, no
need to kill anyone because of this ego
may be, so they form groups and they start
cutting each other's throats. I have seen
on the television how ruthlessly they kill!
that is there. Now, one may say Mother
how does this ego build up in everyone?
I don't know what the difference of
colour is, but somehow they have formed
Of course, mostly it is due to reactions,
also it is due to the conditionings. If the
groups and this group will go and kill that
and that group will come and kill this.
child is told from the childhood that you
should hate these people, they are to be
It's not like Kaurava and Pandva, it's not
two types of people, absolutely opposite,
it's not that the negative and the positive
is there, it's not. They are all negative
whether they are white or black and they
start quarrelling and fighting with each
other. Now this violence is growing so
much, I think, violence is the only weapon
hated, they are wrong people, they are
bad people, they just start doing that.
When they grow up they start showing
that hatred is now like a cactus, growing
very big and is killing others.
There's no justification for this kind
of a behaviour by human beings. If they
are human beings they have to have
human qualities and that is possible only
if he learns how to just witness and not
they use now to express themselves. You
see here something happens somewhere
there you find they explode bombs and
kill so many innocent people. It's very-
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 23
Volume XI Issue : 3& 4
Mar- Apr. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
to react. For example, you see two cocks you can do it. Something wonderful. 1
are fighting, you enjoy that Two cocks remember I was not very old at that time
are fighting, people are enjoying One but we were living in a house very close
cock dies, they are very happy as if one to the secretariat, where they had a strike
which died had killed his parents or did and they were asking for separate
! Mahasrashtra or something. So, the
police was standing there and by the order
of the Chief Minister they were shooting
at every one who was coming. Anyone
who passed through that road, they were
shooting they were enjoying a shooting
game, all of them. I saw this and I just
couldn't bear it. I just went down, went
something like that Very surprising
Now is Spain. even now, there are this
bull fights going on. Every year six bull
fights, every year, and the hall contains
more than ten times we have here, and is
always full and now their women have
taken to fight the bulls. Now, if the bull is
not killed they allow the bulls to go on
the street and kill people. This kind of a down and asked the police to stop it. They
violent enjoynent is still lingering into the stopped, you will be amazed, they
minds of the people. It is so sad to see stopped. Then I carried those people who
people who are now talking of humanity. were wounded, up in my house, took out
talking of peace, talking of joy, are still their bullets and all that, called the
enjoying these violent acts. Either they ambulance and saved them. But for that
are doing or they want to watch. So, then
you go to these films and things that are
being created of a horrible violence and
people enjoy it Enjoy such films and such
films are again created,
one thing was there, I was in a state of
witnessing, where you become fearless.
There is no fear at all once you learn how
to have the state of witnessing, because
when you are not witnessing you get
disturb, you get upset, you get
you may join also this wrong type. But if
you are in a state of witnessing, that itself
is a power and that witnessing state helps
excited,
Now, if you really become a witness
state, if you are in a witness state then
what will happen ? If you watch any such
things that are happening, it will subside.
If you are in a witness state and if that
level then no accident will take place in
you to win over so many difficulties of
other people.
your side. Even if there's an accident then
you can save the person, you can help
the person very actively That's in a very
small scale, but even in a very large scale
There's a Chinese story about a saint.
So, one king brought his cock to him and
said you train my cock in such a way that
he should win. He said, alright. So he kept
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Mar - Apr. 1999
24
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
the cock of the king for one month and criticise then it will go on like this and it
when the show started, different cocks will never stop. It's not that. Once you
came from different places and they all watch the thing yourself, only just watch,
started fighting. This cock just stood up your attention itself is enlightened now.
and was watching, just watching and With that enlightened attention you can
other cocks got such a fright! They just watch and stop the nonsense that is
couldn't understand how this fellow is not there. But we are always conscious that
disturbed! He is just watching, he is we are something great and we have to
standing, he is doing nothing. So they all do this, we have to do that. Under these
disappeared from the arena and he was circumstances what happens is that you
declared as the successful one. So, this is become another problem; because what
the best way to bring nonviolence. In can you do? You can't do anything but
violent places you go and stand steadily. what you can do is to watch. By watching
face it, all the things that are happening and by just seeing things as they are you
and that witness state acts, acts and stops really develop a very different state of
that kind of a violence that is going on.
being.
Firstly all such people who are just
But witness state is not a mental state,
it is a state of a spiritual ascent where witness, what happens to them is very
you become a witness. Best way to interesting that their memory loss is much
practice witness state is not to criticise less because whatever they see becomes
like a picture to them, like we can say,
any one, not to criticise. I have seen
people who are all the time criticising they can tell you even the colour, the
others. They can not criticise themselves folding, everything. Whatever they see is
so they start criticising others. So much so much in their mind like a photo and
so, that they don't even see what's wrong they can tell you exactly what they have
with them. They don't even say what seen and your memory is not lost. While
wrong they have done to others because if you react on to everything, your
they think they have a right to criticise memory becomes horrible. People are so
others and they enjoy this criticism very much habituated with reacting, like I
well. Actually, there's nothing to be know of one gentleman, he had a habit of
criticised. You just watch and see for reacting and I was going with him in the
yourself. That's all is your right. You have
no right to criticise anyone or anything. advertisement, every name of every shop,
But some people think, if you do not
car. So, he was reading every
every thing, every person. He was just
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Volume: XI issue 3 & 4
Mar- Apr. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
25
if they go away from Germany they will
prosper again, so, why not kill them I
telling me what is that, what is that, this.
that I was wondering, look at this gentle
man, he is talking so much, what will
mean to such an extent that you can not
happen to him? But ultimately I found that
all such people, who are all the time
reacting, actually have senile decay or
may be they become forgetful, very
forgetful. But this is not the only loss we
have with this kind of a people. When they
even see much tilms, you can not see
anything ofthat nature that Hitler did But
he did it, and people who followed him
also did it, without feeling any hitch as if
it was a matter of great pleasure or a joy
or may be it's a duty. How could they get
duty bound to such a horrible thing like
are formed into a collective they can be
very dangerouus because with that kind of killing thousands and thousands of Jews!
a nature they have to do something. They What Jews had done to them, they could
must do something because after all they have corrected it Why did they indulge
are combined together for a purpose, for, into such kind of violence ? And they
we can say. some reactions which all of wanted to finish all the Jews of the world.
them have built up. In small things, in big It can be very-very dangerous because
things you will find people do like that once you start loosing your witness state,
and some people who are very much, very you can fall into negative collectivity. Thus
much developed in this kind of behaviour this negative collectivity acts, acts in such
can collect lots of people and do any a bad manner that all the conflicts of the
amount of harm to others. I would get world, all the problems of the world
the picture of Hitler. For nine years this perhaps, are related with this
fellow was watching what wrongs Jews
are doing. He wouldn't watch what
So, as Sahaja Yogis, what should we
Germans are doing? What wrong they are do ? We should not react, we should not
doing to the society? At that time society react. If you see something wrong.
also was very bad because they were alright, you meditate on that, you
having all kinds of licentiousness. Now meditate. If you find anything wrong
he was noting down these Jews are like happening, alright, you meditate on that.
this, they do this, they take money, they If somebody is unkind to you, at that
lend money, all kinds of things he got into moment do not react. Afterwards when
his head. As a result of that he built up a that person is quietened you tell him or
reaction into him that we must somehow tell her because at that time he is so
volatile or she is volatile, if you tell,
nothing will happen. Gradually I don't say
or other see that these people go away
from Germany. But then he thought even
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Mar
26
Volume XI Issue : 3 & 4
Apr. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
her eight children just to get sympathy
always you can win over such people, but
gradually you may be able to make them
understand what is wrong. It's wrong to
do things which they have been doing. In
a way you see the reaction to anything
from others. You think of such horrible
things people are doing.
Now, if you want others to have
reaction, you do this, that they want
which is stupid also can be very self
others to see you, to react, to I don't
destroying. Like some people have built
in reactions, like you have seen this Mr.
Clinton behaving. I mean you can't
know, to give you importance, you can
say. But what's the use of such an empty
understand a man of his stature, of his importance. But people are seeking and
it is a very common disease of modern
level should have such reactions. But
life. All the time, how you should look,
must be from his childhood or I don't
how you should appear, how you should
know how he built it up. Now, he is in
trouble. Very shameful. This also is' 1 walk, everything is so stupid! And
think perhaps., comes from a very great
indulgence into reactions. Why should
you react to a woman, I can't understand, very different. None of them are copies,
or to a man ? And this is one of the biggest no doubt. Even in the nature you find
problems of today's culture specially in leaves of trees, they are so unique you
all the developed countries, that all the
time men are looking at women, women So, that's how human beings are created,
are looking at men. For what ? Perhaps, differently. They are made like that. One
they look at women because they want
wastage of energy.
God has created human beings very
can not match them with another leave.
has to accept, whatever you are is alright.
to see how many women are looking at Why do you want to look like another
them or they look at men, perhaps, may person? This kind of reaction is extremely
be that how many men, are looking at stupid, I think, that we are spoiling our
them. Why ? Why is this happening energy and life for something absolutely
because they have some inferiority worthless. Now, you being Sahaja Yogis,
complex in them or that they want to your worth is great. You have come here
attract the attention of everyone. I mean to emancipate human beings from these
horrible things are done these days to silly ideas and foolish ways, the way
people are behaving. I don't know whom
attract the attention of others, to get the
sympathy of others. I mean of the level
of your awareness, where it goes, you will
be amazed! Like, they say one lady killed
to pray but suddenly our attention has
become very diversified. Our reactions
have become very-very funny. One
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 e 3 & 4
27
Mar- Apr. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Valume XI issue
doesn't know why people react like that start from it. When you see yourself, you
and then why do we worry about what will be amazed, how admiring you are!
people react. All these things are not only How happy you are! Now, if you go
on individual level but also on a collective beyond that, a little more, then you don't
level. As a result, you see new kind of think of both these things. You just
value system has been created Now, for become thoughtless and you just stand
a Mother, say for example, she will boast up as a person who is respected, whose
of how many men are running after her company is wanted, who is loved and who
or she would think she is a great actress.
I don't know what they think of towhat people react, what they say about
themselves and the way they talk about yon, what they think ahout you? You
themselves is something surprising. If she should just introspect and see for
is a Mother, she has to be a good Mother yourself. After sometime you don't need
is cared for So, one should not worry as
even introspection. It is a kind of state
I'm talking about where Shri Krishna told
Arjuna that I will not fight so, in between
me and the army-my army-you have to
select So, Kaurava said we will take your
and she has to look like a Mother But
they are so much engrossed or they are
so much standing on the basis that they
have to be extremely attractive, they have
to be the queens or I don't know what.
What a position they want to have! Same
with the men See, if you have something
within you, if there is any quality within
you, if there is anything that can qualify
you as a great man, it will be showing.
You don't have to advertise, you don't
army, you give us your army and we will
strengthen our army but Arjuna said I
don't want army, I want you. You don't
want to fight, it's alright because though
he will be there in a witness state only, he
won't be fighting, but his power will act
He doesn't have to fight, he doesn't have
to do anything, but his own power which
is outwardly silent, but will act and that
is how we will win the war.
have to pamper it, nothing, it will be
showing, So, that indifference if you have
towards public opinion I think you can
achieve a lot. Most of the frustrations will
disappear
So, this power of witnessing you all
should develop Try to develop it that
when you are reacting, stop reaction, stop
reaction about everything You will be
In Sahaja Yoga also I have seen people
who want to show off a lot. I know who
does that But they should know that once
you do not react to outside you start
reacting to inside and introspection will
amazed, you will find yourselfa very-very
powerful persön in the sense you will have
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 28
XI 1Issue 3 & 4
Apr. 1999
Mar
Volume
The Divine Cool Breeze
no ambitions, you will have no desires, that you are in that great state of
you will have no special fondness or witnessing. But if you are very ambitious,
anything but just you are witnessing the even in Sahaja Yoga I have known people
drama. It's very interesting to witness also who are very ambitious, they want to
because then you understand the humour become leaders. I don't know what else!
behind everything, you understand the Actually, it's all a myth, all mythical things
stupidity behind everything, you they want to get to and worry their heads
understand also how people have been about mythical things. Once you learn
so violent and you just laugh at it. You how to witness, you will know the myth,
do not get upset, excited, nothing. Just you will know the absurdity, you will
laugh at it. After sometime you will be know the maya. So, to overcome the
amazed your witness state will increase problems of personality the best thing is
and when in the collective, all of you, have to witness. Practice witnessing
that witness state you can do wonders everything, before talking, practice
without doing anything, without saying witnessing, before giving any comments,
anything, without acting. Only your just start witnessing. It's a very-very
presence itself can work it out. I don't satisfying attitude.
say that it will have effect on everyone;
In Shri Krishna's life, the greatest
no, can't say, but most of the people. Any
power was that he was a witnessing
personality; without doing anything,
without taking a sword in his hand,
without talking about fighting, he is the
person who is in that state, he is the one
who brings peace, he brings joy.
I will tell you the story of a Sahaja Yogi
one who has helped Pandvas to win the
who was going to another island, he was
living in an island, for Sahaja Yoga work
and he found the whole sky was covered
with very black clouds, thundering
clouds. So, he just looked at them like
this and he said, "wait till I come back.
war. Not only this, but through his Gita
he has tried to tell us what we have to do
to win the war over evil. Whole of Gita is
the witness state he described about. If
you read Gita now from this angle, you
will be amazed to find that everywhere
he is like a witness describing everything,
whatever is this and he will tell you how,
how this witness state has helped him to
understand also human beings. He is a
I'm going to do Mother's work". He went
to another island, he did the programme,
everything happened and when he came
back, he wanted to sleep and suddenly it
started raining and thundering. Even the
man who was, we should say, not such a
nature understands, nature understands
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Mar- Apr. 1999
Volume: XI Issue : 3 & 4
29
The Divine Cool Breeze
whatever you have done, He has written
it very well but to understand him one
should again have the witness state to see
big businessman because first he told you
how to become Sthitapragya.
Sthitapragya is the ome who is in witness
what he has written about Karma Then
„State. If you see all these verses on the
he has written about Gyana. Gyana means
where you know, but that doesn't mean
Sthitapragya, iS nothing but a person who
is in witness state, how he lives! how hu
you go on reading books, never. Gyana
means to know what you are!
is happy! How he looks at things! It is
interesting, very interesting. First he
describes that, not like a shop keeper who
That means you have to be a Sahaja
will first describe the bad thing, but he
Yogi by which you know so many things
through vibrations. Gyana doesn't mean
reading books. By reading books you
become more ignorant. So, Gyana means
that you must know yourself. If you do
not know yourself, you do not know
starts with the best Then he goes down
to other things and tell you that whatever
are the three aspects: The first he talks
about is Karma and many people get
stuck at that point that whatever Karmas
we are doing we will get the Punyas out
anything. So, it comes to that you must
get your self realisation, You must know
of it. But he IN not, he didn't say that. If
you know him then you will kmow he never
meant that. What he serys is that whatever
your self. It is the second thing he has
said. Lastly, he talks about Bhakti. Bhakti
is devotion. That too is another trick of
Karmas yon have to do, you can do it
but lecve the results to the divine power.
Shri Krishna the way he has described
Bhakti. Now, you find people on the street
Hare Rama, Hare Krishna' singing. In
one word he has concluded, he says you
must do Ananya Bhakti. Ananya means
Results are from the divine power. Now,
may be, some people think that they have
got money because they have done good
Karmas and start doing all kinds of bad
Karmas with that money! He didn't say
that. He said. leave the results to the
when there is not the other, that means
when you have submerged yourself into
the Divine. You are one with the Divine
divine power because divine power
knows best what is for you and se, if you
think you have done something good, you then you should do Bhakti, otherwise I
have served somewhere, the poor, you don't accept it He says that if you give
have done something really good for the.
women or anything, the result of that you flowers, 1 will accept. I will accept but
leave it at the feet of divine power Means for him real Bhakti is only possible when
that you don't build up an ego for you become one with the Divine
me some leaves or some fruits or some
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30
Mar
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
Apr. 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
the love, the love of this old lady living
Otherwise it's just a show. So, the third
Bhakti part also comes after self in the forest. Her love which was
realisation. Now in the Bhakti you see important.
there is no value he has? How much you
So, when you want to give something
paid for it and how you bought? It is not
important. For that a great example is of also, it is your love, not how much you
Shri Rama when he went to the jungles, pay ? What value you have spent ?
Nothing. It is the love with which you do
it and that love should be evident. If such
things can happen; even with Shri Krishna
There was an old lady, from the scheduled
cast, means she was one of the Bhilni as
they call it, these people live in the jungles.
So, she brought some berrys and offered
it to Shri Rama and she said that I have
tasted all of them and they are not sour.
the same thing happened. He went to,
they called them Hastinapur, those days,
where this Kauravas were living and the
king was Duryodhana and he asked him,
All of them I have tasted. Now, after
tasting something, in India people call it
unworthy, not to be eaten. I mean we can
you come and stay with us and have food.
He said, no, no I'll not be able to come.
not taste something we have to give to He goes to another person, Vidura, who
somebody else, not done, according to was the son of a maid servant, because
Indian culture. Shri Rama took it, he took Vidura was a realised soul. He was a
it and he said 'what beautiful fruits!' I realised soul and so he went and ate in
his house where he had cooked very
have never eaten such fruits. So,
simple food. Because he was a realised
Lakshmana got very angry; he said, you
stupid woman, you have eaten these
fruits, and that's what you have given to
soul, to him he was the best to have food
with him.
So, your value system should be based
on such things like love. Where you can
get love you should be attached to that
person where you get a realised soul
you should be attached to that and not to
worldly people who think no end of
themselves and think they are great. They
may be but to you, as Sahaja Yogis, is
the love of people which should be
respected, should be understood and to
Shri Rama. Why did you do that? So, Sita
was watching, so she asked him why
don't you give me some of these fruits.
He gave, she said, my God ! What nice
fruits these are! I have never eaten such
good fruits. So, then Lakshmana also, his
temper came down, and he said can you
not give me some ? She said, why? You
were so angry, why should I give it to
you? Ultimately, she gives him that fruit.
So, What did he see in those fruits was
be felt. But if you have no witness state
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 31
Mar- Apr 1999
3 & 4
Volume XI Issue
The Divine Cool Breeze
person is spiritual and that's how you
then you will see how much money this
will stick to such a person. You will not
man has got ? How many cars he has
got? What clothes he is wearing? All
go for artificial things, but a genuine
personality that is there.
these considerations will be there, but
in a witness state you will understand
May God Bless You All ! Thank
that you will get vibrations from this
person, you will understand that You!!
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Mar - Apr. 1999
Volume XI issue 3
32
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI GANESHA PUJA
Pravachana By Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Cabella- 05-09-1998
Today we are going to worship Shri grabbed the people. In India we have
you never heard of it, we don't know. Of
Ganesha I think I have told
a lot about Shri Ganesha and his
nature, but still so many of us have not
yet realised what are his powers and what
he wants. First and foremost thing is that
to respect Shri Ganesha is to understand
the importance of Chastity. Chastity is not
only for the women, it is more for the
course some of the men are very very
ruined people and they cann't help it
unless and until they are put into jail. But
for a Sahaja Yogi it is very important to
look after our chastity. As I told
nou
yesterday, it is not necessary to find a girl
for yourself or a boy for yourself It is
also against the rules of chastity. I am not
saying that you should allow only your
parents to decide, but let the Sahaja Yoga
decide, because you are Sahaja Yogis, you
are born after the image of Ganesha who
ultimately becomes Christ
men to observe. If you have self respect
in the real sense of the word you will take
to chastity without any difficulties, but if
you have no self respect then you run after
something which is very low, of a very
degrading quality. So it is very important
that chastity must be respected, must be
understood and must be imbibed. This
So what should be your attitude
towards chastity is very important. The
most important thing that if we get hold
on our chastity level then Sahaja Yoga is
habit of not observing the proper protocol
of the chastity develops from childhood
and we have to be very careful. When we
very very difficult and it doesn't give you
that blessing as you should have. You saw
people from Romania and also from
Ukraine were singing so beautifully, One
of the reasons is that basically they are
very very humble people, they are
humbled down, so much so that they have
given up nonsensical ideas about sex life
are in a Ganesha state we should not take
to such horrible things I don't know from
where people get the ideas, As you see
today in the whole world there is a crisis
of chastity. In the west specially we have
heard of so many cases of child abuse. In
a temple of God one should not even take
the name of this dirty disease which has
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume XI issue : 3 & 4
33
Mar- Apr 1999
and all that. So the humility will teach you power of Ganesha can only be manifested
that you are not having your self respect. if you are wise because he is the giver of
In Islam they stressed a very big wisdom. But people don't understand
importance to chastity, very much, and what this wisdom is, its a big problem.
this went to such an extent that Intelligence so-called is not wisdom. It
Mohammed Saheb said that you can have can make you very cunning, very
five wives or four wives but you don't aggressive and sometimes very subtle
have women who are prostitutes Once person who can go on deceiving people,
this chastity starts leaving us we don't telling lies, doing all kinds of things and
mind anything under the circumstances. believing in themselves that they are very
We have seen results of that working out very successful. Success is never the
in many people who are very highly criteria of a Sahaja Yogi. Success
placed and these highly placed people Sahaja Yoga
think that they are something great and surrendering of oneself to Sahaja Yoga.
they can overcome the binding of Jesus That is seldom to be found unless and
Christ and they can do what they like, go until you meditate every day. Its very
subtle
means very
on misbehaving with women who are important that you must meditate: Those
under them. They may do it secretly, they who do not meditate will be lost to Sahaja
may do it anyway, but Ganesha watches Yoga Because wisdom could only grow
that and he punishes them for what they through your inner inspiration. You can
are doing. Its a terrible thing to go into have this inner inspiration only if the
these kind of ventures which are not the power of Shri Ganesha manifests. He is
fields of Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis first the giver of your wisdom. In the wisdom
of all steady their eyes because it is what you do is to find solutions. Solutions
concerned with the power of Jesus Christ. which are peaceful, which are satisfying,
But in all the Christian nations, I have which are soothing.
seen, people have wandering eyes, very
surprising when Christ is their leader, they
worship Christ. go to Church, sing the
praise of Christ, and they have wandering a whirl wind and many people had to
eyes all over These wandering eyes
He is the one who takes you to task
also, like yesterday I was told there was
suffer little bit because of the wind that
came and blew off your tents. There is
no need to have tents in
cannot be representative of the chastity
of Christ.
this climate What
is the need? I don't understand, but they
cannot live without a tent, you see. I can
Now the second point is that the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Mar - Apr. 1999
34
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
your wisdom and find out if it is wise to
be like that? With this practice you will
reduce your temper absolutely, you will
reduce your lust, you will reduce your
guilt very much; because once you start
sleep outside very nicely on the street
also. So there is no need to, sort of fuss
about, all these things, to bring the whole
household here; there is no need. We
should not be afraid of discomfort. If you
understanding that there is no wisdom in
want to have very comfortable life and
feeling guilty your guilt will disappear.
Also the worst thing is that we have a
great desire to have this or that, to indulge
into all kinds of greed. This greed
becomes zero as soon as you understand
wisely that there is no need; otherwise all
you cann't suffer any discomfort, you are
no good for Sahaja Yoga. In olden days
people used to go to Himalayas, stand
on one leg, and they didn't get rea
They couldn't get realisation while you
lisation.
all have got realisation! So one should
not try to make oneself very very sort of the time you will be thinking about
a lordly person. There is no need to care yourself, about your health, about your
for comfort. I can live in comfort and I children, about your house, whatever is
can live anywhere, at this age also. So supposed to be yours. But the death
what you have do is not to practice proves that nothing belongs to you. You
asceticism but to become an ascetic. have come alone and you have to go
alone. This is the wisdom which is to be
Practising means trouble but if you just
become an ascetic from within then you
don't bother about these little little things.
here and there. But our style is still through your spirituality. Then the
moulded by outside world. We haven't greatest thing that happens is the joy. Joy
got our own world then we are going as of the dancing of Shri Ganesha. Like a
the fashion the wisdom disappears. I child you see him dancing, how joyous
imbibed. You can not practice it, you
cannot force it but it is to be imbibed
he feels and you also feel! In the same
way a little child being born within you
never tell anybody that you don't have
this fashion or that fashion or anything.
and you start behaving like a small child.
Normally it has no sense of lust, greed,
nothing. It knows how to share. So this
is the position we say that you become a
gana, the army of Shri Ganesha. They are
Its your wisdom which will teach you.
Wisdom will teach you how to regulate
yourself because you have come here to
ascend, to achieve a great special place
in the realm of spirituality. I must stress
again on the power of wisdom. Before
doing anything you should just appeal to
ganas; they are very powerful and they
do all the work of the world. They live in
this world but all their source of energy
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Mar- Apt 1999
35
Volume XI Issue
go deep into your spirituality. This aim
of getting into spirituality, I think you all
So Shri Ganesha is the Onkara. He is know, you see, but you do not work out.
the first deity created by the Goddess I have told you last time that your
because he is auspicious. So first attention has to be inside not outside and
auspiciousness is created for our good you should not react All these procedures
We are auspicious because of Shri help vou to be wise, to be sensible But
Ganesha. Some people create problems the sensible person who is just sensible
is from the Devine.
in the house. They are always creating
problems out of nothing They are not
auspicious pecople. Those who are peace
makers, those who are loving, are the
as far as his own comforts are concerned,
money is concerned, all his own health is
concerned, everything encompassing him,
is not wise person. He is not wise. If you
ones who are blessed by Shri Ganesha
see a little child who is properly brought
What is the wisdom in fighting? You
should find out what is the wisdom in
fighting. Why are we fightings? For what
things? For small small things! Things that
up, of course he will always bother about
other people. He will find out what others
need, what can make them happy. In his
all simple methods he will try to please
others but not to gain any favour or to
show off that he is very generous. But in
vou can yourself correct! Why should you
fight? If you have a fighting nature, that
means Ganesha is against you. Your
Ganesha is against you. Your Ganesha is
sleeping. That power is no with you.
There is no wisdom in it. In this world all
the real sense of the word collectivity
gives him joy.
Today I am going to tell you
those great people who have been something more about this collective
nature that comes to you through Shri
respected, since centuries have been very
very wise people. Not hot tempered. Not Ganesha's efforts or we can say his
people who were quarrelling Not people powers. Somebody told me that Eienstein
who were having lust as the aim of their has already made a story like that, it is a
life. Such people will be never discovery that if you all become cool, that
remembered by the progeny. But that's is under Shri Ganesha's blessings, then
not so important, you as Sahaja Yogis are we all become one. That's his theory, but
we also had Philward here who
established that when you cool down the
You are here on this earth to Helium gas, all the molecules or you can
very important.
emancipate the whole of humanity. So
what should be the aim of your life is to
call them atoms, they start moving in a
collective way Otherwise they are hitting
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Volume XI Issue
36
Mar
Apr. 1999
3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
to be the same style. I have seen people
when they come for the Pujas, so many
each other, they are beating each other
and they are running helter-skelter. In the
same way when we have Shri Ganesha's
blessings within us, in the real sense of
the word, with our wisdom then what
of them, how they enjoy each others
company, how they try to help each other!
Somebody who is, say in Russia or say in
happens? We become very much evolved Bulgaria, anywhere, he will write to me
Sahaja Yogis. Evolved Sahaja Yogis about the problem he has. So somebody
means they have become one. One means from America, without I tell him, without
what. One means that they all live for each I inform him, without any information,
other. They enjoy each other, they see immediately writes to me, Mother such
comfort of each other. For example the and such person is there in Russia, will
people who are very rich, people who are you be able to send that person to
very poor, people who are sick, people America?" Most of the time it happens
who are healthy, all of them combine like this. I don't tell them, I never ask
together as one. In Sanskrit it is called them. Even if I ask suddenly there will be
Ekakarita. They become one. And this response from so many people, from so
oneness shows in your celebrations, when many countries. Mother this is the
you all come here you try to help each problem, alright, we will go and do it.
other all the time. I have seen nobody For that I must say Austrians are very
minds helping each other. I have seen sensitive people in this respect, in this
Ekakarita. They went all the way to
want to hurt any one. On the contrary Jerusalem, you know, to help the people,
to get them realised. I wanted to go to
people enjoying each other. They do not
they want to be helpful and sensible with
each other. Most of your leaders, I have
chosen, are very wise, who avoid
problems, who do not get into panics.
Most of them, I should say. When even
Jerusalem but this bombing business may
not allow me to go. But the Jerusalem
people, I found them to be much more
collective because they came to Egypt. I
said, 'why have you come here? 'Make
friends with the Muslims of Egypt.' Just
imagine, I was surprised how could they
come here. "No just to make friends. They
you people try to destroy Sahaja Yoga,
they know you are doing it. So to find
out this Ekakarita you have to go deep
down into yourself by which you will feel
are Muslims so we want to make friends
that you are all one, weather you are here
or you are in Japan or in America, with them.
anywhere. You all think the same way,
all help the same cause and you try
So making friendship without any
you
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Mar- Apr. 1999
37
Volume: XI Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
ulterior motive, without any gain is one exposed. This is the time of exposure that
of the signs of your Ekakarita. Not only they will loose that great faith on which
that you are satisfied with other Sahaja they are working out. All these will have
Yogis but you want to bring other Sahaja to just disappear. This is false idea about
Yogis in. So many have done that. This is superiority of any religion. How can a
something so nourishing. Now as you are religion be superior to another one which
being enlightened, you get another person is created by the effort of Shri Ganesha's
who is enlightened. Its very great joy auspiciousness.
giving. If you give realisation to one
person you feel very happy. So many write
me Mother now we have got thirty another religion or you fight another
persons, twenty persons' and they are creed or you say that this is a lesser race
very happy about it that, we have got so
many Sahaja Yogis. But doing that, one ideas they drop out This doesn't remain
should not develop the ego then you go any more because all these ideas have
against Ganesha because Christ you know created problems. Say, in America they
He doesn't like it. Egoistical people He first hated the blacks, now the blacks are
doesn't like, and He is Shri Ganesha So hating the whites. Its a big turmoil going
he doesn't like such people who out of
Its not auspicious at all that you fight
or we are a higher race. All these false
on. Then we have also in India, we had
people who were supposed to be
untouchables. They were tortured, they
their ego want to create an organisation
of their own and try to dominate others.
This kind of people they don't like. Both
of them are the same. There is complete
were troubled and they did lot of wrong
things, which they should have never
done. Its not written in the Shastras.
Ekakarita between them. In the same way
we too develop that special quality of Because of that now they are acting
Ekakarita We forget about so called against the socalled touchables and
religions that we have. See now, how they putting them right in their own places.
are fighting? All the religions which are So this brings in conflict. Shri Ganesha
outside are fighting among themselves. is the one when He gives you wisdom,
They are dishonest, they are doing all you understand that nobody is superior
kinds of wrong things, you know it very to another person. You are all made by
well. Every day its in the newspaper that God and whatever is made by God is
you hear about what wrongs they are auspicious and beautiful. Once you start
doing. They are little bit successfül but understanding that, this Ekakarita spreads
not for a long time because they will be outside also. It spreads to other people,
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 38
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
Apr. 1999
Mar
The Divine Cool Breeze
its not just because of a certain social
understanding and social upliftment that than to see to others. You have to
you try to be good to others, no. It is meditate and meditate on Shri Ganesha.
from inside, inside you do it.
Try to correct your own Shri Ganesha
Sit on the ground and meditate. Now
when we run away from the Mother Earth
and we don't touch her, we don't respect
This Ekakarita first must work in the
family. Its very important. The family
which is disturbed all the time cannot her, in a way we don't respect Shri
Ganesha. He was made out of Mother
create children who are in the state of
Earth. He controls the Mother Earth. He
Ekakarita. That's why always tell them
that don't fight. In the family they are
controls all the five elements. Not only
that, but He controls you. I liked the film
yesterday where they showed a Ganesha
walking about with another person who
was telling don't do this and don't do this.
Its a very beautiful film because it
fighting! They can not be Sahaja Yogis.
If there is such a fight its better to get out
of such a family. So we have sanctioned
also divorce. Any man who is flirting with
other women or doing wrong things we
have asked him to get out of Sahaja Yoga.
The reason is, one bad apple can spoil
suggests that Ganesha is always there to
tell you not to do it. But if you do it then
you develop all kind of horrible diseases,
many apples. So such a man or such a
woman should be kept out of Sahaja Yoga all kinds of horrible faces, all kinds of
completely, so that there is a better family family problems. Also you can develop
relationship. This is very important in national problems. So this is so important
Sahaja Yoga. Your family relationship to understand that such a feeling of, I
should be absolutely perfect. I cann't should say, very inauspicious characters
understand, if you can't enjoy the are to be avoided. I can't understand how
company of your wife, then what are you can people feel so bad about small small
going to enjoy in this world? If you can children, some two year old child, some
not enjoy the bliss of your family life, you five year old child. If you see a child, even
can not enjoy anything else. This very a photograph of a child you feel like
close relationship of husband and wife is loving that, you feel like kissing that child.
thrown apart because of Ganesha's If the children can not be respected how
problem only. If the Ganesha was alright, can you understand the value of Shri
there would have been a perfect union, Ganesha. See how sweet they are! How
perfect understanding between husband sweetly they behave! They understand
and wife. But that means there is definitely you, they understand me. I know even
the small children, very small, newly born
something wrong with the Shri Ganesha.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 39
Mar- Apr 1999
Volume : XI issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
children understand me. So there is of themselves! Their Ganesha is
innately with in them, is built in, a kind of absolutely ruined and finished. All such
feeling of understanding the love. To people are such leaders of nations, and
understand the love also is very difficult people try to follow them in their own
for egoistical people. Because they love way, though they may do something
themselves, they don't love anybody else secretly! Doesn't matter, people know
Or if they love somebody it is out of lust, about it, because in auspiciousness if you
may be greed, may be some sort of a are loosing, the whole world comes to
association. But love for love sake is only know somehow It will all be exposed
possible if your Shri Ganesha is properly because Satya Yuga has come. In this new
Yuga, there is light of the truth within us.
And this truth can expose all that is
We have come so far, we have so nonsensical they have been doing.
cleaned out and kept.
many Sahaja Yogis all over the world. Of
course I worked very hard, I must say,
Now truth is the quality of Shri
but you also have supported me very Ganesha himself He is the one who is
much. I am thankful to you. It is not giving us truth in our brain, it comes to
possible in this Western World specially us through Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ has
where there is no consideration of worked so much, He has done so much.
Ganesha's principle that you people But look at the condition of the people
should come out so well and accept who are supposed to be following him.
Sahaja Yoga, as a life for yourself. In Look at the way they are behaving. Let
Sahaja Yoga, the most important thing is us atleast show that if you follow Ganesha
to worship Shri Ganesha with in you and and Jesus Christ you are in the image of
that personality which is something so
very spiritual. Spiritual life is the giver of
the quality of Shri Ganesha with in
you.
Its very soothing, its very peace giving,
joy. You can not get joy out of anything
else but spirituality. You can get some
satisfaction, you can get some ego, you
its very security creating power. If your
Ganesha is alright, nobody can touch you,
nobody can destroy you, nobody can
upset you, because He is the one who is might feel that something great, but the
the giver of peace. The world peace is only way you can get the inner peace and
disturhed because we have not joy is Shri Ganesha's manifestation on all
worshipped Shri Ganesha, I have seen
people in very big positions, incharge of chakras. When you are in a proper state
military, incharge of that, not inchaarge on those chakras. you get the joy and that
the Chakras He manifests on all the
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 40
Mar - Apr. 1999
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
joy comes to you through Shri Ganesha.
These days people are writing horrible forgiven, but Shri Ganesha at a point,
books, horrible things. Also, there are when sees people are forgiving, tries to
some who are trying to write a very sweet punish. That the limiting point where He
things about Shri Ganesha's principle of thinks its not proper to forgive such and
understanding, principle of His such person, So for Christ, to forgive is
auspiciousness. Very sweetly! I have seen alright, but for Ganesha, He has to expose
some people have written some very very and punish the person. So in a way you
sweet stories about Him. Its not only the have to know that Christ is very great
love stories. Upto a point alright they because He gives us the forgiving power
created so many love stories. Now and Shri Ganesha is very powerful
something beyond that one has to go. And because He limits our forgiving power.
beyond that is this Ganesha principle, We may forgive, anyone, we may say that
which is of complete peace, of complete I would like to forgive, but we don't know
joy and of understanding of love. The if Shri Ganesha will allow to that extent
value of pure love, of giving and also of and Christ accepts that? Because they are
taking it. Anyone who gives you the pure the same, they are like the two sides of
love should be understood in the right one coin. So we can not depend too much
way. I, yesterday, knew that Shri Ganesha on the forgiveness power of Christ
has gone off a little bit. I don't know why because there is Ganesha always sitting
He was like that? But one has to there and He has in hand, you have seen,
understand that there must be some a very powerful weapon. He is the one
people within us who do not follow the who is just peace, who is coolness, who
principle of Shri Ganesha, and that's why gives you coolness after realisation. You
power. Christ has said that you will be
these troubles are there.
get the cool breeze because of Shri
So with sincere heart and a sincere Ganesha, because it is Brahma-Chaitanya,
mind if you ask blessings of Shri Ganesha, no doubt, but the one who emits it is Shri
He is always ready to give. But if you Ganesha. He cools you down, He brings
don't listen to him and if you destroy your you down to very cool, makes you
chastity, in anyway, He will punish you, satisfied and a person with complete
He will not spare you. He doesn't have calmness. With that calmness you
the idea of sparing. At the level of Christ becomes all one. This Ekakarita is
only He thought of forgiving you. But established, oneness is established,
forgiving doesn't mean that any sin can
be forgiven. No. Its a kind of a controlling whatever country you may be proud of,
whatever country you may be living in,
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 41
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
Mar- Apr 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
you will see the bad things in that country and he got the present. This shows one
thing, that speed is nat the way of success.
will not be identified with the bad. This You have to slow down your speed. Apart
is the greatest thing of this Satya Yuga from that you have to understand what is
that it exposes and you do not support the most important thing, as he understood
something that is wrong, which is being the most important thing is to love your
done as an aggression. You don't accept Mother, to respect your Mother and know
it. And once you don't accept that then that She is the Highest, She is the Greatest.
you start becoming one with the people That is how he has been expressed within
who are one with you and they all believe ourselves. Once that happens your
in the same thing. Their ideas are the spirituality grows. I hope you will work it
same, their thinking is the same, their joy out this way now like Shri Ganesha and
is the same and they enjoy each other start Ekakarita. 1 don't like people writing
very much. They become one and this letters against the leaders, against this man,
oneness has to be established fully in against that man. That's not good, there
Sahaja Yoga. Some people who are only is no need if you first can be forgiving and
interested in making money, who are keeping one with each other. Try to get
interested in getting a good crowd or more people and more people. You can
some sort of a thing of a very low level, not separate anyone as saying that they
are condemned, they are no good Try to
get them with forgiveness, with your sense
of chastity things will improve. So this
exclusiveness also should be given up,
which perhaps comes from a kind of a
sense of insecurity, I think. It is Shri
Ganesha, if there are wrong type of people
he drives them out. So don't get frightened
of them and don't get upset with them.
Try to be one and try to be more attracting
people to yourself. keeping them to you,
and you will try to improve that. You
can not. Those who are in Sahaja Yoga
to find wives for themselves or husbands
for themselves are finished. This
spirituality grows with humility and the
humility of Ganesha is told by his
venture. Once when His Mother asked
him that the one who will go round the
earth three times, I will give him a
present. So Ganesha thought who is
greater than my Mother, not this earth.
He had a small little rat on which He used
to travel. This shows that He was so trying to manage them and look after
humble; on a rat He could travel. No them. I hope you will all now meditate
after this to develop your Ganesha
qualities and develop that power of
Chastity and also of peace and security.
pressure on the rat. And while His
brother Kartikeya had a peacock, which
could fly. He knew he can not go round
the world and compete with his brother.
So he went round his mother three times
May God Bless You,
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Mar - Apr. 1999
42
The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume XI Issue : 3 & 4
(Shri Ganesh Puja)
Talk after the Marriages were performed
they don't know what is the joy of a
t was such a joyous and a beautiful
occasion that we all enjoyed it
married life. If you do not want to enjoy,
its alright. Its like a cake, if you 'don't eat
you don't eat. But to be sensible and to
be acting according to the Divine Laws
you should stick on properly with great
excitement and great enthusiasm. There
are so many marriages in Sahaja Yoga
who have been extremely successful
They have got children who are born
realised, very beautiful children and they
have all the families coming to Sahaja
Yoga by seeing how the marriages have
taken place. I have to give some notes to
you that the husband should not think that
Lthoroughly and all the brides and
bridegrooms look so very happy. It gives
me great pleasure and I bless you from
my heart. Only. I would say that after
marriage try to make a loving, successful
marriage. It is very important. For
example we saw from one country there
were six to seven girls who misbehaved
and took a divorce. Because of this kind
of thing we have banned that country
practically because we think that there is
something wrong with these ladies that
they have broken, one after another, so
because he has married he has a right to
dominate the wife, always to sit on her
head. Of course, in the west they don't
do it but in India they do it very much.
many marriages. So must be their empty
ego or may be something like that. It has
been our experience. Also there are some
other countries also. From there are, we
find, some very bad instances of They are very very aggressive men. On
marriages we have had. So what I said the contrary in the west I find that women
that if you don't want to marry, don't are much more aggressive than the men
marry. But in Sahaja Yoga it is not for are, which is something I can't
yourself or for your wife that you are understand. And because of this some
marrying but you are marrying for Sahaja times the marriages fail. There is no need
Yoga. So when you fight, quarrel or do to aggrees any one. Need not trouble
all nonsense you are only harming the anyone. If it is absolutely incorrigible, if
name of Sahaja Yoga. So you have to it is not at all possible to carry on, we
enjoy each others love, each others have, in Sahaja Yoga, sanctioned
feelings and the joy of a married life. I divorces. But it is a shameful thing. I do
have seen some people are so stupid that
not like it, to have divorces and then not
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-44.txt 
 43
Mar- Apr. 1999
Volume : XI Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
you very- much, he will take you away
from wrong things. I know its such a
blissful thing to be married in Sahaja Yoga
but there are some stupid women or
stupid men who do not want to enjoy their
married life. In that case we will agree to
have them divorced but once they are
to enjoy the life. So you should get into a
beautiful romantic mood now and enjoy
your wives and enjoy your husbands and
don't start quarrelling from the first day.
Now, if you indulge into divorces you
bring actually bad name to your family
up-bringing, then you bring bad name to
your country and as a result other girls
divorced we will not allow them to marry
in Sahaja Yoga. That is for definite. We
don't want to marry anyone who has
divorced. If they have divorced with
proper reason, its alright, but just for the
sake of divorcing if you want to have a
who want to get married from your
country, because of my experience of such
girls who have destroyed their married
life, I don't like to marry anyone from that
country. It has become nowa practice that
w kind of a special treatment, you will not.
So I have to tell you that as far as Sahaja
we see about six seven years now, ho
the marriages have been working out. So
if you want to discard completely all the
decency and the beauty of Sahaja Yoga
marriage then it would have been better
Yoga is concerned divorce is out of
bounds but in case you want to fight, you
want to trouble, you want to destroy
you should have decided not to marry.
Because there is no obligation on us, as
such, its more the obligation on you that
you should get a good wife or a good
husband. Despite everything supposing
others lives, then of course divorce is
done. I would request you now to enjoy
the company of your wife or your
husband. It is for enjoyment that we have
started marrying people from this country
to that country. Yesterday, I told you that
to do it, do not just think of a divorce you don't organise your marriages
because I have seen people in the West because we are not responsible. Let us
are always thinking at the time of organise your marriages. If you start like
marriage how to get divorce. But its a this, all kinds of funny problems will start
very shameful thing. Its a very wrong as they have mostly in the western society.
thing. It shows no Sahaja life. If you are Because they come here, they want to
real Sahaja Yogis, you should be able to select a girl or they select the girl from
you don't want to accept it or don't want
carry on with your wife or with your their own centres. That means in the
husband in a very loving Sahaja manner.
Its the blessing of Ganesha on you. He
centre they are not meditating but trying
to find out a girl or a boy. This kind of a
nonsense we want to stop. So if you want
will protect your married life, he will help
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Volume XI Issue 3 & 4
Apr 1999
Mar
The Divine Cool Breeze
hard for you with all this we have done,
with such scrutiny, with such
understanding, and you should not make
to marry in Sahaja Yoga you don't have
to find out your own bride or your
bridegroom, because we want to see how
us miserable for nothing at all. So I again
and again request you that you be in a
very happy, mood now. I am very happy,
I bless you from my heart and I am sure
your marriages will work out. But don't
be hasty, take it easy. Everything is to be
taken easy, first of all, and see, gently
work out your marriage. May God Bless
You. Thank You.
your vibration match and how this works
out. Despite that also marriages fail. But
invariably I have seen when the marriages
are fixed by themselves they fail. Its just
like any other marriage. So the best thing
for you is to now make a compromise
with yourself that you are not going to
be stupid and you are not going to waste
your married life I have been crying, you
see, with your smoke. So I worked very
We have a custom now that the raise your hands. Say, I give you about
bride and bridegroom receive their ten minutes to compose a couplet in
food in one plate and they feed each any language you want to. In which
other. So. the first the girl, the bride, the name of the bride and bridgroom
has to give the morsel in the mouth of is there. So the bride does that and the
man does that. Then all your life.
married life, you don't call your
husband by name. Its something great
that you are not to call your husband
by name but you have to say. I don't
know in English . Darling That
is, I don't know what that is but thats
how, according to us in Indian way we
the husband. She should be very
i naughty to give a very big one, alright.
| Then the boy, the bridgroom has to
give the morsel in the mouth of his
bride with love. Now also there is a
you
| can do that. Its very simple though that
! you have to take the name of your wife
eustom in India I dont know if
or your husband in a couplet, its like call him the master. And also in
Maharashtra they call it 'a turban in
this and if you can do it, some people
i you just compose it now and you can
the hook'.
 1999_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Shri Mataji,
Thank you very much for realisation.
Thank you very much for making us understand how great we are!
Thank you very much for bringing all the blessings of the Divine.
Thank you very much for raising us higher, much higher than from
where we were.
Thank you very much for sustaining us to improve ourselves and correct
ourselves.
Thank you very much, Mother, that you have incarnated on this earth,
taken your birth and working so hard for all of us.
