The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XII Issue : 5 & 6 May - June 2000 The Spirit is the most precious thing we have within ourselves. The preciousness of the spirit is immeasurable and that is why it is called the thing of eternal value. Because it is infinite, we can not measure." "Our goal is to be the Spirit - nothing but the Spirit." Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 In this Issue: Editorial Easter Puja (25.4.99) Istanbul 2 Seventy Seventh Birthday Puja - A Report 14 Diwali Puja (7.11.99) Greece 18 Guru Nanak Puja (1999) 31 Public Programme (25.03.2000) - A Report 35 How the seekers received the 37 message of Public Programme-A Survey Report Edited by Published by Yogi Mahajan V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067 :

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June 2000 Editorial Ganapatipule1999-2000 "Mine" but Her power of love reigned т |he great Poet Rabindranath Tagore had a Vision that on the shores of Bharat, men of supreme; The waves of Her love carried us across wonderous shores all races shall meet to anoint the where we forget who we were, where "Mother." we came from or what our body's complaints are? Sahaja world meet at Ganapatipule is the fulfillment of his prophecy. Each night was a celestial feast. where we drank deeply the sweet wine Over ten thousand devotees of all colour and race from all over the of Divine melodies and even laid awake in our dreams to enjoy their resonance. Each dawn brought love world congregated on the eve of the new millennium to anoint the Lotus promise of a new gift of love, Feet of Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri which we had never known before; a Nirmala Devi. love that had no bounds but a love Every heart opened to offer its that brought delightful surprises. So petals at the Lotus Feet of the Divine amazed, so joyous, where were we Mother. The compassionate Mother lost before? But having found poured Her love in every heart and ourselves again, let us be lost no the ten thousand petals merged into a single lotus of Her love. Tranquil peace from the Divine Mother permeated the inner most recess of wonderous shores, but Her fragrance every being and calmed it. In the still lingers in our heart. We see Her eternal silence nothing remained but on our alters, we see Her in our the callings of the Ocean, leaping dreams, we see Her in our hearts, we more. Yes, we have returned from those see Her in the smile of innocence, we closer to wash Her Lotus Feet. see Her in each other and in which The chattering mind subsided ever direction our head turns, let us before Her awesome Majesty: Not see Her there.

 May-June 2000 2. The Divine Cool Breeze EASTER PUJA - 99 (25-4-99 ISTANBUL) (We have to establish our Meditation) oday we assembled here in Turkey in Istanbul to celebrate the all have awareness is very very, I should say, absolutely dull and dead. We can see flowers, we can see faces, we can see resurrection of Christ and with that buildings, we can see cities, we can also celebration of your resurrection. see all those things. All these things we see and we feel we are quite aware Christ's resurrection was a great message for us. He won over the death and came out of that dead body which we are not. Actual awareness comes to us when we cross the limit of our mind, go beyond the mind and with another body which was living body. The body was the same but one was the dead body and another was a this was only possible because of the resurrection of Christ. body which was living.. Its not only symbolic. It actually happened with Him. After all He was a Divine child. He resurrected himself because he was a divine person but also we are resurrected because we are blessed by divinity. Now this mind of ours, which is in between, is controlled by Shri Jesus Christ. He controls through He was a Divine person. So, actually it has happened with Him. It is not just a symbolic thing that he died and he resurrected into another person or, you can say, into a living person. For your Agnya, both the sides. He him what is death? For eternal beings controls your conditioning and he there are no deaths. There is no death controls your ego and brings balance for a person who is eternal. He may, in you. But when this Agnya chakra for the time being, look as if he is starts spindling all kinds of ideas, dead but he can never die. Christ was some times reacting, some times like that, very very special incarnation accepting conditioning, it is a slave. which came on this earth to be reborn It is not a free thing because it is out of the dead. Now, we are also, working under the influence of your when we are not yet realized souls, Ego or your Super Ego. For that is when we are not yet enlightened, we the death for our awareness, that we are also dead in the sense, our cannot, we cannot understand

 May-June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze something beyond, that there exists a life. Beyond this we cannot see. This our kith and kin! Then there are children who are killing, parents that are killing. No relationship is there. It is a sign of a person whose awareness is completely dead. In our is we have seen now that we were all in a condition that if one were dead, we were feeling bad, we were feeling anxious, we were fighting and we were thinking that there is something awareness at least we should have feelings of compassion and love. wrong with our present life. There is nothing definitely which makes us But that one is lost. Its not there, we don't have it. The whole world is aflame. When you read about all the wars that are going on, the way they are killing children, the way they are slave, by which we are slavish. That we realised, no doubt, and we started seeking the truth. We started seeking the truth in so many ways. I know, so destroying human beings! It is a many went astray and they lost their balance and have fallen into a wrong attitude. That by the destruction of human beings things complete demise. But so many of you will improve. It is a very very wrong have been salvaged, have been saved by the great example of the Christ's resurrection. He had to venture. He concept that by destroying them one can achieve something. Our work in Sahaja Yoga is doing well, I must say, but it has to stop this had to do it and he worked it out. Without him our agnya would not have been that flexible. As it is, horrible attitude of human beings to destroy. So you might ask that what to do Mother? What to do to stop this human beings in the olden times were conditioned very much and when they have become modern, they are full of Ego nothing in between. With destruction? Answer is in the life of Christ. You resurrect people, these two influences, we are resurrect them, enlighten them, imprisoned. We are absolutely dead bring them to a state where they people. We have no sensitivity for understand what is right and what is wrong. Let them feel, let them feel anything. I have seen now, even today the compassion and love that is within you. When that starts, that 3rd you can see what things are happening across? If people are very anxious to force within us starts acting, our ego kill each other, human beings want to also comes down. Our conditioning kill human beings! Can you inmagine such a stupid thing that we should kill also comes down. For example if we

 May-June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze you are nothing but human beings. All think we are Muslims, we have right these false ideas that we are Hindus, to kill others, if we think we are Jews we are Muslims, we are Christians is we have right to kill others. All these differentiations and this kind of all man created. I mean man can discriminations, that we have, is so create anything. And human beings stupid because you are human beings, have no brains to understand that they are human beings. You are killing these are allI man created. human beings! Not that they have For example, you see, in America committed any sin or they have done anything wrong, except that in their they create associations and big organisations and all based on foolishness they believe that they are absolute falsehood, absolute wrong this and they are that. They are not. ideas, absolute destructiveness, but You are just human beings. In every human being, as you know very well. they form it. They form, they have groups, this, that and they are there is Kundalini. There is no discrimination, every one, whether prospering. But it has a repurcursion, you are a Hindu, Muslim, Jew or Christian, Sikh, Parsi anyone. You they don't know, if you start doing such false things against human beings who are created by God and may call by any name. Now just look at how we accept a certain nobody can destroy them. Then there denomination for ourself. You are are repurcursions. Many many countries who were once upon a time born say to a Christian family, or you are born to a Hindu family, rulers, were known as great things, immediately you start thinking that have come down. you are there to uphold all the flags of that religion in which you are born. You are born in that religion without And all such countries who now think they are very rich and all that will have to come down. All of them have to come down is just an ultimate result of this stupidity to believe that you are higher than others, that you your knowledge, without your permission, understanding. So how can you belong to that religion. You have got Kundalini, everybody has got Kundalini. So you can only belong to the religion of humanity, every human being has got Kundalini. So bugs. While mosquitoes and bugs, without any can kill others. So a non-violent method started which is of another absurdity, I think, because then they start saving mosquitoes and also the

 May-June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze He resurrected himself. So we are also you must know, are the greatest blood in the same position now. I know suckers. They live only on human blood. Such things, what's the use of saving them? So, human beings take to something that is absured, stupid, foolish. I don't knew what is the many a times Sahaja Yoga was challenged. Now its much better. Not so bad. It was challenged and there were so many problems, but now its smoothing down, because that's the truth, that's the reality. That's what is divinity. So you should not be afraid. All these funny ideas about Sahaja Yoga also will die out. It's a resurrection not only of you people but also of our ideologies. Now the ideologies change that our awareness should be enlightened. We should reason. The way they accept things is absolutely unbelievable. I think it is a kind of a slavish mentality which doesn't give them freedom to think what is right, what is wrong. For this we have Christ. We have Christ, a person who was absolutely free, free from all kinds of prejudices, all kinds of temptations, all kinds of nonsense that human beings follow. have light in our awareness. This has come suddenly through Sahaja Yoga But one may say that Mother after all He was divine. He was divine and light then how can you go further to now you are made divine also. So the right path. Its not easy to describe to people, that if you don't have the how can we now join together to make a full effort to tell people that He died so young, and brutely he was what are you doing? Why are you killed. But still he resurrected himself. Christ's life, how went through that, doing it? What is the need to do such things? On one side is, we can say, mass destruction through stupidity, He came out of all that, came out of that ordeal. So for us also when we have problems in Sahaja Yoga, we another side is you own self should know we have a power to destruction. Take to drinking. Take to other self-destructive things which are immoral. That's very easily available and people like it very much and they don't like when you talk that it is destructive. So either we destroy resurrect ourselves. No one can destroy us. No one can finish us off because we have power to resurreet ourselves. This special power that we have to resurrect, you should all the time understand and feel it and others or destroy ourselves. meditate on it. I hear from people Christ was destroyed by others and from every country that the

 May - June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze awareness, in our new personality, Government is doing like this, the in our strengthened personality. Government is doing like this or they Meditation is the only way we can are having same trouble or they call you a sect or they call you this and grow and then no one can destroy that. Alright, it does not matter. Your you because you are all protected by duty is to believe that you are the Divine Love. You don't have to following the foot steps of Christ and worry as to who will destroy you. no one can destroy you. This is the What will happen? Of course in the message of Christ's life that Divine beginning there is a little agitation. People feel little bad about it. This is alright. But actually no one can When his body could not be destroy you. Have this faith in you. destroyed then how can you destroy Christ had no organization. He had the Divine Light in Him. So many no Adi Shakti to support him. In no Life cannot be destroyed. Sahaja Yogis are here who have been since long in Sahaja Yoga and they personality he managed to get out of have had problems and they went all the problems, of all the tortures. through lot of troubles, I agree. But of all the atrocities on him. So now all these things have subsided and you have better advantage, because now you are in such a resurrected you are enlightened. Firstly he was a position that after some time, you will Divine Person and he could go be amazed, Sahaja Yoga will take through all that. You don't have to. way but only through his divine No body will torture you, nobody will put you in jail, nobody will crucify you. No body will. That's not possible. But mentally if you are over all over the world. All over the world people will take to Sahaja Yoga and we will have such a lot of Sahaja Yogis all over the world that all these upset, sometimes you get upset I know. In certain countries people get minority of some stupid people will disappear. upset because they think they are oppressed because they are in Sahaja Yoga. I assure you no one can do that. You must know that all the time you For that what have you to do? Sometime people ask me what do we have to do? You must have also read in the bible that Christ prayed and he was praying. In the same way we can say we have to meditate. Through are protected. Christ is there as your eldest brother. I have always said that. But also you have your Mother and meditation we will grow in our

 May-June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze what's wrong with that religion, as if they turn round and see the image of their society and know what's wrong with them. And when they start meditating on those corrections, it you have all the Ganas and all the angels around you. When I see this I just thought look at this. In every country they have shown angels and Ganas are there. Such pure forms of protection you have. So there is works. Societies are improving. You nothing to worry about your see so called religious ideas are destruction or your impediments or falling into their our traps and they what ever you may call it, a kind of a will all fall because thats falsehood. That's not real religion. Religion is within ourselves and this pure destructive force is acting on. From the life of Christ we have to religion is the one which is a global religion. The solution comes like this know that no one can destroy a realized soul in these modern times. that supposing you have wars. Wars As it is, they never destroyed. We had so may saints who were killed, who in the name of religion, in the name were tortured, but see they still exist of God specially and in the name of as poetry, as poems. Also as their religion, they have wars. So now what blessings, every where. They are not happens? All such wars that take place cannot destroy the reality, finished. They are not dead. Though cannot destroy the truth. This is it seems that they are no more but another message of Christ's even to take their names and even to resurrection. You cannot. You may call them, they work out. They are there in their spirit and they help you. think that today you have destroyed these people but they are there. All Assured by Christ's life, by His the saints, all the great people who resurrection we are resurrected have been resurrected in life are all the time there. Their protections are people. Of course our body has also changed. After resurrection you know there. Their guidance is there. You can that your chakras work out all the see them in a way that they are there. curing and all the blessings. Our So one should have no fear. The attitude, our mental attitude also fear of death has to go away. So many of them have said the same changes and also our ego subsides. Not only that also our conditionings go out. Specially I was so happy that that what is the death after all? The death dies itself when you are those people, who are born in a resurrected. So one should not be particular religion, immediately see

 2000 May-June The Divine Cool Breeze afraid of death. Now how many of personality and sitting down here you you have been afraid of death before are working out the global problems. your resurrection, but not now, you You are not a small person now, who are not bothered as to when the death is only worried about his own comes? What happens? Or which way children, about his family and this or you are going to be, so called, that. This mind of yours has destroyed. You know you cannot be destroyed. In your heart of heart you all know this very well that you cannot be destroyed. The fear of our expanded, expanded like this that it works automatically for all the problems of the world. For a women, I read the destruction goes away, no doubt. But newspapers. Specially women seldom read newspapers. They think it is stupidity to read the newspapers. But I read and Iread those where any attention is needed. I have seen-it works. But all of you put together, if you understand it is your responsib- one thing remains, that is the compassion. When you see all these bad things are happening and people are being tortured, your mind cannot take it for granted. It starts responding to that and it feels the pain of others. Tremendous, but as a result of that your will power, your thinking on ility to correct all the destructive those lines, your tears even are forces, to put them right, you just powerful and they can bring solace have to collectively meditate on the to those people who are suffering points where you find, there is a big unnecessarily. You have to experi- problem. ment with it. Just have a feeling of compassion and love. Things will because of religions, mainly. If they improve. Now as it is, you meditate all can jump into a new religion, but meditate with such compassion global religion, they all are one. They and such love that your tears can also cannot then fight because there is one have an effect on these people who religion. But they don't want to have are stupid, cruel, and killing each one religion because they want to other. But it is important for you to fight, they are fighting cocks. But if know that now you are not an they came to Sahaj, if they become individual but you have become a enlightened, then they will only enjoy Now, the problem mainly is global personality. You are not an a global love of each other and not killing of individual. You are

 9. May-June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze will happen to them? Where will they each other, destruction of others. This is what we have to learn from the life go? What will be their situation? This one is a big message for us that even on the cross he said, 'forgive'. Oh God, Oh Father, forgive them. In the of Christ who was alone, who was single. He did not have collective behind Him. But how powerful he same way we have to also forgive people. It is very important from the life of Christ that we have to forgive. was that he fought the death and came out of it so clearly at the stage of Agnya. Without him we could not have worked out Sahaja Yoga. This forgiveness was of the greatest Kundalini would not have gone importance for the world to through, unless and until he had sacrificed his life. And he readily learn how to forgive, you will be sacrificed. He accepted the task of amazed that half of the wars of this sacrificing His life and then world will be finished. Now resurrecting. He passed through, I something happened thousands of understand. You must forgive. If we years back, still people are fighting. should say, a very constricted channel of Agnya to put you people right by Still they are fighting, thinking this saying "you forgive everyone". If thing happened so many years back, forgiving were such a powerful thing so there are wars. If we can really that you can even fight your death forgive those people who happened then why not forgive? Many people before we were even born, why say that Mother we cannot forgive and should we form a group of such I have told them hundred times that people? Why? Because there is something called hatred in human beings. They have hatred. Hatred for what are you doing if not forgiving? So the message of Christ's life is that He forgot, forgave all the people who troubled him. Even he said "Oh God, this, hatred for that. Even in small things they say, I don't like this. I like this. It is very common, now a days please forgive them because they specially. When we were young we don't know what are they doing." were not supposed to say such things. On the cross he says those things, I don't like it, I like it, we were not supposed to say. But now a days freedom is given to them to talk like this. I don't like them, I don't like that, when he was tortued, insulted. He says Oh God, forgive them, have pity, have sympathy for them because they don't know what are they doing. They are killing the son of God and what I don't like that person. Who are you?

 10 May June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze never. He never boasted of anything, but when He saw people were selling What do you think yourself to judge others? You don't know how to appreciate. You don't know how to things in the Holy places, what did enjoy, and only what you want to say he do? He started beating them with is I don't like it'. And supposing you hunters, because that was wrong, like it then what will you do? Whether absolutely wrong against the holiness you like or don't like is just the same. of that place. Why He didn't say, But just to show off your Ego. You don't like this?" No, he just showed say I don't like this way. I don't like. his complete disapproval of the whole Because there is no love. If there is system of selling things in the temple love then you can enjoy everything. or in the holy place. People go there We will never say, 'I don't like it, I to worship. They need a mind which like it.' You will definitely enjoy if is devoid of money orientation. There you really say that I enjoy. I enjoy should be no money orientation when everything. you are meditating. This is the biggest You are closing down yourself by problem of today. Every thing is saying I don't like it, I don't like it, I don't like it, as if you were a great commander or a person, a judge to money orientation. You like a car which is very expensive. So you want to have. By hook or crook you will say this thing. It is very remarkable get that car and sit in that. You might that in the West it is even more be a thief but you buy an expensive car to show off. Perhaps, may be prominent that they will say I don't because you are a thief, that's why like it. I don't like it." Of course in the East, I would say, in India if you want to hide your personality. So somebody says like that, people will there is no truthful life. Its all just say he is just trying to show off, on showing off and thinking no end of the face. But showing off is not yourself. But when death will come regarded as bad manners. This is not at your door steps, what will you do? At that time you will be trembling. regarded as bad manners in the West. With all your so called achievements To feel shy of anything is regarded and so called showing off, you will as bad manners but to boast of just jumble before death. But a Sajaja something, no body feels that it is bad Yogi cannot. He will like if the death manners. has to come, it has to come. He will not tremble that the death is Did Christ boast of anything? No,

 The Divine Cool Breeze May-June 2000 11 something dangerous, but it is a place where he can go and rest. He won't mind, he won't mind anything meditation. That's very important. The other day I met one lady. She told me of several miracles in her life, how because he is above death, he is above she was saved. She was about to die, destruction. So he would not mind she came across an accident, all kind. anything, whatever comes his way, and he will surrender to it easily. We But how she was saved? While her husband, he succumbed to all kinds have Kabir-Kabir has written so many of things. So I said, "what do you poems, mostly about death. He said when death came, I didn't say a single mean? How it has happened." He said, "Mother its nothing but word. I didn't fight but what I did is Shraddha, Shraddha is dedication, that I took a sheet on top of me and surrendering. Surrendering, went off to sleep. How sweetly he because I am surrendered. I said describes death! Kabir, reminds me of Christ sometimes. How sweetly how? That I don't know, I am just Christ also went through all these surrendered, I feel so comfortable, things and when we died, the whole so lively and so much out of fear elements shook. He was the master when I know I am surrendered, of elements. They shook. There was completely surrendered to my spirit. earthquake and all kinds of things This is what is that we have to learn that happened. They felt his death. when we meditate-that we have to not he. They felt that such a great surrender. divinity which is the essence of Mohammed Sahib has called existence has been killed like that. Islam. Islam means surrender, though They also didn't know that he is they don't surrender otherwise, you going to come back to his life. They see. But what he said that you must surrender to your global nature, to your higher nature. You must not die also were not aware of it. But he did, he did come out of that, deadening thing for which everybody was so out. You must not fizzle out into these much shocked. worldly turmoils and worldly things. His death itself gives us strength. It is a very strength giving example We have no death. We have of Christ and He is with us. He will resurrected and resurrection is with always guide us. He will look after us. But we have to establish. We have us, not only but also he will give us strength. He will destroy all those to establish our Sahaja Yoga, our

 May June 2000 12 The Divine Cool Breeze who will be against eternal life. He personality it was! It was subjected will destroy non-sensical things and to this kind of torture. He could have you are seeing now that how in destroyed all of them in no time. He Kaliyuga all these institutions who was so powerful, such a powerful talk of religion and fight are getting personality, but he did not. He forgave destroyed. Automatically, we have them. He gave you the message of done nothing. On their own only, by forgiveness, the greatest force that can their own doings they are finishing. work out. Now also you should Because there is no reality. There is surrender yourself to this idea of no spirit in them and without the spirit forgiveness and really try to forgive. what is left is nothing but a dead body. You will be amazed, you will feel The whole understanding should be very much peaceful, very happy and for Sahaja Yogis that we have to be the person who have tortured you spirit oriented, not money oriented, will came down. What we have to body oriented, emotions oriented do now, is to transform people. but spirit oriented, which is a joy That's our job. We have to giving thing-and you will be transform them. We surprised, with that orientation you transformed, we are at a point, we are will be the most happy, most loving, can call we are resurrected. We have most beautiful person. Immediately people will know around that there is something about this man, some spark about this lady, some sort of a to resurrect the whole world. That's our job. All these fights, all these quarrels, all these falsehood will just be finished. spark that she is or he is so much different from others. It can be For us Christ is our leader, who has recognised in no time. Now at the done this for us. He came as an ordinary human being, lived as an ordinary human being, with all his powers within him. He never used them to destroy. In the same way, we can also, with love and affection, we can also really come out of our death, come out of our misgivings, come out time of Christ, very few people could recognise him, because they were not enlightened. Because they were very much below the level of human beings, I should say. But you are not. You are quite aware. You are born in modern times. And at this time when we think of Christ, we should know, of our destructive nature. This life it was! What a grand destructive nature is the most what a

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June 2000 13 dangerous thing for the Sahaja Yogis. That's the only hope we have that Sahaja Yogis are resurrected. Only thing I know that if we have so many Sahaja Yogis, this world will change. and try to find out how many people he can convert and how many people he can bring round. I hope next time we will have double the number of people that are here from all these eight countries who are hosting now. This world has to change. But your progress should go on. You should All my love to you all. Great days progress more and more and you are waiting us. We have to now should not retrace back. understand only our responsibility. Main thing is, how many people we have converted? How many people For small things here and there you do not worry. You have a very great responsibility and that responsibility is to transform the human beings. we have resurrected? That is the have record, not how many Pujas you That's your due, how may have you transformed? How many have you attended and all that. That's not so important. Pujas are just to give you strength and to give you power. But changed. It is alright for men or they are not your work, that's not your work, for your work you can take from Pujas all the strength that you women. You have to change people. This is your job and this is the power you have got from Christ that you have to change them, transform them need, but if you don't use this power then what's the use? So now I leave it into the new world of happiness and to you to remember that you are resurrected and you have to resurrect others. It's a very very important job at this time of complete turmoil and joy. Which we call as the Sahaja Nirmal Dharama. If it works out, if it really works out, think of the world, how beautiful it will became for us. destruction. It's the duty of every Sahaja Yogi to go into this kind of a new venture May God Bless You.

 May-June 2000 14 The Divine Cool Breeze Celebrations on the Auspicious Occasion of the Seventy-seventh Birthday of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi at Nirmal Dham- Delhi, March 21-2000 (A Report) elhi, the capital of India, Mother's birthday as though to add with a metropolitan area colour to the Holi merriment. population of around 13 The Vice President of the United million, situated on the bank of the State of America, governors of river Yamuna with its per capita various states in the income at about USA, 10 mayors "All organisations are double the national obsessed with the theory that from main cities human beings are guided by based in the USA, the the lust for power and that they Prime Minister of cannot get to love one another Canada, Members of The collectivity of Sahaja Parliament from Yogis are special human Canada, Australia, the beings, having taken to the President of Medical simple knowledge of self, they Association (folk are rich within, capable within, medicines)- Russia, they are aware of absolute ten mayors of major truth. They know how to share cities in Canada, the obvercome baser president of Ivory instincts, disproving the Coast etc, who sent in conventional organisational their greetings to Shri average was the witness to joyous celebrations of the seventy seventh birthday of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi on March 21, 2000 by her followers from all over the world. 725 Sahaja Yogis from regions love, of Europe, North America, Latin America, Africa theory." Mataji occasion had special the Australia, East Asia, Her Holiness Mataji Shri Russia etc. joined Nirmala Devi - March 21, mention of Her role in posit ive hands with 2500 2000- Nirmal Dham Delhi transformation of the Yogis from the individual and in the different states of India at Nirmal process the society to which do they Dham - near Chhawla village on the memorable occasion of their Holy belong. Special mentions of the

 15 May - June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze not the physical pollution but on the prevailing pollution in the moral fabric of the society. It is well known that Delhi, given its vast and rapidly increasing motor vehicle population, faces an acute air pollution problem associated with the use of energy in resolution of the New York State Assembly to the two-time nominee for the World Peace Prize on Her role in promoting peace, health and well being of 80 countries through the Sahaja Yoga meditation, laudatory references to Her work on adding the the transport sector (Delhi is among new vision in the new millennium that of promoting an enabling the 12 megacities mentioned by environment where people could live WHO/UNEP as having serious in peace dissolving difference of race particulate pollution and it is and region from various other estimated that 67% of air Pollution is caused by motor vehicles). L. K. Advani's prescription to do away with the "internal" pollution was to assemblies, sufi saints etc were read out, in brief, by the convenor of the felicitations programme from Delhi- Mr. V.J. Nalgirkar. spiritually elevate oneself through the Sahaja Yoga meditation. Mr. Speaking on the occasion, Mr. Sunderlal Patwa, former Chief Balram Jakhar, former speaker of Lok Minister of Madhya Pradesh, mentioned that he was overwhelmed Sabha, mentioned that the true global village will come out of the spread of Sahaja Yoga throughout the world Lotus Feet of the Holy Mother. Dr. and wished that She continued to Shoba Das, Head, Department of celebrate Her birthday till the mission physiology, Lady Harding Hospital, is achieved. He did not forget to seek presented to Shri Mataji two theses Shri Mataji's blessings to achieve recognised and accepted by the Delhi positive results in his proposed University on the Role of Sahaja that he was able to surrender at the difficult mission in Kashmir. Yoga in Stress Management; the third ongoing research on the effect of Sahaja Yoga on Lipid Peroxidation was also briefly referred. The Minister of Home Affairs, L.K. Advani cited his desire to have a darshan and an occasion to listen to the discourses of Shri Mataji as the Sir C.P. Srivastava, who received several citations and awards during prime reason for his travel to Nirmal Dham. He chose the occasion to his tenure with the International and speak on Pollution and Environment, Indian civil service, husband of Shri

 16 May -June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze "assembly"- one to dedicate to the cause of advancement of Sahaja Yoga throughout the world and the other to have the Holy Mother continue the Divine Form till every man/woman is transformed. Yogi Mahajan in his capacity as the representative of the “assembly" "The diamond does not know passed both the Mataji Nirmala Devi, spoke of his transition through the three stage of "bewilderment", "splendour" and the final stage of"surrender". Initially the stage of bewilderment, when he witnessed people getting transformed soon transcended to that of splendour when he witnessed transformation of its value; so is the human "resolutions." societies where Sahaja being, until he acquires self- knowledge... Armed with the self-knowledge, self-realised souls represent lotuses-they Yogis/Yoginis had a positive role to play. In the eightieth year of his birth, he has reached the Shri Mataji in address Her mentioned that She holds in stage of "surrender"-a emit divine fragrance, are so surrender to the Divine colourful, attractive due to Power which has their innate value system." produced the unique Her Holiness Mataji Shri Once they are assembly of Angles Nirmala Devi, March 21, self-realised, they (Sahaja Yogis/Yoginis) 2000 – Nirmal Dham, Delhi can improve the esteem, persons with strong patriotic feelings. whose object is to condition of the express the pure innocent love for each other that society/country through their attention in the process utilising beyond differences in religions, races, effectively the potential of Sahaja in forging a single Sahaja Yoga Yoga. Once enlightened, She family. According to him, this mentioned, destructive thoughts/ assembly was even more important activities are automatically dropped. than the General Assembly of the She transformed them to serve the go United Nations for this represented local population. She said that in light of the spirit one could perceive what is wrong with the society, country and have the power to correct them. She referred to the offer of some Sahaja the moral/ethical/spiritual assembly of the world. He referred to the vision of the Holy Mother in creating similar assemblies all over the world and creating a new humanity. Sir C.P. Yogis to travel to Kashmir to change Srivastava had two proposals to the the attitude of the Kashmiries.

 The Divine Cool Breeze May-June 2000 17 "Once enlightened, you can to the Kundalini of the whole world. witness the beauty of the religion. She said absolute knowledge could Oneness of the religion will be be gained only through vibratory understood. How can you fight in the awareness. She also mentioned that equipped with the true if there is only one-I am overwhelmed that you knowledge, sahaja have brought light and life to yogis could change name of the religion God?" the society/country. As an instance She wastelands (referring to She spoke of the separate religious identity accorded to Nirmal Dham which was referred to the recent prior to setting up of the camp. a wilderness). I am happy that work of Australian people worked together with Sahaja Yogis in love and respect for each setting up nine centres other. I am very happy that the of Sahaja Yoga in Delhi collectivity with the help Vishwa Nirmala Dharm in Russia as this religion believes only in compassion without any trace of Orissa. hatred. She said that from Yogis/yoginis of Uttar any visualisation of Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana also a witness to The occasion was was able to achieve so much sanctification of thirty the "Form" can only begin with the within such a short period.. understanding of three "international" Her Holiness Mataji Shri marriages amongst Nirmala Devi - March 21. Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis from over eighty countries- a pointer to the firm ", realised establishment of Vishwa Nirmal Formless, a process that is feasible only 2000- Nirmal Dham, Delhi. when one is self- realised, Armed with the true knowledge souls would be able to intervene Dharma which champions the effectively inter-religious hostilities. concept of Universal Brotherhood. She likened the Yoga Bhoomi-India

 18 May-June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze PUJA DIWALI 7-11-99 (GREECE) (You bave to be very Meditative to Mature) t is very fortunate and auspicious down as existence, She created Shri that we are celebrating the Diwali Ganesha and then She went to the Lin Greece, specially in Delfi. It right side and created Maha- has a very ancient history and as you Saraswati, we can say, the whole know Athena resided here. She was Universe, all creation She created. the Primordial Mother. "Atha in And then She came down; came Sanskrit means primordial. So this down and settled as Kundalini but place has been described even in the coming down She ereated Maha '. Laxmi principle which is for our Manipur is the Nabhi. Also in ascent. This was her movement but it is said that She incarnated in the Nabhi because may be after doing all this She incarnated in the Nabhi and also we see that Ganesha's Kundalini Puranas as Manipur Dweep Sanskrit Manipur means the Nabhi Chakra. So it is described as Manipur Dweep. It is written 'Manipur-E- Dweepe'. Just imagine these puranas, these ancient time books and guess how old they are? Must be at least is in the Nabhi. She incarnated in the Nabhi, they say because the first pure 8000 or may be more and they have desire of a person, or an animal or described the Manipur Dweep as the anybody is hunger. That is in the place of Nabhi, where resides the Nabhi. And this hunger She wanted Adishakti, that's the Athena. So, I to satisfy or to direct or to handle and mean, how it was known to them? that might be the reason She might May be through torsion area, I would have first come to the Nabhi. Now say. But it is written very clearly and this Primordial Mother that we have same we find here is the place of as Athena also has in her hand a Athena, which is in the Nabhii. Also Kundalini; also She has one trident. Athena the Primordial Mother, they All this is sign that when She was born say, expressed herself first in the sea on the Nabhi itself. From there She did all her work. Now we can say that She knew that She has to fight the evil forces in the Nabhi chakra. All this history is really shown very clearly in the Greek Mythology, but later on in her movement, when She came

 2000 19 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June the poet who came with him here and this Mythology took a very-very wrong path through human beings as they know how to spoil everything. So what they did is to make all the he has described into all details what things are. He has also described that there is a temple of Primordial gods and goddesses look like human beings and so we have here many gods which are in India. They are represented even in the Greek mythology. But the Indian gods are kept very pure and very godly and saintly, but here it was brought down to the level of human beings and so many gods who were there were shown to be little different from Mother, very clearly, of the Adi Shakti and there is the Ganesha also sitting there. He described it in all details. Also the steps going to the temple are three and a half pieces. Three are big ones and last one is half one. If you may extend them to the whole world, it can make three and a half coils. Also very clearly it is said that there are Swayambhu, Swayambhu of Shri Ganesha, and also about the oracle of Delfi they say that in the Nabhi chakra the Gods will live. All this is descri- Indian gods. Because they made it human. It's very surprising how it was deviated gradually from one to another? Even in India, its done but bed in India much before, much much it does not stay, because we have before Alexander came to India and from that we can understand that there might have been much more rapport. May be, may be many people were going abroad or many be coming here Puranas. So every time people try to ruin and spoil it, it goes back to the normal state because we have Puranas. But Puranas are not or may be from the torsion area all worshipped like Bible or like Koran, like any other such religious book but they are just relating the history of the ancient times and one has to just see So its absolutely an ancient place we it that it is intelligible, this can be are in, which is truthful in its explained, people can know about it. description and everything, no doubt, But the way they have described but later on the deterioration came to Manipur Dweep, was really very great. Even at the time of Alexander. of Kundalini was there and the Greece was a very prosperous and the Puranas were written down. this place. Also here we have question chakras were painted also. But when extremely beautiful State. It is Christianity came, they said, it is all bogus, forget it. They didn't want to see the other side and that is how it described by Chanderavardai, one of

 20 May-June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze Mrs. Srivastava. So they came to see became just a kind of history also that was not so clean and clear. The faith me. Imagine them. The idea of in Athena subsided, faith in all the serenity does not exist now for women in the world. But these ladies Gods and Godesses also subsided and came to see me that who is this serene it started becoming absolute and they lady who has come. And they looked after me very well and then afterwards there was an election coming also. But I don't forget the way they told me, and very respectfully, they said, how did you develop this serenity. I said I did not develop. This is just existing and I did not do anything to look serene or in any way work it out. There is no beauty parlour for that but it is something innate in me what you think to be serenity. She said, no no said it was disappearing nicely, This was the situation of this Greece. Now again we are back. In the Manipur-E- Dweepe we are sitting down nicely and for Laxmi Puja, which is in the Nabhi, Laxmi came out of water, no doubt, but Athena is the Mother of Laxmi. She is the one who is all pervading and She created Laxmi and this Laxmi is the one that ruled here and She was very much manifesting and She created beautiful things all the men praise you that She is a person who is, even in these horrible days, extremely serene. because they were very rich people. Greeks were very rich and they were indulging into all kinds of things, specially in business, then in shipping. Now Diwali is very significant Shipping is their one of the most because today is the darkest day. important business and I came with Darkest night and longest night, and my husband here because he was a to end it up they put lights. Now in shipping man. I was surprised that at the atmosphere its all very dark black, the airport we had the Minister's wife the sun is gone. So they put on all another Minister's wife, Prime these lights. In the same way it is Minister's wife. I was surprised. Kaliyuga. Now Kaliyuga, even Normally they never go to receive any consider as one day it is very dark, horrible, it has lots of problems which lady visitor who comes. No, no they said you see what happened that our made our life miserable and we don't husbands told us if you really want know how to move with love. At this to see a lady who is absolutely, moment what is necessary is to emaculately feminine and very enlighten oneself. Kaliyuga is at its auspicious and very serene then it is worst now. The kind of things people

 21 May - June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze enlightened. There should be light in the hearts of people. Once they are enlightened, this darkness, from which we are suffering because of our are doing even in the name of God is shocking. But that is Kaliyuga, where we have lost all sense of direction. We don't know which way we are going. ignorance, will be finished and we will have the absolute knowledge. So All kinds of wrong things we are this is a new age that we are talking about here, right now here, that it is doing and we think its alright. After all what's wrong in it. Everything you going to work out in such a manner that there will be all enlightened tell them, they say what's wrong? You tell them don't do it, they say what's wrong? That's how every human personalities together and they will being has become very individual- know what is right, what is real istic. In a way he is not, because they follow a fashion, they follow a style. I mean they are not. They are slavish. Knowledge that is love. Knowledge But they believe that they are very that is compassion. This is what we independent. They are free people. have to understand that we have come They can do whatever they like. As a into another area, arena where all the result of this freedom, in this skirmishes and the troubles of knowledge, Gyana. So ours is the path of knowledge. Kaliyuga, what has happened with Kaliyuga cannot interfere. Its reigning them is that they have become outside, nothing inside. Its like that extremely ugly. The kind of things that we are now not only free but they are doing in Kaliyuga is whatever we are doing is nothing but unbelievable. Even when they are freedom. preached, they are in the Churchs, this thing, that thing. They become so horribly immoral that you can not anything that can debase us, make us Today we are not attached to lose grip over truth. When such a believe how come that be in the name of God, under the roof of God, But it personality is brought in, then what has started, that is Kaliyuga. And this happens? That all these ideas of Kaliyuga will disappear. But I must say it is the last judgement at the same time. Those who accept the truth and reside in truth and grow Kaliyuga has to be finished. So what do we do to remove the darkness of the night, is to put light. in truth will remain, and all other In the same way people should be

 The Divine Cool Breeze May-June 2000 22 will be perished. It is said already. horrible temperament can develop Like you see a garden in which there are some trees, which are nourished that you blame others, never yourself that it is your mistake that you hit yourself. It was you who did wrong and that's what it is. well, which get lot of water and love and which give also so much to people. They exist. The others are burnt down and finished. In the same way we have to first accept the love, take the love, nourish yourself with that love and then you give to others. This is a simple way you can This is what we call the illusion, the Bhram'. And this illusion has to go away. For Kaliyuga it is said it is the Era of illusions and this illusion, if you fall into it you are finished. But if you see the illusions then you try overcome the Kaliyga's curses. Kaliyuga is so much full of darkness to seek the truth. That's why today that we start hitting each other. For the seeking is very strong because example you are all sitting here. they can feel it is an illusion. It is not Suddenly it becomes dark, you don't the truth they know and once they know how to move, whether you are know it is not the truth, what do they hitting others or not, with whom are SO do? They want to know what is the you sitting, nothing. It's the same. truth, where is the truth? And they try with the darkness in the heart, to find it. That's how also in this Kaliyuga the seeking has started. darkness in the mind, you don't know where are you, what are you doing and what you should be doing? Just The story about Kaliyuga is also told in another Puranas, Damayanti Purana. Where Damayanti, the wife of Nala was separated from him like going amuck you go on hitting each other. This is what is Kaliyuga and the one who recognises it and gets out of it is the Sahaja Yogi. Otherwise they are just like other people, if you are still in the same perifery, in the same circles of because of the same illusions created by Kali. So one day it happened that Nala got hold of this horrible Kali and he said that now I am going to strangle you and finish you up. So Kali said, you can do it, but first listen to my importance, my Mahatmaya, what imbalance. Now another thing in Kaliyuga is this that even if you are hit, even if importance I have, why I am here? you are destroyed, they just don't blame themselves. Thus another you listen to me I will tell you. When So he waited. He said now agree, if

 May-June 2000 23 The Divine Cool Breeze I will come and I will rule the world, that's the Diwali. If the people are means when there will be Kaliyuga, enlightened that's the Diwali. That people will get into Bhranti, mean they remove all the darkness of illusions. They will not know whether Kaliyuga and you all enjoy the beauty this is truth or not and they will then and joy of Kaliyuga. Its very very try to seek the truth. But not only the symbolic, I should say, that Diwali people those who go to jungles and has already started. We have many those who renounce every thing, but lights and we have to get more lights. there will be another type, the same Not because it is short of light. Why people who are doing this kind of are we taking more lights? Why do seeking will, in the Kaliyuga, take we want? Because all must be saved. birth and will be normal house Our effort is to save everyone of them. holders and they will get into these It is difficult, very difficult. illusions. At that time when they will But you can see now, how like into this illusions then only they seeds, realize souls go and plant themselves in very far-fetched places get will start seeking, realising that it is untruth and they will seek the truth at and there they prosper, become very beautiful trees, fragrant and which are that time. At that time only they will get their self-realization. He told it giving shade to others. That's why you see people from all sorts of places are being awakened and they become very clearly, thousands of years back. So Kaliyuga is the time where people can get their self-realization. They will know their self. They will know the truth. This is said long time back realized souls and they awaken others. Its all the process. It's so well built in Itlooks like that and it is working and you can see now itself. So this was the time meant for that because out well. The only thing which is if you are alright like in Satyayuga doubtful is that how many will come and all that, so you don't seek. You to Sahaja Yoga and how many we just accept, you are obedient, you are can salvage and save? This is the good people. But in Kaliyuga you only problem and for that you really start seeking the absolute truth should be prepared that every one and that is why these lights depict that of you should decide that I am going character or you can say that soul to save atleast one soul every day. which are being enlightened. So you One person every day. Supposing we are all enlightened souls. For me have some people who are getting drowned in a river or in a sea. What

 May- June 2000 24 The Divine Cool Breeze and also they can go about anywhere they feel like, specially on the day they get realization. It has worked wonders because that day you are in a stronger mood and you avoid all do you do? You all rush together to save. You go all out to save their lives. In the same way we have to understand that we have to save the lives of all the people and for that we have to work very hard. wrong things. Now so mnany of you have grown up in Sahaja Yoga and are transformed completely. So, very Now in this rising from illusion to truth also we have certain problems which must be faced in a proper way. happy to see that. I have not done much, I don't think. I have just One of the problems that arises out enlightened in a way that is very far of this is the hunger. Hunger could fetched. But I don't do anything, be for money, could be for food, without doing anything if you get could be for anything. Now if there enlightened and say, you have done is a hunger for money it is going to it. I cannot believe it. How can that settle you permanently. Because it is be. I did not do anything, just you got never satiable. It can never be your realisation. But now when I see s and I reflect and find how beautifully people are just going mad, really mad. you people sing, how beautifully you They do not care whether others have have become sweet and how it or not, others have this convenience beautifully you have become friendly or not but just like to show off. They to each other, I am convinced and feel want to show off. They are very rich, that it won't take much time for you they are very good and do all kinds to establish Sahaja Yoga. It is very of things with all their ego. They think high time that we should understand nothing is wrong, what's wrong, that we have to expose ourselves to satisfied, but in the modern times what's wrong. This is one of the Sahaja Yoga much more often than biggest hurdles you have that your otherwise. And, you see the other mind which is ego dictates and you problems are there also, like they have try to do it without even verifying some problems, they are saying what is this, what is that. Mind is Mother there should be some written laws. I said, no. It is through your experience also you can work. For example the other day I said there is under Bhranti, illusion and then you have many ways to understand. Sol have said that in Sahaja Yoga if they want they should get their realization the Laxmi principle. Now let us see

 25 2000 May - June The Divine Cool Breeze has. In this Kaliyuga this is one of the blessings, because the job of Kaliyuga is to create doubts, to create illusions "Bhram" (TH). So it will go on creating. But you should stick on how the Laxmi principle goes out. Very simple, very easy if you want to know, it's very simple. Because this Laxmi is very volatile, "chanchal'. Once you give Rs. 100/- to a servant, immediately he will go to the pub and to the truth, then it won't work out. It won't work out. So it is important to drink. The Laxmi is there. As soon understand that all the time we are as he gets Laxmi, he tries to go to the pub and drink. So you can imagine under testing ground. It is a thing just to be witnessed. Its very interesting what is the situation with this Laxmi. to see how this Laxmi works. One should run away from the house of a She is very good but she tempts. She tempts you. So you have to watch. Whatever money you have man, who is only interested in cheating, interested in grabbing and you put in the bank or do whatever you like but just don't spend the telling lies. So this Laxmi does not whole. Just don't do it. Secondly, you stay with him. She goes away. All these things are happening around us. must know also that if all the doors I am not saying this of mine, its all are closed and you get Laxmi from there. one door, she will stay. No doubt, she will stay, if you are miserly she will stay but she will rot because there is no outlet. But if you open the other door, you will be amazed that not only this Laxmi can go out but also can get much more air; much more freedom from out side, because you You see, you have to see clearly the movement of your mind. Where is it going, what is it thinking?. Laxmi is the one, she make you think about something which you should not think. As I told you people will start They drinking, they will go to races. will drink a lot. I mean they will do everything. Why? Because they have money and they spend it somewhere. But they put it into things which have no investment in the real good, in the have opened the other door. With one door, you just experiment, nothing comes in. Open one door, no air will come, nothing will come. But you open the second door then you will find that there is gushing of currents inside. In the same way a person who real achievement and that's how we have now people who are spending so much money, so much on wasteful wants to have money should first learn to spend whatever money he things. So wastefulness can never

 May-June 2000 26 The Divine Cool Breeze or can you give me some report. They never achieve the goal that is yours go on asking you questions. But why? and the goal that is yours, is the fulfillment of your being,to become the spirit. It is very very subtle to understand. You say I am doing this. What is wrong? What is there? After all if I am doing so many things wrong or something serious, the body should react, No, nothing will react, neither We don't want, we don't want to do that. They are not interested, they are not interested in what you have. This is something one has to learn very favourably and intelligently when people start communicating to you about the business part. In Sahaja your mind nor your body. You see all these years my experience has been very simple. That there are some Sahaja Yogis still involved in the Laxmi principle. Like they want to cheat me, they want to make money out of Sahaja Yoga. Then there are some people who want to do business among themselves. All of them have failed very badly. Failed so badly that they are like bankrupts or they are in jail and all that. So never do business with Sahaja Yogis. For Yoga there is no business among themselves except they have business with self-realization. If you understand this small point, the money part of it which is quite illusive, will disappear. It all works out beautifully if you are surrendered but otherwise also it can be worked out. Even if you are not surrendered because you see the result and you are hurt, you are troubled and so you will give it up. So whatever happens, its our watching system, I should say, one of the Chakras. You can see clearly by Sahaja Yogis it is very important not to do any business with the Sahaja Yogis. If you understand this principle will not do business in Sahaja watching, clearly you can see, how much you have gone into trouble. So you give it up. But before doing that we have a very good way of seeing through our vibrations. You just feel the vibrations and see for yourself. If the vibrations are good? If they are not alright you should know that there is something wrong. You can judge any human being like, you can judge you Yoga. Of course you cannot do business with me also. So this is a very very simple thing which people start doing. For example, there are two Sahaja Yogis one from, say, from. Japan another from, say, America. And they start saying, "oh you are a Sahaja Yogi, I am also a Sahaja Yogi" Can you give me some false papers any pastor or you want to see any one of these millionaires and all those

 May - June 27 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze vibrations that means you will not things but first you must find out that judge people rightly, nor will you have knowledge properly. So first you must get all your vibrations corrected one is a perfect Sahaja Yogi or not. This happens with the individuals. It can happen in collective also. I have seen in the collective, people are so and also you chakras corrected. After much misled and one negative person that you can see what are your immediately knows who is the other associates? Who are they? See negative, and then, he gets hold of that actually, your mind now is so negative and they start working enlightened that you can straight together. So you have to be extremely forward see everything before you. cautious that you have got your self- But if you don't use that enlightened realization. You got everything, you mind, you will be amazed, there are have got also lot of money in Sahaja some forces of negativity and once Yoga. With all that you should know these forces start, you see, actually we are at a juncture now that these things won't happen anymore. When I started Sahaja Yoga, it was very bad. It was very bad situation and we had half baked, quarter baked, 1/16 baked, people. And I just didn't know, it's a very very good sign for thieves to walk in. So you should be very careful and don't get charmed by all these non-sensical things. That's what is the protection from your Mother, that She wants to protect you in this way. Our whole attitude towards life how to tell them because if I tell them anything, they would just run away. They would not come to Sahaja Yoga. While in the other places like Gurus, what they do, they take money and that's all. People think now we have has to be that of a witness. You see everything clearly. Gradually this scene will become so very sharp, so clear, so understanding that you will be amazed. Then you will be using given money to the Guru, how can we leave? They go on giving money and sticking on. sömething, anything you have. Then you don't have to think, only you have to know the vibrations. What the vibrations are? What do the vibration But in Sahaja Yoga there is no say, because they are there to guide money involved. So they come and you. then disappear. It is common, very, very common that they come for a Those who are not yet very good short time to Sahaja Yoga. But if they are really special people, they just at vibrations should try to establish themselves. If you are not good at

 May - June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 28 stick and start seeing everything from the right angle because they are enlightened, they are grown up and they are mature. So this is how we be surprised that we have been given very very important thing to be done. And the most important thing is to be watchful about yourself. That I hope you are not falling into the trap have to come back to this horrible night of Kaliyuga through Diwali. of Laxmi. The same Lxmi that decorates you can also disfigure you. So we have to do everything to keep This is what we have to do, to be humble and to find whether you are alright or not, whether you are going in the right direction or not. It is you only who can decide. With vibrations you can immediately this beautiful Laxmi, this decorated Laxmi as our ideal and it works out. Our aim is this, our ideal is this and we have to do this. So we can know that you are catching or you will know you are right. Whatever decision has to be taken you have to use your hands fully. Its not talking that is going to help, it is not giving lectures that is going to help. It is through experiment, through understanding, through the feeling or the deep, I should say, the deep impact establish the new Government, very beautiful Govt. Our whole attitude should be such that we have to be alert because you become meditative. As soon as you start thinking about something you become meditative. Your thinking will go away. You won't be able to think and then if not meditative you can be lost. When you of everything will communicate to you what sort of people they are, what Why? Because then you have given they are talking about, what you your life in the hands of truth. You should do. It could be little mental but have given your hand into the hand later on it becomes absolutely beyond of reality and that guides you, that the mental activity. are meditative you cannot be lost. protects you around; that watches, Now, as it is, I said that Kaliyuga that watches, that helps you, you can is over, is about to finish. But still never go wrong. Even if you are there may be people who will try to meditative, you don't worry, nothing go back to this kind of normałcy, so will happen to you. But if you are called. But there is a way out for all. never meditative then it is impossible This is simple meditation. With to save. It is impossible to save. It is impossible to mature. You have to be very meditative to mature. That's very meditation you will achieve, whatever is to be achieved and then you will

 29 May-June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze are listening to me please try that you have to meditate afterwards. In meditation you will assimilate and important. I would say that all the Sahaja Yogis here today are doing this Puja and then there will be also the same power that you think is within you, of discrimination, of giving vibrations, of doing all kinds of things out of Sahaja Yoga, will be completely, continuously be acting. But if you do not meditate, if you are somewhere else, it will not work another Puja of enlightenment, I have called. But you have to be very very careful not to denounce your meditative mood. No. What you can do is to watch, how far you have gone? How far you have solved your problems? As soon as you see that immediately you become a complete out. Won't work out. So today is the day to celebrate and to be happy that realized soul. we have so many Sahaja Yogis all So the guideline is such that we over. There is hope for the whole should know that we are realized world and we can save all people who are lost in the wilderness.That's souls. What is so important? Why are we realized souls? Not only for our desires, for our pure desires but perfect. No doubt. But after that celebration and everything we should sit on the asan or anywhere and watch, also for others. And in that understanding that we are not only what is happening and you will be for ourselves but for others, you amazed that in meditation all the become collectively conscious and you start helping others. You stand beauties you have achieved will be very well, otherwise are lost and the revealed to you. All kinds of things others are also lost. This is the way that you have achieved. And all the we have to really go ahead; go ahead botherations and worries of things towards the truth and bring that truth will disappear. This should happen to you all and this is what I request you for other people and save them. This is how you can express your love to all to have this special capacity to understand yourself. My own hope is fulfilled. To see you sitting down here Ifeel over joyed and same way you will also feel when you all will try to them, all your caring. . It is a subject, which is very difficult to handle, I think, because, I should say, to talk about this subject is much easier than to assimilate this raise the Kundalini of others. Establish them in Sahaja Yoga. You will be amazed, what will happen to within ourselves. So now when you

 May June 2000 30 The Divine Cool Breeze realization to people and look after the Nabhi of the people. Whatever it you. Its so joyous to give realization to others. For that you don't have to is, it is very very important to understand how far you can go. We have to change the world. We have do anything.. You don't have to pay anything. Nothing of the kind. This power you have; which is awakened, to save the world. Its your that's all. Wherever you go what you have to do is to just awaken the responsibility. You have got Kundalini of the person and give realization, not the others. So don't realization. Nothing is to be done. try to find faults with others. Think And that's so joy giving. You feel so about you that you have got realization and it is expected that happy about it. you should spread Sahaja Yoga. Thank you very much. So today I bless you all with this special power that you give May God Bless you.

 May -June 2000 31 The Divine Cool Breeze GURU NANAK BIRTIHDAY PUJA - 1999 (Noida House) Pravachan by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi T. oday is the birthday of Shri Guru Nanaka. It is being Shabad-Jalam (confusion), in which most of the people are caught, will come to an end. See the condition of celebrated through-out the world with so much of zeal that I have Sikhs! not seen in India. For the first time it Without looking within and has been advertised in so many papers experiencing the innate energy, how could one follow Sikh religion? Only and by different means. Guru Nanaka always talked of this is the teaching of Guru Nanaka, this is what is called 'Sikh' (learning). All the saints of that age had the Sahaja Yoga. Everything else, he said, is just showing off. About religion he said that observing fasts, going on pilgrimage, etc., are just meant to show off. Now you have to discover discretion to know who is a saint and who is not. All the Gurus incorporated their poems and experiences in Guru the power that is within you and Grantha and that is why Guru Grantha establish it. Guru Nanaka kept on is revered so much. Only the repeating the same thing again and again. He never talked of rituals. But when Guru Teg-Bahadur came, war renowned Gurus contributed to it. They were so spiritual that they did churning of all the religious scriptures and put the substance in Guru with Mohammadan Rulers was being fought. So he prescribed Kada (iron bangle), sword (kripan) to keep them in the state of preparedness. But Guru Nanaka always talked of the spirit. He Grantha. That is what we do in Sahaja Yoga. We do not follow any particular saint explained it very clearly, but no one or incarnation; we respect all of them heeded what he wrote. They will just and strike a balance. But all this was put a finger on the couplet and read it lost in words. People did not go out. Could we understand him this deeper in them. That is why Kabira way? If we go through his writings properly and absorb it, then the whole has written 'even the scholars went on reading and reading like fools,

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June 2000 32 without absorbing any thing (f - Huge Gurudwaras were built. But पढि पण्डित मुर्ख भए). That is how a there is no use. There are very few race of fools was created. Now there evolved beings, the remaining is just is no war being fought but they are a race of Sardars. How could truth be so conditioned that they will wear told to them? But now Sikhs have Turbans, keep swords and combs ete. started coming to Sahaja Yoga. I have But they have no objection in seen many of them with turbans on. consuming Alcohol. All the Gurus May be some of them are coming warned the disciples about the evil without turbans. One is Namdhari Sikh. There are many Namdhari Sikhs in Bankok. As many as fifty-sixty of them come to the Programme. They effects of alcohol. Any one talking of consciousness could never support wine. On the one side they will consume alcohol, on the other they wear white turbans. I do not know wear turbans, keep swords and what is their speciality, but they combs! Any way they wish to be part follow what Guru Nanak has said. of that clane. This has affected their That is how diversions are created and internal growth. They have taken to people start fighting amongst this kind of situation and as a result themselves. Guru Nanaka said that I have become material beings. On am prophet of Mohammedans and material level they look to everything. Guru of Hindus. Until one is realized one cannot understand this. But it was To transform these people, should not be difficult because we (Sahaja necessary to prepare us for this day. Now it is our duty to work-out what H.rin Yogis) are going by what the Gurus preached. Gurus could not give they said. Things, however, went in opposite direction and many seekers realization to people but we are giving realization. They talked of achieving were lost, no-one knows where! "Sahaja Smadhi', but did not tell how. I was talking about Gyan Deva.. He belongs to Nath cult. He wrote about Kundalini but his disciples call themselves varkaris ( , They take two heavy cymbals (sitn in their hands, wear jute clothes and go to Pandhari Nath, Pandhar Pur. It takes Who will raise the Kundalini? Guru Nanaka gave realisation to only two of his disciples. One Guru giving realisation to only two of his disciples! What could be the effect on the society? So people started worshipping him at external level. them one month to reach there. They

 May-June 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 33 travel on foot and thus consider themselves to be very sacrificing. All the way they chew tobacco. These Varkari people have created this cult. They take procession of Gyan Deva on a palanquin. Gyan Deva never have experienced the truth. So you cannot accept the falsehood. Falsehood gets finished in Sahaja Yoga. So many people have got their self-realization in the world. No one could spread falsehood now. Whatever I have told in Sahaja Yoga afforded shoes when he was alive, but people place his slipper, in the palanquin and take the procession from one village to another. Wherever they reach the villagers offer them food and refreshment. It is a new method of beggary. At the birth place of Gyan Deva and places like Pune and Niwase women grow Tulsi in is taped and recorded. No one could change it. People could listen to tapes, but they go on reading books without understanding. This is the reason I told them to have more tapes and get the books printed. Listening to the tapes will definitely have impact on their minds. People take book reading heavy earthen pots, lift it on their heads and walk in procession to as a means of entertainment. What is the use of it? But now Sahaja Yogis Anandi. This I have seen myself. have reached a level from where they People have made lot of money in the name of Gyna Deva. But I do not know what to do to stop it. All his cannot go astray. They will not have to adopt wrong things. That is what we have to learn from Guru Nanaka. purpose has forfeited. One fellow gives big big lecture on Gyan Deva, (3TT ai). But what people are speaks whatever he feels like and doing! However, in Sahaja Yoga such there are people who listen to him things will not happen since I have Guru Nanaka said know thyself? with blind faith! convinced all of them. They cannot Same is the case with Guru Change now. No harm could be done Nanaka. No one knows what he now; what has happened has happened. Reading scriptures and Church Book will have no beneficial effect. To awaken one's energy is the lesson that we have to take from Guru actually said. People have made Chandigarh, Guru Nanaka talked of Chandi. He talked of my incarnation on the earth. He explained every Nanaka. We, Realized beings thing. But no one cares for it. Most understand Sahaja Yoga so deeply that now there is no need to draw any of the prophets and Gurus have been treated like that. Of course you people

 May June 200D The Divine Coal Breeze 34 other meaning of it. Still there are made of his achievements? These people suggesting rituals. It is all people are misusing Lord Christ, useless. I have never said so, yet Mohammad Sahib and, above all, people are doing what I have never Guru Nanaka because he was the last said. So now when they listen to tapes incarnation. Shirdi Sainath incarnated of my lectures and understand that after him. Sai Nath was against all the Mother has not said it, why should rituals and conditioning because these we do that? But because of old are misleading. After awakening, Sanskara (conditioning) we keep on things change of course. Realized people become knowledgeable.. Without realization it is not possible. observing certain rituals. So long as we do not get rid of So Sai Nath did not organize. We have our conditionings, we shall not understand real Sahaja Yoga. I have not organized too. We have no organization. People automatically made you very special people. You know the real meaning of religion. get organized after awakening, the way different organs of the body are organized. So without any organizationeverything is going on immaculately in Sahaja Yoga. You know every thing, you know about yourself and about others. You could give realisation to people. So now you have become perfect (t). So what is there to go astray now? I bless you all. You have to keep in mind that we have not to pervert what we have achieved. It is most sacrilegious. We don't have to pervert You cannot fall. So today I thought of the pains of Guru Nanaka. How much he it, perversion should not be allowed. tolerated! His wife was not May God Bless You. cooperative at all. What people have

 May June 2000 35 The Divine Cool Breeze PUBLIC PROGRAMME AT RAM LILA MAIDAN NEW DELHI – MARCH 25, 2000 (A Report) "All roads lead to Ramlila Maidan" item captioned "Survey Report"). would have been the appropriate Seekers of truth from all castes and proverb on March 25, the day the social groupings had assembled to public programme had been have a "darshan" of Shri Mataji and organised at the main Ramilila were eager to receive the "Spiritual Maidan. Numerous buses chartered Experience". from neighbouring places such as Meerut, Gurgaon, Faridabad, Ghaziabad ete., not to mention of welcome Shri Mata Ji when She their counterparts from East, West. arrived. The Chief Minister of Delhi, North, South and Central Delhi, all Mrs Shiela Dixit was present there. made a beeline towards the Ramlila She presented a bouquet to Her Maidan. The sea of humanity Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi at estimated anywhere between forty to the dais. Seekers of the spiritual bliss sixty thousand had assembled at the listened spell bound when Shri Mataji Maidan well before the schedule start suggested to them that the path of time of 6.45 P.M. Hundreds of self-knowledge was easy to access- hoardings, thousands of lamppost hangings and the numerous wall renunciation. All it required was a posters announcing the public yearning for the great spiritual programme did have their impact judging by the long queue of cars and internal harmony and external balance other personal vehicles which were of the seeker in his day-to-day life. trying to earn a parking slot in the Shri Mataji was pained to see that vicinity, Roughly 50% of the seekers such genuine seekers were being had traveled all the way from Meerut, taken for a ride by numerous fake Noida, Ghaziabad, Gurgaon, Faridabad, Haridwar etc. While the The huge crowd stood up to it required no penance, no happening and a maintenance of an gurus. Shri Mataji mentioned that the Sahaja Yoga, at once, appeals to the productive entrepreneurship of an remainder were from the Delhi metro region (for details refer to the news

 The Divine Cool Breeze May-June 2000 36 individual. To buttress the point, She unproductive activities to achieve referred to the incident where the super normal profits. A central point chief of a mafia of Talyati region in in the economic literature is that Russia sought Her permission to reallocation of entrepreneurship can embrace the Sahaja Yoga . On be achieved through changes in rules transformation, he wanted Shri that determine relative rewards than Mataji's permission to export onions to Delhi where onion prices reigned via modification of goals of entrepreneurs and prospective entrepreneurs themselves. Shri Mataji through her illustration sky-high for a brief period due to an adverse demand-supply gap situation. was The accepted hypothesis in mentioning that the transformation of an individual is possible on self- economic literature is that есопотic entrepreneurs are always with us in realisation even when the incentive the society. The private entrepreneur- structure is not right! ship has a bias toward profit. The productive contribution of the seekers had the unique first encounter society's entreprenurial activities with the reality just by extending their depends on the relative payoffs hands towards Her Holiness Mataji society offers to productive activities Shri Nirmala Devi. such as innovation in contrast to Then the great moment arrived;

 The Divine Cool Breeze May-June 2000 37 HOW THE SEEKERS RECEIVED THE MESSAGE OF THE PUBLIC PROGRAMME Survey of Seekers at Ramlila Ground on March 25, 2000 (Survey Report) (Prepared by the core team consisting participated in the survey and of R. Venkatesan (Team Leader), respondents were around 930 in Nitin Jindal, Devender Kumar, number. Sowmiya Venkatesan and Sujata Srivastava. More than 35 volunteers Major Findings administered the schedule) 1) Source of Information on the Public Programme Introduction Friends and family was the main The purpose of the survey was to identify the main source of source of information on the public information on the public programme; roughly two-thirds of programme, geographical spread of seekers came to know of the seekers programme through their friends and Delhi and across neighbouring cities and the major family members while one-fourth demographical details on seekers became aware through hoarding and especially age and educational background. Care was taken to ensure advertisements were the medium of that there was no bias in the information for hardly 4% of seekers Newspaper wall posters. estimation process through adoption who attended. Result indicates that of the Open Random Method of the Delhi collectivity is both active Sampling. Thirty-five volunteers and effective.

 The Divine Cool Breeze May June 2000 38 Table : Source of Information on the Public Programme Source of Information Percent of seekers Newspaper Advertisements 3.6% Hoarding 12.6% Wall Posters 13.6% Family 19.7% Friends 45.7% T.V. Advertisements 1.8% Cable T.V 0.6% Bus Hoarding 0.8% Articles -Magazines /Newspaper Others 0.6% 2) Geographical Spread of Seekers behind in the dissemination activity. Across Delhi and Neighbouring Roughly 45% of seekers traveled States from neighbouring cities to the Ramlila grounds; Ghaziabad Sahaja Yoga is evenly spread across all regions of the Delhi metro. The East Delhi collectivity has been more active in spreading the information on the public programme while the Central Delhi collectivity lagged collectivity had been the most active in disseminating information through meetings, organising buses etc. Meerut; Noida are distant second in this aspect while Faridabad and Gurgaon are laggards. Table 2 Locationwise Distribution of Seekers Location Percent Respondents South Delhi 12.4% North Delhi 12.4% West Delhi 12.8% East Delhi 18.6% Central Delhi 7.3% Ghaziabad & Areas looked after by Ghaziabad Centre 20.3% Noida 8.3% Gurgaon 2.8% Faridabad 1.5% Meerut 3,6%

 May-June 2000 39 The Divine Cool Breeze 3) Educational background of seekers did not have a high school level qualification. This is a pointer to the cultural richness of the Yoga Seekers Interest on Sahaja Yoga cuts across Bhoomi. educational barriers; nearly 43% of Educational Background Percent Respondents 57% More Than High School Level Education Less Than High School Level Education But literate 34% lliterate 4) Agewise Distribution of Spiritual active age group of 20 to 40 years. Seekers The popular myth that the spiritual Yet pointer to the fact that India is a seeking is the last resort of the retired Yoga Bhoomi is that roughly two- personnel is demystified in this thirds of seekers belonged to the survey. Percent Respondents Age Group 15 to 20 years 6% 32% 21 to 30 years 31 to 40 years 25% 41 to 50 years 25% Older than 50 years 12%



----------------------

2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XII Issue : 5 & 6
May - June 2000
The Spirit is the most precious thing we have within ourselves. The
preciousness of the spirit is immeasurable and that is why it is called the
thing of eternal value. Because it is infinite, we can not measure."
"Our goal is to be the Spirit - nothing but the Spirit."
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Editorial
Easter Puja (25.4.99) Istanbul
2
Seventy Seventh Birthday Puja - A Report
14
Diwali Puja (7.11.99) Greece
18
Guru Nanak Puja (1999)
31
Public Programme (25.03.2000) - A Report
35
How the seekers received the
37
message of Public Programme-A Survey Report
Edited by
Published by
Yogi Mahajan
V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
:
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June 2000
Editorial
Ganapatipule1999-2000
"Mine" but Her power of love reigned
т
|he great Poet Rabindranath
Tagore had a Vision that on
the shores of Bharat, men of
supreme; The waves of Her love
carried us across wonderous shores
all races shall meet to anoint the where we forget who we were, where
"Mother."
we came from or what our body's
complaints are?
Sahaja world meet at Ganapatipule
is the fulfillment of his prophecy.
Each night was a celestial feast.
where we drank deeply the sweet wine
Over ten thousand devotees of all
colour and race from all over the of Divine melodies and even laid
awake in our dreams to enjoy their
resonance. Each dawn brought
love
world congregated on the eve of the
new millennium to anoint the Lotus
promise of a new gift of love,
Feet of Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri
which we had never known before; a
Nirmala Devi.
love that had no bounds but a love
Every heart opened to offer its that brought delightful surprises. So
petals at the Lotus Feet of the Divine amazed, so joyous, where were we
Mother. The compassionate Mother lost before? But having found
poured Her love in every heart and ourselves again, let us be lost no
the ten thousand petals merged into a
single lotus of Her love. Tranquil
peace from the Divine Mother
permeated the inner most recess of wonderous shores, but Her fragrance
every being and calmed it. In the still lingers in our heart. We see Her
eternal silence nothing remained but on our alters, we see Her in our
the callings of the Ocean, leaping dreams, we see Her in our hearts, we
more.
Yes, we have returned from those
see Her in the smile of innocence, we
closer to wash Her Lotus Feet.
see Her in each other and in which
The chattering mind subsided ever direction our head turns, let us
before Her awesome Majesty: Not see Her there.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 May-June 2000
2.
The Divine Cool Breeze
EASTER PUJA - 99 (25-4-99 ISTANBUL)
(We have to establish our Meditation)
oday we
assembled here in Turkey in
Istanbul to celebrate the
all
have
awareness is very very, I should say,
absolutely dull and dead. We can see
flowers, we can see faces, we can see
resurrection of Christ and with that
buildings, we can see cities, we can
also celebration of your resurrection.
see all those things. All these things
we see and we feel we are quite aware
Christ's resurrection was a great
message for us. He won over the
death and came out of that dead body
which we are not. Actual awareness
comes to us when we cross the limit
of our mind, go beyond the mind and
with another body which was living
body. The body was the same but one
was the dead body and another was a
this was only possible because of the
resurrection of Christ.
body which was living.. Its not only
symbolic. It actually happened with
Him. After all He was a Divine child.
He resurrected himself because he
was a divine person but also we are
resurrected because we are blessed by
divinity. Now this mind of ours,
which is in between, is controlled by
Shri Jesus Christ. He controls through
He was a Divine person. So, actually
it has happened with Him. It is not
just a symbolic thing that he died and
he resurrected into another person or,
you can say, into a living person. For your Agnya, both the sides. He
him what is death? For eternal beings controls your conditioning and he
there are no deaths. There is no death controls your ego and brings balance
for a person who is eternal. He may, in you. But when this Agnya chakra
for the time being, look as if he is starts spindling all kinds of ideas,
dead but he can never die. Christ was some times reacting, some times
like that, very very special incarnation accepting conditioning, it is a slave.
which came on this earth to be reborn It is not a free thing because it is
out of the dead. Now, we are also, working under the influence of your
when we are not yet realized souls, Ego or your Super Ego. For that is
when we are not yet enlightened, we
the death for our awareness, that we
are also dead in the sense, our
cannot, we cannot understand
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 May-June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
something beyond, that there exists a
life. Beyond this we cannot see. This
our kith and kin! Then there are
children who are killing, parents that
are killing. No relationship is there.
It is a sign of a person whose
awareness is completely dead. In our
is we have seen now that we were all
in a condition that if one were dead,
we were feeling bad, we were feeling
anxious, we were fighting and we
were thinking that there is something
awareness at least we should have
feelings of compassion and love.
wrong with our present life. There is
nothing definitely which makes us
But that one is lost. Its not there,
we don't have it. The whole world is
aflame. When you read about all the
wars that are going on, the way they
are killing children, the way they are
slave, by which we are slavish. That
we realised, no doubt, and we started
seeking the truth. We started seeking
the truth in so many ways. I know, so
destroying human beings! It is a
many went astray and they lost their
balance and have fallen into a
wrong attitude. That by the
destruction of human beings things
complete demise. But so many of you
will improve. It is a very very wrong
have been salvaged, have been saved
by the great example of the Christ's
resurrection. He had to venture. He
concept that by destroying them one
can achieve something.
Our work in Sahaja Yoga is doing
well, I must say, but it has to stop this
had to do it and he worked it out.
Without him our agnya would not
have been that flexible. As it is, horrible attitude of human beings to
destroy. So you might ask that what
to do Mother? What to do to stop this
human beings in the olden times were
conditioned very much and when
they have become modern, they are
full of Ego nothing in between. With
destruction? Answer is in the life of
Christ. You resurrect people,
these two influences, we are
resurrect them, enlighten them,
imprisoned. We are absolutely dead bring them to a state where they
people. We have no sensitivity for understand what is right and what
is wrong. Let them feel, let them feel
anything. I have seen now, even today
the compassion and love that is
within you. When that starts, that 3rd
you can see what things are happening
across? If people are very anxious to
force within us starts acting, our ego
kill each other, human beings want to
also comes down. Our conditioning
kill human beings! Can you inmagine
such a stupid thing that we should kill
also comes down. For example if we
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 May-June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
you are nothing but human beings. All
think we are Muslims, we have right
these false ideas that we are Hindus,
to kill others, if we think we are Jews
we are Muslims, we are Christians is
we have right to kill others. All these
differentiations and this kind of
all man created. I mean man can
discriminations, that we have, is so create anything. And human beings
stupid because you are human beings, have no brains to understand that
they are human beings. You are killing these are allI man created.
human beings! Not that they have
For example, you see, in America
committed any sin or they have done
anything wrong, except that in their they create associations and big
organisations and all based on
foolishness they believe that they are absolute falsehood, absolute wrong
this and they are that. They are not.
ideas, absolute destructiveness, but
You are just human beings. In every
human being, as you know very well. they form it. They form, they have
groups, this, that and they are
there is Kundalini. There is no
discrimination, every one, whether prospering. But it has a repurcursion,
you are a Hindu, Muslim, Jew or
Christian, Sikh, Parsi anyone. You
they don't know, if you start doing
such false things against human
beings who are created by God and
may call by any name. Now just look
at how we accept a certain nobody can destroy them. Then there
denomination for ourself. You are
are repurcursions. Many many
countries who were once upon a time
born say to a Christian family, or you
are born to a Hindu family, rulers, were known as great things,
immediately you start thinking that
have come down.
you are there to uphold all the flags
of that religion in which you are born.
You are born in that religion without
And all such countries who now
think they are very rich and all that
will have to come down. All of them
have to come down is just an ultimate
result of this stupidity to believe that
you are higher than others, that you
your knowledge, without your
permission,
understanding. So how can you
belong to that religion. You have got
Kundalini, everybody has got
Kundalini. So you can only belong
to the religion of humanity, every
human being has got Kundalini. So bugs. While mosquitoes and bugs,
without
any
can kill others. So a non-violent
method started which is of another
absurdity, I think, because then they
start saving mosquitoes and also the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 May-June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
He resurrected himself. So we are also
you must know, are the greatest blood
in the same position now. I know
suckers. They live only on human
blood. Such things, what's the use of
saving them? So, human beings take
to something that is absured, stupid,
foolish. I don't knew what is the
many a times Sahaja Yoga was
challenged. Now its much better. Not
so bad. It was challenged and there
were so many problems, but now its
smoothing down, because that's the
truth, that's the reality. That's what is
divinity. So you should not be afraid.
All these funny ideas about Sahaja
Yoga also will die out. It's a
resurrection not only of you people
but also of our ideologies. Now the
ideologies change that our awareness
should be enlightened. We should
reason. The way they accept things is
absolutely unbelievable. I think it is
a kind of a slavish mentality which
doesn't give them freedom to think
what is right, what is wrong. For this
we have Christ. We have Christ, a
person who was absolutely free, free
from all kinds of prejudices, all kinds
of temptations, all kinds of nonsense
that human beings follow.
have light in our awareness. This has
come suddenly through Sahaja Yoga
But one may say that Mother after
all He was divine. He was divine and light then how can you go further to
now you are made divine also. So the right path. Its not easy to describe
to people, that if you don't have the
how can we now join together to
make a full effort to tell people that He died so young, and brutely he was
what are you doing? Why are you killed. But still he resurrected himself.
Christ's life, how went through that,
doing it? What is the need to do such
things? On one side is, we can say,
mass destruction through stupidity,
He came out of all that, came out of
that ordeal. So for us also when we
have problems in Sahaja Yoga, we
another side is you own self
should know we have a power to
destruction. Take to drinking. Take to
other self-destructive things which are
immoral. That's very easily available
and people like it very much and they
don't like when you talk that it is
destructive. So either we destroy
resurrect ourselves. No one can
destroy us. No one can finish us off
because we have power to resurreet
ourselves. This special power that
we have to resurrect, you should all
the time understand and feel it and
others or destroy ourselves.
meditate on it. I hear from people
Christ was destroyed by others and
from every country that the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 May - June
2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
awareness, in our new personality,
Government is doing like this, the
in our strengthened personality.
Government is doing like this or they
Meditation is the only way we can
are having same trouble or they call
you a sect or they call you this and grow and then no one can destroy
that. Alright, it does not matter. Your you because you are all protected by
duty is to believe that you are the Divine Love. You don't have to
following the foot steps of Christ and worry as to who will destroy you.
no one can destroy you. This is the What will happen? Of course in the
message of Christ's life that Divine beginning there is a little agitation.
People feel little bad about it. This is
alright. But actually no one can
When his body could not be destroy you. Have this faith in you.
destroyed then how can you destroy Christ had no organization. He had
the Divine Light in Him. So many no Adi Shakti to support him. In no
Life cannot be destroyed.
Sahaja Yogis are here who have been
since long in Sahaja Yoga and they personality he managed to get out of
have had problems and they went all the problems, of all the tortures.
through lot of troubles, I agree. But of all the atrocities on him. So now
all these things have subsided and you have better advantage, because
now you are in such a resurrected you are enlightened. Firstly he was a
position that after some time, you will Divine Person and he could go
be amazed, Sahaja Yoga will take through all that. You don't have to.
way but only through his divine
No body will torture you, nobody will
put you in jail, nobody will crucify
you. No body will. That's not
possible. But mentally if you are
over all over the world. All over the
world people will take to Sahaja Yoga
and we will have such a lot of Sahaja
Yogis all over the world that all these
upset, sometimes you get upset I
know. In certain countries people get
minority of some stupid people will
disappear.
upset because they think they are
oppressed because they are in Sahaja
Yoga. I assure you no one can do that.
You must know that all the time you
For that what have you to do?
Sometime people ask me what do we
have to do? You must have also read
in the bible that Christ prayed and he
was praying. In the same way we can
say we have to meditate. Through
are protected. Christ is there as your
eldest brother. I have always said that.
But also you have your Mother and
meditation we will grow in our
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 May-June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
what's wrong with that religion, as if
they turn round and see the image of
their society and know what's wrong
with them. And when they start
meditating on those corrections, it
you have all the Ganas and all the
angels around you. When I see this I
just thought look at this. In every
country they have shown angels and
Ganas are there. Such pure forms of
protection you have. So there is works. Societies are improving. You
nothing to worry about your see so called religious ideas are
destruction or your impediments or falling into their our traps and they
what ever you may call it, a kind of a will all fall because thats falsehood.
That's not real religion. Religion is
within ourselves and this pure
destructive force is acting on.
From the life of Christ we have to
religion is the one which is a global
religion. The solution comes like this
know that no one can destroy a
realized soul in these modern times.
that supposing you have wars. Wars
As it is, they never destroyed. We had
so may saints who were killed, who in the name of religion, in the name
were tortured, but see they still exist of God specially and in the name of
as poetry, as poems. Also as their religion, they have wars. So now what
blessings, every where. They are not happens? All such wars that take
place cannot destroy the reality,
finished. They are not dead. Though cannot destroy the truth. This is
it seems that they are no more but
another message of Christ's
even to take their names and even to
resurrection. You cannot. You may
call them, they work out. They are
there in their spirit and they help you.
think that today you have destroyed
these people but they are there. All
Assured by Christ's life, by His
the saints, all the great people who
resurrection we are resurrected
have been resurrected in life are all
the time there. Their protections are
people. Of course our body has also
changed. After resurrection you know
there. Their guidance is there. You can
that your chakras work out all the
see them in a way that they are there.
curing and all the blessings. Our
So one should have no fear. The
attitude, our mental attitude also
fear of death has to go away. So
many of them have said the same
changes and also our ego subsides.
Not only that also our conditionings
go out. Specially I was so happy that
that what is the death after all? The
death dies itself when you are
those people, who are born in a
resurrected. So one should not be
particular religion, immediately see
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 2000
May-June
The Divine Cool Breeze
afraid of death. Now how many of personality and sitting down here you
you have been afraid of death before are working out the global problems.
your resurrection, but not now, you You are not a small person now, who
are not bothered as to when the death is only worried about his own
comes? What happens? Or which way children, about his family and this or
you are going to be, so called, that. This mind of yours has
destroyed. You know you cannot be
destroyed. In your heart of heart you
all know this very well that you
cannot be destroyed. The fear of our
expanded, expanded like this that it
works automatically for all the
problems of the world.
For a
women, I read the
destruction goes away, no doubt. But
newspapers. Specially women
seldom read newspapers. They think
it is stupidity to read the newspapers.
But I read and Iread those where any
attention is needed. I have seen-it
works. But all of you put together, if
you understand it is your responsib-
one thing remains, that is the
compassion. When you see all these
bad things are happening and people
are being tortured, your mind cannot
take it for granted. It starts responding
to that and it feels the pain of others.
Tremendous, but as a result of that
your will power, your thinking on ility to correct all the destructive
those lines, your tears even are forces, to put them right, you just
powerful and they can bring solace have to collectively meditate on the
to those people who are suffering points where you find, there is a big
unnecessarily. You have to experi- problem.
ment with it. Just have a feeling of
compassion and love. Things will because of religions, mainly. If they
improve. Now as it is, you meditate all can jump into a new religion,
but meditate with such compassion global religion, they all are one. They
and such love that your tears can also cannot then fight because there is one
have an effect on these people who religion. But they don't want to have
are stupid, cruel, and killing each one religion because they want to
other. But it is important for you to fight, they are fighting cocks. But if
know that now you are not an they came to Sahaj, if they become
individual but you have become a enlightened, then they will only enjoy
Now, the problem mainly is
global personality. You are not an
a global
love of each other and not killing of
individual. You are
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 9.
May-June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
will happen to them? Where will they
each other, destruction of others. This
is what we have to learn from the life
go? What will be their situation? This
one is a big message for us that even
on the cross he said, 'forgive'. Oh
God, Oh Father, forgive them. In the
of Christ who was alone, who was
single. He did not have collective
behind Him. But how powerful he
same way we have to also forgive
people. It is very important from the
life of Christ that we have to forgive.
was that he fought the death and came
out of it so clearly at the stage of
Agnya. Without him we could not
have worked out Sahaja Yoga. This forgiveness was of the greatest
Kundalini would not have gone importance for the world to
through, unless and until he had
sacrificed his life. And he readily learn how to forgive, you will be
sacrificed. He accepted the task of amazed that half of the wars of this
sacrificing His life and then world will be finished. Now
resurrecting. He passed through, I something happened thousands of
understand. You must forgive. If we
years back, still people are fighting.
should say, a very constricted channel
of Agnya to put you people right by Still they are fighting, thinking this
saying "you forgive everyone". If thing happened so many years back,
forgiving were such a powerful thing so there are wars. If we can really
that you can even fight your death forgive those people who happened
then why not forgive? Many people before we were even born, why
say that Mother we cannot forgive and should we form a group of such
I have told them hundred times that people? Why? Because there is
something called hatred in human
beings. They have hatred. Hatred for
what are you doing if not forgiving?
So the message of Christ's life is that
He forgot, forgave all the people who
troubled him. Even he said "Oh God,
this, hatred for that. Even in small
things they say, I don't like this. I like
this. It is very common, now a days
please forgive them because they
specially. When we were young we
don't know what are they doing."
were not supposed to say such things.
On the cross he says those things,
I don't like it, I like it, we were not
supposed to say. But now a days
freedom is given to them to talk like
this. I don't like them, I don't like that,
when he was tortued, insulted. He
says Oh God, forgive them, have pity,
have sympathy for them because they
don't know what are they doing. They
are killing the son of God and what
I don't like that person. Who are you?
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
May June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
never. He never boasted of anything,
but when He saw people were selling
What do you think yourself to judge
others? You don't know how to
appreciate. You don't know how to things in the Holy places, what did
enjoy, and only what you want to say he do? He started beating them with
is I don't like it'. And supposing you hunters, because that was wrong,
like it then what will you do? Whether absolutely wrong against the holiness
you like or don't like is just the same. of that place. Why He didn't say,
But just to show off your Ego. You don't like this?" No, he just showed
say I don't like this way. I don't like. his complete disapproval of the whole
Because there is no love. If there is system of selling things in the temple
love then you can enjoy everything. or in the holy place. People go there
We will never say, 'I don't like it, I to worship. They need a mind which
like it.' You will definitely enjoy if is devoid of money orientation. There
you really say that I enjoy. I enjoy should be no money orientation when
everything.
you are meditating. This is the biggest
You are closing down yourself by problem of today. Every thing is
saying I don't like it, I don't like it, I
don't like it, as if you were a great
commander or a person, a judge to
money orientation. You like a car
which is very expensive. So you want
to have. By hook or crook you will
say this thing. It is very remarkable get that car and sit in that. You might
that in the West it is even more
be a thief but you buy an expensive
car to show off. Perhaps, may be
prominent that they will say I don't because you are a thief, that's why
like it. I don't like it." Of course in
the East, I would say, in India if you want to hide your personality. So
somebody says like that, people will there is no truthful life. Its all just
say he is just trying to show off, on showing off and thinking no end of
the face. But showing off is not
yourself. But when death will come
regarded as bad manners. This is not at your door steps, what will you do?
At that time you will be trembling.
regarded as bad manners in the West. With all your so called achievements
To feel shy of anything is regarded and so called showing off, you will
as bad manners but to boast of
just jumble before death. But a Sajaja
something, no body feels that it is bad
Yogi cannot. He will like if the death
manners.
has to come, it has to come. He will
not tremble that the death is
Did Christ boast of anything? No,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May-June 2000
11
something dangerous, but it is a place
where he can go and rest. He won't
mind, he won't mind anything
meditation. That's very important.
The other day I met one lady. She told
me of several miracles in her life, how
because he is above death, he is above
she was saved. She was about to die,
destruction. So he would not mind
she came across an accident, all kind.
anything, whatever comes his way,
and he will surrender to it easily. We
But how she was saved? While her
husband, he succumbed to all kinds
have Kabir-Kabir has written so many
of things. So I said, "what do you
poems, mostly about death. He said
when death came, I didn't say a single
mean? How it has happened."
He said, "Mother its nothing but
word. I didn't fight but what I did is
Shraddha, Shraddha is dedication,
that I took a sheet on top of me and
surrendering. Surrendering,
went off to sleep. How sweetly he
because I am surrendered. I said
describes death! Kabir, reminds me
of Christ sometimes. How sweetly how? That I don't know, I am just
Christ also went through all these surrendered, I feel so comfortable,
things and when we died, the whole so lively and so much out of fear
elements shook. He was the master when I know I am surrendered,
of elements. They shook. There was completely surrendered to my spirit.
earthquake and all kinds of things This is what is that we have to learn
that happened. They felt his death. when we meditate-that we have to
not he. They felt that such a great
surrender.
divinity which is the essence of
Mohammed Sahib has called
existence has been killed like that.
Islam. Islam means surrender, though
They also didn't know that he is
they don't surrender otherwise, you
going to come back to his life. They
see. But what he said that you must
surrender to your global nature, to
your higher nature. You must not die
also were not aware of it. But he did,
he did come out of that, deadening
thing for which everybody was so
out. You must not fizzle out into these
much shocked.
worldly turmoils and worldly things.
His death itself gives us strength. It is a very strength giving example
We have no death. We have of Christ and He is with us. He will
resurrected and resurrection is with always guide us. He will look after
us. But we have to establish. We have
us, not only but also he will give us
strength. He will destroy all those
to establish our Sahaja Yoga, our
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 May June 2000
12
The Divine Cool Breeze
who will be against eternal life. He personality it was! It was subjected
will destroy non-sensical things and to this kind of torture. He could have
you are seeing now that how in destroyed all of them in no time. He
Kaliyuga all these institutions who was so powerful, such a powerful
talk of religion and fight are getting personality, but he did not. He forgave
destroyed. Automatically, we have them. He gave you the message of
done nothing. On their own only, by forgiveness, the greatest force that can
their own doings they are finishing. work out. Now also you should
Because there is no reality. There is surrender yourself to this idea of
no spirit in them and without the spirit forgiveness and really try to forgive.
what is left is nothing but a dead body. You will be amazed, you will feel
The whole understanding should be very much peaceful, very happy and
for Sahaja Yogis that we have to be the person who have tortured you
spirit oriented, not money oriented, will came down. What we have to
body oriented, emotions oriented do now, is to transform people.
but spirit oriented, which is a joy That's our job. We have to
giving thing-and you will be transform them. We
surprised, with that orientation you transformed, we are at a point, we
are
will be the most happy, most loving,
can call we are resurrected. We have
most beautiful person. Immediately
people will know around that there is
something about this man, some
spark about this lady, some sort of a
to resurrect the whole world. That's
our job. All these fights, all these
quarrels, all these falsehood will just
be finished.
spark that she is or he is so much
different from others. It can be
For us Christ is our leader, who has
recognised in no time. Now at the done this for us. He came as an
ordinary human being, lived as an
ordinary human being, with all his
powers within him. He never used
them to destroy. In the same way, we
can also, with love and affection, we
can also really come out of our death,
come out of our misgivings, come out
time of Christ, very few people could
recognise him, because they were not
enlightened. Because they were very
much below the level of human
beings, I should say. But you are not.
You are quite aware. You are born in
modern times. And at this time when
we think of Christ, we should know, of our destructive nature. This
life it was! What a grand destructive nature is the most
what a
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June
2000
13
dangerous thing for the Sahaja Yogis.
That's the only hope we have that
Sahaja Yogis are resurrected. Only
thing I know that if we have so many
Sahaja Yogis, this world will change.
and try to find out how many people
he can convert and how many people
he can bring round. I hope next time
we will have double the number of
people that are here from all these
eight countries who are hosting now.
This world has to change. But your
progress should go on. You should
All my love to you all. Great days
progress more and more and you are waiting us. We have to now
should not retrace back.
understand only our responsibility.
Main thing is, how many people we
have converted? How many people
For small things here and there you
do not worry. You have a very great
responsibility and that responsibility
is to transform the human beings.
we have resurrected? That is the
have
record, not how many Pujas you
That's your due, how may have you
transformed? How many have you
attended and all that. That's not so
important. Pujas are just to give you
strength and to give you power. But
changed. It is alright for men or
they are not your work, that's not your
work, for your work you can take
from Pujas all the strength that you
women. You have to change people.
This is your job and this is the power
you have got from Christ that you
have to change them, transform them
need, but if you don't use this power
then what's the use? So now I leave it
into the new world of happiness and
to you to remember that you are
resurrected and you have to resurrect
others. It's a very very important job
at this time of complete turmoil and
joy. Which we call as the Sahaja
Nirmal Dharama. If it works out, if it
really works out, think of the world,
how beautiful it will became for us.
destruction.
It's the duty of every Sahaja Yogi to
go into this kind of a new venture
May God Bless You.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 May-June 2000
14
The Divine Cool Breeze
Celebrations on the Auspicious Occasion of the
Seventy-seventh Birthday of Her Holiness
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi at Nirmal Dham-
Delhi, March 21-2000
(A Report)
elhi, the capital of India, Mother's birthday as though to add
with a metropolitan area colour to the Holi merriment.
population of around 13
The Vice President of the United
million, situated on the bank of the
State of America, governors of
river Yamuna with its per capita
various states in the
income at about
USA, 10 mayors
"All organisations are
double the national
obsessed with the theory that from main cities
human beings are guided by based in the USA, the
the lust for power and that they Prime Minister of
cannot get to love one another Canada, Members of
The collectivity of Sahaja Parliament from
Yogis are special human Canada, Australia, the
beings, having taken to the President of Medical
simple knowledge of self, they Association (folk
are rich within, capable within, medicines)- Russia,
they are aware of absolute ten mayors of major
truth. They know how to share cities in Canada, the
obvercome baser president of Ivory
instincts, disproving the Coast etc, who sent in
conventional organisational their greetings to Shri
average was
the
witness to
joyous celebrations
of the seventy
seventh birthday of
Her Holiness Mataji
Shri Nirmala Devi
on March 21, 2000
by her followers
from all over the
world. 725 Sahaja
Yogis from regions love,
of Europe, North
America, Latin
America, Africa theory."
Mataji
occasion had special
the
Australia, East Asia,
Her Holiness Mataji Shri
Russia etc. joined Nirmala Devi - March 21,
mention of Her role in
posit ive
hands with 2500
2000- Nirmal Dham Delhi
transformation of the
Yogis from the
individual and in the
different states of India at Nirmal
process the society to which do they
Dham - near Chhawla village on the
memorable occasion of their Holy belong. Special mentions of the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 15
May - June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
not the physical pollution but on the
prevailing pollution in the moral
fabric of the society. It is well known
that Delhi, given its vast and rapidly
increasing motor vehicle population,
faces an acute air pollution problem
associated with the use of energy in
resolution of the New York State
Assembly to the two-time nominee
for the World Peace Prize on Her role
in promoting peace, health and well
being of 80 countries through the
Sahaja Yoga meditation, laudatory
references to Her work on adding the
the transport sector (Delhi is among
new vision in the new millennium that
of promoting an enabling the 12 megacities mentioned by
environment where people could live WHO/UNEP as having serious
in peace dissolving difference of race particulate pollution and it is
and region from various other estimated that 67% of air Pollution is
caused by motor vehicles). L. K.
Advani's prescription to do away with
the "internal" pollution was to
assemblies, sufi saints etc were read
out, in brief, by the convenor of the
felicitations programme from Delhi-
Mr. V.J. Nalgirkar.
spiritually elevate oneself through the
Sahaja Yoga meditation. Mr.
Speaking on the occasion, Mr. Sunderlal Patwa, former Chief
Balram Jakhar, former speaker of Lok
Minister of Madhya Pradesh,
mentioned that he was overwhelmed
Sabha, mentioned that the true global
village will come out of the spread of
Sahaja Yoga throughout the world Lotus Feet of the Holy Mother. Dr.
and wished that She continued to Shoba Das, Head, Department of
celebrate Her birthday till the mission physiology, Lady Harding Hospital,
is achieved. He did not forget to seek presented to Shri Mataji two theses
Shri Mataji's blessings to achieve recognised and accepted by the Delhi
positive results in his proposed University on the Role of Sahaja
that he was able to surrender at the
difficult mission in Kashmir.
Yoga in Stress Management; the
third ongoing research on the effect
of Sahaja Yoga on Lipid Peroxidation
was also briefly referred.
The Minister of Home Affairs,
L.K. Advani cited his desire to have
a darshan and an occasion to listen to
the discourses of Shri Mataji as the
Sir C.P. Srivastava, who received
several citations and awards during
prime reason for his travel to Nirmal
Dham. He chose the occasion to
his tenure with the International and
speak on Pollution and Environment,
Indian civil service, husband of Shri
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 16
May -June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
"assembly"- one to dedicate to the
cause of advancement of Sahaja Yoga
throughout the world and the other to
have the Holy Mother continue the
Divine Form till every man/woman
is transformed. Yogi Mahajan in his
capacity as the representative of the
“assembly"
"The diamond does not know passed both the
Mataji Nirmala Devi, spoke of his
transition through the three stage of
"bewilderment", "splendour" and the
final stage of"surrender". Initially the
stage of bewilderment, when he
witnessed people getting transformed
soon transcended to that of splendour
when he witnessed
transformation
of
its value; so is the human "resolutions."
societies where Sahaja
being, until he acquires self-
knowledge... Armed with the
self-knowledge, self-realised
souls represent lotuses-they
Yogis/Yoginis had a
positive role to play. In
the eightieth year of his
birth, he has reached the
Shri Mataji in
address
Her
mentioned that
She holds in
stage of "surrender"-a emit divine fragrance, are so
surrender to the Divine colourful, attractive due to
Power which has their innate value system."
produced the unique Her Holiness Mataji Shri Once they are
assembly of Angles Nirmala Devi, March 21, self-realised, they
(Sahaja Yogis/Yoginis) 2000 – Nirmal Dham, Delhi can improve the
esteem, persons
with
strong
patriotic feelings.
whose object is to
condition of the
express the pure
innocent love for each other that
society/country through their
attention in the process utilising
beyond differences in religions, races, effectively the potential of Sahaja
in forging a single Sahaja Yoga Yoga. Once enlightened, She
family. According to him, this mentioned, destructive thoughts/
assembly was even more important activities are automatically dropped.
than the General Assembly of the She transformed them to serve the
go
United Nations for this represented
local population. She said that in light
of the spirit one could perceive what
is wrong with the society, country and
have the power to correct them. She
referred to the offer of some Sahaja
the moral/ethical/spiritual assembly
of the world. He referred to the vision
of the Holy Mother in creating similar
assemblies all over the world and
creating a new humanity. Sir C.P.
Yogis to travel to Kashmir to change
Srivastava had two proposals to the
the attitude of the Kashmiries.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May-June 2000
17
"Once enlightened, you can
to the Kundalini of the whole world.
witness the beauty of the religion. She said absolute knowledge could
Oneness of the religion will be be gained only through vibratory
understood. How can you fight in the awareness. She also mentioned that
equipped with the true
if there is only one-I am overwhelmed that you knowledge, sahaja
have brought light and life to yogis could change
name of the religion
God?"
the society/country.
As an instance She
wastelands (referring to
She spoke of the
separate religious
identity accorded to
Nirmal Dham which was
referred to the recent
prior to setting up of the camp.
a wilderness). I am happy that work of Australian
people worked together with Sahaja Yogis in
love and respect for each setting up nine centres
other. I am very happy that the of Sahaja Yoga in
Delhi collectivity with the help
Vishwa Nirmala
Dharm in Russia as
this religion believes
only in compassion
without any trace of
Orissa.
hatred. She said that from Yogis/yoginis of Uttar
any visualisation of Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana also a witness to
The occasion was
was able to achieve so much sanctification of thirty
the "Form" can only
begin with the within such a short period..
understanding of
three "international"
Her Holiness Mataji Shri marriages amongst
Nirmala Devi - March 21. Sahaja Yogis and
Yoginis from over
eighty countries- a
pointer to the firm
", realised establishment of Vishwa Nirmal
Formless, a process
that is feasible only
2000- Nirmal Dham, Delhi.
when one is self-
realised, Armed
with the true knowledge
souls would be able to intervene Dharma which champions the
effectively inter-religious hostilities. concept of Universal Brotherhood.
She likened the Yoga Bhoomi-India
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 18
May-June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
PUJA
DIWALI
7-11-99 (GREECE)
(You bave to be very Meditative to Mature)
t is very fortunate and auspicious down as existence, She created Shri
that we are celebrating the Diwali Ganesha and then She went to the
Lin Greece, specially in Delfi. It right side and created Maha-
has a very ancient history and as you Saraswati, we can say, the whole
know Athena resided here. She was Universe, all creation She created.
the Primordial Mother. "Atha in And then She came down; came
Sanskrit means primordial. So this down and settled as Kundalini but
place has been described even in the coming down She ereated Maha
'. Laxmi principle which is for our
Manipur is the Nabhi. Also in ascent. This was her movement but it
is said that She incarnated in the
Nabhi because may be after doing all
this She incarnated in the Nabhi and
also we see that Ganesha's Kundalini
Puranas as Manipur Dweep
Sanskrit Manipur means the Nabhi
Chakra. So it is described as Manipur
Dweep. It is written 'Manipur-E-
Dweepe'. Just imagine these puranas,
these ancient time books and guess
how old they are? Must be at least
is in the Nabhi. She incarnated in the
Nabhi, they say because the first pure
8000 or may be more and they have desire of a person, or an animal or
described the Manipur Dweep as the anybody is hunger. That is in the
place of Nabhi, where resides the Nabhi. And this hunger She wanted
Adishakti, that's the Athena. So, I to satisfy or to direct or to handle and
mean, how it was known to them? that might be the reason She might
May be through torsion area, I would have first come to the Nabhi. Now
say. But it is written very clearly and this Primordial Mother that we have
same we find here is the place of as Athena also has in her hand a
Athena, which is in the Nabhii. Also Kundalini; also She has one trident.
Athena the Primordial Mother, they
All this is sign that when She was born
say, expressed herself first in the sea
on the Nabhi itself. From there She
did all her work. Now we can say that
She knew that She has to fight the evil
forces in the Nabhi chakra. All this
history is really shown very clearly
in the Greek Mythology, but later on
in her movement, when She came
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 2000
19
The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June
the poet who came with him here and
this Mythology took a very-very
wrong path through human beings as
they know how to spoil everything.
So what they did is to make all the
he has described into all details what
things are. He has also described that
there is a temple of Primordial
gods and goddesses look like human
beings and so we have here many
gods which are in India. They are
represented even in the Greek
mythology. But the Indian gods are
kept very pure and very godly and
saintly, but here it was brought down
to the level of human beings and so
many gods who were there were
shown to be little different from
Mother, very clearly, of the Adi Shakti
and there is the Ganesha also sitting
there. He described it in all details.
Also the steps going to the temple are
three and a half pieces. Three are big
ones and last one is half one. If you
may extend them to the whole world,
it can make three and a half coils. Also
very clearly it is said that there are
Swayambhu, Swayambhu of Shri
Ganesha, and also about the oracle of
Delfi they say that in the Nabhi chakra
the Gods will live. All this is descri-
Indian gods. Because they made it
human. It's very surprising how it was
deviated gradually from one to
another? Even in India, its done but
bed in India much before, much much
it does not stay, because we have
before Alexander came to India and
from that we can understand that there
might have been much more rapport.
May be, may be many people were
going abroad or many be coming here
Puranas. So every time people try to
ruin and spoil it, it goes back to the
normal state because we have
Puranas. But Puranas are not
or may be from the torsion area all
worshipped like Bible or like Koran,
like any other such religious book but
they are just relating the history of the
ancient times and one has to just see So its absolutely an ancient place we
it that it is intelligible, this can be are in, which is truthful in its
explained, people can know about it. description and everything, no doubt,
But the way they have described but later on the deterioration came to
Manipur Dweep, was really very
great. Even at the time of Alexander. of Kundalini was there and the
Greece was a very prosperous and
the Puranas were written down.
this place. Also here we have question
chakras were painted also. But when
extremely beautiful State. It is Christianity came, they said, it is all
bogus, forget it. They didn't want to
see the other side and that is how it
described by Chanderavardai, one of
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
May-June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mrs. Srivastava. So they came to see
became just a kind of history also that
was not so clean and clear. The faith me. Imagine them. The idea of
in Athena subsided, faith in all the serenity does not exist now for
women in the world. But these ladies
Gods and Godesses also subsided and
came to see me that who is this serene
it started becoming absolute and they
lady who has come. And they looked
after me very well and then afterwards
there was an election coming also.
But I don't forget the way they told
me, and very respectfully, they said,
how did you develop this serenity. I
said I did not develop. This is just
existing and I did not do anything to
look serene or in any way work it out.
There is no beauty parlour for that but
it is something innate in me what you
think to be serenity. She said, no no
said it was disappearing nicely, This
was the situation of this Greece. Now
again we are back. In the Manipur-E-
Dweepe we are sitting down nicely
and for Laxmi Puja, which is in the
Nabhi, Laxmi came out of water, no
doubt, but Athena is the Mother of
Laxmi. She is the one who is all
pervading and She created Laxmi and
this Laxmi is the one that ruled here
and She was very much manifesting
and She created beautiful things
all the men praise you that She is a
person who is, even in these horrible
days, extremely serene.
because they were very rich people.
Greeks were very rich and they were
indulging into all kinds of things,
specially in business, then in shipping.
Now Diwali is very significant
Shipping is their one of the most because today is the darkest day.
important business and I came with Darkest night and longest night, and
my husband here because he was a to end it up they put lights. Now in
shipping man. I was surprised that at the atmosphere its all very dark black,
the airport we had the Minister's wife the sun is gone. So they put on all
another Minister's wife, Prime these lights. In the same way it is
Minister's wife. I was surprised. Kaliyuga. Now Kaliyuga, even
Normally they never go to receive any consider as one day it is very dark,
horrible, it has lots of problems which
lady visitor who comes. No, no they
said you see what happened that our
made our life miserable and we don't
husbands told us if you really want know how to move with love. At this
to see a lady who is absolutely, moment what is necessary is to
emaculately feminine and very enlighten oneself. Kaliyuga is at its
auspicious and very serene then it is
worst now. The kind of things people
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 21
May - June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
enlightened. There should be light in
the hearts of people. Once they are
enlightened, this darkness, from
which we are suffering because of our
are doing even in the name of God is
shocking. But that is Kaliyuga, where
we have lost all sense of direction.
We don't know which way we are
going.
ignorance, will be finished and we
will have the absolute knowledge. So
All kinds of wrong things we are
this is a new age that we are talking
about here, right now here, that it is
doing and we think its alright. After
all what's wrong in it. Everything you
going to work out in such a manner
that there will be all enlightened
tell them, they say what's wrong? You
tell them don't do it, they say what's
wrong? That's how every human personalities together and they will
being has become very individual- know what is right, what is real
istic. In a way he is not, because they
follow a fashion, they follow a style.
I mean they are not. They are slavish. Knowledge that is love. Knowledge
But they believe that they are very that is compassion. This is what we
independent. They are free people. have to understand that we have come
They can do whatever they like. As a into another area, arena where all the
result of this freedom, in this skirmishes and the troubles of
knowledge, Gyana.
So ours is the path of knowledge.
Kaliyuga, what has happened with Kaliyuga cannot interfere. Its reigning
them is that they have become outside, nothing inside. Its like that
extremely ugly. The kind of things that we are now not only free but
they are doing in Kaliyuga is whatever we are doing is nothing but
unbelievable. Even when they are freedom.
preached, they are in the Churchs, this
thing, that thing. They become so
horribly immoral that you can not anything that can debase us, make us
Today we are not attached to
lose grip over truth. When such a
believe how come that be in the name
of God, under the roof of God, But it personality is brought in, then what
has started, that is Kaliyuga. And this happens? That all these ideas of
Kaliyuga will disappear. But I must
say it is the last judgement at the
same time. Those who accept the
truth and reside in truth and grow
Kaliyuga has to be finished.
So what do we do to remove the
darkness of the night, is to put light.
in truth will remain, and all other
In the same way people should be
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May-June 2000
22
will be perished. It is said already. horrible temperament can develop
Like you see a garden in which there
are some trees, which are nourished
that you blame others, never yourself
that it is your mistake that you hit
yourself. It was you who did wrong
and that's what it is.
well, which get lot of water and love
and which give also so much to
people. They exist. The others are
burnt down and finished. In the same
way we have to first accept the love,
take the love, nourish yourself with
that love and then you give to others.
This is a simple way you can
This is what we call the illusion,
the Bhram'. And this illusion has to
go away. For Kaliyuga it is said it is
the Era of illusions and this illusion,
if you fall into it you are finished. But
if you see the illusions then you try
overcome the Kaliyga's curses.
Kaliyuga is so much full of darkness to seek the truth. That's why today
that we start hitting each other. For the seeking is very strong because
example you are all sitting here. they can feel it is an illusion. It is not
Suddenly it becomes dark, you don't the truth they know and once they
know how to move, whether you are know it is not the truth, what do they
hitting others or not, with whom are
SO
do? They want to know what is the
you sitting, nothing. It's the same. truth, where is the truth? And they try
with the darkness in the heart,
to find it. That's how also in this
Kaliyuga the seeking has started.
darkness in the mind, you don't know
where are you, what are you doing
and what you should be doing? Just
The story about Kaliyuga is also
told in another Puranas, Damayanti
Purana. Where Damayanti, the wife
of Nala was separated from him
like going amuck you go on hitting
each other. This is what is Kaliyuga
and the one who recognises it and
gets out of it is the Sahaja Yogi.
Otherwise they are just like other
people, if you are still in the same
perifery, in the same circles of
because of the same illusions created
by Kali. So one day it happened that
Nala got hold of this horrible Kali and
he said that now I am going to strangle
you and finish you up. So Kali said,
you can do it, but first listen to my
importance, my Mahatmaya, what
imbalance.
Now another thing in Kaliyuga is
this that even if you are hit, even if importance I have, why I am here?
you are destroyed, they just don't
blame themselves. Thus another you listen to me I will tell you. When
So he waited. He said now agree, if
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 May-June 2000
23
The Divine Cool Breeze
I will come and I will rule the world,
that's the Diwali. If the people are
means when there will be Kaliyuga, enlightened that's the Diwali. That
people will get into Bhranti, mean they remove all the darkness of
illusions. They will not know whether Kaliyuga and you all enjoy the beauty
this is truth or not and they will then and joy of Kaliyuga. Its very very
try to seek the truth. But not only the symbolic, I should say, that Diwali
people those who go to jungles and has already started. We have many
those who renounce every thing, but lights and we have to get more lights.
there will be another type, the same Not because it is short of light. Why
people who are doing this kind of are we taking more lights? Why do
seeking will, in the Kaliyuga, take we want? Because all must be saved.
birth and will be normal house Our effort is to save everyone of them.
holders and they will get into these It is difficult, very difficult.
illusions. At that time when they will
But you can see now, how like
into this illusions then only they
seeds, realize souls go and plant
themselves in very far-fetched places
get
will start seeking, realising that it is
untruth and they will seek the truth at
and there they prosper, become very
beautiful trees, fragrant and which are
that time. At that time only they will
get their self-realization. He told it
giving shade to others. That's why
you see people from all sorts of places
are being awakened and they become
very clearly, thousands of years back.
So Kaliyuga is the time where people
can get their self-realization. They
will know their self. They will know
the truth. This is said long time back
realized souls and they awaken others.
Its all the process. It's so well built
in Itlooks like that and it is working
and you can see now itself. So this
was the time meant for that because out well. The only thing which is
if you are alright like in Satyayuga doubtful is that how many will come
and all that, so you don't seek. You to Sahaja Yoga and how many we
just accept, you are obedient, you are
can salvage and save? This is the
good people. But in Kaliyuga you only problem and for that you
really start seeking the absolute truth should be prepared that every one
and that is why these lights depict that of you should decide that I am going
character or you can say that soul to save atleast one soul every day.
which are being enlightened. So you One person every day. Supposing we
are all enlightened souls. For me
have some people who are getting
drowned in a river or in a sea. What
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 May- June 2000
24
The Divine Cool Breeze
and also they can go about anywhere
they feel like, specially on the day
they get realization. It has worked
wonders because that day you are in
a stronger mood and you avoid all
do you do? You all rush together to
save. You go all out to save their lives.
In the same way we have to
understand that we have to save the
lives of all the people and for that we
have to work very hard.
wrong things. Now so mnany of you
have grown up in Sahaja Yoga and
are transformed completely. So, very
Now in this rising from illusion to
truth also we have certain problems
which must be faced in a proper way.
happy to see that. I have not done
much, I don't think. I have just
One of the problems that arises out
enlightened in a way that is very far
of this is the hunger. Hunger could
fetched. But I don't do anything,
be for money, could be for food, without doing anything if you get
could be for anything. Now if there enlightened and say, you have done
is a hunger for money it is going to it. I cannot believe it. How can that
settle you permanently. Because it is be. I did not do anything, just you got
never satiable. It can never be your realisation. But now when I see
s and I reflect and find how beautifully
people are just going mad, really mad. you people sing, how beautifully you
They do not care whether others have have become sweet and how
it or not, others have this convenience beautifully you have become friendly
or not but just like to show off. They to each other, I am convinced and feel
want to show off. They are very rich, that it won't take much time for you
they are very good and do all kinds to establish Sahaja Yoga. It is very
of things with all their ego. They think high time that we should understand
nothing is wrong, what's wrong, that we have to expose ourselves to
satisfied, but in the modern times
what's wrong. This is one of the Sahaja Yoga much more often than
biggest hurdles you have that your otherwise. And, you see the other
mind which is ego dictates and you problems are there also, like they have
try to do it without even verifying some problems, they are saying
what is this, what is that. Mind is Mother there should be some written
laws. I said, no. It is through your
experience also you can work. For
example the other day I said there is
under Bhranti, illusion and then you
have many ways to understand. Sol
have said that in Sahaja Yoga if they
want they should get their realization
the Laxmi principle. Now let us see
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 25
2000
May - June
The Divine Cool Breeze
has. In this Kaliyuga this is one of
the blessings, because the job of
Kaliyuga is to create doubts, to create
illusions "Bhram" (TH). So it will go
on creating. But you should stick on
how the Laxmi principle goes out.
Very simple, very easy if you want to
know, it's very simple. Because this
Laxmi is very volatile, "chanchal'.
Once you give Rs. 100/- to a servant,
immediately he will go to the pub and
to the truth, then it won't work out. It
won't work out. So it is important to
drink. The Laxmi is there. As soon
understand that all the time we are
as he gets Laxmi, he tries to go to the
pub and drink. So you can imagine
under testing ground. It is a thing just
to be witnessed. Its very interesting
what is the situation with this Laxmi.
to see how this Laxmi works. One
should run away from the house of a
She is very good but she tempts.
She tempts you. So you have to
watch. Whatever money you have
man, who is only interested in
cheating, interested in grabbing and
you put in the bank or do whatever
you like but just don't spend the telling lies. So this Laxmi does not
whole. Just don't do it. Secondly, you stay with him. She goes away. All
these things are happening around us.
must know also that if all the doors
I am not saying this of mine, its all
are closed and you get Laxmi from
there.
one door, she will stay. No doubt, she
will stay, if you are miserly she will
stay but she will rot because there is
no outlet. But if you open the other
door, you will be amazed that not only
this Laxmi can go out but also can
get much more air; much more
freedom from out side, because you
You see, you have to see clearly
the movement of your mind. Where
is it going, what is it thinking?. Laxmi
is the one, she make you think about
something which you should not
think. As I told you people will start
They
drinking, they will go to races.
will drink a lot. I mean they will do
everything. Why? Because they have
money and they spend it somewhere.
But they put it into things which have
no investment in the real good, in the
have opened the other door. With one
door, you just experiment, nothing
comes in. Open one door, no air will
come, nothing will come. But you
open the second door then you will
find that there is gushing of currents
inside. In the same way a person who
real achievement and that's how we
have now people who are spending
so much money, so much on wasteful
wants to have money should first
learn to spend whatever money he things. So wastefulness can never
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 May-June 2000
26
The Divine Cool Breeze
or can you give me some report. They
never achieve the goal that is yours
go on asking you questions. But why?
and the goal that is yours, is the
fulfillment of your being,to become
the spirit. It is very very subtle to
understand. You say I am doing this.
What is wrong? What is there? After
all if I am doing so many things wrong
or something serious, the body should
react, No, nothing will react, neither
We don't want, we don't want to do
that. They are not interested, they are
not interested in what you have. This
is something one has to learn very
favourably and intelligently when
people start communicating to you
about the business part. In Sahaja
your mind nor your body. You see all
these years my experience has been
very simple. That there are some
Sahaja Yogis still involved in the
Laxmi principle. Like they want to
cheat me, they want to make money
out of Sahaja Yoga. Then there are
some people who want to do business
among themselves. All of them have
failed very badly. Failed so badly
that they are like bankrupts or they
are in jail and all that. So never do
business with Sahaja Yogis. For
Yoga there is no business among
themselves except they have business
with self-realization. If you
understand this small point, the money
part of it which is quite illusive, will
disappear. It all works out beautifully
if you are surrendered but otherwise
also it can be worked out. Even if you
are not surrendered because you see
the result and you are hurt, you are
troubled and so you will give it up.
So whatever happens, its our
watching system, I should say, one of
the Chakras. You can see clearly by
Sahaja Yogis it is very important not
to do any business with the Sahaja
Yogis. If you understand this principle
will not do business in Sahaja
watching, clearly you can see, how
much you have gone into trouble. So
you give it up. But before doing that
we have a very good way of seeing
through our vibrations. You just feel
the vibrations and see for yourself. If
the vibrations are good? If they are
not alright you should know that there
is something wrong. You can judge
any human being like, you can judge
you
Yoga. Of course you cannot do
business with me also. So this is a very
very simple thing which people start
doing. For example, there are two
Sahaja Yogis one from, say, from.
Japan another from, say, America.
And they start saying, "oh you are a
Sahaja Yogi, I am also a Sahaja Yogi"
Can you give me some false papers
any pastor or you want to see any one
of these millionaires and all those
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 May - June
27
2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
vibrations that means you will not
things but first you must find out that
judge people rightly, nor will you
have knowledge properly. So first you
must get all your vibrations corrected
one is a perfect Sahaja Yogi or not.
This happens with the individuals. It
can happen in collective also. I have
seen in the collective, people are so and also you chakras corrected. After
much misled and one negative person that you can see what are your
immediately knows who is the other associates? Who are they? See
negative, and then, he gets hold of that actually, your mind now is so
negative and they start working enlightened that you can straight
together. So you have to be extremely forward see everything before you.
cautious that you have got your self- But if you don't use that enlightened
realization. You got everything, you mind, you will be amazed, there are
have got also lot of money in Sahaja some forces of negativity and once
Yoga. With all that you should know these forces start, you see, actually we
are at a juncture now that these things
won't happen anymore. When I
started Sahaja Yoga, it was very bad.
It was very bad situation and we had
half baked, quarter baked, 1/16
baked, people. And I just didn't know,
it's a very very good sign for thieves
to walk in. So you should be very
careful and don't get charmed by all
these non-sensical things. That's what
is the protection from your Mother,
that She wants to protect you in this
way. Our whole attitude towards life
how to tell them because if I tell them
anything, they would just run away.
They would not come to Sahaja Yoga.
While in the other places like Gurus,
what they do, they take money and
that's all. People think now we have
has to be that of a witness. You see
everything clearly. Gradually this
scene will become so very sharp, so
clear, so understanding that you will
be amazed. Then you will be using
given money to the Guru, how can
we leave? They go on giving money
and sticking on.
sömething, anything you have. Then
you don't have to think, only you have
to know the vibrations. What the
vibrations are? What do the vibration
But in Sahaja Yoga there is no
say, because they are there to guide
money involved. So they come and
you.
then disappear. It is common, very,
very common that they come for a
Those who are not yet very good
short time to Sahaja Yoga. But if they
are really special people, they just
at vibrations should try to establish
themselves. If you are not good at
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 May - June
2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
28
stick and start seeing everything from
the right angle because they are
enlightened, they are grown up and
they are mature. So this is how we
be surprised that we have been given
very very important thing to be done.
And the most important thing is to
be watchful about yourself. That I
hope you are not falling into the trap
have to come back to this horrible
night of Kaliyuga through Diwali.
of Laxmi. The same Lxmi that
decorates you can also disfigure you.
So we have to do everything to keep
This is what we have to do, to be
humble and to find whether you are
alright or not, whether you are going
in the right direction or not. It is you
only who can decide. With
vibrations you can immediately
this beautiful Laxmi, this decorated
Laxmi as our ideal and it works out.
Our aim is this, our ideal is this and
we have to do this. So we can
know that you are catching or you
will know you are right. Whatever
decision has to be taken you have to
use your hands fully. Its not talking
that is going to help, it is not giving
lectures that is going to help. It is
through experiment, through
understanding, through the feeling or
the deep, I should say, the deep impact
establish the new Government, very
beautiful Govt. Our whole attitude
should be such that we have to be alert
because you become meditative. As
soon as you start thinking about
something you become meditative.
Your thinking will go away. You
won't be able to think and then if not
meditative you can be lost. When you
of everything will communicate to
you what sort of people they are, what Why? Because then you have given
they are talking about, what you your life in the hands of truth. You
should do. It could be little mental but have given your hand into the hand
later on it becomes absolutely beyond of reality and that guides you, that
the mental activity.
are meditative you cannot be lost.
protects you around; that watches,
Now, as it is, I said that Kaliyuga that watches, that helps you, you can
is over, is about to finish. But still never go wrong. Even if you are
there may be people who will try to meditative, you don't worry, nothing
go back to this kind of normałcy, so will happen to you. But if you are
called. But there is a way out for all. never meditative then it is impossible
This is simple meditation. With
to save. It is impossible to save. It is
impossible to mature. You have to be
very meditative to mature. That's very
meditation you will achieve, whatever
is to be achieved and then you will
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 29
May-June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
are listening to me please try that
you have to meditate afterwards. In
meditation you will assimilate and
important. I would say that all the
Sahaja Yogis here today are doing this
Puja and then there will be also
the same power that you think is
within you, of discrimination, of
giving vibrations, of doing all kinds
of things out of Sahaja Yoga, will be
completely, continuously be acting.
But if you do not meditate, if you
are somewhere else, it will not work
another Puja of enlightenment, I have
called. But you have to be very very
careful not to denounce your
meditative mood. No. What you can
do is to watch, how far you have
gone? How far you have solved your
problems? As soon as you see that
immediately you become a complete
out. Won't work out. So today is the
day to celebrate and to be happy that
realized soul.
we have so many Sahaja Yogis all
So the guideline is such that we over. There is hope for the whole
should know that we are realized
world and we can save all people who
are lost in the wilderness.That's
souls. What is so important? Why
are we realized souls? Not only for
our desires, for our pure desires but perfect. No doubt. But after that
celebration and everything we should
sit on the asan or anywhere and watch,
also for others. And in that
understanding that we are not only
what is happening and you will be
for ourselves but for others, you amazed that in meditation all the
become collectively conscious and
you start helping others. You stand beauties you have achieved will be
very well, otherwise are lost and the revealed to you. All kinds of things
others are also lost. This is the way that you have achieved. And all the
we have to really go ahead; go ahead botherations and worries of things
towards the truth and bring that truth will disappear. This should happen to
you all and this is what I request you
for other people and save them. This
is how you can express your love to all to have this special capacity to
understand yourself. My own hope is
fulfilled. To see you sitting down here
Ifeel over joyed and same way you
will also feel when you all will try to
them, all your caring.
.
It is a subject, which is very
difficult to handle, I think, because, I
should say, to talk about this subject
is much easier than to assimilate this
raise the Kundalini of others.
Establish them in Sahaja Yoga. You
will be amazed, what will happen to
within ourselves. So now when you
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 May June 2000
30
The Divine Cool Breeze
realization to people and look after
the Nabhi of the people. Whatever it
you. Its so joyous to give realization
to others. For that you don't have to
is, it is very very important to
understand how far you can go. We
have to change the world. We have
do anything.. You don't have to pay
anything. Nothing of the kind. This
power you have; which is awakened,
to save the world. Its your
that's all. Wherever you go what you
have to do is to just awaken the responsibility. You have got
Kundalini of the person and give realization, not the others. So don't
realization. Nothing is to be done. try to find faults with others. Think
And that's so joy giving. You feel so about you that you have got
realization and it is expected that
happy about it.
you should spread Sahaja Yoga.
Thank you very much.
So today I bless you all with this
special power that you give
May God Bless you.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 May -June 2000
31
The Divine Cool Breeze
GURU NANAK BIRTIHDAY PUJA - 1999
(Noida House)
Pravachan by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
T.
oday is the birthday of Shri
Guru Nanaka. It is being
Shabad-Jalam (confusion), in which
most of the people are caught, will
come to an end. See the condition of
celebrated through-out the
world with so much of zeal that I have
Sikhs!
not seen in India. For the first time it
Without looking within and
has been advertised in so many papers
experiencing the innate energy, how
could one follow Sikh religion? Only
and by different means.
Guru Nanaka always talked of
this is the teaching of Guru Nanaka,
this is what is called 'Sikh' (learning).
All the saints of that age had the
Sahaja Yoga. Everything else, he said,
is just showing off. About religion he
said that observing fasts, going on
pilgrimage, etc., are just meant to
show off. Now you have to discover
discretion to know who is a saint and
who is not. All the Gurus incorporated
their poems and experiences in Guru
the power that is within you and Grantha and that is why Guru Grantha
establish it. Guru Nanaka kept on is revered so much. Only the
repeating the same thing again and
again. He never talked of rituals. But
when Guru Teg-Bahadur came, war
renowned Gurus contributed to it.
They were so spiritual that they did
churning of all the religious scriptures
and put the substance in Guru
with Mohammadan Rulers was being
fought. So he prescribed Kada (iron
bangle), sword (kripan) to keep them
in the state of preparedness. But Guru
Nanaka always talked of the spirit. He
Grantha.
That is what we do in Sahaja Yoga.
We do not follow any particular saint
explained it very clearly, but no one or incarnation; we respect all of them
heeded what he wrote. They will just and strike a balance. But all this was
put a finger on the couplet and read it lost in words. People did not go
out. Could we understand him this deeper in them. That is why Kabira
way? If we go through his writings
properly and absorb it, then the whole
has written 'even the scholars went
on reading and reading like fools,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June 2000
32
without absorbing any thing (f - Huge Gurudwaras were built. But
पढि पण्डित मुर्ख भए). That is how a
there is no use. There are very few
race of fools was created. Now there evolved beings, the remaining is just
is no war being fought but they are a race of Sardars. How could truth be
so conditioned that they will wear told to them? But now Sikhs have
Turbans, keep swords and combs ete. started coming to Sahaja Yoga. I have
But they have no objection in seen many of them with turbans on.
consuming Alcohol. All the Gurus May be some of them are coming
warned the disciples about the evil without turbans. One is Namdhari
Sikh. There are many Namdhari Sikhs
in Bankok. As many as fifty-sixty of
them come to the Programme. They
effects of alcohol. Any one talking of
consciousness could never support
wine. On the one side they will
consume alcohol, on the other they
wear white turbans. I do not know
wear turbans, keep swords and what is their speciality, but they
combs! Any way they wish to be part follow what Guru Nanak has said.
of that clane. This has affected their
That is how diversions are created and
internal growth. They have taken to people start fighting amongst
this kind of situation and as a result themselves. Guru Nanaka said that I
have become material beings. On am prophet of Mohammedans and
material level they look to everything. Guru of Hindus. Until one is realized
one cannot understand this. But it was
To transform these people, should
not be difficult because we (Sahaja
necessary to prepare us for this day.
Now it is our duty to work-out what
H.rin
Yogis) are going by what the Gurus
preached. Gurus could not give
they said. Things, however, went in
opposite direction and many seekers
realization to people but we are giving
realization. They talked of achieving
were lost, no-one knows where!
"Sahaja Smadhi', but did not tell how.
I was talking about Gyan Deva..
He belongs to Nath cult. He wrote
about Kundalini but his disciples call
themselves varkaris ( , They
take two heavy cymbals (sitn in their
hands, wear jute clothes and go to
Pandhari Nath, Pandhar Pur. It takes
Who will raise the Kundalini? Guru
Nanaka gave realisation to only two
of his disciples. One Guru giving
realisation to only two of his
disciples! What could be the effect on
the society? So people started
worshipping him at external level.
them one month to reach there. They
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 May-June 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
33
travel on foot and thus consider
themselves to be very sacrificing. All
the way they chew tobacco. These
Varkari people have created this cult.
They take procession of Gyan Deva
on a palanquin. Gyan Deva never
have experienced the truth. So you
cannot accept the falsehood.
Falsehood gets finished in Sahaja
Yoga. So many people have got their
self-realization in the world. No one
could spread falsehood now.
Whatever I have told in Sahaja Yoga
afforded shoes when he was alive, but
people place his slipper, in the
palanquin and take the procession
from one village to another. Wherever
they reach the villagers offer them
food and refreshment. It is a new
method of beggary. At the birth place
of Gyan Deva and places like Pune
and Niwase women grow Tulsi in
is taped and recorded. No one could
change it. People could listen to tapes,
but they go on reading books without
understanding. This is the reason I
told them to have more tapes and get
the books printed. Listening to the
tapes will definitely have impact on
their minds. People take book reading
heavy earthen pots, lift it on their
heads and walk in procession to
as a means of entertainment. What is
the use of it? But now Sahaja Yogis
Anandi. This I have seen myself.
have reached a level from where they
People have made lot of money in the
name of Gyna Deva. But I do not
know what to do to stop it. All his
cannot go astray. They will not have
to adopt wrong things. That is what
we have to learn from Guru Nanaka.
purpose has forfeited. One fellow
gives big big lecture on Gyan Deva, (3TT ai). But what people are
speaks whatever he feels like and doing! However, in Sahaja Yoga such
there are people who listen to him things will not happen since I have
Guru Nanaka said know thyself?
with blind faith!
convinced all of them. They cannot
Same is the case with Guru Change now. No harm could be done
Nanaka. No one knows what he
now; what has happened has
happened. Reading scriptures and
Church Book will have no beneficial
effect. To awaken one's energy is the
lesson that we have to take from Guru
actually said. People have made
Chandigarh, Guru Nanaka talked of
Chandi. He talked of my incarnation
on the earth. He explained every
Nanaka. We, Realized beings
thing. But no one cares for it. Most
understand Sahaja Yoga so deeply
that now there is no need to draw any
of the prophets and Gurus have been
treated like that. Of course you people
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 May June 200D
The Divine Coal Breeze
34
other meaning of it. Still there are made of his achievements? These
people suggesting rituals. It is all people are misusing Lord Christ,
useless. I have never said so, yet Mohammad Sahib and, above all,
people are doing what I have never Guru Nanaka because he was the last
said. So now when they listen to tapes incarnation. Shirdi Sainath incarnated
of my lectures and understand that after him. Sai Nath was against all the
Mother has not said it, why should rituals and conditioning because these
we do that? But because of old are misleading. After awakening,
Sanskara (conditioning) we keep on things change of course. Realized
people become knowledgeable..
Without realization it is not possible.
observing certain rituals.
So long as we do not get rid of
So Sai Nath did not organize. We have
our conditionings, we shall not
understand real Sahaja Yoga. I have
not organized too. We have no
organization. People automatically
made you very special people. You
know the real meaning of religion. get organized after awakening, the
way different organs of the body are
organized. So without any
organizationeverything is going on
immaculately in Sahaja Yoga.
You know every thing, you know
about yourself and about others. You
could give realisation to people. So
now you have become perfect (t).
So what is there to go astray now?
I bless you all. You have to keep
in mind that we have not to pervert
what we have achieved. It is most
sacrilegious. We don't have to pervert
You cannot fall.
So today I thought of the pains of
Guru
Nanaka.
How much he
it, perversion should not be allowed.
tolerated! His wife was not
May God Bless You.
cooperative at all. What people have
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-36.txt 
 May June 2000
35
The Divine Cool Breeze
PUBLIC PROGRAMME AT RAM LILA MAIDAN
NEW DELHI – MARCH 25, 2000
(A Report)
"All roads lead to Ramlila Maidan" item captioned "Survey Report").
would have been the appropriate Seekers of truth from all castes and
proverb on March 25, the day the social groupings had assembled to
public programme had been have a "darshan" of Shri Mataji and
organised at the main Ramilila were eager to receive the "Spiritual
Maidan. Numerous buses chartered Experience".
from neighbouring places such as
Meerut, Gurgaon, Faridabad,
Ghaziabad ete., not to mention of welcome Shri Mata Ji when She
their counterparts from East, West. arrived. The Chief Minister of Delhi,
North, South and Central Delhi, all Mrs Shiela Dixit was present there.
made a beeline towards the Ramlila She presented a bouquet to Her
Maidan. The sea of humanity Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi at
estimated anywhere between forty to the dais. Seekers of the spiritual bliss
sixty thousand had assembled at the listened spell bound when Shri Mataji
Maidan well before the schedule start suggested to them that the path of
time of 6.45 P.M. Hundreds of self-knowledge was easy to access-
hoardings, thousands of lamppost
hangings and the numerous wall renunciation. All it required was a
posters announcing the public yearning for the great spiritual
programme did have their impact
judging by the long queue of cars and internal harmony and external balance
other personal vehicles which were of the seeker in his day-to-day life.
trying to earn a parking slot in the Shri Mataji was pained to see that
vicinity, Roughly 50% of the seekers such genuine seekers were being
had traveled all the way from Meerut, taken for a ride by numerous fake
Noida, Ghaziabad, Gurgaon,
Faridabad, Haridwar etc. While the
The huge crowd stood up to
it required no penance, no
happening and a maintenance of an
gurus.
Shri Mataji mentioned that the
Sahaja Yoga, at once, appeals to the
productive entrepreneurship of an
remainder were from the Delhi metro
region (for details refer to the news
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May-June 2000
36
individual. To buttress the point, She unproductive activities to achieve
referred to the incident where the super normal profits. A central point
chief of a mafia of Talyati region in in the economic literature is that
Russia sought Her permission to reallocation of entrepreneurship can
embrace the Sahaja Yoga . On be achieved through changes in rules
transformation, he wanted Shri that determine relative rewards than
Mataji's permission to export onions
to Delhi where onion prices reigned
via modification of goals of
entrepreneurs and prospective
entrepreneurs themselves. Shri Mataji
through her illustration
sky-high for a brief period due to an
adverse demand-supply gap situation.
was
The accepted hypothesis in mentioning that the transformation of
an individual is possible on self-
economic literature is that
есопотic
entrepreneurs are always with us in realisation even when the incentive
the society. The private entrepreneur-
structure is not right!
ship has a bias toward profit. The
productive contribution of the seekers had the unique first encounter
society's entreprenurial activities with the reality just by extending their
depends on the relative payoffs hands towards Her Holiness Mataji
society offers to productive activities Shri Nirmala Devi.
such as innovation in contrast to
Then the great moment arrived;
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May-June 2000
37
HOW THE SEEKERS RECEIVED THE MESSAGE OF THE PUBLIC PROGRAMME
Survey of Seekers at Ramlila Ground on March 25, 2000
(Survey Report)
(Prepared by the core team consisting participated in the survey and
of R. Venkatesan (Team Leader), respondents were around 930 in
Nitin Jindal, Devender Kumar,
number.
Sowmiya Venkatesan and Sujata
Srivastava. More than 35 volunteers
Major Findings
administered the schedule)
1) Source of Information on the
Public Programme
Introduction
Friends and family was the main
The purpose of the survey was to
identify the main source of source of information on the public
information on the public programme; roughly two-thirds of
programme, geographical spread of seekers came to know of the
seekers
programme through their friends and
Delhi
and
across
neighbouring cities and the major family members while one-fourth
demographical details on seekers became aware through hoarding and
especially age and educational
background. Care was taken to ensure advertisements were the medium of
that there was no bias in the information for hardly 4% of seekers
Newspaper
wall
posters.
estimation process through adoption who attended. Result indicates that
of the Open Random Method of the Delhi collectivity is both active
Sampling. Thirty-five volunteers and effective.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-39.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May June 2000
38
Table : Source of Information on the Public Programme
Source of Information
Percent of seekers
Newspaper Advertisements
3.6%
Hoarding
12.6%
Wall Posters
13.6%
Family
19.7%
Friends
45.7%
T.V. Advertisements
1.8%
Cable T.V
0.6%
Bus Hoarding
0.8%
Articles -Magazines /Newspaper
Others
0.6%
2) Geographical Spread of Seekers behind in the dissemination activity.
Across Delhi and Neighbouring Roughly 45% of seekers traveled
States
from neighbouring cities to the
Ramlila grounds; Ghaziabad
Sahaja Yoga is evenly spread across
all regions of the Delhi metro. The
East Delhi collectivity has been more
active in spreading the information on
the public programme while the
Central Delhi collectivity lagged
collectivity had been the most active
in disseminating information through
meetings, organising buses etc.
Meerut; Noida are distant second in
this aspect while Faridabad and
Gurgaon are laggards.
Table 2 Locationwise Distribution of Seekers
Location
Percent Respondents
South Delhi
12.4%
North Delhi
12.4%
West Delhi
12.8%
East Delhi
18.6%
Central Delhi
7.3%
Ghaziabad & Areas looked after by Ghaziabad Centre
20.3%
Noida
8.3%
Gurgaon
2.8%
Faridabad
1.5%
Meerut
3,6%
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-40.txt 
 May-June 2000
39
The Divine Cool Breeze
3) Educational background of seekers did not have a high school
level qualification. This is a pointer
to the cultural richness of the Yoga
Seekers
Interest on Sahaja Yoga cuts across
Bhoomi.
educational barriers; nearly 43% of
Educational Background
Percent Respondents
57%
More Than High School Level Education
Less Than High School Level Education But literate
34%
lliterate
4) Agewise Distribution of Spiritual
active age group of 20 to 40 years.
Seekers
The popular myth that the spiritual
Yet pointer to the fact that India is a seeking is the last resort of the retired
Yoga Bhoomi is that roughly two- personnel is demystified in this
thirds of seekers belonged to the
survey.
Percent Respondents
Age Group
15 to 20 years
6%
32%
21 to 30 years
31 to 40 years
25%
41 to 50 years
25%
Older than 50 years
12%
