The Divine Cool Breeze 00 March April 2000 Volume : XII Issue: 3 & In thoughtless awareness nobody can touch you, that's your fortress. By meditation one must establish thoughtless awareness. That is the sign you are rising higher.... You have to see whether you have achieved your thoughtless awareness? Its the minimum of minimum. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Ekadash Rudra Puja

 In this Issue: Invocation to Shri Adi Shakti 1 Shri Ganesha Puja 25.9.99 (Cabella) Navratri Puja 12 North American Tour 1999 21 Shri Mataji's Canadian Tour 1999 25 Reclaiming the Swastika 32 Sahaja Yoga World Centres 37 Edited by : Yogi Mahajan V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar Published by : New Delhi-110 067

 The Divine Cool Breeze March - April 2000 INVOCATION TO SHRI ADI SHAKTI O Mother Divine Out of the highest realm of Divinity You have come on this Earth only because of Your infinite love, compassion and benevolence. Your powers, which created all the universes. are insurmountable. Your completeness is such that everything that exists, that has existed, shall exist and also that exists for ever is contained in Your indescribable being. Despite that, O Supreme Mother, out of Your immeasurable love, You have assumed a form which is similar to ours, only to give us guidance, protection, salvation. In spite of being the Most Powerful, the Most Complete, the One Who contains everything, O Beloved Mother, You have granted to Your children the opportunity of offering Puja at Your Lotus Feet, only for our own benefit. On this auspicious occasion of your 77th Birthday we all the Sahaja children from the world most humbly and respectfully invite You to Delhi and shower your blessings on us. Humbly, Your children from the world.

 March April SHRI GANESHA PUJA. 1999 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI GANESHA PUJA 25.9.99 (Cabella) Discourse by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi these problems, all such people, who suffer from the right side, should worship Shri Ganesha. For example these days, life is very much busy with all of you. You are extremely busy with your work and you are doing extra work, I should say, ODAY We have gathered here to worship Shri Ganesha. You äll know what a powerful deity He is. His power comes from his innocence. When we see small children we are automatically compelled towards them and also we want to love them, kiss them than normal. But you think you are doing a very great job of God. As a result Shri Ganesha is neglected and such a man can beceome either very dry or very self indulgent. One of the two things come up and he does not know where he is going. The only thing that keeps you in the middle, in Sahaja Yoga, is Shri Ganesha's Puja, Shri Ganesha's worship by which you can always be in the centre. All these diseases of the right side can be and be with them. And very innocent they are, extremely innocent, and when we worship Shri Ganesha we have to know if we have been really innocent or not. These days people have become extremely cunning, and they don't mind any amount of cunning. They play all kinds of cunning games on others who are innocent and simple. They can justify themselves always that whatever they are doing is the right thing in these modern times when everybody is so cunning. This cunningness can take you to the other Now there are various ways people extreme of right side, which is very much worship Shri Ganesha but there is a punishable, in the sense that some peoplesimple way to remember him and sit develop all kinds of problems, which are before his photograph and take vibrations physical, you can say. Like their hands from him. Thats the best way you can can get paralysed or their leg can get balance yourself. There are so many paralysed. AIso, they can have other worries, there are so many struggles you cured by Shri Ganesha's Puja. have. All these can be neutralised by Shri troubles with their liver treatments and Ganesha. Though innocent, He is extremely clever and when he comes to all that. All this comes up. Then to punish them a disease of psychosomatic nature might set in. At this time, when you have your help you are amazed. How he works

 SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999 March - April 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze very difficult times. It is his style that he it out and how he removes all the hurdles manages things so weil because he is a Ganpati. Ganpati means the one who is the Lord of the Ganas. As I have told you Ganas exist within us. Very nicely settled down as these bodies, small, small bodies and all the worries from you. So this is the most important deity we have. Though its a very simple deity. This Mooladhar chakra is very very complicated. It is one of the most complicated, chakras I think, because it has many waves, it has many compartments. We can say which all the time are vibrating and oscillating. So to study down these you should try to be who report if there is any problem. They report to the brain that there is a problem and on the sternum bone is the residence or you can say the throne of the Goddess Durga. So whenever there is any problem absolutely dedicated to Shri Ganesha. we are found into some trouble, sternum bone starts vibrating and these bodies Shri Ganesha, as I told you, was which are Ganas get the information. incarnated as Jesus Christ, and Jesus was Antibodies they are called in the medical also a very innocent person. If he was not terminology. Then these Ganas attack. They can target also. They know how to innocent, He would not have been crucified, but he was not a cunning fellow target the troubles and attack it, one may think that only the people who are to see the cunning of others. His own disciple deceived him and still he knew suffering medically are helped by Ganas is not true. Also the people who are who it was, he never said who it was. If you see his life, its full of innocent beauty, mentally upset, who are mentally suffering are also helped by the Ganas. These is such a simple hearted personality, such a good personality and wherever he saw anything wrong done he is to go all out to fight it. Same is Shri Ganesha. Ganas are so good at targeting their problems that sometimes we are surprised how things are worked out. For example Shri Ganesha's blessings are very say something happens to someone, some important for all the people who are child, somewhere. Now his parents start specially proe to some sort of a hurdle crying for Mother and the Mother is the or 'Sankata as they call it'. He is called as Durga say, then what happens, that they Sankata Vimochan, the one who takes immediately rush to that place and you out of all the hurdles of life. So many miraculously they cure the boy. of you have experienced how he has miraculously they say. So many helped you in different troubles and miraculous thing that have happened in hurdles and also different type of very your life you cannot explain, but they are

 March April 2000 4 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999 they brought out the boy and he was treated by the doctors also but also with vibrations and today that boy is perfectly alright, while the doctors had said he can all due to this Ganapati's Ganas. They are also small like him and they are very active and very alert. They never sleep. Anytime there is any trouble these Ganas will go and attack the problem and find out solution for him. It is something unbelievable how they act and how they never survive. If there is one chance of his surviving, he will be like a dead body, in a coma all the time. This boy, I have met him this time, when I went to America. So, like this, so many things inform. Ican give you so many examples that have happened like this. For example there was a boy who got drowned in one of our happen and people tell me that Mother its your 'kripa', your blessings that this has happened. ashrams in America in the swimming pool. They were all jumping in the In a way, it is very distantly, I should say, swimming pool, I didn't like the idea of but because of Shri Ganesha. Now Shri swimming pool very much because there Ganesha's another quality is that he is were children. So one boy fell down into extremely obedient to Mother. He does that and was inside for about 15 to 20 not recognize even Shiva, Vihnu, any one. minutes. Nobody knew he was there. So To him his Mother is everything. So he can fight with his father, Shiva, he can fight with anyone because to him is then they tried to find out the body of the boy and then they found out he was not there. Where has he gone? Then they discovered that he was in that swimming complete obedience and absolutely quick Tatpar', just quickly understands what is pool. After that they got so frightened and they said we just prayed to you, Mother to save this boy. Surprisingly, I never telephone to any Ashram, I didn't know even the address, but I asked to telephone to this number, on my own. I don't know the desire of the Mother and he works it out. His style is otherwise very innocent, simple, child like but His work is tremendous. Now these Ganas are also very innocent people, very innocent but when told that you have to attend to a particular problem, they are extremely quick and they are very fast. The another thing within is that he respects people who are chaste, who have chastity as the prime thing in their life. Chastity is very much anybody's numbers and, when I telephoned, one of the leaders came there and I told him I know the boy has fallen into the water and he will be saved. Nobody had told me anything. "Don't worry he will be perfectly alright." Then worshipped by him. Its not only in women

 March - April 2000 SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze but also in men, he expects chastity to be present. After getting realisation you should be absolutely chaste people, you shouldn't have your eyes rolling around country, who are doing black magic, or who are doing fundamentalism and where people are also having very bad morals. He creates problems for them. What happens that He tells the Mother earth to every where and sort of what you can call create the earthquakes. Earthquake takes place in places where there is no respect of chastity, also where there are a very bad method of communicating with young women and young men and spoiling your chastity. Even your eyes should be cleaned, even your thoughts should be cleaned. For that you should introspect and see for yourself what mistakes you have committed and what kind of an unchaste behaviour you have. You have to correct yourself and ask Shri Ganesha to forgive you. If you ask for forgiveness, he can forgive anything. He is so innocent and beautiful that he fundamentalist and also where there are people who are worshipping the black magic. This kind of people are attacked by him through his Mother. So the Mother earth also understands. Now we have so many earthquakes, one in Turkey you know, one in Taiwan, but not a single Sahaja Yogi has died. So he protects them. He has discrimination and only such people, who are of this kind, he tries to destroy them, and he has destroyed many like this even before. Also, the Mother forgives you, but that is a very important thing. Our whole morality depends on our idea of chastity. We should be very chaste. So many religions have come and they have talked about chastity. But religions earth's powers he has got, is that he is magnetic, he attracts people towards have become so useless now, have himself, people take to him very easily as we take to children very easily. So that is become without any basis, without any proper execution, of what is written for them. They do all kinds of things and they magnetic power that he has got within himself. call themselves Hindus, Muslims, Now, you will be surprised this magnet exists also in the birds, also in many animals but specially in the birds. That's Christians, all kinds of religions. Actually the religions have failed completely and that's why Shri Ganesha gets after them. how they can follow direction where they have to go. They are flying from, say Siberia, all the way, flying to Australia. How do they fly? And again they come back to the same place. It also is in the Another thing about Shri Ganesh is that he is created out of the Mother earth. He is absolutely created out of the mother Earth. So if he doesn't like people of some

 March - April SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 2000 Ganesha. So like that they were doing to fishes. Fishes also are found say in the waters which are coming from some hills, so they come to the plains for some time and again God knows how, they go back to their own place. So going back to the same place is only possible if there is a way of knowing the direction. But they know the direction, they have a sense of this one statue that they had and they were dancing before it. But when they put the statue in the water and they came back home, they got drunk and when they got drunk, they started dancing with that drinking and saying Jai Ganesha, Jai Ganesha. At that time the earth moved direction, also they are bound by their own qualities. For example a snake will be a snake, a dog will be a dog, and a lion will be a lion. But human beings have perhaps all the animals within them. So they could be anything, you can't say and they are too cunning to admit that they can be anything. And once they become anything like that you are amazed how these people can be of such a low level when they are human beings. But it is so because Ganesha has not been respected in their lives. So they can go to any level, and the earthquake took away all of them inside the earth itself. They all disappeared into earth. Apart from that there were many others also who were doing this kind of thing, were taken into the mother earth. And our Ashram was there, a kind of a centre and around the centre there was a very beautiful land but he did not touch that land. Around is about at least quite a long distance, a big gap came in and there was a opening in the mother earth all around the centre and nobody was harmed. They were all at home. They were all right. But this happened, that our any place. Ashram was not at all touched and this is Another example, I give you a very big how they saved the Ashram and not a earthquake we had in India, in Latur. In single Sahaja Yogi died. It is really very Latur this was the fourteenth day of Shri remarkable how the protection is given Ganesha where they take Shri Ganesha by Shri Ganesha and his Ganas. and put it in the sea or in the water of a So we must respect his Ganas, very river. So there, in Latur, these people have been having a nice statue of Shri Ganasha. important is to see that they are all around within us, they are acting within us. They Before the statue they dance and they have now started playing very dirty, very bad, music from some very funny films see us what sort of person you are, and in case you try to dislodge Shri Ganesha by your misbehaviour they try to see that or something. It's so bad that you just can't you again go back to normal. They give bear it. Very bad and that upsets Shri

 SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999 March - April 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze not for worship. There is no photograph of real Shri Ganesha, no photograph. you a chance many a times. But even then you go on with your cunning and ideas about your ego, you are very badly hit by There are eight Shri Ganeshas who came out of mother earth. I have seen them. But in those places the pujaris, the people who are the priest are horrible, horrible people. I went to one of them and he said, "I am getting Asthama", "I am getting him and that is the biggest, I should say, calamity for you people. So you must worship Shri Ganesha but I always say don't worship every Shri Ganesha which is being created by those, we can say, artisans. Because God knows what sort paralysis, how is it I am worshipping Shri Ganesha, my forefathers have worshipped Shri Ganesha and how he is doing this to us." I said, you just introspect yourself, what kind of a life you lead, what do of Artisans they are. For money's sake they might be making Ganesha and they might not have got any idea of Chastity. Such people make these Ganesha and then you worship those Ganeshas, so we you do, are you really worthy of Shri Ganesha's Pujari. And then he realized it. are not at all helped by this. That's why Mohammad Saheb has said, don't do any worship of any idol because I said, "I will cure you now. Its all right but afterwards you see to it that you become an innocent personality. Try to these idols have been created by human beings who are not authorised to do that. lead an innocent life, not of outwitting They are not Swayambhus Ha. They another and being very cunning and are not created by the mother earth but clever. Shri Ganesha's troubles, are really, are copied by people who are just wanting I can't count them even, how much it can to make money out of them. So that's how hamper, or how much it can give you any idol you get, say, from the shops trouble, how much it can take you nearer need not be worshiped, it is not to be to your death. He is so powerful, because worshiped, any idol whatsoever. So all his energy is for the divine work of his whatever is not there, we should not Mother, all his energy. vorship because it is made by somebody who has very bad vibrations, who is a He doesn't do anything, he doesn't want cheat, who is very cunning and thinks no anything. Just all his energy is for that and end of himself. With such a person if you he is asking for what is simple, what you buy a Shri Ganesha it is going to harm can call Modaka, a kind of a thing they you, is not going to help you. You can make out of coconut. That's what he eats. His body is so subtle and so, so powerful have it for decoration in the house but

 March - April 2000 SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Ganesha. that he can move mountains after mountains. With his simplicity, with his All these things are there but we cannot sweetness, and with his innocence he can understand it because we are confused. We don't want to see it in a proper sense that this is already written there. So those who worship Christ, also worship Shri Ganesha and whatever you say to Christ really change people. People who are very harsh, can be changed. His symbol as we have seen is a Swastika, of the right direction. But if it is the other way round Swastika, then that can destroy. When It was used by Hitler in the beginning, it was you are saying it to Shri Ganesha. They are not two, they are one and absolutely one with each other. All the things I have the right type and he was successful. But then what happened, they had stencils and told you about Christ, you can try to find out and you will prove it. Like Christ had these two fingers, this means one finger they started using it from the otherside. So it was from the left side, they started other way round and then they were all destroyed. How powerful is Shri is for the Vishuddi as we say Shri Krishna and this one is Vishnu's means this is his Ganesha's Swastika, you can say. Also we have proved now that Swastika if you see from left to the right, is actually from the Carbon atom. The carbon atom has got father's. That means his father was Vishnu or Shri Krishna. Very clearly he used to do, why didn't he use other fingers, only these two fingers why did he use. Pointing Swastika and the whole of this chakra is made of Carbon atoms, all put in series. out towards his father who was Shri Vishnu and Shri Krishna. Now if you look at it from the left side, It is easy to understand what I am saying, if you see the vibrations of Shri Ganesha. If you see his vibrations and think of him you will be amazed, that your Agnya will open out, you will become thoughtless, you have proved it now, look at it from the left side to right side, what you see is Onkar. If you see it from right side to left side, you see the Swastika, and if you see from down below upward then it looks like a Cross. So it proves that Shri Ganesha incarnated as Christ and he is because he is the Jesus and he is on the Agnya. So it all opens out and all the stupid ideas about getting the Agnya, this and that is all neutralized because you see for yourself, just the name of Shri Ganesha can open your Agnya. The and out of the half of the egg became cunningness that comes from Agnya is Christ and half of the egg was Shri absolutely finished. You are no more the one who is worshipped all over the world, is already written in the Devi Mahatmaya if you read it, is all clearly written about him how he became an egg

 March- April 2000 SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze cunning. When you see this innocence on your forehead, you are amazed at yourself earth is a wrong idea, is very wrong because it is harming us with pollution. To cut down the trees, to cut down every thing that mother has produced and just to use it for money is a very wrong thing. One should think about it and when you cut one tree also you should put another one there. That is the beauty of the Mother earth, all the greenery, every thing is the beauty of the Mother carth. and all such ideas just disappear. You cannot think of something very cunning and harmful to others. You are completely changed when the Agnya is absolutely opened out. This one is a very big blessing to us that we all have this Muladhara Chakra now put into proper thing. When you sit on the ground also it helps more because the mother of Shri Ganesha is Many people have no interest in gardening or in nature, no interest. I don't this Prithvi, is this earth, the mother earth and that's why we should look after the know how they live but they do without taking any interest in gardening or in the mother earth. We don't look after the mother earth. We don't understand the nature. Nature is so beautiful, just look at the nature, it is never smelling, is never dirty, every leaf is so organized that it value of mother earth. Actually in Indian culture it is that when you are getting up in the morning, you must say Namaskar should get the sunrays. There is no quarrel about it. They are so well organized, bow to you, O. Mother earth because I everything is so beautiful and it is never am touching you with my feet. Such destroyed also by any animals. You will respect you should have for Mother earth, be amazed. The animals also don't then you won't exploit it, you won't have destroy, at the most they might eat some to the Mother earth because saying that I today's problems of pollution and this and grass or something, but normally animals do not destroy any tree, do not destroy that. It all comes out of our ignorance that the anything as we destroy the Mother earth Mother earth is the mother of Shri for our own use. Whatever may be the Ganesha who's chakra we have got as cry for this, we have to understand that Mooladhara. If you understand this you we have to respect to the Mother earth. will be able to understand, what is to be Mother earth is the mother of Shri done. The mother earth itself we should Ganesha, who is our, you should say the look after, we can glorify her, we can eldest Sahaja Yogi. He never had to take beautify her, we can do all kinds of things but the way we are exploiting the mother to yoga but he is in Yoga all the time. He is the greatest yogi we have and the way

 March - April 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999 10 he is doing right things all the time. He never does anything wrong, never and he is so capable of getting to the position of any great deity that is possible, I would say. He is the greatest deity we have and much more for men. Shri Ganesha is very important thing because men can develop so many diseases if they do not respect Shri Ganesha. Our health would be the best if we look after Shri Ganesha because he is all the we should really worship him. Through him all deities are worshiped and are made happy and blissful. So this is today's thing was that I was just thinking that now a time repairing our body. He is all the time looking after, protecting us and our Shri Ganesha is in the Mooladhara. He is the days, in modern times how we have become shameless, how we have tried to trouble our chastity, for kind of a honour. one who is looking after our Kundalini, he is protecting our Kundalini. If any thing happens to us the Kundalini comes up but If we have any honour you will have the chastity but you are dishonouring yourself and you think you have been very very smart and modern by becoming so sinful. All the sinful act that is going on in these modern times is absolutely wrong and it should be completely, we should abhor it. You should go no way near because the one who supports her and, keeps her up, awakened and standing is Shri Ganesha. He works it out. He is the one who is the protector of our Kundalini which is also a basis of your self realisation. So how much important is Shri Ganesha you should know, and you should find out about yourself, introspect thats all wrong and that's how Shri that are we really dedicated to Shri Ganesha gets angry. Decency is very important in understanding, what is our important basis, is our chastity. In India you know thirty two thousand women got themselves burnt for saving their chastity. I come from the same family and you can imagine what courage they must be having, what faith they must be having, in their chastity that if we lose our chastity what's the use of our life. So they cared for their chastity, have done so much sacrifice to show that chastity is the most Ganesha? If we are, what are we doing about it? Then you will develop a real hatred for all these dirty things. You will not like them, will not like such people. That is how a Sahaja Yogi should work it out. The children are the best as we know. Children are so sweet and so kind, they are so loving, so beautiful. In the same way we should know Shri Ganesha is there. He is the one who is really innocent but extremely extremely, protective of you, very much protective, with his important thing, we all should have. Its not only for women but also for men, very innocence. So we should also try to cherish our

 March - April 2000 SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999 11 The Divine Cool Breeze other countries it has happened but I was happy to see that in Australia they are very secular. They have many Maoris and all those people and they encourage all of them and its so surprising that they have so much talent and they are bringing innocence and not to feel hurt because sometime such people are cheated, dominated, every thing happens, doesn't matter. They will all suffer who will dominate innocent people. As the whole world, you see, there is a big uproar about it, people are talking about it that there should not be domination of the innocent them to this state to show that they are equal in their rights, political rights, in Australia. Its a very good venture. simple people. It has happened but it all has to be changed, has to be brought to some last end otherwise people can not Now this Ganesha has appeared in Australia is as Uluru, is a very big exist, like everywhere they went and mountain which looks like Shri Ganesha. It has also a very big trunk, going down. oppressed so many people. In America, I was surprised to see that there were so Vibrations itself will prove that it is Shri many Red Indians, who are called as Indian Americans. They were all Ganesha, from the mother earth. He has appeared in many places, Shri Ganesha not only there. But there I felt really the oppressed so much that they had to run away to different places and then I went to this place Canajohari. I found the vibrations were so good. That means they It is. And in Australia I thank him that were very innocent, simple people and because of him only Sahaja Yoga has Americans that time, who went there. worked so well and so easily, and tried to completely finish them. So they Government also has never troubled us went and hid in places like Canajohari but source, source of vibrations. Thats what or there has been no problem with them. I don't know what's this helping them but the Canajohari has such tremendous vibrations that I said look at this, so many perhaps it is Shri Ganesha as uluru which years have passed, still the people who is protecting Sahaja Yoga there and is live there or worked about and were growing so much. In the same way every atsolutely enjoying this place were Red where, where ever you may be Shri Indians, the ones who were Indians, we Ganesha should be worshipped and you call them American Indians. But they are will be helped out and out miraculously. so simple and innocent and they were so, You will be helped, miraculously but first I think, spiritual people because they used do something about our chastity which is to worship the Mother. All the time they Shri Ganesha. May God Bless You. worship the Mother. Even I have seen in

 March April 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 12 NAVRATRI PUJA NAVRATRI PUJA Cabella, 17-10-1999 Discourse by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Tonight we have gathered here to do the Puja, to the Devi, that is, Mahakali we can call her, or Durga. So many types of forms, She has taken to kill the negative forces that are trying to trouble or to obstruct or even to grow, the people who were gentle and good, Her forms are of different types that we know about, that She destroyed so many rakshasas. She destroyed many evil doers. Also, we do not know that in the world wars that we to hate. But these forces join together sometimes to form a giant personality of evil which tries to torture the human beings and trouble them. They might take any name, they might call themselves by anything but they are absolutely hundred percent evil and for such persons there is no pity or compassion from the God Almighty. These are to be destroyed and that is the job of the Goddess, to destroy them, who is a Mother, full of compassion had She was there to protect the right and love. type of people and that's how they all survived the ill plan, the ill gotten plan of It's a very contradictory work the very cruel and evil people. The evil people Goddess has to do, to kill these people have a capaeity to hate and to expresS their hatred in every way that is possible. They are really born evil and there are also who become evil. When they are born because in the larger interest it is important that all such evil people should be destroyed completely, but they do not. They, like you go to jail for sometimes, like that, they go to hell for sometimes, suffer and again they come back much more stronger and then again try to trouble good, saintly people. It's a common style they are, all over the world. They can come in the form of a very good evil you can make them out that their whole style is so aggressive and so vindictive about things, but hatred has no limits, no limits at all because if they hate, someone then just to justify that hatred they will say all kinds of things, just to justify. But sometimes they don't even want to justify, they just feel that they hate and it's a fundamental right they have got man, of a very gentle man or of a man who knows a lot about God or they can also say that they can give you realisation.

 March- April 2000 NAVRATRI PUJA 13 The Divine Cool Breeze All kinds of lies they are capable of these people. While the good people also because they have that power-evil power sometimes follow suite, they also try to of doing evil. So, they take to all kind of follow them. It's very surprising why falsehood and they proclaim that we are should good people not understand what this and we are that and we can give you is good and what is bad? But that discrimination many good people also lack and that's why they take to wrong Actually they have come on this earth to things and then they go on justifying all ruin people. We have had many of these the time. Whatever they are doing is the false people and many stupid people right thing, is the best thing, they have this, all that. followed them. They never talked against the proof of it. each other. Christ has said, "Devil won't talk against its own house", as if they are Now, as you know there have been many in one house and in one house they live of them in this Kaliyuga and so many of and they can not talk, of something that them have now disappeared from this will disturb their collectivity or their earth and now they can not trouble us. fraternity. Their fraternity is so great that But, there are still some more who are wherever they are, they know that they exposed, people have exposed them so are together. Just imagine, all the evil much that no body can expose anybody people should join together and behave without any proof. But, they have such in this manner, is very surprising. That's courage and they are so full of confidence why they are very collective. Supposing, that they can do what they like and one has taken a particular part of the land. anybody tries to expose them, they will Then he dominates there, another takes definitely ruin that person. Few things up in another way, third one takes, there's they are doing-fīrst of all, they put wrong no competition as such. Ultimate effort ideas into your head. They say that we is somehow or other to destroy all the are very great people, we are this, we are creation of God, all the good people of that. God has sent us, all sorts of things tne world, who will ultimately get their they will talk but there is no proof about it and human beings never ask for the self realisation and who will have the knowledge about reality. This kind of proof as to how do you say? What is the proof? So, the solution is Sahaja Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga you have the experience, you have the proof. Then you grow into it, immediately you cannot become a great atmosphere is the worst during Kaliyuga, and there are so many, stupid people who may be simple, who may be good natured but they are drawn by the evil doing of

 March - April 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze NAVRATRI PUJA 14 Sahaja Yogi, that's a fact. You have to will tell you by many ways that this is wrong, why you are doing wrong to some person. But, if you do not repent and come back on to the normal position, She gives you up. Once Mahakali gives you mature, it takes some time for some people, it takes some more time for some people, doesn't matter. But, you do mature. In the meanwhile if you try to go up, you are now exposed and become prone to all kinds of evil things. I would say, when you worship her, what you want? You want her to protect. In your discrimination, in your mistake you might do something wrong, may do something that is not good for you, could be very to these wrong people then there is no possibility, there is no way of again bringing you up. Specially those people who rise high in Sahaja Yoga. If they fall, they fall so low then even an ordinary Sahaja Yogi could say Mother, look at him, where has he gone! So, with all these things happening, what is our job, is to worship Mahakali within us because what does She do, perhaps, we are not very dangerous for you. But She is the person who guides you, how to avoid all the dangers. aware of. Now, She protects your life. She protects First and foremost thing She does is to protect us. Wherever you may be, what your body, She protects all organs of your body, She is the one who gives you all ever you may be doing, in whatever peril you may be, how-so-ever dangerously you may be placed in life, She protects the security of the life. In Her realm you feel completely secure, you are never afraid of anything. Because you have left you. First thing, She protects you. All the people who write to me how they were protected, how they were cured, how they were helped is this thing that they should know that all this has happened because of Mahakali power within you. She exists within you. When you are worshipping Mahakali, you are worshipping the Mahakali within you, with due respect you must know that this Mahakali is a very sensitive personality, She is very sensitive. If you try to do any wrong to anyone, She will guide you, She her realm, you have come out of it that's why, that is the reason, you are afraid. But, if you are under Her beautiful guidance and Her blessings you will never feel afraid to do anything, you will never do anything wrong also. As soon as you will try to do wrong, She will hold your hand. She is really the guiding person, She is the one who actually gives us our existence. Without Her we cannot exist because She is the one who is the power of Shri Shiva. She gives us so many things. For example, She gives us the

 March - April 2000 NAVRATRI PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze 15 relaxation, the sleep. She gives you the truth, She tells you what is the truth and what is not. Sometimes people so much in their ego, always try to believe that what I think is the truth. Then, She is the one who points it out by creating a maya, a kind of a confusion that you start thinking, what is this? So, She is called also the one who gives us 'Bhranti' means 'illusions'. She puts you to illusions also. She tests you, puts you to illusions and She then ultimately takes you out of the when you are like a child before Her, how can you worry about it! So, your worries are finished. She worries about you, you shouldn't worry about yourself. That's the point in it. Her security is so great, She is so secure Herself that She gives you all the security that you need. You can hold on to Her feet, you can hold on to Her image or to anything, you can even pray to Her. Many people are being cured only by praying to Her because She cures you. She can cure your diseases which are very complicated diseases, She can cure. illusions. She is the one who relaxes you because Now, what she likes-Mahakali likes the She take over all your responsibilities, She light. She is worshipped in the night takes over all your problems. She is the because then we can put on the lights. one who solves all the problems. It is we She likes enlightened person. Also, She who forget to leave all the problems to likes the light, She likes the sun, She likes Her. If you just leave problems to Her, something that will be completely all your problems are solved. Not only enlightened and brightened. You must that but you really feel blessed. It's not have heard about people who are called, only physical also it is mental that She I don't know what, but specially in the makes your mind absolutely free of West they use them, they have big teeth worries. She doesn't worry and She and they are the people, just imagine, they doesn't want you to worry. If you worry cannot exist before the sun. As soon as then She tries to show that while you are there is a sun rise they just want to go off worrying, you are denying Her, you are and sleep. They cannot see the sun 1.ot accepting Her. Worrying is because the light they can't bear. Now, something, is very common and people what has happened here that Mahakali has take great pride in it."O! I was worried." departed from them and when Mahakali How can you be worried when your has departed from them and then they are Mother is sakshaat Mahakali. She can kill afraid and such people are attacked by all the demons, She can finish all of them. these people who know they are afraid. She knows how to manage things and The sun itself is very important to work

 March - April 2000 16 NAVRATRI PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze works, what does it teach you, what does it tell you, try to understand what is the plan of this evil person that you are playing into his hands! How can you play into his hands? And how can you do whatever wrongs he wants you to do? out this Mahakali thing. But, as it is, in the West specially, we are very hard working and very much sun oriented and we worship the sun. All this we do- worship the sun and also go right sided very much. Then it is She who gives us the balance. She is the one who gives us Secondly, against Her is the ego. The biggest problem is the ego today. Ego shows "no, no I can do," Ego says - I will work it out, the balance by relaxing us completely and protecting us. Sometimes we are competitive and we are really worried and we want to do something which we cannot do then we get upset and we don't know what to do. Then it is She who ego says - it will be done but the human beings, yield to ego, It is of a great satisfaction for them that their ego is so strong and they don't want to listen to the brings sleep to us. So, when we sleep She looks after us, She soothes us and She takes away our problems. So many things She is doing but what are we doing for Her that we should see. Main thing is that Mahakali forces. You have to be like children, really that's a state we have to be in, is to be innocent like we are ourselves worshipping Her. She children. She loves innocent people, She is likes that Her children should worship innocence Herself, She loves innocent Her. That on that level she can be one people and She looks after you much more with them, she can give them Her because you are innocent, you are not compassion, love and protection from all cunning, you are not very much trying to play the evil. But, it has to be understood those your ego on others. If you are innocent, She who are not yet settled, those who are helps you, She definitely will help you but not yet absolutely belonging to that land this ego has to be brought under control of security of Mahakali can be attacked because he is the worst enemy She has. and once they leave that area, they can She doesn't like your ego, She wants you be very badly injured, killed, whatever to be egoless, to be innocent. As you know may happen. that it is first She came and She created Shri Ganesha. That's why we worship Shri Ganesha, we have to be innocent, means. So, we are living in this Kaliyuga in a very dangerous times, means anything can happen. So we have to be very careful, we have to watch our mind, to see how it we are not planning to do something bad or good or anything but we are without any intentions. It's a timeless, activity. You

 The Divine Cool Breeze March - April 2000 NAVRATRI PUJA 17 just don't bother about what you are going compassion, compassion for each other, love for each other, also caring for others. That is something She loves. If you are a Sahaja Yogi, if you are a realised soul She's always with you but she says what are you doing with your compassion? How many people you are giving realisation?How many people you are curing? How many people you are helping? She is quite aware of to do, what you are not going to do, what you should do-nothing of the kind. You are just existing in your complete innocence and enjoying yourself and making others enjoy. If there's one child in the house he can make hundred people dance, it's like that. Because these children have the power of innocence and that is what She respects. You sometimes feel that how people are cheats, how they cheat us, how they make all kinds of, I should say, aggressiveness, whatever you are doing. I should say it's such a tremendous power of Mahakali that She knows everything about you, everything. She knows, your mind, She knows your heart, She knows about your health. Everything She knows, actually She is the Mother in every way who cares for the little child. In that way She knows that sometimes how they try to also tell lies, all kinds of things they will do and they expect so much from you also but all this is happening, is happened. You shouldn't bother about these things, you should keep to your innocence and you will be surprised you will be completely innocent. So, like when you are very protected. How? because Mahakali will small, your mother looks after you. In the this child doesn't do anything, is very stand around you, She will look after you same way, this Mahakali looks after you. if you are innocent. Innocent person doesn't get angry. What is there to get Then the Mahasaraswati power comes in angry. Innocence has its own, I should and She educates you, She gives you say, strength, power. It's extremely other ideas of knowledge, this, that but powerful. Even a cruel man, if he sees a looking after the child in you, looking child he becomes little bit aware of it, after your innocence and your there's a child. The whole world is aware compassion is all done by this Mahakali that children should not be in any way power. So, She is extremely sensitive about her children. No body dare touch Her children. For her everybody is like a tortured or troubled, why? Because children are so innocent. So, the quality of innocence is going to really help you very much because She appreciates your child. Those who are realised souls specially, She thinks are Her children and quality of innocence. in no way they should be hurt, nothing Then another thing She loves in you is your

 March - April 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze NAVRATRI PUJA 18 should happen to them. She is always the end of our life! What is the purpose of following them. One can say if She is a person, how does She follow them, because She is omnipresent. She is present everywhere, everywhere in your life She is there, specially with Sahaja Yogis. She follows them up and down, everywhere, whatever you are doing. You are in an accident She's there to see you, this life? Why have we come on this earth? What is so special that we should live on this earth? All such fundamental questions start rising and then you just take to the seeking. In that also you have to understand the Mahalakshmi principle is very-very, very different from what people understand. They think if they are seeking it should be intelligible, it should be through their minds or could be rational, all this or scientific. That's how they move seeking the truth. It's not possible. Mahalakshmi's principle is like this, that you should have earnest desire to know the truth and truth and truth and nothing She's like an angel behind you and nothing can happen to you if you really worship her from your full heart, not for any gain, not for any achievement but for Her blessings. Her blessings are very great and they really have enriched human beings, they have enriched this earth, they have enriched everything because of the blessings of Mahakali. else. When you think like that then you will not take to other things. So many people took to drugs thinking that by doing that they will achieve their self realisation. It's a wrong idea. How can you Of course, then there comes the Mahalakshmi. Her thing is that in Mahalakshmi principle you become sort of detached. You start finding that what is this world after all, and a kind of a feeling of detachment comes into you and you start thinking that there must be something better, there must be truth beyond. Specially, people who have been tortured by bad people always think like get away from your awareness to achieve that. Awareness is the most important thing. If you can go into the realm of awareness then you have to understand the basic awareness is not to be lost. If your basic awareness is lost through drinking or through drugs or all these things that people do. They think that they are seeking that's why they are doing. So, sometimes they take excuse of seeking to do wrong things. It's like a revenge on yourself, I think, that you want to revenge on yourself by thinking that that that there must be someone who will raise us from this. Here comes the Mahalakshmi principle in you which is the principle of the Goddess, of ascent. She puts the ideas in your head that what is next? What do we have to do? After all, is this you are now seeking. It's not the real seeking. In a real seeking a person has to

 March - April 2000 19 NAVRATRI PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze sale on, I said, really! You can pay him half just meditate and should find out what is the the amount, he can give you his blessings, alright. Then next week she said, now the right way but that too by not reading some books or listening to some false gurus. sale has come to one fourth. If you pay the one fourth amount then he will give you the full knowledge. I said, how can he reciprocate, it's not proportionate, I said. When you were giving half, he was giving half, when you are giving one fourth, he is giving full. That's the thing, she said. he is very magnanimous, you see, that's the point. I said, for all such people who think they can purchase truth, they can Actually Kundalini awakening is the only way one can know the reality, there's no other way out. But no body tells that it is Kundalini awakening. They will tell you, we will go to this place, then to that place then, move to that place then, this has to be done and ultimately where do you come-where you started. It's just like that moving from places to places, moving from false to another false to another false to falsehood. not achieve it. You can not purchase it, Ultimately so many seekers have been lost. you can not pay for your Kundalini So many have been lost because they payment for that. awakening, no, nor you should take any thought that certain type of seeking is very precious, because you can pay lots of Self realisation is absolutely the divine money to the guru. I mean, you can grace and you can not take money for purchase the guru and so all the rich that. You can not sell it. It's not so cheap people can become enlightened, that means that. But I don't think the to be sold. If you understand that then the Mahalakshmi power works and Mahalakshmi power is really meant for people who are genuine seekers, who are really seeking genuinely. It acts and works so well that they achieve a kind of a very- very spontaneous realisation. This spontaneous realisation you all have got percentage of good people are all only rich. The people who are good are good whether they are rich or not is not the point. But such people try to gather round a person because I think there's a subtle ego of their money that we can afford to buy this, buy that. Once I was in America and there was one lady who came to see me and she didn't know that I was a spiritual it, you don't have to go to Himalayas, you don't have to do anything like that. All those things are over, you have done it. person. So, she said, now, there's a very In your previous lives you must have done it. Now you don't have to do anything. good guru who has come to America. I said, really! what does he do? She said, there's a You can get it, you are getting it just

 20 2000 March - April The Divine Cool Breeze NAVRATRI PUJA must mature in such a manner that you should sitting down here. Wherever you are in the know everything of all these evil doers. You must find out what these false people are whole world you can get it and it is spreading fast. Now, it's also the duty of Sahaja very doing? It's very easy because you are enlightened and with your enlightened attention you can definitely find out what's wrong with what organisation, with which you will do it. It will be the best way to meditate. Not to be aggressive in any way but just to meditate and ask Mahakali- Yogis to spread Sahaja Yoga. Now, this one is to be understood that Mahalakshmi and Mahakali both go hand in hand. When, Mahakali blesses you and She is with you and you are in her realm the Mahalakshmi comes forward and She definitely helps you to achieve your realisationa and also to improve your destroy, destroy him for he is destroying the world, you please destroy him. That's Her problems to help you, I mean, the financial side of it, you can call it or in any way other problems also, She solves. The greatest problem She solves that your greatest desire, to achieve self realisation, is granted. So, there's is no competition between them. All these three powers job and She would love to do but somebody has to tell Her and ask Her. It's very good because there are so many that unless and until you point it out She may not be able to put Her attention to them possibly. So, best is always ask Her to help you on individual basis, on a national basis, may be work together and whatever is needed they work it out. But, it is the Mahakali who guides, where what help has to go on a collective basis or maybe on global basis. That's what. She exists every where, She is globally available. Anywhere, you and that's why the power of Mahakali is very much respected. As it is She has killed so many devils, and so many rakshasas and still there are some more, may be having any colour, any race, any nation, anything. But She exists within you all the time and to worship her and to awaken her is only your duty, that you have some of them are existing but I am sure they to do. will be all finished. There will be none of If She is awakened within you will be a these horrible ones ever existing. humble person. You will see what mistakes you have been committing and will feel bad about it. You will not But, still we have to be very careful and alert and try to find out what's wrong with these people. What are they doing? And what they are trying to propagate? You you feel guilty but you feel bad that I will never do such thing, I have done very great comr'd on page31

 NORTH AMERICAN TOUR 1999 March April 2000 21 The Divine Cool Breeze NOR TH AMERICAN TOUR 1999 Sixty-Four Powers of Shri Adi Shakti On the Occasion of Shri Adi Shakti Puja, Canajoharie, New York, June 20, 1999 heavens ring with joy for the lifty-four adorations were offered to Shri Mataji by the U.S. collective for Adi Shakti Puja. delight of Shri Sada Shiva. 7. Indeed, You are the Source of Shri Mataji reviewed and edited them, Cosmic Energy. This Power and added the last ten Herself. radiates from You as the Finest Ethers of Divine Love. After each name, say together, "Aum Shri Adi Shakti Namoh Namah." 8. Beyond beyond matter, 1. Shri Adi Shakti, You are the consciousness, the Grace of Adi Shakti is where reality can be Principle that created the fourteen known. bhuvanas of universes; You are beyond our comprehension. 9. You are the Ineffable, the Immeasurable. We call You The AUM is Your Sound which 2. Pneuma, Divine Breath, the Living resonates Your Three Powers Waters, yet You are so much more throughout the universe. than this. Only the Deities have the 3. The Joy of Your Attention- Darshan of Your Greater Powers. chitvilas-is expressed in all Your 10. God Almighty in His Dance unifies Creation. with Your Complete Power as Shri Adi Shakti. 4. In the Play of the Divine, God Almighty acts by Your Powers. 11. You are the Primordial Power of 5. The Breath and Desire of Shri Sada Shiva are One with You. the Holy spirit that mothered Shri Jesus. 6. The Paramchaitanya, which is your 12. You are the Creatrix, the Feminine power, makes the stars and the Creative Energy that sustains the

 March - April 2000 22 NORTH AMERICAN TOUR 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Peace of God Almighty. for You, the grandest tree has its share as well. 13. Through Your Mahalakshmi 22. All Nature's Creatures are Yours, Power, we experience the Timeless Peace of the Fourth Dimension. From the Beauty of Mother Earth's Green Sari to the Majesty of the 14. Shri Adi Shakti, You enable God Tiger and the Lion. Almighty to do His Sacred Work. Verily, You are the Most Sublime 23. The Gravity of Mother Earth, and of all Your Heavenly Spheres, is Power in the cosmos. controlled by Your Power 15. God Almighty takes charge in a way swift and surprising if anyone Magnificent. 24. Your Power, the Paramchaitanya, acts against Shri Adi Shakti. adjusts nature and its elements, and its all-pervading power opens us 16. Shri Ganesha, Your first creation, resonates in the carbon atom, the to Your Benevolence. essence of life. May He reawaken innocence and wisdom in the very 25. Shri Adi Shakti is the Artistic Creator of the Mother Earth and cells of humankind. those who respect the Mother Earth are loved by you. 17. You created the World of the Divine, and the World of Evolving. May our Evolution merge with this 26. Shri Adi Shakti, the Land of Divine Play. Vishuddhi is one aspect of Your Vast Creation. You will raise the 18. O, Adi Shakti, Evolution is the Vibrations to transform the people force that gives rise to Your Divine of this land. Play in the lives of humanity. 27. The native peoples of America 19. The Adi Kundalini formed the worshipped Adi Shakti as the primordial chakras, and opened the doors to the unfolding of life. Great Mother, and they respected the land as sacred. May this attitude return to all others who 20. It is You who created the Kundalini live here and enjoy the land's of our Mother Earth. bounty. 21. The simplest flower has its fraction

 NORTH AMERICAN TOUR 1999 March - April 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 23 28. The mystery of living processes is Yours and Yours alone, and cannot 37. Shri Adi Shakti, to describe You is the work of poets and saints who be duplicated by any personality. awkwardly try to embrace a Let humanity be aware of this. mystery on the horizon. 29. O, Ritambharapragnya, You are 38. You are Para Shakti, the power One of the Powers of Shri Adi beyond all powers. Shakti-You are the Power of all 39. Give us, O Adi Shakti, greater living work. humility so that we can gain some 30. You regulate and organize all life. small glimpse of Your Glory. 31. You came, Shri Adi Shakti, as 40. Make us like the Sufis and the Gnostics- adoring You at every Surabhi, the Divine Cow emerging from the Vishnuloka at moment. Gokul, where Shri Krishna had His 41. Your power of Mahalakshmi bridges over the Void to allow the childhood. 32. Shri Adi Shakti, let the feminine Kundalini of the seekers to ascend. qualities of the Sahaja Yoginis 42. Thank You, O Adi Shakti, for the manifest through the beauty of seeking which brought us to Sahaja Yoga. You now lift up humanity meditation, surrender and self- esteem. into the Omega of the Last 33. Your Quality of Sharada Devi Judgement. gives authority over the truth, art, 43. We pray that Adi Shakti's Love. music and drama. continues to protect all the saints 34. You give to women the Regal and seekers around the world. Gentleness of Shaleenata to care 44. Shri Adi Shakti, Your Work is for their families and to be the greater than any? You created the preservers of society. pithas, the chakras, nature and humanity, and its subtle workings. 35. You also came as Sati Devi, May the complexity of Your Work humble us down completely. establishing a Royal Dharma to which we aspire. 36. O Vag Devi, Goddess of Language, 45. Your Love gives power to the You give inspiration to the great Bandhan, which directs the vibrations. poets and saints.

 March - April 2000 24 NORTH AMERICAN TOUR 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze clutches of false pride, jealousy, 46. Your Power of Kundalini brings false attachment, greed, freedom that is Divine. It is the identification and violence. only true freedom. 47. Flow through us freely. Help us 56. You have incarnated on this earth give vibrations to all with Your Photograph of Living Vibrations. 57. You are the Source of Cognitive for the Last Judgement. 48. Your Mahamaya Swarupa allows E Science and the Torsion Area. us to be near You, and it shields us 58. Whatever human beings plan, You dismantle to destroy their egos. from the Awesome Might that flows form You. With one subtle movement of Your 49. Shri Adi Shakti, please give us Finger, You destroy people like deeper powers of introspection so that we become self-cleansing and Hitler. 59. You give powerful advice with self-aware. very subtle humour. 50. You are the Mother who desired You correct Sahaja Yogis, never by 60. that human beings be mirrors for harsh words, but with very loving, God Almighty. gentle affection. You have crafted Beautiful Mirrors 51. 61. You explain the subtle meaning of all the scriptures. of the Spirit in the Sahaja Yogis to help redeem humanity. 62. You expose the falsehood in very Your Compassion protects us from the anger of God Almighty. 52. direct ways. 63. You do not know any fear and You 53. Through maya, humanity forgot the principles of life. Through Sahaja Yoga, humanity now give complete security to all Sahaja Yogis. You respect Your children and love 64. remembers and absorbs the them to make them perfect models vibrations of Shri Adi Shakti. for the rest of humanity. You have 54. May Your Evolutionary Force bring humanity to the inspired existence of the Golden Age. given Sahaja Yogis sinless fun and a life of complete joy. Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti 55. You have disentangled us from the Namoh Namah.

 March - April 2000 SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIANTOUR 1999 25 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999 Shri Mataji's Visit to Toronto Mother. (The hotel manger actually asked the guests occupying the most prestigious HE CANADIAN SAHAJA YOGIS were most plesantly surprised by the news that Shri Mataji would be coming to Toronto before proceeding to the USA. It was a sheer joy to hear that the Adi Shakti would be gracing Canada suite in the hotel to "move over" in order to make place for their "valued and esteemed" guest!) Prior to the arrival of Shri Mataji, it rained by Her most auspicious presence! Shri Mataji in Her Divine compassion sent a continuously for three days, not only in message to the Toronto collective that Toronto but also over almost the entire though it was 'short notice' to arrange a province of Ontario. The rains were much needed as the lake levels were going public program, we should not worry as down and the authorities were worried! the results would be unprecedented and we would have more people attending this program than every before! The atmosphere was thus purified and readied by Shri Vishnumaya to receive the Adi Shakti and we were all eagerly Posters were printed and put up all over the city of Toronto and adjoining areas, awaiting Her arrival pamphlets distributed at all the prominent Shri Mataji arrived in Toronto in the public places, newspaper ads placed and evening on May 25th, 1999. There were important dignitaries in the public and political arena were sent personal Her. While waiting for Her luggage in the invitations via personal telephone calls. immigration area, She gave realization to fax or e-mail. Most ministers of the seven customs officials who were then Canadian federal government as well as about 150 yogis at the airport to receive continuously around Her till She left the all the provincial Government Ministers airport! Shri Mataji was very happy to were informed and invited to the Toronto see so many yogis at the airport and program as well as to the forthcoming remarked that the collective here had Vancouver program (June 26th). We grown a lot and that Sahaja Yoga was spreading quite rapidly in Canada! She also described the loving way in which were even able to get the hotel booking where we had wanted to for our Divine

 March- April 2000 26 SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze the Sahaja Yogis of Germany had the audience while putting them into a gathered to welcome Her at the Frankfurt meditative mood. Then a local Sahaja airport (Her stopover on Her way to Yogi very effectively, in 10 minutes, Toronto). She then received flowers from introduced Sahaja Yoga along with an all those assembled, and blessed explanation of the subtle system and the chakras. everyone. Amazingly enough, just as he As She sat there in Her chair . concluded and his talk, smiled, Shri our hearts Mataji sang with joy and our spirits graced us with Нег danced. presence. Th Everyone stood up public program to greet was held Нег. the at The Canvocation evening Hall of the belonged University to Shri Mataji. She was in Her element. of Toronto. The sequence of events to take place at the public program was She communicated the benefits of Sahaja clearly outlined by Shri Mataji; no wonder Yoga in a very easy and simple manner, everything went like song! There were along with a sense of humour, to which approximately 1,000 people present in the everyone responded with spontaneous auditorium, eagerly waiting for the laughter. The entire talk was full of proceedings to begin. The program compassion and Her voice was started at around 7.30 p.m., thanks to the overflowing with the love and the concern of a Divine Mother. Indeed She efforts of the Yuva Shakti, who had the venue ready on time. Steven Dey played manifested Her form as Sakshat Shri raag Yaman on the sarod and charmed Sandrakaruna. Later in Her hotel room

 SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999 March - April 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 27 She said that she was concerned about to the audience. She requested them to join us by clapping their hands because it the direction in which American society increases the vibrations. The auditorium was going. The solution to all their problems, She further continued, was only Sahaja Yoga. was full of joy and Shri Mataji joined in the clapping. The bhajan reached a crescendo and our joy through vibrations peaked. Silence prevailed for a minute or Shri Mataji requested the audience to ask Her questions because She felt they were two and Shri Mataji thanked and blessed intelligent people. However She requested that they ask relevant questions everyone. Everyone stood up on Her departure. only. Shri Mataji, once again, with disarming ease and spontaneity answered the questions succinctly with Her own brand of humour. On being asked as to who She was, She answered, "Instead of The next day Shri Mataji agreed to meet Tamil TV (an ethnic television network with an extensive reach in North America) and talked to them for an hour and a half. They plan to do a documentary on Shri Mataji. They also covered the public program the day before and had Self Realization. They were very worrying yourself as to who I am, why don't you try to understand who you are? By knowing yourself, shall you know who I am." Jai Shri Mataji! their got respectful to Shri Mataji and sat at Her Lotus Feet during the interview. The (some other questions and answers interview will be broadcast to all of North After the question and answer session appear at the end of this article), Shri Mataji mentioned it was time for everyone to experience their Self Realization. What America and some countries in the Caribbean where there are pockets of ethnic Tamilians, which is a community happened next was an unusual experience from the south Indian state of Tamil for most Yogis. We felt cool breeze in Nadu. Shri Mataji then departed for the the auditorium and saw the banner behind airport. She had a few brief words and Shri Mataji moving with the breeze. Shri bid Her good-byes for now! With the ever Mataji did tell the audience She felt the beautiful smile, the Divine Mother cool breeze coming to Her from the continued on Her way to meet Her audience. What a blessing! Toronto was expectant children waiting for Her in New really "cool." York, USA! Shri Mataji requested the bhajan singers to sing Jogawa and explained its meaning Approximately 100 people attended the first follow-up program. Their sincerity

 March - April SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999 28 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze and interest was simply amazing. A four- purpose of life?" "That's simple", Shri part follow-up program was scheduled, during which we proposed to gently guide our new brothers and sisters to find deeper meaning of their own selves, their kundalinis already awakened by and in the presence of the Divine Spirit itself! Mataji replied, "to become Divine." Others asked questions revealing their inner anguish and the pains of seeking. Shri Mataji complimented them on their honesty. A young boy in the front row wanted to know how evil comes into us. Another man sought the meaning of the Bolo Jagatmata Shri Nirmala Devi Ki jai!! backdrop on the stage behind Shri Mataji. She explained that was only there for decoration. "Everything you see," She cautioned, "but why don't you see the There are now 2,500 newly realized souls point?" After the public program, Shri in the city of Vancouver. After two public Mataji toured the city by car- Stanley programs conducted by Her Holiness Park and the North Shore mountains - Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, a visit to Her to disperse the strong vibrations of the -Ashish Pradhan, Toronto Shri Mataji in Vancouver House in suburban Surrey and a hotel evening. room press conference, our city has been After very little sleep, Shri Mataji visited on Sunday morning a temple in Burnaby for the second public program. Speaking thoroughly vibrated and blessed by Her detailed attention, unprecedented in the eighteen years since Her first visit here. entirely in Hindi, She told these devotees Arriving from Chicago on Saturday, June of Shri Krishna that it should be easy for 26th, Shri Mataji gave a public program them to get their Self Realization. The at the city's major convention centre built temple's pujari prepared the way by over the water of the inner harbour. In introducing our Mother with great this landmark building first constructed devotion and recognition. From Burnaby, as the Canadian pavilion for Expo 86, Shri Shri Mataji travelled to Her house in Mataji addressed the seekers of our city. Surrey, a Sahaja Yoga ashram, where She As She had done in Toronto, New York received all the Sahaja Yogis, had lunch and Washington, Shri Mataji invited questions from the audience, satisfying all and rested. In the evening, back at the hotel, a small their mental concerns before the gift of Self Realisation. One man asked, with the press conference was held for five directness of a true seeker, "What is the journalists, including the editor of

 March April 2000 SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999 29 The Divine Cool Breeze Common Ground (the city seeking have evolved from the animal, so this magazine), a crew from Vision TV (a evolution is not complete, I think, as national religious cable chanel) and human beings also. But whatever it is, all members of the Vancouver Indian these horrible things that are lingering community's press and television. They within us and our personality are also sat shoeless on the floor before Her. One coming from our heritage. Then also because we think too much, we acquire article was offered to Shri Mataji the following morning for Her approval and correction. It reads as if written by a Sahaja Yogi. lots of things and our orientation also changes from other orientation like food, but we become sort of great greedy people. We become very money-oriented and the whole system changes to We all feel very blessed by Shri Mataji's great attention upon our city. Every Sahaja Yogi was able to offer Her flowers at the airport at both Her arrival and departure. When She visited the ashram in Surrey, everyone was able to go to Her different line, but these lingering things are still there, so with that also, we have jealousy, aggressiveness. All those things are actually our inheritance. So as a result, you become a person who can see things, Feet, offer a gift or discuss a concern. She who can watch things and not react. gave time equally to each of Her That's the greatest benefit I think. Children. She said that Paramchaitanya QUESTION: Did you do any work with was so pleased that She just wanted to fill the house with vibrations, to just let it Gandhi? flow. And so we were blessed. SHRI MATAJI:I didn't do vork, as such. Richard PAYMENT was a little child of seven years and I stayed with him and he found out about Me. He knew because he was also a On June 27th, Shri Mataji held a press realized soul, but very much full of conference in Her hotel room while disciplines and things like that. So people visiting Vancouver. Four journalists were never understood that side of Gandhiji. present representing Common Ground But he was a very spiritual man and he magazine, U magazine, The Link loved children. If I did any work, I used QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS newspaper and Vision of Fiji television program. Here is a small excerpt. to take out his temper some time, entertain him. But actually, you see, with him, he wanted Me to find out how he SHRI MATAJI: You see, what is the Should write the different bhajans. In his trouble with human beings, is that they

 March - April 2000 30 SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi gave a public program in Vancouver. She invited questions from the audience. bhajanawali they had a book, written down all the hymns, so in what series we should write. So according to different centres, I told him that you have to QUESTION:What's the purpose of life? awaken on the centres. Shri Mataji: To become Divine. Simple. QUESTION: Are we all one being? That's a question to be felt within us. What is the purpose of human life? Is to become Divine, part and parcel of the Divinity. Now supposing you are a father, what do you want your son to become? SHRI MATAJI: All are connected, but those who are realized souls can feel the connection. But those who are not, do not feel it, but we are all connected. Happy, enjoyable and also a responsible They're all one person, part and parcel of one spiritual being. We can call it God Almighty. We have to be just aware of it. person. You also want that for your children. Then your great Father, what does He want for you? He wants you to be happy joyous people. Out of We have not come into our awareness. Once it comes, you know that... and then you are a different personality. ignorance, you are not that, so He wants to remove that ignorance. This is the QUESTION: When will things work out? purpose of our life. SHRI MATAJI: It depends on the wish QUESTION: If someone is in a stressful of the people. My wish, that it should situation and they don't have the happen tomorrow. Why should we waste our life on the non-sensical? Come to our senses. This is what I want, but I'm now opportunity to go and meditate or they don't have a chance to align, what is the best, on-the-spot, way to raise their vibration so that they can see it fromn God's point of view, from the point of view travelling, lecturing, talking, but what I feel that at the helm of affairs one should see the point. of society, in order to properly deal with QUESTION: Then how do you reach the problem? supreme being, God? In other words, is this the route to reach the supreme God? is your fundamental right and, if Shri Mataji: As I have told you already, it circumstances do not help you, the whole SHRI MATAJI: Yes, this is, of course. thing works out, automatically it works out. You get all the opportunities. I have This is Nirvana. On Saturday June 26th, Her Holiness seen many people who had these

 March April 2000 SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999 The Divine Cool Breeze 31 problems, but they work on it. So believe in this power of love, how beautifully it works it. All right? May God bless you. all these are meant for introducing spirituality, and that's not the end of it. What is the end? End of it is to know yourself, to become spiritually endowed. I am saying you have to go QUESTION: [A man from a Vancouver Hindu temple invites Shri Mataji to visit beyond your mental personality, For that, you have to have Kundalini awakening. the next day and give a program.] SHRI MATAJI:Thank you very much. You see, temples, gurudwaras, churches. Continue from page 20 and that childhood has to come back in you, wrong and then you will try to correct it. Al this works out very well when you are pure in your heart. The heart should be pure. If if you really worship the Mothe. May God Bless You your heart is not pure, if you are doing Sahaja Yoga to have some competition with others or with some sort of material achievements, it will not work out. You have to do it in a way that is an innocent act, that you are worshipping your Mother like a little child worships and loves his mother. It's a very simple relationship which all of us have felt. How we should love our Mother and how we should be under her guidance and under her protection. That is something very simple you have known in your childhood

 The Divine Cool Breeze RECLAIMING THE SWASTIKA March April 2000 32 Reclaiming the Swastika Have you ever looked up the word, ness about the swastika - yet the pure swastika" at the library? While writing truth about the swastika can never be this article, the reference librarian at the altered. It is the most ancient symbol of New York Public Library was asked humankind and its shape actually imparts about a text about the swastika. Her the energy of Shri Ganesha. The vibration reply: "Are you researching of the swastika is very World Wart II?" When it powerful and holy, and marks His presence. was explained that the swastika is one of word The the most revered swastika in symbols of Sanskrit Hinduism and derives from other religious traditions, the S Vasti • me aning "well-being" writer was sent over to: (su-good +asti-being). The following is the Fine Arts Division, Things were an incomplete list better there, as the of cultures that have librarian said, "Oh, revered the swastika, you're interested in Shri and have used it extensively to Ganesha and the swastika. He is the show auspiciousness of favorable circumstances: India; China; The son of Shri Shiva and Shri Parvati; here is a reference about it." Myceneans (of Greece); The Celts (or Ireland); also, Ancient Britain and As the swastika is such an essential part Scandinavia; Ancient Christians of the of life and Sahaja Yoga, understanding its meaning and history is important. The negativity of the Third Reich has affected the awareness in the public conscious- Middle East; Native Americans; Russia: Japan: and Gemany, The presence of the true swastika (in a

 RECLAIMING THE SWASTIKA March - April 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 33 clockwise direction) gives miraculous vibrationally aware, and their chakras qualities. It acts as the remover of insensitive to the kundalini. It makes one obstacles and as such marked the ships wonder if the repeated (but unintentional) departing from Lanka to insure Shri Ram's victory. In China, stone carvings of Shri Buddha's feet are often marked use of the counter-clockwise swastika eventually brought entire societies down by displeasing the Divine. with swastikas. Its name there is wantz- te and it represents a benevolent society. the totality of life, and Buddha's heart. The ancient Christians identified the swastika with Jesus Christ and the Sun. In the Apocalypse of John in the New Testament, references are made to four angels, each standing on a fiery wheel- like cross, and each facing one of the four Actually, the swastika is found virtually everywhere human-kind has wandered. Thousands of swastikas are painted on the walls of ancient Indian caves, and directions. This can only be the divine quality of Shri Ganesha interpreted through Western iconography. today the Hindu housewife in the villages still marks the doorway and walls of her home with it. Ancient Greek coins, Roman mosaics, and even the sewing Pre-World War I Western philosophers bobbins of Old Europe have this mark. had a positive understanding about the As the centuries have gone on, the swastika as representing dynamic growth understanding of the swastika became in life, and as a symbol of Christ. They disconnected from people's lives. also took it to be a symbol of the four directions, and the evolution from the animal realm to human life and up to the celestial realms. They were unaware that Sacredness was separated from the activities of everyday life. Nevertheless, the swastika appeared on household Ganesha and Christ were aspects of the same principle, and associated with the cross of Christ which is not a truth. goods, clothings, and building columns as a mark of auspiciousness that was less conscious than in the past. e past. Through Sahaja Yoga, we know that the qualities of Shri Ganesha-innocence and wisdom-reside in living cells on a subtle The vibratory quality of the swastika is in its clockwise direction. The counter- clockwise form is not auspicious and has level. The swastika is also reflected in the been used in this form for tantric or evil spiral shape of the DNA molecule, the building block of life. On an atomic level. purposes. In many cultures, the swastika became an ornamental symbol (used in the swastika itself is visible in the carbon either form) as people became less

 2000 34 March - April RECLAIMING THE SWASTIKA The Divine Cool Breeze great Uluru, otherwise known as Ayer's atom. Shri Mataji has confirmed the findings Rock. A massive red rock formation, it of Sahaja Yoga scientists who have is a Ganesha swayambhu, a natural geological phenomenon that emits vibrations. Ayer's Rock was a sacred place for the aboriginal tribes who felt the huge documented that the swastika (), as well as the omkara (). Alpha (a) and Omega (Q) can be seen as part of the structure of the carbon atom. stone formation was alive. Scientists have pinpointed this rock as the oldest fossil record of amoebic life and possibly life The swastika is not just a representation: it is in itself the presence of life. Before realization, seekers find comfort in itself. The rock is red in colour and has messages and symbols. After realization, magnetic properties. we feel the blessing of this "symbol" Shri Mataji speaks about the magnetic and electromagnetic qualities of Shri Ganesha, who is at the core of evolution itself: directly on our chakras. In the land of the Vishuddhi, the Native Americans felt the power of the earth "At the level of matter, we might call it element. The ancestors of the Pueblo people of the American Southwest, the electromagnetic, but potentially it is the Anazazi, depicted swastika designs on energy of Shri Ganesha which is electromagnetic at this point. There it starts evolving, growing. That's how we their beautiful pottery. Today the Hopi, their descendants, still tell stories of an ancient migration In a human being it exists, as you know, covering 10,000 years of history as auspiciousness, as purity, mainly the throughout the Southwest. The Hopi innocence." believe that they as a people came right have different growth of the evolution. out of the earth and that they migrated in Shri Ganesha, the four-armed elephant- the four directions in the shape of a headed God, mirrors the swastika in form. clockwise swastika. They believe this His flowing arms and hands are reflected shape gave religious meaning to the in the words of the Shri Ganesha Song. journey. Their emergence symbolized to He is praised here as Shri Vinayaka (the them an entrance into a new world and remover of obstacles). "Four Holy Hands, created a longing to return to the world the blessing, rope and goad, the fourth where the "door to the top of the head" offers food to your devotees." The goad-spiritual growth; the rope- rescue from harm; the cup-raised hand- bestowing blessings; and the fourth was open, a return to the mother. In Australia, Shri Ganesha's land, sits the

 March April 2000 RECLAIMING THE SWASTIKA 35 The Divine Cool Breeze angelic quality of the right side of Germany. Shri Hanumana acted during World War II to play a trick on Hitler. The Nazi Party bearing food-or blessings of prasad. All of these combine to represent innocence itself, and gives pranava-"that is when electromagnetic force is charged with originally used the swastika in a clockwise Ganesha's principle." These symbolic manner on its flag. Shri Hanumana made the aspects of Shri Ganesha help impart stencil go in such a way that the Nazis pranava, a coefficient that generates decided to use the other side. Both Shri vibrations. (Shri Ganesha Puja, Cabella, Ganesha and Shri Hanumana joined September 19, 1993). together to stop Hitler from winning the war in this way and so the whole world was saved from evil's attempt to conquer. Then how did the swastika of Shri Ganesha get distorted by the evil of Hitler? Shri Mataji explains that Hitler New seekers at meetings may have was influenced by Tibetan Buddhists who conditioned ideas toward the swastika were involved with tantric practices. because of this century's negativity from Knowing this symbol had power, he used Nazism. The Western media also it to represent a supposed German perpetrates a fundamental misunder- cultural resurrection and to justify his evil standing about the meaning of the doings. At aother point in history, the Roman empire used the swastika as a sign of its domination, and it was carried by Roman standard bearers, but as in the case swastika because of World War II memories. In India, today the swastika represents political elections and the Indian society at large in a positive way. As recently as the 1930s, public buildings of the Nazis, such wrongs are always conquered by goodness. As Shri Mataji reminds us, the Romans were responsible for the death of Shri Jesus Christ. Their around America were built with swastika as a beautiful decorative element representing life and goodwill. It is only in the last fifty years that attention has gone backwards. empire weakened soon after. It is a fact that their mercantile trade with India introduced them to the swastika as a Sahaja Yoga is healing these misunderstandings about the meaning and symbol of society, but the Romans used it in reverse. power of this profound sacred mystery, At the 1998 Shri Hanumana Puja the swastika. The swastika of Shri (conducted in Germany), Shri Mataji Ganesha is inviolate, pure and beyond spoke about Shri Hanumana and the time and history, and through Sahaja Yoga

 The Divine Cool Breeze RECLAIMING THE SWASTIKA 36 March- April 2000 its public dignity will be completely restored. Shri Ganesha Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah - Karen DeNitto, USA

 SAHAJA YOGA WORLD CENTRES March - April 2000 37, The Divine Cool Breeze Sahaja Yoga World Centres Mr. Mohammaed Said Ail-Chaalal 27 Avenue Pasteur Mr. Jay Chudasama 390 Dixon Road # 612 Etobicoke OT Canada M9R 1T4 Belarus Minsk, UL llimskaya Dom 1 kv 56 Korotky Oleg Telephone (7 0172) 62 68 27 Work: (7 0172) 6 02 13 Alger Algeria Telephone: (213) 64 8122 Work: (213) 64 95 23 Telephone: (1-416) 614-7338 Fax: (1-416) 614-9521 (ashram) Nadjilem Tolasde Moudjingar do Ndoubalengar Mdgaou SA.C. N. P. 185 Ndjamena, Chad Mr. Mariano Martinez Cuyo 937, Martinez 1640 Buenos Aires Argentina Tel/Fax: (54-11-4) 798-9378 E-Mail: mmartinez@civdad.com.ar Mr. Roger Akigbe. B.P. 362, Porto-Novo Benin Tel/Fax: (229) 21-25-25 Mr. Bernard Cuvellier Mr. Gerardo Bell Valenzuela Puelma 7511-Casa C Santiago Chile Rue Piervenne 58 B 5590 Ciney Belgium Tel/ Fax : 32 55) 428 265 E-Mail: cuve skynet.be Mr. & Mrs. Nikhil & Raani Varde Palm Apts 11B, Palm Beach 6D (Dutch Caribbean) Telephone: (56-2) 275-1131 Cell: (56-2) 9-342-9115 E-mail: gbell@bdachile.cl Aruba Telephone: (297) 839 662 Fax: (297) 839 253 E- Mail: nash@ setarnet.aw Mr. Javier Valderrama Los Pinos Bioque 7 Apartamento 102 San Miguel, LaPaz Bolivia Mrs. Marie-Laure Cernay Diag 110-Nr 19-15 Bogota, Colombia Telelphone: (571) 214-3971 Fax: (571) 629-8402 E-Mail: sycolomb@ colomsay.net.com Mr. Michael Fogarty 20 Holly Street Castle Cove NSW 2069 Australia Telephone: (591 2) 790 870 Fax : (591 2) 391782 E-Mail: jvalderr@entelsa.entelnet.bo TelFax: (61 2) 9417 5572 E-Mail: esis@ tpgi.com.au (John Dobbie) Mr. Edson Almeida Mr. Michel Bikindou 33 rue Owando-Ouenze Cond. Rural Vivendas da Serra. Modulo C, Casa 4 Rod. DF-150, km 2,5 (Sobradinho Brasilia DF 730 70-014 Brazil Dr. Engelbert Oman Auhofstraße 231/3/1 Brazzaville Congo 1130 Vienna Austria Mr. Radim Ryska. Telephone: (55 61) 501-0834 Cell telephone: (55 61) 983-9821 E-Mail: marinoe if.utrj.br Telephone: (43-1) 877 7411 Koziskova 511 250 82 Uvaly Czech Republic Tel/Fax: (420 2) 997 23 10 Work: (420 2) 519 33 94 E-Mail: ryskaemsmt.cz Dr. Wolfgang Hack! Schöbrunner Allee 113 2331 Vosendorf Austria Mrs. Rosa Alexieva Complex Hippodruma Block 122, Entrance A, Floor 5 TelFax : (43-1) 609 1131 Cell telephone: (66-4) 422 5686 E-Mail: wolfganghackl@aon.at Sofia 1612 Inna Angelidou Cyprus Telephone: (3572) 489596 E-Mail: loukis@ rai.com.cy Bulgaria Tel/Fax: (35 92) 599 360 Shri K. Madhusudan Pillai C.C. 85, ALBA Post Box 570 Bahrain Mr. Daniel Oyon0 B.P. 11771 Yaounde Cameroon Telephone: (237) 2273 97 (Joseph Tsala) Telephone: (973) 702 148

 SAHAJA YOGA WORLD CENTRES March- April 2000 38 The Divine Cool Breeze Mr. Rasmus Heltberg Hammelstrupvej 40, 2 tv 2450 Copenhagen SV Denmark Mr. Vaibhav Khopade & Thodoreos Proussis-11 John and Gulshan Fisher Kusumaatmaja 58 Menteng, Jakarta, Indonesia Telephone: (62 21) 720 6613 Mobile: 0811 993 312 104-40 Athens Greece Telephone: (45) 36 45 60 15 Work: (45) 32 32 44 00 E-Mail: rasmus. heltberg@econ.ku.dk Tel/Fax: (30-1) 884 1489 Mr. Michael Roussin Graham & Tamara Donaldson No.62 Carysfort Averiue Blackrock, County Dublin, Ireland Telephone: (353 1) 282 5542 Work : (353 1) 278 1242 9 rue Auguste Boudinot 97300 Cayenne Guyane Francaise Tel/Fax : (594) 30 4614 Work: (594) 29 99 24 E-Mail: rlomaint@nplus.gf Aleksei & Galina Kotlov Rohu 109-14 EE-80040 Parnu, Estonia Telephone: (372 44) 36 043 E-Mail: galina@viisnurk.ee Mr. Oleg Kotilarsky clo Philippe Scheimann 30 A #3 Avoda St. 63821 Tel Aviv, Israel Telephone: (972-3) 507 3911 E-Mait: Philips weil.com (Philippe Scheimann) Mr. Raine Salo Kuusikallionkuja 3B 27 02210 Espoo Mr. Alex Henshaw Flat D, 6/F, Lel Shun Court 116 Leighton Rd. Causeway Bay Hong Kong Telephone (852) 2504-5260 Work : (852) 2504-4779 Fax: (852) 2504-4965 E-Mail: smtech hkstar.com Finland Telephone : (358 9) 855 0934 Fax: (358 9) 621 4262 E-Mail; tuomas@cute.fi (Tuomas Kantelinen) Mr. Guido Lanza Vocabolo Albereto 10 02046 Magliano Sabina, Italy Telephone: (09-744) 919-851 &: (39-744) 919-122 Fax: (39-744) 919-904 E-Mail: Nirmala@etr.it Majid Golpour 47 rue de Verneuil Mr. Gyorgy Pohl Liliom u. 27/A II8 H-1094 Budapest Hungary Teiephone : (36-1) 218 0493 Fax : (36-1) 220 0264 E-Mail: pohl.gyorgy@emeryworld.com 75007 Paris France Telephone: (33-145)483 373 Mr. Jean-Claude Laine 01 BP 2887 Bouake 01, Ivory Coast Tel: work: (225) 63 25 14 E-Mail: Amon@ AfricaOnline.co.ci(Amon Ettien) Mr. Patrick Desire Akouma Nze B.P 146 Libreville Mr. V. J. Nalgirkar Sahaja Yoga Temple C-17, Qutub Institutional Area Behind Qutub Hotel New Delhi-110016 Tel.: 91-011-6966652 Work: 91-011-6179421 Gabon Georgia 380094 Tbilisi Mr. Philippe Carton Himonya 6 chome 7-8 Megoru-ku Tokyo 152, Japan Tel/Fax: (81-3) 3760 4434 E-Mail: pcarton@softlab.co.jp UI.N. Nikoladze10 Peter Jijeishvili Telephone: (995 8832) 934-911 E-Mail: ella@geonet.ge Prof. Dr. U.C. Rai International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Centre Plot 1, Sector & CBD Navi Mumbai, India Mr. Phillip Zeiss Kastanienstrasse 19 D 14624 Daligow Germany Telephone: (493322) 20 8870 Work: (4930) 315 25 66 Fax: (49 3322) 20 24 73 E-Mail: ganeshat@cs.tu-berlin.de (Karsten Radatz) Kazakhstan 486 008 Chimkent UL Gagarin 38-45 Bondarenko Dima Telephone, (7 3252) 12 13 68 Telephone (91 22) 757 6922 Fax : (91 22) 757 6795

 March- April 2000 SAHAJA YOGA WORLD CENTRES The Divine Cool Breeze 39 Mr. Henno de Graaf Kersegaarde 16 3436 GD Nieuwegein Netherlands Christian Fontaine Didier Gauvin French School of Nairoti (College Diderot) PO. Box 47525, Nairobi, Kenya Telephone: (254 2) 56 62 59 58, Grand Fond Exterieur 97414 Entre Deux Réunion TelFax: (262) 39 62 32 E-Mail tgauvin@guetali Telephone: (31 30) 630 1270 Fax: (31 30) 630 1700 E-Mail: h.degraaf @ inter.ni.net Mr. Dan Costian Ms. Inna Solomenikova Str. Constantin Nacu No. 8 70219 Bucharest. Romania Telephone: (40-1) 313-58-82 Fax: (45-1) 211-57-87 E-Mial: dcostiane syrom.slos.ro Riga, Latvia Telephone: (0132) 25 93 42 Mr. Geofl Piatford 24 Pukenui Road Epsom, Auckland New Zealand Gertruda Sargautiene Staneviciaus 66-64 Telephone (64-9) 624 1788 Fax: (64-9) 625 B888 E-Mail: sahaj-nz @ihug.co.nz Vilnius 2029, Lithuania Teléphone (37 02) 4781 43 E-Mail: jvkos@pub.osf.t (subj "to Gertruda) Russia 119148 Moscow UI. I Frunzenskaya 6, kv 5 Telephone, (7 095) 245 25 50 E-Maitunionesahaja.msk su (collective) Sidsel Muglord Myrlia 31 1453 Bjornemyr. Norway TellFax: (47) 66 91 56 08 E-Mail : mugford@ online.no Goitchoo StevkOVski Partenie Zografski 77A 91000 Skopje, Macedonia Telephone. (389 91) 22 62 75 Mr. Aziz Gueye Sic de Sengue M'Baye Gueye Direction CFAO-BP 2631 Mr. Ivan Tan 17, Jalan 14/52 46100 Petaling Jaya Selangor, Malaysia Telephone: (60 3) 774 4750 Fax: (60 3) 718 7128 E-Mail: tbertan @pc.jaring.my Dakar Marina Traversa Av. Golf Los Incas 440/13 Lima 33, Peru Telephone: (51) 436 5152 E-Mail: mtravers @staff.sansil.edu pe Senegal Mr. Eric Sopholas Belonie, Mahe Seychelles Telephone: (248) 24 400 ext. 545 Dr. Rajiv Kumar 29. V Madrigal Street, Corrinthian Graciela Vazquez-Diaz Tejocoles 56-201 Col. del Valle Mexico D.F. 03100, Mexico TelFax: (52 5) 575 1949 E-Mat: indoamci rn netmx Mr. Patrick B Sheriff c/o Sierra Rutile Limited P.O. Box 59 Freetown Sierra Leone Gardens Quezon City 1100. Metro Manila Philippines Telephone: (632) 633 5633 Fax: (632) 632 2381 Work: Telephone: (232) 25316 Telex: 3259 (632) 632 5709 E-Mail: rkumari mail.asiandevbank.org Mr. Peter Koretzki Mr. Jozel Skurla Zochova 16/IX Bratislava 811 03, Slovakia Tel Fax: (421 7)5441 5493 E-Mail trans-eu@internet.sk Mr. Tormasz Kornacki ul. Baczynskiego 20 m. 17 05-092 Lomianio nr.Warsaw Poland Maratesti Str. 13/1 Chisinau, Moldova Telephone: (373-2) 73 0212 Fax: (373-2) 73 86 69 Tel/Fax: (48 22) 7513520 Mr. Herbert Wiehart Gourmet Vienna Chha 1-705 Thamel, Kathmandu Nepal Tel/Fax: (977 1) 415488 Mr. Dusan Rados Voliceva 6 SI-1380 Vrhnika Catarina de Castro Freire R. Garcia de Orta, 70-1'C Lisboa-1200, Portugal Telephone: (351-1) 396-3149 Slovenia Telephone: (386) 61 755369 E-Mail: bostjan.troha@ siol.net

 The Divine Cool Breeze March - April SAHAJA YOGA WORLD CENTRES 40 2000 Dr. Siva Govender P.O. Box 729 Mrs. Clarie Skinner Cumana Postal Agency Cumana Via Toco, Toco Mr. Manoj Kumar 270 Overpeck Avenue Ridgefield Park NJ 07660-1239 USA Laxmi 3207 Natal, South Africa Telephone: (27-331) 424484 Fax: (27-331) 425685 E-Mail:/G=Deena/S-Govender/OU- Trinidad Telephone: (1-201) 384-5034 Fax: (1-201) 384-0820 E-Mail: manoj-kumar@merck.com Tunisia c/o Mr. Youcef Brahimi Roggegasse 40 1210 Wien, Austria Telephone: (43 1) 2929 956 =1751PMFS/0=TMZA.UNI @LANGATE.gb.sprint.com Monia Almensa Carlos Albo W47 Paysandú Uruguay Telephone: (59) 72 35831 E-Mait anona@adinet.com.uy Mr. Eduardo Marino Mrs. Nese Aigan Atiye Sok Ak Apt. No. 7/7 Tesvikiye - Istanbul, Turkey Telephone: (90) 212 248 3122 Work: (90) 212 241 3487 Fax: (90) 212 231 3524 E-Mailt nalgan@domi.com.tr Rua Aperana, 99 Ap. 201 22450-190 Rio de Janeiro RJ Brazil South America Telephone (55-21) 274-1753 Fax : (55-21) 239-2705 E-Mail: marino@it.ufrj.br Mrs. Rani Lavu P.O. Box 50180 Lusaka, Zambia Telephone: (260) 1 291 378 Cell telephone: (260) 757 550 Mr. José-Antonio Salgado Santa Virgilia 16 Zou33 Madrid, Spain Ukraine 252 190, Kyiv - 190 Vul. Estoska, 5, kv. 80 Galina Sabirova Telephone: (34-91) 764 3767 Fax : (34-91) 564 4457 Telephone: (380 44) 442 6871 Fax: (380 44)412 9806 EMaikdobro@ppadamkevua Mr. Rolf Carlsson Valhallanvagen 18 S-11422 Stockholm, Sweden Telephone: (46-8) 16 77 17 E-Mail: rolf.carisson@stockhoim. mail.telia.com Pravin Saxena/Suresh Ananthnarayan PO Box 25450 Sharjah United Arab Emirates Telephone: (971 6) 519012 Fax: (971 6) 518894 Work: (971 67) 571797 Work Fax: (971 67) 571773 Mobile: 050-631 3504 Mr. Arneau de Kalbermatten 2 bis, Chemin Sous-Voie 1295 Mies, Switzerland Tele/Fax: (41 22) 779.20.37 EMatpharmuae@emirates.netae Mr. Wen-Cheng Liu 2F, No. 13, Alley 3, Lane 106 Sec 3, Ming Chuan East Rd. Sung-Shan District Taipei Cit. Taiwan (R.o.C.) Tel: home: (886 2) 7155208 Mr. Derek Lee clo 44 Chelsham Road London, England SW4 6NP United Kingdom Telephone: (44 1223) 420 855 Fax: (44 1223) 423 278) E-Mail: ealing@dircon.co.uk(attention: Derek Lee) Mr. Pascal Sreshthaputra 84 Sukhumvit Soi 40 Bangkok 10110, Thailand Telephone: (66 2) 712 1418 Fax: (66 2) 391 2373 or: (662) 382 1109 E-Mait: pascal@loxinfo.co.th

 2930



----------------------

2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
00
March April 2000
Volume : XII Issue: 3 &
In thoughtless awareness nobody can touch you, that's your fortress. By
meditation one must establish thoughtless awareness. That is the sign
you are rising higher....
You have to see whether you have achieved your thoughtless awareness?
Its the minimum of minimum.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Ekadash Rudra Puja
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Invocation to Shri Adi Shakti
1
Shri Ganesha Puja 25.9.99 (Cabella)
Navratri Puja
12
North American Tour 1999
21
Shri Mataji's Canadian Tour 1999
25
Reclaiming the Swastika
32
Sahaja Yoga World Centres
37
Edited by : Yogi Mahajan
V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
Published by :
New Delhi-110 067
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
March - April 2000
INVOCATION TO SHRI ADI SHAKTI
O Mother Divine
Out of the highest realm of Divinity You have come on this
Earth only because of Your infinite love, compassion and
benevolence. Your powers, which created all the universes.
are insurmountable. Your completeness is such that
everything that exists, that has existed, shall exist and also
that exists for ever is contained in Your indescribable
being. Despite that, O Supreme Mother, out of Your
immeasurable love, You have assumed a form which is
similar to ours, only to give us guidance, protection,
salvation.
In spite of being the Most Powerful, the Most Complete,
the One Who contains everything, O Beloved Mother, You
have granted to Your children the opportunity of offering
Puja at Your Lotus Feet, only for our own benefit.
On this auspicious occasion of your 77th Birthday we all
the Sahaja children from the world most humbly and
respectfully invite You to Delhi and shower your blessings
on us.
Humbly,
Your children from the world.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 March April
SHRI GANESHA PUJA. 1999
2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI GANESHA PUJA 25.9.99 (Cabella)
Discourse by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
these problems, all such people, who
suffer from the right side, should worship
Shri Ganesha. For example these days,
life is very much busy with all of you. You
are extremely busy with your work and
you are doing extra work, I should say,
ODAY We have gathered here to
worship Shri Ganesha. You äll
know what a powerful deity He
is. His power comes from his innocence.
When we see small children we are
automatically compelled towards them
and also we want to love them, kiss them
than normal. But you think you are doing
a very great job of God. As a result Shri
Ganesha is neglected and such a man can
beceome either very dry or very self
indulgent. One of the two things come
up and he does not know where he is
going. The only thing that keeps you in
the middle, in Sahaja Yoga, is Shri
Ganesha's Puja, Shri Ganesha's worship
by which you can always be in the centre.
All these diseases of the right side can be
and be with them. And very innocent they
are, extremely innocent, and when we
worship Shri Ganesha we have to know
if we have been really innocent or not.
These days people have become
extremely cunning, and they don't mind
any amount of cunning. They play all
kinds of cunning games on others who
are innocent and simple. They can justify
themselves always that whatever they are
doing is the right thing in these modern
times when everybody is so cunning. This
cunningness can take you to the other Now there are various ways people
extreme of right side, which is very much worship Shri Ganesha but there is a
punishable, in the sense that some peoplesimple way to remember him and sit
develop all kinds of problems, which are before his photograph and take vibrations
physical, you can say. Like their hands from him. Thats the best way you can
can get paralysed or their leg can get balance yourself. There are so many
paralysed. AIso, they can have other worries, there are so many struggles you
cured by Shri Ganesha's Puja.
have. All these can be neutralised by Shri
troubles with their liver treatments and
Ganesha. Though innocent, He is
extremely clever and when he comes to
all that. All this comes up. Then to punish
them a disease of psychosomatic nature
might set in. At this time, when you have
your help you are amazed. How he works
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999
March - April 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
very difficult times. It is his style that he
it out and how he removes all the hurdles
manages things so weil because he is a
Ganpati. Ganpati means the one who is
the Lord of the Ganas. As I have told you
Ganas exist within us. Very nicely settled
down as these bodies, small, small bodies
and all the worries from you. So this is
the most important deity we have.
Though its a very simple deity. This
Mooladhar chakra is very very
complicated. It is one of the most
complicated, chakras I think, because it
has many waves, it has many
compartments. We can say which all the
time are vibrating and oscillating. So to
study down these you should try to be
who report if there is any problem. They
report to the brain that there is a problem
and on the sternum bone is the residence
or you can say the throne of the Goddess
Durga. So whenever there is any problem
absolutely dedicated to Shri Ganesha.
we are found into some trouble, sternum
bone starts vibrating and these bodies
Shri Ganesha, as I told you, was which are Ganas get the information.
incarnated as Jesus Christ, and Jesus was
Antibodies they are called in the medical
also a very innocent person. If he was not
terminology. Then these Ganas attack.
They can target also. They know how to
innocent, He would not have been
crucified, but he was not a cunning fellow
target the troubles and attack it, one may
think that only the people who are
to see the cunning of others. His own
disciple deceived him and still he knew
suffering medically are helped by Ganas
is not true. Also the people who are
who it was, he never said who it was. If
you see his life, its full of innocent beauty,
mentally upset, who are mentally suffering
are also helped by the Ganas. These
is such a simple hearted personality, such
a good personality and wherever he saw
anything wrong done he is to go all out
to fight it. Same is Shri Ganesha.
Ganas are so good at targeting their
problems that sometimes we are surprised
how things are worked out. For example
Shri Ganesha's blessings are very say something happens to someone, some
important for all the people who are child, somewhere. Now his parents start
specially proe to some sort of a hurdle crying for Mother and the Mother is the
or 'Sankata as they call it'. He is called as Durga say, then what happens, that they
Sankata Vimochan, the one who takes immediately rush to that place and
you out of all the hurdles of life. So many miraculously they cure the boy.
of you have experienced how he has miraculously they say. So many
helped you in different troubles and miraculous thing that have happened in
hurdles and also different type of very your life you cannot explain, but they are
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 March April 2000
4
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999
they brought out the boy and he was
treated by the doctors also but also with
vibrations and today that boy is perfectly
alright, while the doctors had said he can
all due to this Ganapati's Ganas. They are
also small like him and they are very active
and very alert. They never sleep. Anytime
there is any trouble these Ganas will go
and attack the problem and find out
solution for him. It is something
unbelievable how they act and how they
never survive. If there is one chance of
his surviving, he will be like a dead body,
in a coma all the time. This boy, I have
met him this time, when I went to
America. So, like this, so many things
inform.
Ican give you so many examples that have
happened like this. For example there was
a boy who got drowned in one of our
happen and people tell me that Mother
its your 'kripa', your blessings that this
has happened.
ashrams in America in the swimming
pool. They were all jumping in the In a way, it is very distantly, I should say,
swimming pool, I didn't like the idea of but because of Shri Ganesha. Now Shri
swimming pool very much because there Ganesha's another quality is that he is
were children. So one boy fell down into extremely obedient to Mother. He does
that and was inside for about 15 to 20 not recognize even Shiva, Vihnu, any one.
minutes. Nobody knew he was there. So To him his Mother is everything. So he
can fight with his father, Shiva, he can
fight with anyone because to him is
then they tried to find out the body of the
boy and then they found out he was not
there. Where has he gone? Then they
discovered that he was in that swimming
complete obedience and absolutely quick
Tatpar', just quickly understands what is
pool. After that they got so frightened and
they said we just prayed to you, Mother
to save this boy. Surprisingly, I never
telephone to any Ashram, I didn't know
even the address, but I asked to telephone
to this number, on my own. I don't know
the desire of the Mother and he works it
out. His style is otherwise very innocent,
simple, child like but His work is
tremendous. Now these Ganas are also
very innocent people, very innocent but
when told that you have to attend to a
particular problem, they are extremely
quick and they are very fast. The another
thing within is that he respects people who
are chaste, who have chastity as the prime
thing in their life. Chastity is very much
anybody's numbers and, when I
telephoned, one of the leaders came there
and I told him I know the boy has fallen
into the water and he will be saved.
Nobody had told me anything. "Don't
worry he will be perfectly alright." Then
worshipped by him. Its not only in women
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 March - April 2000
SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
but also in men, he expects chastity to be
present. After getting realisation you
should be absolutely chaste people, you
shouldn't have your eyes rolling around
country, who are doing black magic, or
who are doing fundamentalism and where
people are also having very bad morals.
He creates problems for them. What
happens that He tells the Mother earth to
every where and sort of what you can call
create the earthquakes. Earthquake takes
place in places where there is no respect
of chastity, also where there are
a very bad method of communicating with
young women and young men and
spoiling your chastity. Even your eyes
should be cleaned, even your thoughts
should be cleaned. For that you should
introspect and see for yourself what
mistakes you have committed and what
kind of an unchaste behaviour you have.
You have to correct yourself and ask Shri
Ganesha to forgive you. If you ask for
forgiveness, he can forgive anything. He
is so innocent and beautiful that he
fundamentalist and also where there are
people who are worshipping the black
magic. This kind of people are attacked
by him through his Mother. So the Mother
earth also understands. Now we have so
many earthquakes, one in Turkey you
know, one in Taiwan, but not a single
Sahaja Yogi has died. So he protects
them. He has discrimination and only such
people, who are of this kind, he tries to
destroy them, and he has destroyed many
like this even before. Also, the Mother
forgives you, but that is a very important
thing. Our whole morality depends on our
idea of chastity. We should be very chaste.
So many religions have come and they
have talked about chastity. But religions
earth's powers he has got, is that he is
magnetic, he attracts people towards
have become so useless now, have
himself, people take to him very easily as
we take to children very easily. So that is
become without any basis, without any
proper execution, of what is written for
them. They do all kinds of things and they
magnetic power that he has got within
himself.
call themselves Hindus, Muslims,
Now, you will be surprised this magnet
exists also in the birds, also in many
animals but specially in the birds. That's
Christians, all kinds of religions. Actually
the religions have failed completely and
that's why Shri Ganesha gets after them.
how they can follow direction where they
have to go. They are flying from, say
Siberia, all the way, flying to Australia.
How do they fly? And again they come
back to the same place. It also is in the
Another thing about Shri Ganesh is that
he is created out of the Mother earth. He
is absolutely created out of the mother
Earth. So if he doesn't like people of some
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 March - April
SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
2000
Ganesha. So like that they were doing to
fishes. Fishes also are found say in the
waters which are coming from some hills,
so they come to the plains for some time
and again God knows how, they go back
to their own place. So going back to the
same place is only possible if there is a
way of knowing the direction. But they
know the direction, they have a sense of
this one statue that they had and they were
dancing before it. But when they put the
statue in the water and they came back
home, they got drunk and when they got
drunk, they started dancing with that
drinking and saying Jai Ganesha, Jai
Ganesha. At that time the earth moved
direction, also they are bound by their
own qualities. For example a snake will
be a snake, a dog will be a dog, and a lion
will be a lion. But human beings have
perhaps all the animals within them. So
they could be anything, you can't say and
they are too cunning to admit that they
can be anything. And once they become
anything like that you are amazed how
these people can be of such a low level
when they are human beings. But it is so
because Ganesha has not been respected
in their lives. So they can go to any level,
and the earthquake took away all of them
inside the earth itself. They all disappeared
into earth. Apart from that there were
many others also who were doing this
kind of thing, were taken into the mother
earth. And our Ashram was there, a kind
of a centre and around the centre there
was a very beautiful land but he did not
touch that land. Around is about at least
quite a long distance, a big gap came in
and there was a opening in the mother
earth all around the centre and nobody
was harmed. They were all at home. They
were all right. But this happened, that our
any place.
Ashram was not at all touched and this is
Another example, I give you a very big how they saved the Ashram and not a
earthquake we had in India, in Latur. In single Sahaja Yogi died. It is really very
Latur this was the fourteenth day of Shri remarkable how the protection is given
Ganesha where they take Shri Ganesha by Shri Ganesha and his Ganas.
and put it in the sea or in the water of a
So we must respect his Ganas, very
river. So there, in Latur, these people have
been having a nice statue of Shri Ganasha.
important is to see that they are all around
within us, they are acting within us. They
Before the statue they dance and they
have now started playing very dirty, very
bad, music from some very funny films
see us what sort of person you are, and
in case you try to dislodge Shri Ganesha
by your misbehaviour they try to see that
or something. It's so bad that you just can't
you again go back to normal. They give
bear it. Very bad and that upsets Shri
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999
March - April 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
not for worship. There is no photograph
of real Shri Ganesha, no photograph.
you a chance many a times. But even then
you go on with your cunning and ideas
about your ego, you are very badly hit by
There are eight Shri Ganeshas who came
out of mother earth. I have seen them.
But in those places the pujaris, the people
who are the priest are horrible, horrible
people. I went to one of them and he said,
"I am getting Asthama", "I am getting
him and that is the biggest, I should say,
calamity for you people. So you must
worship Shri Ganesha but I always say
don't worship every Shri Ganesha which
is being created by those, we can say,
artisans. Because God knows what sort
paralysis, how is it I am worshipping Shri
Ganesha, my forefathers have worshipped
Shri Ganesha and how he is doing this to
us." I said, you just introspect yourself,
what kind of a life you lead, what do
of Artisans they are. For money's sake
they might be making Ganesha and they
might not have got any idea of Chastity.
Such people make these Ganesha and
then you worship those Ganeshas, so we
you
do, are you really worthy of Shri
Ganesha's Pujari. And then he realized it.
are not at all helped by this.
That's why Mohammad Saheb has said,
don't do any worship of any idol because
I said, "I will cure you now. Its all right
but afterwards you see to it that you
become an innocent personality. Try to
these idols have been created by human
beings who are not authorised to do that.
lead an innocent life, not of outwitting
They are not Swayambhus Ha. They another and being very cunning and
are not created by the mother earth but
clever. Shri Ganesha's troubles, are really,
are copied by people who are just wanting I can't count them even, how much it can
to make money out of them. So that's how hamper, or how much it can give you
any idol you get, say, from the shops trouble, how much it can take you nearer
need not be worshiped, it is not to be to your death. He is so powerful, because
worshiped, any idol whatsoever. So all his energy is for the divine work of his
whatever is not there, we should not Mother, all his energy.
vorship because it is made by somebody
who has very bad vibrations, who is a He doesn't do anything, he doesn't want
cheat, who is very cunning and thinks no anything. Just all his energy is for that and
end of himself. With such a person if you he is asking for what is simple, what you
buy a Shri Ganesha it is going to harm can call Modaka, a kind of a thing they
you, is not going to help you. You can make out of coconut. That's what he eats.
His body is so subtle and so, so powerful
have it for decoration in the house but
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 March - April
2000
SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Ganesha.
that he can move mountains after
mountains. With his simplicity, with his
All these things are there but we cannot
sweetness, and with his innocence he can
understand it because we are confused.
We don't want to see it in a proper sense
that this is already written there. So those
who worship Christ, also worship Shri
Ganesha and whatever you say to Christ
really change people. People who are very
harsh, can be changed. His symbol as we
have seen is a Swastika, of the right
direction. But if it is the other way round
Swastika, then that can destroy. When It
was used by Hitler in the beginning, it was
you are saying it to Shri Ganesha. They
are not two, they are one and absolutely
one with each other. All the things I have
the right type and he was successful. But
then what happened, they had stencils and
told you about Christ, you can try to find
out and you will prove it. Like Christ had
these two fingers, this means one finger
they started using it from the otherside.
So it was from the left side, they started
other way round and then they were all
destroyed. How powerful is Shri
is for the Vishuddi as we say Shri Krishna
and this one is Vishnu's means this is his
Ganesha's Swastika, you can say. Also we
have proved now that Swastika if you see
from left to the right, is actually from the
Carbon atom. The carbon atom has got
father's. That means his father was Vishnu
or Shri Krishna. Very clearly he used to
do, why didn't he use other fingers, only
these two fingers why did he use. Pointing
Swastika and the whole of this chakra is
made of Carbon atoms, all put in series.
out towards his father who was Shri
Vishnu and Shri Krishna.
Now if you look at it from the left side,
It is easy to understand what I am saying,
if you see the vibrations of Shri Ganesha.
If you see his vibrations and think of him
you will be amazed, that your Agnya will
open out, you will become thoughtless,
you have proved it now, look at it from
the left side to right side, what you see is
Onkar. If you see it from right side to left
side, you see the Swastika, and if you see
from down below upward then it looks
like a Cross. So it proves that Shri
Ganesha incarnated as Christ and he is
because he is the Jesus and he is on the
Agnya. So it all opens out and all the
stupid ideas about getting the Agnya, this
and that is all neutralized because you see
for yourself, just the name of Shri
Ganesha can open your Agnya. The
and out of the half of the egg became cunningness that comes from Agnya is
Christ and half of the egg was Shri absolutely finished. You are no more
the one who is worshipped all over the
world, is already written in the Devi
Mahatmaya if you read it, is all clearly
written about him how he became an egg
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 March- April 2000
SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
cunning. When you see this innocence on
your forehead, you are amazed at yourself
earth is a wrong idea, is very wrong
because it is harming us with pollution.
To cut down the trees, to cut down every
thing that mother has produced and just
to use it for money is a very wrong thing.
One should think about it and when you
cut one tree also you should put another
one there. That is the beauty of the
Mother earth, all the greenery, every thing
is the beauty of the Mother carth.
and all such ideas just disappear. You
cannot think of something very cunning
and harmful to others. You are completely
changed when the Agnya is absolutely
opened out. This one is a very big blessing
to us that we all have this Muladhara
Chakra now put into proper thing. When
you sit on the ground also it helps more
because the mother of Shri Ganesha is
Many people have no interest in
gardening or in nature, no interest. I don't
this Prithvi, is this earth, the mother earth
and that's why we should look after the
know how they live but they do without
taking any interest in gardening or in the
mother earth. We don't look after the
mother earth. We don't understand the
nature. Nature is so beautiful, just look
at the nature, it is never smelling, is never
dirty, every leaf is so organized that it
value of mother earth. Actually in Indian
culture it is that when you are getting up
in the morning, you must say Namaskar
should get the sunrays. There is no quarrel
about it. They are so well organized,
bow to you, O. Mother earth because I everything is so beautiful and it is never
am touching you with my feet. Such destroyed also by any animals. You will
respect you should have for Mother earth, be amazed. The animals also don't
then you won't exploit it, you won't have destroy, at the most they might eat some
to the Mother earth because saying that I
today's problems of pollution and this and
grass or something, but normally animals
do not destroy any tree, do not destroy
that.
It all comes out of our ignorance that the anything as we destroy the Mother earth
Mother earth is the mother of Shri for our own use. Whatever may be the
Ganesha who's chakra we have got as cry for this, we have to understand that
Mooladhara. If you understand this you we have to respect to the Mother earth.
will be able to understand, what is to be Mother earth is the mother of Shri
done. The mother earth itself we should
Ganesha, who is our, you should say the
look after, we can glorify her, we can
eldest Sahaja Yogi. He never had to take
beautify her, we can do all kinds of things
but the way we are exploiting the mother
to yoga but he is in Yoga all the time. He
is the greatest yogi we have and the way
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 March - April 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999
10
he is doing right things all the time. He
never does anything wrong, never and he
is so capable of getting to the position of
any great deity that is possible, I would
say. He is the greatest deity we have and
much more for men. Shri Ganesha is very
important thing because men can develop
so many diseases if they do not respect
Shri Ganesha.
Our health would be the best if we look
after Shri Ganesha because he is all the
we should really worship him. Through
him all deities are worshiped and are made
happy and blissful. So this is today's thing
was that I was just thinking that now a
time repairing our body. He is all the time
looking after, protecting us and our Shri
Ganesha is in the Mooladhara. He is the
days, in modern times how we have
become shameless, how we have tried to
trouble our chastity, for kind of a honour.
one who is looking after our Kundalini,
he is protecting our Kundalini. If any thing
happens to us the Kundalini comes up but
If we have any honour you will have the
chastity but you are dishonouring yourself
and you think you have been very very
smart and modern by becoming so sinful.
All the sinful act that is going on in these
modern times is absolutely wrong and it
should be completely, we should abhor
it. You should go no way near because
the one who supports her and, keeps her
up, awakened and standing is Shri
Ganesha. He works it out. He is the one
who is the protector of our Kundalini
which is also a basis of your self
realisation. So how much important is
Shri Ganesha you should know, and you
should find out about yourself, introspect
thats all wrong and that's how Shri
that are we really dedicated to Shri
Ganesha gets angry. Decency is very
important in understanding, what is our
important basis, is our chastity. In India
you know thirty two thousand women got
themselves burnt for saving their chastity.
I come from the same family and you can
imagine what courage they must be
having, what faith they must be having,
in their chastity that if we lose our chastity
what's the use of our life. So they cared
for their chastity, have done so much
sacrifice to show that chastity is the most
Ganesha? If we are, what are we doing
about it? Then you will develop a real
hatred for all these dirty things. You will
not like them, will not like such people.
That is how a Sahaja Yogi should work it
out. The children are the best as we know.
Children are so sweet and so kind, they
are so loving, so beautiful. In the same
way we should know Shri Ganesha is
there. He is the one who is really innocent
but extremely extremely, protective of
you, very much protective, with his
important thing, we all should have. Its
not only for women but also for men, very
innocence.
So we should also try to cherish our
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 March - April 2000
SHRI GANESHA PUJA, 1999
11
The Divine Cool Breeze
other countries it has happened but I was
happy to see that in Australia they are
very secular. They have many Maoris and
all those people and they encourage all
of them and its so surprising that they
have so much talent and they are bringing
innocence and not to feel hurt because
sometime such people are cheated,
dominated, every thing happens, doesn't
matter. They will all suffer who will
dominate innocent people. As the whole
world, you see, there is a big uproar about
it, people are talking about it that there
should not be domination of the innocent
them to this state to show that they are
equal in their rights, political rights, in
Australia. Its a very good venture.
simple people. It has happened but it all
has to be changed, has to be brought to
some last end otherwise people can not
Now this Ganesha has appeared in
Australia is as Uluru, is a very big
exist, like everywhere they went and
mountain which looks like Shri Ganesha.
It has also a very big trunk, going down.
oppressed so many people. In America, I
was surprised to see that there were so
Vibrations itself will prove that it is Shri
many Red Indians, who are called as
Indian Americans. They were all
Ganesha, from the mother earth. He has
appeared in many places, Shri Ganesha
not only there. But there I felt really the
oppressed so much that they had to run
away to different places and then I went
to this place Canajohari. I found the
vibrations were so good. That means they It is. And in Australia I thank him that
were very innocent, simple people and because of him only Sahaja Yoga has
Americans that time, who went there. worked so well and so easily, and
tried to completely finish them. So they Government also has never troubled us
went and hid in places like Canajohari but
source, source of vibrations. Thats what
or there has been no problem with them.
I don't know what's this helping them but
the Canajohari has such tremendous
vibrations that I said look at this, so many perhaps it is Shri Ganesha as uluru which
years have passed, still the people who is protecting Sahaja Yoga there and is
live there or worked about and were growing so much. In the same way every
atsolutely enjoying this place were Red where, where ever you may be Shri
Indians, the ones who were Indians, we Ganesha should be worshipped and you
call them American Indians. But they are will be helped out and out miraculously.
so simple and innocent and they were so, You will be helped, miraculously but first
I think, spiritual people because they used do something about our chastity which is
to worship the Mother. All the time they
Shri Ganesha.
May God Bless You.
worship the Mother. Even I have seen in
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 March April 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
12
NAVRATRI PUJA
NAVRATRI PUJA
Cabella, 17-10-1999
Discourse by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Tonight we have gathered here to do the
Puja, to the Devi, that is, Mahakali we
can call her, or Durga. So many types of
forms, She has taken to kill the negative
forces that are trying to trouble or to
obstruct or even to grow, the people who
were gentle and good, Her forms are of
different types that we know about, that
She destroyed so many rakshasas. She
destroyed many evil doers. Also, we do
not know that in the world wars that we
to hate. But these forces join together
sometimes to form a giant personality of
evil which tries to torture the human
beings and trouble them. They might take
any name, they might call themselves by
anything but they are absolutely hundred
percent evil and for such persons there is
no pity or compassion from the God
Almighty. These are to be destroyed and
that is the job of the Goddess, to destroy
them, who is a Mother, full of compassion
had She was there to protect the right and love.
type of people and that's how they all
survived the ill plan, the ill gotten plan of It's a very contradictory work the
very cruel and evil people. The evil people Goddess has to do, to kill these people
have a capaeity to hate and to expresS
their hatred in every way that is possible.
They are really born evil and there are
also who become evil. When they are born
because in the larger interest it is
important that all such evil people should
be destroyed completely, but they do not.
They, like you go to jail for sometimes,
like that, they go to hell for sometimes,
suffer and again they come back much
more stronger and then again try to
trouble good, saintly people. It's a
common style they are, all over the world.
They can come in the form of a very good
evil you can make them out that their
whole style is so aggressive and so
vindictive about things, but hatred has no
limits, no limits at all because if they hate,
someone then just to justify that hatred
they will say all kinds of things, just to
justify. But sometimes they don't even
want to justify, they just feel that they hate
and it's a fundamental right they have got
man, of a very gentle man or of a man
who knows a lot about God or they can
also say that they can give you realisation.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 March- April 2000
NAVRATRI PUJA
13
The Divine Cool Breeze
All kinds of lies they are capable of these people. While the good people also
because they have that power-evil power sometimes follow suite, they also try to
of doing evil. So, they take to all kind of follow them. It's very surprising why
falsehood and they proclaim that we are should good people not understand what
this and we are that and we can give you is good and what is bad? But that
discrimination many good people also
lack and that's why they take to wrong
Actually they have come on this earth to things and then they go on justifying all
ruin people. We have had many of these the time. Whatever they are doing is the
false people and many stupid people right thing, is the best thing, they have
this, all that.
followed them. They never talked against
the proof of it.
each other. Christ has said, "Devil won't
talk against its own house", as if they are Now, as you know there have been many
in one house and in one house they live of them in this Kaliyuga and so many of
and they can not talk, of something that them have now disappeared from this
will disturb their collectivity or their earth and now they can not trouble us.
fraternity. Their fraternity is so great that But, there are still some more who are
wherever they are, they know that they exposed, people have exposed them so
are together. Just imagine, all the evil much that no body can expose anybody
people should join together and behave without any proof. But, they have such
in this manner, is very surprising. That's courage and they are so full of confidence
why they are very collective. Supposing, that they can do what they like and
one has taken a particular part of the land. anybody tries to expose them, they will
Then he dominates there, another takes definitely ruin that person. Few things
up in another way, third one takes, there's they are doing-fīrst of all, they put wrong
no competition as such. Ultimate effort ideas into your head. They say that we
is somehow or other to destroy all the are very great people, we are this, we are
creation of God, all the good people of that. God has sent us, all sorts of things
tne world, who will ultimately get their
they will talk but there is no proof about
it and human beings never ask for the
self realisation and who will have the
knowledge about reality. This kind of
proof as to how do you say? What is the
proof? So, the solution is Sahaja Yoga.
In Sahaja Yoga you have the experience,
you have the proof. Then you grow into
it, immediately you cannot become a great
atmosphere is the worst during Kaliyuga,
and there are so many, stupid people who
may be simple, who may be good natured
but they are drawn by the evil doing of
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 March - April 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
NAVRATRI PUJA
14
Sahaja Yogi, that's a fact. You have to
will tell you by many ways that this is
wrong, why you are doing wrong to some
person. But, if you do not repent and
come back on to the normal position, She
gives you up. Once Mahakali gives you
mature, it takes some time for some
people, it takes some more time for some
people, doesn't matter. But, you do
mature. In the meanwhile if you try to go
up, you are now exposed and become
prone to all kinds of evil things. I would
say, when you worship her, what you
want? You want her to protect. In your
discrimination, in your mistake you might
do something wrong, may do something
that is not good for you, could be very
to these wrong people then there is no
possibility, there is no way of again
bringing you up. Specially those people
who rise high in Sahaja Yoga. If they fall,
they fall so low then even an ordinary
Sahaja Yogi could say Mother, look at
him, where has he gone! So, with all these
things happening, what is our job, is to
worship Mahakali within us because what
does She do, perhaps, we are not very
dangerous for you. But She is the person
who guides you, how to avoid all the
dangers.
aware of.
Now, She protects your life. She protects
First and foremost thing She does is to
protect us. Wherever you may be, what
your body, She protects all organs of your
body, She is the one who gives you
all
ever you may be doing, in whatever peril
you may be, how-so-ever dangerously
you may be placed in life, She protects
the security of the life. In Her realm
you
feel completely secure, you are never
afraid of anything. Because you have left
you. First thing, She protects you. All the
people who write to me how they were
protected, how they were cured, how
they were helped is this thing that they
should know that all this has happened
because of Mahakali power within you.
She exists within you. When you are
worshipping Mahakali, you are
worshipping the Mahakali within you,
with due respect you must know that this
Mahakali is a very sensitive personality,
She is very sensitive. If you try to do any
wrong to anyone, She will guide you, She
her realm, you have come out of it that's
why, that is the reason, you are afraid.
But, if you are under Her beautiful
guidance and Her blessings you will never
feel afraid to do anything, you will never
do anything wrong also. As soon as you
will try to do wrong, She will hold your
hand. She is really the guiding person, She
is the one who actually gives us our
existence. Without Her we cannot exist
because She is the one who is the power
of Shri Shiva. She gives us so many
things. For example, She gives us the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 March - April 2000
NAVRATRI PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
15
relaxation, the sleep. She gives you the
truth, She tells you what is the truth and
what is not. Sometimes people so much
in their ego, always try to believe that
what I think is the truth. Then, She is the
one who points it out by creating a maya,
a kind of a confusion that you start
thinking, what is this? So, She is called
also the one who gives us 'Bhranti' means
'illusions'. She puts you to illusions also.
She tests you, puts you to illusions and
She then ultimately takes you out of the
when you are like a child before Her, how
can you worry about it! So, your worries
are finished. She worries about you, you
shouldn't worry about yourself. That's the
point in it. Her security is so great, She is
so secure Herself that She gives you all
the security that you need. You can hold
on to Her feet, you can hold on to Her
image or to anything, you can even pray
to Her. Many people are being cured only
by praying to Her because She cures you.
She can cure your diseases which are very
complicated diseases, She can cure.
illusions.
She is the one who relaxes you because
Now, what she likes-Mahakali likes the
She take over all your responsibilities, She light. She is worshipped in the night
takes over all your problems. She is the because then we can put on the lights.
one who solves all the problems. It is we She likes enlightened person. Also, She
who forget to leave all the problems to likes the light, She likes the sun, She likes
Her. If you just leave problems to Her, something that will be completely
all your problems are solved. Not only enlightened and brightened. You must
that but you really feel blessed. It's not have heard about people who are called,
only physical also it is mental that She I don't know what, but specially in the
makes your mind absolutely free of West they use them, they have big teeth
worries. She doesn't worry and She and they are the people, just imagine, they
doesn't want you to worry. If you worry cannot exist before the sun. As soon as
then She tries to show that while you are there is a sun rise they just want to go off
worrying, you are denying Her, you are and sleep. They cannot see the sun
1.ot accepting Her. Worrying is because the light they can't bear. Now,
something, is very common and people what has happened here that Mahakali has
take great pride in it."O! I was worried." departed from them and when Mahakali
How can you be worried when your has departed from them and then they are
Mother is sakshaat Mahakali. She can kill afraid and such people are attacked by
all the demons, She can finish all of them. these people who know they are afraid.
She knows how to manage things and The sun itself is very important to work
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 March - April 2000
16
NAVRATRI PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
works, what does it teach you, what does
it tell you, try to understand what is the
plan of this evil person that you are
playing into his hands! How can you play
into his hands? And how can you do
whatever wrongs he wants you to do?
out this Mahakali thing. But, as it is, in
the West specially, we are very hard
working and very much sun oriented and
we worship the sun. All this we do-
worship the sun and also go right sided
very much. Then it is She who gives us
the balance. She is the one who gives us
Secondly, against Her is the ego. The biggest
problem is the ego today. Ego shows "no,
no I can do," Ego says - I will work it out,
the balance by relaxing us completely and
protecting us. Sometimes we are
competitive and we are really worried and
we want to do something which we
cannot do then we get upset and we don't
know what to do. Then it is She who
ego says - it will be done but the human
beings, yield to ego, It is of a great
satisfaction for them that their ego is so
strong and they don't want to listen to the
brings sleep to us. So, when we sleep She
looks after us, She soothes us and She
takes away our problems. So many things
She is doing but what are we doing for
Her that we should see. Main thing is that
Mahakali forces.
You have to be like children, really that's a
state we have to be in, is to be innocent like
we are ourselves worshipping Her. She children. She loves innocent people, She is
likes that Her children should worship
innocence Herself, She loves innocent
Her. That on that level she can be one people and She looks after you much more
with them, she can give them Her
because you are innocent, you are not
compassion, love and protection from all cunning, you are not very much trying to play
the evil. But, it has to be understood those your ego on others. If you are innocent, She
who are not yet settled, those who are helps you, She definitely will help you but
not yet absolutely belonging to that land this ego has to be brought under control
of security of Mahakali can be attacked because he is the worst enemy She has.
and once they leave that area, they can She doesn't like your ego, She wants you
be very badly injured, killed, whatever to be egoless, to be innocent. As you know
may happen.
that it is first She came and She created Shri
Ganesha. That's why we worship Shri
Ganesha, we have to be innocent, means.
So, we are living in this Kaliyuga in a very
dangerous times, means anything can
happen. So we have to be very careful,
we have to watch our mind, to see how it
we are not planning to do something bad
or good or anything but we are without
any intentions. It's a timeless, activity. You
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
March - April 2000
NAVRATRI PUJA
17
just don't bother about what you are going
compassion, compassion for each other,
love for each other, also caring for others.
That is something She loves. If you are a
Sahaja Yogi, if you are a realised soul She's
always with you but she says what are you
doing with your compassion? How many
people you are giving realisation?How many
people you are curing? How many people
you are helping? She is quite aware of
to do, what you are not going to do, what
you should do-nothing of the kind. You are
just existing in your complete innocence and
enjoying yourself and making others enjoy.
If there's one child in the house he can make
hundred people dance, it's like that.
Because these children have the power of
innocence and that is what She respects.
You sometimes feel that how people are
cheats, how they cheat us, how they make
all kinds of, I should say, aggressiveness,
whatever you are doing. I should say it's
such a tremendous power of Mahakali that
She knows everything about you, everything.
She knows, your mind, She knows your
heart, She knows about your health.
Everything She knows, actually She is the
Mother in every way who cares for the
little child. In that way She knows that
sometimes how they try to also tell lies, all
kinds of things they will do and they expect
so much from you also but all this is
happening, is happened. You shouldn't
bother about these things, you should
keep to your innocence and you will be
surprised you will be completely innocent. So, like when you are very
protected. How? because Mahakali will small, your mother looks after you. In the
this child doesn't do anything, is very
stand around you, She will look after you
same way, this Mahakali looks after you.
if you are innocent. Innocent person
doesn't get angry. What is there to get Then the Mahasaraswati power comes in
angry. Innocence has its own, I should
and She educates you, She gives you
say, strength, power. It's extremely other ideas of knowledge, this, that but
powerful. Even a cruel man, if he sees a looking after the child in you, looking
child he becomes little bit aware of it, after your innocence and your
there's a child. The whole world is aware compassion is all done by this Mahakali
that children should not be in any way
power. So, She is extremely sensitive
about her children. No body dare touch
Her children. For her everybody is like a
tortured or troubled, why? Because
children are so innocent. So, the quality
of innocence is going to really help you
very much because She appreciates your
child. Those who are realised souls
specially, She thinks are Her children and
quality of innocence.
in no way they should be hurt, nothing
Then another thing She loves in you is your
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 March - April 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
NAVRATRI PUJA
18
should happen to them. She is always
the end of our life! What is the purpose of
following them. One can say if She is a
person, how does She follow them,
because She is omnipresent. She is
present everywhere, everywhere in your
life She is there, specially with Sahaja
Yogis. She follows them up and down,
everywhere, whatever you are doing. You
are in an accident She's there to see you,
this life? Why have we come on this earth?
What is so special that we should live on
this earth? All such fundamental questions
start rising and then you just take to the
seeking. In that also you have to understand
the Mahalakshmi principle is very-very, very
different from what people understand. They
think if they are seeking it should be
intelligible, it should be through their minds
or could be rational, all this or scientific.
That's how they move seeking the truth. It's
not possible. Mahalakshmi's principle is like
this, that you should have earnest desire to
know the truth and truth and truth and nothing
She's like an angel behind you and nothing
can happen to you if you really worship
her from your full heart, not for any gain,
not for any achievement but for Her
blessings. Her blessings are very great and
they really have enriched human beings,
they have enriched this earth, they have
enriched everything because of the
blessings of Mahakali.
else. When you think like that then you will
not take to other things.
So many people took to drugs thinking that
by doing that they will achieve their self
realisation. It's a wrong idea. How can you
Of course, then there comes the
Mahalakshmi. Her thing is that in
Mahalakshmi principle you become sort
of detached. You start finding that what
is this world after all, and a kind of a
feeling of detachment comes into you and
you start thinking that there must be
something better, there must be truth
beyond. Specially, people who have been
tortured by bad people always think like
get away from your awareness to achieve
that. Awareness is the most important thing.
If you can go into the realm of awareness
then you have to understand the basic
awareness is not to be lost. If your basic
awareness is lost through drinking or
through drugs or all these things that people
do. They think that they are seeking that's
why they are doing. So, sometimes they take
excuse of seeking to do wrong things. It's
like a revenge on yourself, I think, that you
want to revenge on yourself by thinking that
that that there must be someone who will
raise us from this. Here comes the
Mahalakshmi principle in you which is the
principle of the Goddess, of ascent. She puts
the ideas in your head that what is next?
What do we have to do? After all, is this
you are now seeking. It's not the real
seeking. In a real seeking a person has to
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 March - April 2000
19
NAVRATRI PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
sale on, I said, really! You can pay him half
just meditate and should find out what is the
the amount, he can give you his blessings,
alright. Then next week she said, now the
right way but that too by not reading some
books or listening to some false gurus.
sale has come to one fourth. If you pay the
one fourth amount then he will give you the
full knowledge. I said, how can he
reciprocate, it's not proportionate, I said.
When you were giving half, he was giving
half, when you are giving one fourth, he
is giving full. That's the thing, she said.
he is very magnanimous, you see, that's
the point. I said, for all such people who
think they can purchase truth, they can
Actually Kundalini awakening is the only way
one can know the reality, there's no other
way out. But no body tells that it is Kundalini
awakening. They will tell you, we will go to
this place, then to that place then, move to
that place then, this has to be done and
ultimately where do you come-where you
started. It's just like that moving from places
to places, moving from false to another false
to another false to falsehood.
not achieve it. You can not purchase it,
Ultimately so many seekers have been lost. you can not pay for your Kundalini
So many have been lost because they payment for that.
awakening, no, nor you should take any
thought that certain type of seeking is very
precious, because you can pay lots of Self realisation is absolutely the divine
money to the guru. I mean, you can grace and you can not take money for
purchase the guru and so all the rich that. You can not sell it. It's not so cheap
people can become enlightened, that
means that. But I don't think the
to be sold. If you understand that then
the Mahalakshmi power works and
Mahalakshmi power is really meant for
people who are genuine seekers, who are
really seeking genuinely. It acts and works
so well that they achieve a kind of a very-
very spontaneous realisation. This
spontaneous realisation you all have got
percentage of good people are all only
rich. The people who are good are good
whether they are rich or not is not the
point. But such people try to gather round
a person because I think there's a subtle ego
of their money that we can afford to buy
this, buy that. Once I was in America and
there was one lady who came to see me
and she didn't know that I was a spiritual
it, you don't have to go to Himalayas, you
don't have to do anything like that. All
those things are over, you have done it.
person. So, she said, now, there's a very
In your previous lives you must have done
it. Now you don't have to do anything.
good guru who has come to America. I said,
really! what does he do? She said, there's a
You can get it, you are getting it just
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
2000
March - April
The Divine Cool Breeze
NAVRATRI PUJA
must mature in such a manner that you should
sitting down here. Wherever you are in the
know everything of all these evil doers. You
must find out what these false people are
whole world you can get it and it is spreading
fast. Now, it's also the duty of Sahaja
very
doing? It's very easy because you are
enlightened and with your enlightened
attention you can definitely find out what's
wrong with what organisation, with which
you will do it. It will be the best way to
meditate. Not to be aggressive in any way
but just to meditate and ask Mahakali-
Yogis to spread Sahaja Yoga.
Now, this one is to be understood that
Mahalakshmi and Mahakali both go hand
in hand. When, Mahakali blesses you and
She is with you and you are in her realm
the Mahalakshmi comes forward and She
definitely helps you to achieve your
realisationa and also to improve your
destroy, destroy him for he is destroying the
world, you please destroy him. That's Her
problems to help you, I mean, the financial
side of it, you can call it or in any way
other problems also, She solves. The
greatest problem She solves that your
greatest desire, to achieve self realisation,
is granted. So, there's is no competition
between them. All these three powers
job and She would love to do but
somebody has to tell Her and ask Her. It's
very good because there are so many that
unless and until you point it out She may not
be able to put Her attention to them possibly.
So, best is always ask Her to help you on
individual basis, on a national basis, may be
work together and whatever is needed
they work it out. But, it is the Mahakali
who guides, where what help has to go
on a collective basis or maybe on global
basis. That's what. She exists every where,
She is globally available. Anywhere, you
and that's why the power of Mahakali is
very much respected. As it is She has
killed so many devils, and so many
rakshasas and still there are some more,
may be having any colour, any race, any
nation, anything. But She exists within
you all the time and to worship her and to
awaken her is only your duty, that you have
some of them are existing but I am sure they
to do.
will be all finished. There will be none of
If She is awakened within you will be a
these horrible ones ever existing.
humble person. You will see what
mistakes you have been committing and
will feel bad about it. You will not
But, still we have to be very careful and
alert and try to find out what's wrong with
these people. What are they doing? And
what they are trying to propagate? You
you
feel guilty but you feel bad that I will never
do such thing, I have done very
great
comr'd on page31
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 NORTH AMERICAN TOUR 1999
March April 2000
21
The Divine Cool Breeze
NOR TH AMERICAN TOUR 1999
Sixty-Four Powers
of Shri Adi Shakti
On the Occasion of Shri Adi Shakti Puja,
Canajoharie, New York, June 20, 1999
heavens ring with joy for the
lifty-four adorations were offered
to Shri Mataji by the U.S.
collective for Adi Shakti Puja.
delight of Shri Sada Shiva.
7. Indeed, You are the Source of
Shri Mataji reviewed and edited them,
Cosmic Energy. This Power
and added the last ten Herself.
radiates from You as the Finest
Ethers of Divine Love.
After each name, say together, "Aum
Shri Adi Shakti Namoh Namah."
8. Beyond
beyond
matter,
1. Shri Adi Shakti, You are the
consciousness, the Grace of Adi
Shakti is where reality can be
Principle that created the fourteen
known.
bhuvanas of universes; You are
beyond our comprehension.
9. You are the Ineffable, the
Immeasurable. We call You
The AUM is Your Sound which
2.
Pneuma, Divine Breath, the Living
resonates Your Three Powers
Waters, yet You are so much more
throughout the universe.
than this. Only the Deities have the
3. The Joy of Your Attention-
Darshan of Your Greater Powers.
chitvilas-is expressed in all Your
10. God Almighty in His Dance unifies
Creation.
with Your Complete Power as Shri
Adi Shakti.
4. In the Play of the Divine, God
Almighty acts by Your Powers.
11. You are the Primordial Power of
5. The Breath and Desire of Shri Sada
Shiva are One with You.
the Holy spirit that mothered Shri
Jesus.
6. The Paramchaitanya, which is your
12. You are the Creatrix, the Feminine
power, makes the stars and the
Creative Energy that sustains the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 March - April 2000
22
NORTH AMERICAN TOUR 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Peace of God Almighty.
for You, the grandest tree has its
share as well.
13. Through Your Mahalakshmi
22. All Nature's Creatures are Yours,
Power, we experience the Timeless
Peace of the Fourth Dimension.
From the Beauty of Mother Earth's
Green Sari to the Majesty of the
14. Shri Adi Shakti, You enable God
Tiger and the Lion.
Almighty to do His Sacred Work.
Verily, You are the Most Sublime
23. The Gravity of Mother Earth, and
of all Your Heavenly Spheres, is
Power in the cosmos.
controlled by Your Power
15. God Almighty takes charge in a
way swift and surprising if anyone
Magnificent.
24. Your Power, the Paramchaitanya,
acts against Shri Adi Shakti.
adjusts nature and its elements, and
its all-pervading power opens us
16. Shri Ganesha, Your first creation,
resonates in the carbon atom, the
to Your Benevolence.
essence of life. May He reawaken
innocence and wisdom in the very 25. Shri Adi Shakti is the Artistic
Creator of the Mother Earth and
cells of humankind.
those who respect the Mother
Earth are loved by you.
17. You created the World of the
Divine, and the World of Evolving.
May our Evolution merge with this 26. Shri Adi Shakti, the Land of
Divine Play.
Vishuddhi is one aspect of Your
Vast Creation. You will raise the
18. O, Adi Shakti, Evolution is the
Vibrations to transform the people
force that gives rise to Your Divine
of this land.
Play in the lives of humanity.
27. The native peoples of America
19. The Adi Kundalini formed the
worshipped Adi Shakti as the
primordial chakras, and opened the
doors to the unfolding of life.
Great Mother, and they respected
the land as sacred. May this
attitude return to all others who
20. It is You who created the Kundalini
live here and enjoy the land's
of our Mother Earth.
bounty.
21. The simplest flower has its fraction
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 NORTH AMERICAN TOUR 1999
March - April 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
23
28. The mystery of living processes is
Yours and Yours alone, and cannot
37. Shri Adi Shakti, to describe You is
the work of poets and saints who
be duplicated by any personality.
awkwardly try to embrace a
Let humanity be aware of this.
mystery on the horizon.
29. O, Ritambharapragnya, You are
38. You are Para Shakti, the power
One of the Powers of Shri Adi
beyond all powers.
Shakti-You are the Power of all
39. Give us, O Adi Shakti, greater
living work.
humility so that we can gain some
30. You regulate and organize all life.
small glimpse of Your Glory.
31. You came, Shri Adi Shakti, as
40. Make us like the Sufis and the
Gnostics- adoring You at every
Surabhi, the Divine Cow
emerging from the Vishnuloka at
moment.
Gokul, where Shri Krishna had His
41. Your power of Mahalakshmi
bridges over the Void to allow the
childhood.
32. Shri Adi Shakti, let the feminine
Kundalini of the seekers to ascend.
qualities of the Sahaja Yoginis 42. Thank You, O Adi Shakti, for the
manifest through the beauty of
seeking which brought us to Sahaja
Yoga. You now lift up humanity
meditation, surrender and self-
esteem.
into the Omega of the Last
33. Your Quality of Sharada Devi
Judgement.
gives authority over the truth, art,
43. We pray that Adi Shakti's Love.
music and drama.
continues to protect all the saints
34. You give to women the Regal
and seekers around the world.
Gentleness of Shaleenata to care
44. Shri Adi Shakti, Your Work is
for their families and to be the
greater than any? You created the
preservers of society.
pithas, the chakras, nature and
humanity, and its subtle workings.
35. You also came as Sati Devi,
May the complexity of Your Work
humble us down completely.
establishing a Royal Dharma to
which we aspire.
36. O Vag Devi, Goddess of Language, 45. Your Love gives power to the
You give inspiration to the great
Bandhan, which directs the
vibrations.
poets and saints.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 March - April
2000
24
NORTH AMERICAN TOUR 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
clutches of false pride, jealousy,
46. Your Power of Kundalini brings
false
attachment,
greed,
freedom that is Divine. It is the
identification and violence.
only true freedom.
47. Flow through us freely. Help us 56. You have incarnated on this earth
give vibrations to all with Your
Photograph of Living Vibrations. 57. You are the Source of Cognitive
for the Last Judgement.
48. Your Mahamaya Swarupa allows
E Science and the Torsion Area.
us to be near You, and it shields us
58. Whatever human beings plan, You
dismantle to destroy their egos.
from the Awesome Might that
flows form You.
With one subtle movement of Your
49. Shri Adi Shakti, please give us
Finger, You destroy people like
deeper powers of introspection so
that we become self-cleansing and
Hitler.
59. You give powerful advice with
self-aware.
very subtle humour.
50. You are the Mother who desired
You correct Sahaja Yogis, never by
60.
that human beings be mirrors for
harsh words, but with very loving,
God Almighty.
gentle affection.
You have crafted Beautiful Mirrors
51.
61. You explain the subtle meaning of
all the scriptures.
of the Spirit in the Sahaja Yogis to
help redeem humanity.
62. You expose the falsehood in very
Your Compassion protects us from
the anger of God Almighty.
52.
direct ways.
63. You do not know any fear and You
53. Through maya, humanity forgot
the principles of life. Through
Sahaja Yoga, humanity now
give complete security to all Sahaja
Yogis.
You respect Your children and love
64.
remembers and absorbs the
them to make them perfect models
vibrations of Shri Adi Shakti.
for the rest of humanity. You have
54. May Your Evolutionary Force
bring humanity to the inspired
existence of the Golden Age.
given Sahaja Yogis sinless fun and
a life of complete joy.
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti
55. You have disentangled us from the
Namoh Namah.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 March - April 2000
SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIANTOUR 1999
25
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999
Shri Mataji's Visit to Toronto
Mother. (The hotel manger actually asked
the guests occupying the most prestigious
HE CANADIAN SAHAJA YOGIS were
most plesantly surprised by the
news that Shri Mataji would be
coming to Toronto before proceeding to
the USA. It was a sheer joy to hear that
the Adi Shakti would be gracing Canada
suite in the hotel to "move over" in order
to make place for their "valued and
esteemed" guest!)
Prior to the arrival of Shri Mataji, it rained
by Her most auspicious presence! Shri
Mataji in Her Divine compassion sent a continuously for three days, not only in
message to the Toronto collective that Toronto but also over almost the entire
though it was 'short notice' to arrange a province of Ontario. The rains were much
needed as the lake levels were going
public program, we should not worry as
down and the authorities were worried!
the results would be unprecedented and
we would have more people attending
this program than every before!
The atmosphere was thus purified and
readied by Shri Vishnumaya to receive the
Adi Shakti and we were all eagerly
Posters were printed and put up all over
the city of Toronto and adjoining areas,
awaiting Her arrival
pamphlets distributed at all the prominent Shri Mataji arrived in Toronto in the
public places, newspaper ads placed and evening on May 25th, 1999. There were
important dignitaries in the public and
political arena were sent personal Her. While waiting for Her luggage in the
invitations via personal telephone calls. immigration area, She gave realization to
fax or e-mail. Most ministers of the seven customs officials who were then
Canadian federal government as well as
about 150 yogis at the airport to receive
continuously around Her till She left the
all the provincial Government Ministers airport! Shri Mataji was very happy to
were informed and invited to the Toronto see so many yogis at the airport and
program as well as to the forthcoming remarked that the collective here had
Vancouver program (June 26th). We
grown a lot and that Sahaja Yoga was
spreading quite rapidly in Canada! She
also described the loving way in which
were even able to get the hotel booking
where we had wanted to for our Divine
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 March- April 2000
26
SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
the Sahaja Yogis of Germany had the audience while putting them into a
gathered to welcome Her at the Frankfurt meditative mood. Then a local Sahaja
airport (Her stopover on Her way to Yogi very effectively, in 10 minutes,
Toronto). She then received flowers from introduced Sahaja Yoga along with an
all those assembled, and blessed explanation of the subtle system and the
chakras.
everyone.
Amazingly
enough,
just as he
As She sat
there in
Her chair
.
concluded
and
his talk,
smiled,
Shri
our hearts
Mataji
sang with
joy and
our spirits
graced
us with
Нег
danced.
presence.
Th
Everyone
stood up
public
program
to greet
was held
Нег.
the
at
The
Canvocation
evening
Hall of the
belonged
University
to Shri Mataji. She was in Her element.
of Toronto. The sequence of events to
take place at the public program was She communicated the benefits of Sahaja
clearly outlined by Shri Mataji; no wonder Yoga in a very easy and simple manner,
everything went like song! There were along with a sense of humour, to which
approximately 1,000 people present in the everyone responded with spontaneous
auditorium, eagerly waiting for the laughter. The entire talk was full of
proceedings to begin. The program compassion and Her voice was
started at around 7.30 p.m., thanks to the overflowing with the love and the concern
of a Divine Mother. Indeed She
efforts of the Yuva Shakti, who had the
venue ready on time. Steven Dey played manifested Her form as Sakshat Shri
raag Yaman on the sarod and charmed Sandrakaruna. Later in Her hotel room
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999
March - April 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
27
She said that she was concerned about
to the audience. She requested them to
join us by clapping their hands because it
the direction in which American society
increases the vibrations. The auditorium
was going. The solution to all their
problems, She further continued, was
only Sahaja Yoga.
was full of joy and Shri Mataji joined in
the clapping. The bhajan reached a
crescendo and our joy through vibrations
peaked. Silence prevailed for a minute or
Shri Mataji requested the audience to ask
Her questions because She felt they were
two and Shri Mataji thanked and blessed
intelligent people. However She
requested that they ask relevant questions
everyone. Everyone stood up on Her
departure.
only. Shri Mataji, once again, with
disarming ease and spontaneity answered
the questions succinctly with Her own
brand of humour. On being asked as to
who She was, She answered, "Instead of
The next day Shri Mataji agreed to meet
Tamil TV (an ethnic television network
with an extensive reach in North America)
and talked to them for an hour and a half.
They plan to do a documentary on Shri
Mataji. They also covered the public
program the day before and had
Self Realization. They were very
worrying yourself as to who I am, why
don't you try to understand who you are?
By knowing yourself, shall you know who
I am." Jai Shri Mataji!
their
got
respectful to Shri Mataji and sat at Her
Lotus Feet during the interview. The
(some other questions and answers interview will be broadcast to all of North
After the question and answer session
appear at the end of this article), Shri
Mataji mentioned it was time for everyone
to experience their Self Realization. What
America and some countries in the
Caribbean where there are pockets of
ethnic Tamilians, which is a community
happened next was an unusual experience from the south Indian state of Tamil
for most Yogis. We felt cool breeze in Nadu. Shri Mataji then departed for the
the auditorium and saw the banner behind airport. She had a few brief words and
Shri Mataji moving with the breeze. Shri bid Her good-byes for now! With the ever
Mataji did tell the audience She felt the beautiful smile, the Divine Mother
cool breeze coming to Her from the continued on Her way to meet Her
audience. What a blessing! Toronto was
expectant children waiting for Her in New
really "cool."
York, USA!
Shri Mataji requested the bhajan singers
to sing Jogawa and explained its meaning
Approximately 100 people attended the
first follow-up program. Their sincerity
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 March - April
SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999
28
2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
and interest was simply amazing. A four-
purpose of life?" "That's simple", Shri
part follow-up program was scheduled,
during which we proposed to gently guide
our new brothers and sisters to find deeper
meaning of their own selves, their
kundalinis already awakened by and in the
presence of the Divine Spirit itself!
Mataji replied, "to become Divine."
Others asked questions revealing their
inner anguish and the pains of seeking.
Shri Mataji complimented them on their
honesty. A young boy in the front row
wanted to know how evil comes into us.
Another man sought the meaning of the
Bolo Jagatmata Shri Nirmala Devi Ki jai!!
backdrop on the stage behind Shri Mataji.
She explained that was only there for
decoration. "Everything you see," She
cautioned, "but why don't you see the
There are now 2,500 newly realized souls point?" After the public program, Shri
in the city of Vancouver. After two public Mataji toured the city by car- Stanley
programs conducted by Her Holiness Park and the North Shore mountains -
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, a visit to Her to disperse the strong vibrations of the
-Ashish Pradhan, Toronto
Shri Mataji in Vancouver
House in suburban Surrey and a hotel evening.
room press conference, our city has been
After very little sleep, Shri Mataji visited
on Sunday morning a temple in Burnaby
for the second public program. Speaking
thoroughly vibrated and blessed by Her
detailed attention, unprecedented in the
eighteen years since Her first visit here.
entirely in Hindi, She told these devotees
Arriving from Chicago on Saturday, June of Shri Krishna that it should be easy for
26th, Shri Mataji gave a public program them to get their Self Realization. The
at the city's major convention centre built temple's pujari prepared the way by
over the water of the inner harbour. In introducing our Mother with great
this landmark building first constructed devotion and recognition. From Burnaby,
as the Canadian pavilion for Expo 86, Shri Shri Mataji travelled to Her house in
Mataji addressed the seekers of our city. Surrey, a Sahaja Yoga ashram, where She
As She had done in Toronto, New York received all the Sahaja Yogis, had lunch
and Washington, Shri Mataji invited
questions from the audience, satisfying all
and rested.
In the evening, back at the hotel, a small
their mental concerns before the gift of
Self Realisation. One man asked, with the press conference was held for five
directness of a true seeker, "What is the journalists, including the editor of
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 March April 2000
SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999
29
The Divine Cool Breeze
Common Ground (the city seeking have evolved from the animal, so this
magazine), a crew from Vision TV (a evolution is not complete, I think, as
national religious cable chanel) and human beings also. But whatever it is, all
members of the Vancouver Indian these horrible things that are lingering
community's press and television. They within us and our personality are also
sat shoeless on the floor before Her. One coming from our heritage. Then also
because we think too much, we acquire
article was offered to Shri Mataji the
following morning for Her approval and
correction. It reads as if written by a
Sahaja Yogi.
lots of things and our orientation also
changes from other orientation like food,
but we become sort of great greedy
people. We become very money-oriented
and the whole system changes to
We all feel very blessed by Shri Mataji's
great attention upon our city. Every
Sahaja Yogi was able to offer Her flowers
at the airport at both Her arrival and
departure. When She visited the ashram
in Surrey, everyone was able to go to Her
different line, but these lingering things
are still there, so with that also, we have
jealousy, aggressiveness. All those things
are actually our inheritance. So as a result,
you become a person who can see things,
Feet, offer a gift or discuss a concern. She
who can watch things and not react.
gave time equally to each of Her That's the greatest benefit I think.
Children. She said that Paramchaitanya
QUESTION: Did you do any work with
was so pleased that She just wanted to
fill the house with vibrations, to just let it
Gandhi?
flow. And so we were blessed.
SHRI MATAJI:I didn't do vork, as such.
Richard PAYMENT
was a little child of seven years and I
stayed with him and he found out about
Me. He knew because he was also a
On June 27th, Shri Mataji held a press realized soul, but very much full of
conference in Her hotel room while disciplines and things like that. So people
visiting Vancouver. Four journalists were never understood that side of Gandhiji.
present representing Common Ground But he was a very spiritual man and he
magazine, U magazine, The Link loved children. If I did any work, I used
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
newspaper and Vision of Fiji television
program. Here is a small excerpt.
to take out his temper some time,
entertain him. But actually, you see, with
him, he wanted Me to find out how he
SHRI MATAJI: You see, what is the
Should write the different bhajans. In his
trouble with human beings, is that they
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 March - April 2000
30
SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi gave a public
program in Vancouver. She invited
questions from the audience.
bhajanawali they had a book, written
down all the hymns, so in what series we
should write. So according to different
centres, I told him that you have to
QUESTION:What's the purpose of life?
awaken on the centres.
Shri Mataji: To become Divine. Simple.
QUESTION: Are we all one being?
That's a question to be felt within us.
What is the purpose of human life? Is to
become Divine, part and parcel of the
Divinity. Now supposing you are a father,
what do you want your son to become?
SHRI MATAJI: All are connected, but
those who are realized souls can feel the
connection. But those who are not, do
not feel it, but we are all connected.
Happy, enjoyable and also a responsible
They're all one person, part and parcel of
one spiritual being. We can call it God
Almighty. We have to be just aware of it.
person. You also want that for your
children. Then your great Father, what
does He want for you? He wants you to
be happy joyous people. Out of
We have not come into our awareness.
Once it comes, you know that... and then
you are a different personality.
ignorance, you are not that, so He wants
to remove that ignorance. This is the
QUESTION: When will things work out?
purpose of our life.
SHRI MATAJI: It depends on the wish
QUESTION: If someone is in a stressful
of the people. My wish, that it should
situation and they don't have the
happen tomorrow. Why should we waste
our life on the non-sensical? Come to our
senses. This is what I want, but I'm now
opportunity to go and meditate or they
don't have a chance to align, what is the
best, on-the-spot, way to raise their
vibration so that they can see it fromn
God's point of view, from the point of view
travelling, lecturing, talking, but what I
feel that at the helm of affairs one should
see the point.
of society, in order to properly deal with
QUESTION: Then how do you reach the problem?
supreme being, God? In other words, is
this the route to reach the supreme God? is your fundamental right and, if
Shri Mataji: As I have told you already, it
circumstances do not help you, the whole
SHRI MATAJI: Yes, this is, of course.
thing works out, automatically it works
out. You get all the opportunities. I have
This is Nirvana.
On Saturday June 26th, Her Holiness
seen many people who had these
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 March April 2000
SHRI MATAJI'S CANADIAN TOUR 1999
The Divine Cool Breeze
31
problems, but they work on it. So believe
in this power of love, how beautifully it
works it. All right? May God bless you.
all these are meant for introducing
spirituality, and that's not the end of it.
What is the end? End of it is to know
yourself, to become spiritually
endowed. I am saying you have to go
QUESTION: [A man from a Vancouver
Hindu temple invites Shri Mataji to visit
beyond your mental personality, For that,
you have to have Kundalini awakening.
the next day and give a program.]
SHRI MATAJI:Thank you very much.
You see, temples, gurudwaras, churches.
Continue from page 20
and that childhood has to come back in you,
wrong and then you will try to correct it. Al
this works out very well when you are pure
in your heart. The heart should be pure. If
if you really worship the Mothe.
May God Bless You
your heart is not pure, if you are doing
Sahaja Yoga to have some competition with
others or with some sort of material
achievements, it will not work out. You have
to do it in a way that is an innocent act, that
you are worshipping your Mother like a little
child worships and loves his mother. It's a
very simple relationship which all of us have
felt. How we should love our Mother and
how we should be under her guidance and
under her protection. That is something very
simple you have known in your childhood
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
RECLAIMING THE SWASTIKA
March April 2000
32
Reclaiming the Swastika
Have you ever looked up the word, ness about the swastika - yet the pure
swastika" at the library? While writing truth about the swastika can never be
this article, the reference librarian at the altered. It is the most ancient symbol of
New York Public Library was asked humankind and its shape actually imparts
about a text about the swastika. Her the energy of Shri Ganesha. The vibration
reply: "Are you researching
of the swastika is very
World Wart II?" When it
powerful and holy, and
marks His presence.
was explained that the
swastika is one of
word
The
the most revered
swastika in
symbols of
Sanskrit
Hinduism and
derives from
other religious
traditions, the
S Vasti
• me aning
"well-being"
writer was
sent over to:
(su-good
+asti-being).
The following is
the Fine Arts
Division,
Things
were
an incomplete list
better there, as the
of cultures that have
librarian said, "Oh,
revered the swastika,
you're interested in Shri
and have used it extensively to
Ganesha and the swastika. He is the
show auspiciousness of favorable
circumstances: India; China; The
son of Shri Shiva and Shri Parvati; here
is a reference about it."
Myceneans (of Greece); The Celts (or
Ireland); also, Ancient Britain and
As the swastika is such an essential part
Scandinavia; Ancient Christians of the
of life and Sahaja Yoga, understanding
its meaning and history is important. The
negativity of the Third Reich has affected
the awareness in the public conscious-
Middle East; Native Americans; Russia:
Japan: and Gemany,
The presence of the true swastika (in a
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 RECLAIMING THE SWASTIKA
March - April 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
33
clockwise direction) gives miraculous vibrationally aware, and their chakras
qualities. It acts as the remover of insensitive to the kundalini. It makes one
obstacles and as such marked the ships wonder if the repeated (but unintentional)
departing from Lanka to insure Shri
Ram's victory. In China, stone carvings
of Shri Buddha's feet are often marked
use of the counter-clockwise swastika
eventually brought entire societies down
by displeasing the Divine.
with swastikas. Its name there is wantz-
te and it represents a benevolent society.
the totality of life, and Buddha's heart.
The ancient Christians identified the
swastika with Jesus Christ and the Sun.
In the Apocalypse of John in the New
Testament, references are made to four
angels, each standing on a fiery wheel-
like cross, and each facing one of the four
Actually, the swastika is found virtually
everywhere human-kind has wandered.
Thousands of swastikas are painted on
the walls of ancient Indian caves, and
directions. This can only be the divine
quality of Shri Ganesha interpreted
through Western iconography.
today the Hindu housewife in the villages
still marks the doorway and walls of her
home with it. Ancient Greek coins,
Roman mosaics, and even the sewing Pre-World War I Western philosophers
bobbins of Old Europe have this mark. had a positive understanding about the
As the centuries have gone on, the swastika as representing dynamic growth
understanding of the swastika became in life, and as a symbol of Christ. They
disconnected from people's lives.
also took it to be a symbol of the four
directions, and the evolution from the
animal realm to human life and up to the
celestial realms. They were unaware that
Sacredness was separated from the
activities of everyday life. Nevertheless,
the swastika appeared on household
Ganesha and Christ were aspects of the
same principle, and associated with the
cross of Christ which is not a truth.
goods, clothings, and building columns
as a mark of auspiciousness that was less
conscious than in the past.
e past.
Through Sahaja Yoga, we know that the
qualities of Shri Ganesha-innocence and
wisdom-reside in living cells on a subtle
The vibratory quality of the swastika is
in its clockwise direction. The counter-
clockwise form is not auspicious and has
level. The swastika is also reflected in the
been used in this form for tantric or evil
spiral shape of the DNA molecule, the
building block of life. On an atomic level.
purposes. In many cultures, the swastika
became an ornamental symbol (used in
the swastika itself is visible in the carbon
either form) as people became less
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 2000
34
March - April
RECLAIMING THE SWASTIKA
The Divine Cool Breeze
great Uluru, otherwise known as Ayer's
atom. Shri Mataji has confirmed the findings
Rock. A massive red rock formation, it
of Sahaja Yoga scientists who have
is a Ganesha swayambhu, a natural
geological phenomenon that emits
vibrations. Ayer's Rock was a sacred place
for the aboriginal tribes who felt the huge
documented that the swastika (), as well
as the omkara (). Alpha (a) and
Omega (Q) can be seen as part of the
structure of the carbon atom.
stone formation was alive. Scientists have
pinpointed this rock as the oldest fossil
record of amoebic life and possibly life
The swastika is not just a representation:
it is in itself the presence of life. Before
realization, seekers find comfort in
itself. The rock is red in colour and has
messages and symbols. After realization,
magnetic properties.
we feel the blessing of this "symbol"
Shri Mataji speaks about the magnetic and
electromagnetic qualities of Shri Ganesha,
who is at the core of evolution itself:
directly on our chakras.
In the land of the Vishuddhi, the Native
Americans felt the power of the earth
"At the level of matter, we might call it
element. The ancestors of the Pueblo
people of the American Southwest, the electromagnetic, but potentially it is the
Anazazi, depicted swastika designs on energy of Shri Ganesha which is
electromagnetic at this point. There it
starts evolving, growing. That's how we
their beautiful pottery.
Today the Hopi, their descendants, still
tell stories of an ancient migration In a human being it exists, as you know,
covering 10,000 years of history as auspiciousness, as purity, mainly the
throughout the Southwest. The Hopi innocence."
believe that they as a people came right
have different growth of the evolution.
out of the earth and that they migrated in Shri Ganesha, the four-armed elephant-
the four directions in the shape of a headed God, mirrors the swastika in form.
clockwise swastika. They believe this His flowing arms and hands are reflected
shape gave religious meaning to the in the words of the Shri Ganesha Song.
journey. Their emergence symbolized to He is praised here as Shri Vinayaka (the
them an entrance into a new world and remover of obstacles). "Four Holy Hands,
created a longing to return to the world the blessing, rope and goad, the fourth
where the "door to the top of the head" offers food to your devotees." The
goad-spiritual growth; the rope-
rescue from harm; the cup-raised hand-
bestowing blessings; and the fourth
was open, a return to the mother.
In Australia, Shri Ganesha's land, sits the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 March April 2000
RECLAIMING THE SWASTIKA
35
The Divine Cool Breeze
angelic quality of the right side of Germany.
Shri Hanumana acted during World War II
to play a trick on Hitler. The Nazi Party
bearing food-or blessings of prasad. All
of these combine to represent innocence
itself, and gives pranava-"that is when
electromagnetic force is charged with originally used the swastika in a clockwise
Ganesha's principle." These symbolic manner on its flag. Shri Hanumana made the
aspects of Shri Ganesha help impart stencil go in such a way that the Nazis
pranava, a coefficient that generates decided to use the other side. Both Shri
vibrations. (Shri Ganesha Puja, Cabella, Ganesha and Shri Hanumana joined
September 19, 1993).
together to stop Hitler from winning the war
in this way and so the whole world was
saved from evil's attempt to conquer.
Then how did the swastika of Shri
Ganesha get distorted by the evil of
Hitler? Shri Mataji explains that Hitler New seekers at meetings may have
was influenced by Tibetan Buddhists who conditioned ideas toward the swastika
were involved with tantric practices. because of this century's negativity from
Knowing this symbol had power, he used Nazism. The Western media also
it to represent a supposed German perpetrates a fundamental misunder-
cultural resurrection and to justify his evil standing about the meaning of the
doings. At aother point in history, the
Roman empire used the swastika as a sign
of its domination, and it was carried by
Roman standard bearers, but as in the case
swastika because of World War II
memories. In India, today the swastika
represents political elections and the
Indian society at large in a positive way.
As recently as the 1930s, public buildings
of the Nazis, such wrongs are always
conquered by goodness. As Shri Mataji
reminds us, the Romans were responsible
for the death of Shri Jesus Christ. Their
around America were built with swastika
as a beautiful decorative element
representing life and goodwill. It is only
in the last fifty years that attention has
gone backwards.
empire weakened soon after. It is a fact
that their mercantile trade with India
introduced them to the swastika as a
Sahaja Yoga is healing these
misunderstandings about the meaning and
symbol of society, but the Romans used
it in reverse.
power of this profound sacred mystery,
At the 1998 Shri Hanumana Puja the swastika. The swastika of Shri
(conducted in Germany), Shri Mataji Ganesha is inviolate, pure and beyond
spoke about Shri Hanumana and the time and history, and through Sahaja Yoga
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
RECLAIMING THE SWASTIKA
36
March- April 2000
its public dignity will be completely restored.
Shri Ganesha Sakshat
Shri Adi Shakti Mataji
Om Twameva Sakshat
Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah
- Karen DeNitto, USA
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 SAHAJA YOGA WORLD CENTRES
March - April 2000
37,
The Divine Cool Breeze
Sahaja Yoga World Centres
Mr. Mohammaed Said Ail-Chaalal
27 Avenue Pasteur
Mr. Jay Chudasama
390 Dixon Road # 612
Etobicoke OT
Canada M9R 1T4
Belarus
Minsk, UL llimskaya
Dom 1 kv 56
Korotky Oleg
Telephone (7 0172) 62 68 27
Work: (7 0172) 6 02 13
Alger
Algeria
Telephone: (213) 64 8122
Work: (213) 64 95 23
Telephone: (1-416) 614-7338
Fax: (1-416) 614-9521 (ashram)
Nadjilem Tolasde Moudjingar
do Ndoubalengar Mdgaou
SA.C. N. P. 185
Ndjamena, Chad
Mr. Mariano Martinez
Cuyo 937, Martinez
1640 Buenos Aires
Argentina
Tel/Fax: (54-11-4) 798-9378
E-Mail: mmartinez@civdad.com.ar
Mr. Roger Akigbe.
B.P. 362, Porto-Novo
Benin
Tel/Fax: (229) 21-25-25
Mr. Bernard Cuvellier
Mr. Gerardo Bell
Valenzuela Puelma
7511-Casa C
Santiago
Chile
Rue Piervenne 58
B 5590 Ciney
Belgium
Tel/ Fax : 32 55) 428 265
E-Mail: cuve skynet.be
Mr. & Mrs. Nikhil & Raani Varde
Palm Apts 11B, Palm Beach 6D
(Dutch Caribbean)
Telephone: (56-2) 275-1131
Cell: (56-2) 9-342-9115
E-mail: gbell@bdachile.cl
Aruba
Telephone: (297) 839 662
Fax: (297) 839 253
E- Mail: nash@ setarnet.aw
Mr. Javier Valderrama
Los Pinos Bioque 7 Apartamento 102
San Miguel, LaPaz
Bolivia
Mrs. Marie-Laure Cernay
Diag 110-Nr 19-15
Bogota, Colombia
Telelphone: (571) 214-3971
Fax: (571) 629-8402
E-Mail: sycolomb@ colomsay.net.com
Mr. Michael Fogarty
20 Holly Street
Castle Cove NSW 2069
Australia
Telephone: (591 2) 790 870
Fax : (591 2) 391782
E-Mail: jvalderr@entelsa.entelnet.bo
TelFax: (61 2) 9417 5572
E-Mail: esis@ tpgi.com.au (John Dobbie) Mr. Edson Almeida
Mr. Michel Bikindou
33 rue Owando-Ouenze
Cond. Rural Vivendas da Serra.
Modulo C, Casa 4
Rod. DF-150, km 2,5 (Sobradinho
Brasilia DF 730 70-014
Brazil
Dr. Engelbert Oman
Auhofstraße 231/3/1
Brazzaville
Congo
1130 Vienna
Austria
Mr. Radim Ryska.
Telephone: (55 61) 501-0834
Cell telephone: (55 61) 983-9821
E-Mail: marinoe if.utrj.br
Telephone: (43-1) 877 7411
Koziskova 511
250 82 Uvaly
Czech Republic
Tel/Fax: (420 2) 997 23 10
Work: (420 2) 519 33 94
E-Mail: ryskaemsmt.cz
Dr. Wolfgang Hack!
Schöbrunner Allee 113
2331 Vosendorf
Austria
Mrs. Rosa Alexieva
Complex Hippodruma
Block 122, Entrance A, Floor 5
TelFax : (43-1) 609 1131
Cell telephone: (66-4) 422 5686
E-Mail: wolfganghackl@aon.at
Sofia 1612
Inna Angelidou
Cyprus
Telephone: (3572) 489596
E-Mail: loukis@ rai.com.cy
Bulgaria
Tel/Fax: (35 92) 599 360
Shri K. Madhusudan Pillai
C.C. 85, ALBA
Post Box 570
Bahrain
Mr. Daniel Oyon0
B.P. 11771 Yaounde
Cameroon
Telephone: (237) 2273 97 (Joseph Tsala)
Telephone: (973) 702 148
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 SAHAJA YOGA WORLD CENTRES
March- April 2000
38
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mr. Rasmus Heltberg
Hammelstrupvej 40, 2 tv
2450 Copenhagen SV
Denmark
Mr. Vaibhav Khopade & Thodoreos
Proussis-11
John and Gulshan Fisher
Kusumaatmaja
58 Menteng, Jakarta, Indonesia
Telephone: (62 21) 720 6613
Mobile: 0811 993 312
104-40 Athens
Greece
Telephone: (45) 36 45 60 15
Work: (45) 32 32 44 00
E-Mail: rasmus. heltberg@econ.ku.dk
Tel/Fax: (30-1) 884 1489
Mr. Michael Roussin
Graham & Tamara Donaldson
No.62 Carysfort Averiue
Blackrock, County Dublin, Ireland
Telephone: (353 1) 282 5542
Work : (353 1) 278 1242
9 rue Auguste Boudinot
97300 Cayenne
Guyane Francaise
Tel/Fax : (594) 30 4614
Work: (594) 29 99 24
E-Mail: rlomaint@nplus.gf
Aleksei & Galina Kotlov
Rohu 109-14
EE-80040 Parnu, Estonia
Telephone: (372 44) 36 043
E-Mail: galina@viisnurk.ee
Mr. Oleg Kotilarsky
clo Philippe Scheimann
30 A #3 Avoda St.
63821 Tel Aviv, Israel
Telephone: (972-3) 507 3911
E-Mait: Philips weil.com (Philippe
Scheimann)
Mr. Raine Salo
Kuusikallionkuja 3B 27
02210 Espoo
Mr. Alex Henshaw
Flat D, 6/F, Lel Shun Court
116 Leighton Rd.
Causeway Bay
Hong Kong
Telephone (852) 2504-5260
Work : (852) 2504-4779
Fax: (852) 2504-4965
E-Mail: smtech hkstar.com
Finland
Telephone : (358 9) 855 0934
Fax: (358 9) 621 4262
E-Mail; tuomas@cute.fi (Tuomas
Kantelinen)
Mr. Guido Lanza
Vocabolo Albereto 10
02046 Magliano Sabina, Italy
Telephone: (09-744) 919-851
&: (39-744) 919-122
Fax: (39-744) 919-904
E-Mail: Nirmala@etr.it
Majid Golpour
47 rue de Verneuil
Mr. Gyorgy Pohl
Liliom u. 27/A II8
H-1094 Budapest
Hungary
Teiephone : (36-1) 218 0493
Fax : (36-1) 220 0264
E-Mail: pohl.gyorgy@emeryworld.com
75007 Paris
France
Telephone: (33-145)483 373
Mr. Jean-Claude Laine
01 BP 2887
Bouake 01, Ivory Coast
Tel: work: (225) 63 25 14
E-Mail: Amon@ AfricaOnline.co.ci(Amon
Ettien)
Mr. Patrick Desire Akouma Nze
B.P 146
Libreville
Mr. V. J. Nalgirkar
Sahaja Yoga Temple
C-17, Qutub Institutional Area
Behind Qutub Hotel
New Delhi-110016
Tel.: 91-011-6966652
Work: 91-011-6179421
Gabon
Georgia
380094 Tbilisi
Mr. Philippe Carton
Himonya 6 chome 7-8
Megoru-ku
Tokyo 152, Japan
Tel/Fax: (81-3) 3760 4434
E-Mail: pcarton@softlab.co.jp
UI.N. Nikoladze10
Peter Jijeishvili
Telephone: (995 8832) 934-911
E-Mail: ella@geonet.ge
Prof. Dr. U.C. Rai
International Sahaja Yoga Research &
Health Centre
Plot 1, Sector & CBD
Navi Mumbai, India
Mr. Phillip Zeiss
Kastanienstrasse 19
D 14624 Daligow
Germany
Telephone: (493322) 20 8870
Work: (4930) 315 25 66
Fax: (49 3322) 20 24 73
E-Mail: ganeshat@cs.tu-berlin.de
(Karsten Radatz)
Kazakhstan
486 008 Chimkent
UL Gagarin 38-45
Bondarenko Dima
Telephone, (7 3252) 12 13 68
Telephone (91 22) 757 6922
Fax : (91 22) 757 6795
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 March- April 2000
SAHAJA YOGA WORLD CENTRES
The Divine Cool Breeze
39
Mr. Henno de Graaf
Kersegaarde 16
3436 GD Nieuwegein
Netherlands
Christian Fontaine
Didier Gauvin
French School of Nairoti
(College Diderot)
PO. Box 47525, Nairobi, Kenya
Telephone: (254 2) 56 62 59
58, Grand Fond Exterieur
97414 Entre Deux Réunion
TelFax: (262) 39 62 32
E-Mail tgauvin@guetali
Telephone: (31 30) 630 1270
Fax: (31 30) 630 1700
E-Mail: h.degraaf @ inter.ni.net
Mr. Dan Costian
Ms. Inna Solomenikova
Str. Constantin Nacu No. 8
70219 Bucharest. Romania
Telephone: (40-1) 313-58-82
Fax: (45-1) 211-57-87
E-Mial: dcostiane syrom.slos.ro
Riga, Latvia
Telephone: (0132) 25 93 42
Mr. Geofl Piatford
24 Pukenui Road
Epsom, Auckland
New Zealand
Gertruda Sargautiene
Staneviciaus 66-64
Telephone (64-9) 624 1788
Fax: (64-9) 625 B888
E-Mail: sahaj-nz @ihug.co.nz
Vilnius 2029, Lithuania
Teléphone (37 02) 4781 43
E-Mail: jvkos@pub.osf.t (subj "to
Gertruda)
Russia
119148 Moscow
UI. I Frunzenskaya 6, kv 5
Telephone, (7 095) 245 25 50
E-Maitunionesahaja.msk su (collective)
Sidsel Muglord
Myrlia 31
1453 Bjornemyr. Norway
TellFax: (47) 66 91 56 08
E-Mail : mugford@ online.no
Goitchoo StevkOVski
Partenie Zografski 77A
91000 Skopje, Macedonia
Telephone. (389 91) 22 62 75
Mr. Aziz Gueye
Sic de Sengue M'Baye Gueye
Direction CFAO-BP 2631
Mr. Ivan Tan
17, Jalan 14/52
46100 Petaling Jaya
Selangor, Malaysia
Telephone: (60 3) 774 4750
Fax: (60 3) 718 7128
E-Mail: tbertan @pc.jaring.my
Dakar
Marina Traversa
Av. Golf Los Incas 440/13
Lima 33, Peru
Telephone: (51) 436 5152
E-Mail: mtravers @staff.sansil.edu pe
Senegal
Mr. Eric Sopholas
Belonie, Mahe
Seychelles
Telephone: (248) 24 400 ext. 545
Dr. Rajiv Kumar
29. V Madrigal Street, Corrinthian
Graciela Vazquez-Diaz
Tejocoles 56-201
Col. del Valle
Mexico D.F. 03100, Mexico
TelFax: (52 5) 575 1949
E-Mat: indoamci rn netmx
Mr. Patrick B Sheriff
c/o Sierra Rutile Limited
P.O. Box 59
Freetown
Sierra Leone
Gardens
Quezon City 1100. Metro Manila
Philippines
Telephone: (632) 633 5633
Fax: (632) 632 2381
Work:
Telephone: (232) 25316
Telex: 3259
(632) 632 5709
E-Mail: rkumari mail.asiandevbank.org
Mr. Peter Koretzki
Mr. Jozel Skurla
Zochova 16/IX
Bratislava 811 03, Slovakia
Tel Fax: (421 7)5441 5493
E-Mail trans-eu@internet.sk
Mr. Tormasz Kornacki
ul. Baczynskiego 20 m. 17
05-092 Lomianio nr.Warsaw
Poland
Maratesti Str. 13/1
Chisinau, Moldova
Telephone: (373-2) 73 0212
Fax: (373-2) 73 86 69
Tel/Fax: (48 22) 7513520
Mr. Herbert Wiehart
Gourmet Vienna
Chha 1-705
Thamel, Kathmandu
Nepal
Tel/Fax: (977 1) 415488
Mr. Dusan Rados
Voliceva 6
SI-1380 Vrhnika
Catarina de Castro Freire
R. Garcia de Orta, 70-1'C
Lisboa-1200, Portugal
Telephone: (351-1) 396-3149
Slovenia
Telephone: (386) 61 755369
E-Mail: bostjan.troha@ siol.net
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
March - April
SAHAJA YOGA WORLD CENTRES
40
2000
Dr. Siva Govender
P.O. Box 729
Mrs. Clarie Skinner
Cumana Postal Agency
Cumana Via Toco, Toco
Mr. Manoj Kumar
270 Overpeck Avenue
Ridgefield Park NJ 07660-1239
USA
Laxmi 3207
Natal, South Africa
Telephone: (27-331) 424484
Fax: (27-331) 425685
E-Mail:/G=Deena/S-Govender/OU-
Trinidad
Telephone: (1-201) 384-5034
Fax: (1-201) 384-0820
E-Mail: manoj-kumar@merck.com
Tunisia
c/o Mr. Youcef Brahimi
Roggegasse 40
1210 Wien, Austria
Telephone: (43 1) 2929 956
=1751PMFS/0=TMZA.UNI
@LANGATE.gb.sprint.com
Monia Almensa
Carlos Albo W47
Paysandú
Uruguay
Telephone: (59) 72 35831
E-Mait anona@adinet.com.uy
Mr. Eduardo Marino
Mrs. Nese Aigan
Atiye Sok Ak Apt. No. 7/7
Tesvikiye - Istanbul, Turkey
Telephone: (90) 212 248 3122
Work: (90) 212 241 3487
Fax: (90) 212 231 3524
E-Mailt nalgan@domi.com.tr
Rua Aperana, 99 Ap. 201
22450-190 Rio de Janeiro RJ Brazil
South America
Telephone (55-21) 274-1753
Fax : (55-21) 239-2705
E-Mail: marino@it.ufrj.br
Mrs. Rani Lavu
P.O. Box 50180
Lusaka, Zambia
Telephone: (260) 1 291 378
Cell telephone: (260) 757 550
Mr. José-Antonio Salgado
Santa Virgilia 16
Zou33 Madrid, Spain
Ukraine
252 190, Kyiv - 190
Vul. Estoska, 5, kv. 80
Galina Sabirova
Telephone: (34-91) 764 3767
Fax : (34-91) 564 4457
Telephone: (380 44) 442 6871
Fax: (380 44)412 9806
EMaikdobro@ppadamkevua
Mr. Rolf Carlsson
Valhallanvagen 18
S-11422 Stockholm, Sweden
Telephone: (46-8) 16 77 17
E-Mail: rolf.carisson@stockhoim.
mail.telia.com
Pravin Saxena/Suresh Ananthnarayan
PO Box 25450
Sharjah
United Arab Emirates
Telephone: (971 6) 519012
Fax: (971 6) 518894
Work: (971 67) 571797
Work Fax: (971 67) 571773
Mobile: 050-631 3504
Mr. Arneau de Kalbermatten
2 bis, Chemin Sous-Voie
1295 Mies, Switzerland
Tele/Fax: (41 22) 779.20.37
EMatpharmuae@emirates.netae
Mr. Wen-Cheng Liu
2F, No. 13, Alley 3, Lane 106
Sec 3, Ming Chuan East Rd.
Sung-Shan District
Taipei Cit. Taiwan (R.o.C.)
Tel: home: (886 2) 7155208
Mr. Derek Lee
clo 44 Chelsham Road
London, England SW4 6NP
United Kingdom
Telephone: (44 1223) 420 855
Fax: (44 1223) 423 278)
E-Mail: ealing@dircon.co.uk(attention:
Derek Lee)
Mr. Pascal Sreshthaputra
84 Sukhumvit Soi 40
Bangkok 10110, Thailand
Telephone: (66 2) 712 1418
Fax: (66 2) 391 2373
or: (662) 382 1109
E-Mait: pascal@loxinfo.co.th
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 2930
