The Divine Cool Breeze 00 Volume : XII issue: 1 & 2 January- February 2000 First of all you should see il you are a peaceful person. Is there peace in your heart? If you have no peace in your heart then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. If you get excited and if you start shouting al people and all that, it means you are nol a Sahaja Yogi. You have to have a very very peaceful temperament. That is very important. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 In this Issue: 1 Editorial Guru Puja -1.8.99 3. Shri Krishna Puja-5.9.99 14 Shri Ram Puja 22 381 Ekadash Rudra Puja-1984 Shri Adi Shakti Puja â€“ U.S.A. 20.6.99 46 Edited by : Yogi Mahajan Published by : V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Editorial that cast an evil eye and understand how they operate. With the power of our People all over the world are celebrating the dawn of the new millennium with great elan. There is always excitement of the "New" but its significance is often Divine mother we are able to ward off all sinister attempts and neutralise their impact. Furthermore, with the new consciousness of Divine love, our pure eclipsed because in darkness one only sees shadows. The shadows are not reality. Although most people sense that something great is happening, they do not know what it is. The uniqueness of the desire is able to work-out individual and collective problems as our enlightened attention penetrates them. Not only this. new millennium is that Shri Adi Shakti but we have discovered that Param has incarnated and is counselling us in Chaitanya comes to our rescue at every step, it even aligns the elements to assist person. The power of love has penetrated human consciousness and expanded in us. From this it becomes evident that in concentric waves all aspects of human life. With the help of her power of love we have resurrected and experienced collective consciousness. This experience has led to the knowledge of the Absolute Truth. In the light of true knowledge it has become clear that the purpose of our life is to become instruments of Shri Adi the dawn of the new millennium the world does not stand independent, aloof or isolated but rests under the complete surveillance and protection of the Goddess who created it. She is watching everything that is going on in it and knows each and every movement of ours. In the ancient description of the goddess it is said that "Even if fleeting glance of Shakti and respect her love. She has transfoImed us from narrow goddess falls on someone, he is blessed." Then when great blessings are upon the world, revolving before her benevolent eyes, we have witnessed many dry deserts that have been transformed into oasis by individual micro cosmos into collective macro beings. Through our new macro vision, we are able to see collective patterns and are capable of moulding them towards collective benevolence. We her power of love. It is thus clear that we are also able to see the sinister designs have entered a new millennium of love

 and Divine Discretion. As human The light of Thy Lotus Feet consciousness is ascending towards the ocean of her love, it is leaving behind the shores of hatred, violence and vengeance. Has ushered in such a glorious millennium! Please grant our eyes Over the morning sky of the new millennium a rainbow has emerged, of Constant Darshan of Thy Lotus Feet, Though hidden by the fall of Thy Saree. vibrant colours of forgiveness, compassion, hope and joy. Allow our ears, O Mother Divine. To hear the Sweet melodies of the Golden Even the fragrance of seasons has altered. Nirmala season has dawned bringing Payal That adorns those beautiful Feet, sweet cooling fragrance to delight us. And worship them in our hearts O Goddess, How could we thank Thee? Each breath of our lives.

 Jan - Feb, 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze GURU PUJA Pravachna (Talk) by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Cabella (1-8-99) Since we have come to Cabella, it is the us-the aggressiveness, the domination, ten years completed. So, you can imagine how in these ten years we have been able to progress in Sahaja Yoga. Today we are going to have a Guru Puja. As I have said, peevishsness, fear, grabbing-all these are our inheritance and they are within us lingering. We want to grab things of others. Not you people, of course not, you all are gurus and you want to worship but people who are not yet in Sahaja me, as your Guru, is alright. But the main Yoga. They first used to grab lands. Then thing one should understand is that you they started grabbing people, making have become Guru, no doubt, because them slaves. Then they were not satisfied you have the knowledge, you have the with that. so they were grabbing absolute knowledge and so we can say, Kingdoms, jewellery and all these things. you have become gurus, no doubt. But They have no legal right, still they would one has to understand that you have grab. It seems very funny, it seems very reached a state where you can raise the inhuman but it is there because of our Kundalini, you can give realisation to others. Also, you know, what is the things like jealousy. Among animals there absolute knowledge. To know the is very little of that. They don't have absolute knowledge is very important and jealousy so much as we have while we to assimilate is even much more have inherited this jealousy by our own important. Though we know the absolute reactions and thinking. People get jealous knowledge we cannot assimilate it that and they want to put down others. If they much that means, we can not go deep into cannot achieve any height, they want to inheritance. Now, there are so many other it. What is the reason for that? bring down heights of others. This kind of jealousy when it grabs human beings, they think whatever is done in the name We have to realise that we have all come out of the heritage that was the animal Kingdom. From the animal Kingdom you have evolved. So, there are so many of jealousy is alright. They become very conscious that we are lower than another things of the animal heritage lingering in person, we lack in some talents than

 Jan - Feb. 2000 4 GURU PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze very good as a guru. As a guru we should not flare, we should not get angry, we another person and they try to over power that person because of the force of jealousy behind them. Now, the trouble is, though we are human beings, we have inherited so many animal qualities like we are ferocious, we are angry and we get upset as animals do but, additional to that human beings can react because of their should not try to oppress others. What can we do then, people will ask. We have another method what we call is love, love. Instead of getting angry if you show love and compassion to that person so what happens that it doesn't give you any anger and the another person, you don't make him angry also. Anger begets anger. If you thinking. They think, they can think and by thinking all these inherited properties become perverted. Like, a person wants to put down another person then he doesn't behave like an animal straight get angry with some body, that person may not retort because he is afraid of you may be that, but in his heart he will keep a revenge in his mind that one day I will show him why should he get angry with me. So, in Sahaja Yoga please remember forwardly but he will find out a device, a method, he will think it over how to do it. that love is the only way we can solve the The main problem with human beings is that they still have inherited very violent problem. Now, if something you wrong say, in the ashram, if you get angry with that person what will happen. That person will bear temper. This violent temper has to be controlled, has to be seen. When you see something which you don't like, which is against your will, may be something like that immediately you flare up. Just now I good Sahaja Yogi he may realise that it saw instead of the camphor they had put was a wrong thing to do. But, if he is a a sugar candy. To sugar candy they were bad Sahaja Yogi, not yet fully equipped putting the match box there using the to understand then what he will do. He match stick, it would not take the fire. will just feel that this man has insulted They tried and tried, it would not so, I me, he has deliberated put me down and a grudge against you. Perhaps, if he is a all that and I should try to take a revenge. said let me see what is that! So, that was Among animals this activity is very limited. I don't think they believe in revenge except for few animals, they say, that if you hurt a snake it will take its respite, it will come back on you, that's a sugar candy if it was camphor, it would just flare up. So, the quality of the person is known in the same way. If with the slightest provocation he gets into temper and gets annoyed then his quality is not

 The Divine Cool Breeze Jan - Feb. 2000 GURU PUJA what is said and this is one quality of the snake. But, as we have passed through all these different categories we might be having some of the qualities of some of these animals within us. We may be even snakes at some time. If the snake is within mean that if he has done wrongs, all kinds of wrongs you forgive him and he goes on, still with the same, doesn't mean. Forgiven means forgotten. Such and such person has been misbehaving so just forget it, forget it, completely forget it, for a guru it is important, for a Sahaja us then anybody who hurts you, you will remember him all your life-he has hurt Yogi guru. I must say other gurus were me so I will put him right one day, I will take a revenge- if there's a snake within us. But now, if there's a tiger within you, not like that. They were absolutely would say, extremely hot tempered and they used to loose temper on people. so, you will become very ferocious. At the smallest thing you will get angry, loose Once I met a guru and he told me, temper. Now, this is not a very good "Mother, you are too kind to them and situation that we are still at the level of with this kindness you cannot create good animals and our inheritance is still people. I have had enough of it, he said. I had made two people into gurus and one of them got lost in the money. Alright, So, we have to keep a watch, we have to what happened to the second? And the working in us. be good gurus and for good guru you second one got lost in the women."I said, have to have a very peaceful, now it's alright if they are lost, they are compassionate, loving temperament. lost but if you can revive them with your After all, one has to understand that love, affection and kindness better get people have this inheritance and some people have more, some people have this or some people have that. For that if you get angry with that person, it's not going to help him or help you but if you are loving and compassionate and you explain that person, what is the problem and what you want to do, I tell you he will definitely improve and he will feel your love. Of course, sometimes it is necessary to also forgive such a person. Such a person is to be forgiven absolutely. In that doesn't around them. So, as a guru you must conclude that they are still lingering with their inheritance. But, the second problem is much worse because human beings can think, of course, animals also think but it is always conditioning. Whatever conditioning they have accordingly they behave but they don't have ego that kind, as human beings have developed. So, the gurus develop also a very bad ego. The first ego is other

 Jan - Feb. 2000 6 The Divine Cool Breeze GURU PUJA was like this, your grandfather was like this, your great grand father was like this and you are also like this or some sort of a thing that will hurt him. By hurting a person you are not going to help. Supposing, while walking you are hurt, you can't walk. In your spiritual ascent gurus have seen they told me- that we have done so much, we have worked so hard to achieve this state and why should we give realisation to others or if they have got realisation then what have they done? Why should they get realisation? It becomes a comparison between their own state and how they have achieved it and how others have to achieve it. So, also if you are hurt you cannot go ahead. So, not to hurt people is very important. they made all kinds of different torturing, troubling manoeuvres. For example, they make the disciple stand on his head, give up his family, do this, do that, they can beat also. They will make him stay in the Once you go on hurting others then you are not a good guru, you are not one who is really being kind and understanding the disciple. In Sahaja Yoga it's a different thing water for a long time, make him stand on altogether because you all have achieved one feet. Like this they punish and worse Sahaja Yoga without doing any kind of penance, any kind of guilty consciousness, confessions, nothing. As you are, you got your realisation. Nobody had to stand on their heads, give up their husbands, wives, family, this thing nothing of the kind. As you are, whatever dress you are wearing, in whatever conditions you are, you are given realisation, it is a fact. You don't come to worse, they may beat with sticks or with stones, they are like that. They don't want to talk, they don't want to understand what the other person has to say or the one's who are the seekers, how they should be treated? All this anger and all these things might have been alright before but, after the advent of Sahaja Yoga, you must know, it is not necessary. It is not at all necessary to give any physical punishment to your have to pay for it, you don't have to exert yourself, don't have to do anything. Just you get it sitting down, wherever you are. After that this kind of a happening should prove to you that you have a power of love, of compassion. Out of love you are given realisation we never realise that. Supposing, we are anxious to give realisation to people, we want to go to the villages, work there and give them disciples. Now, also the mental punishment to your disciples should not be given. Like people start saying all kinds of things to their disciples. Say, there's a leader and the leader finds something wrong with the disciple then he goes on saying now you are like this, your father

 Jan-Feb. 2000 GURU PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze 7. realisation. Why? Why do we do it? It is not for any fame, not for any reward or anything but just out of the love that is within your heart that you feel, why am I enjoying everything? Why others are not enjoying? And so you go out of the way to help people, to get their realisation. attached person. Now, what is the description of an attached person. Attached person is always worried about the other person, goes on thinking about the other person, cannot think of Sahaja Yoga, only think of the people with whom he is attached. Then he is very sensitive, you can't say anything to his brothers, sisters or anyone otherwise he jumps. Attachment is also with the name that he Now, you have become a greater human being and you feel concerned. Others are getting ruined, they are going on a wrong has. Supposing, he has achieved a certain path, they are doing wrong things and that makes you feel very-very upset and youdoes he do. You can't challenge him any name, or some big position, then what want to help them and this understanding once you have then you will know how to deal with the person with whom you have to behave like a guru. Mostly it is way, you cannot, by any words, challenge because he is so identified with that, he thinks, he is a big person who has achieved such a lot of position in life. He not necessary to say anything harsh to that person, at the most you can tell the is so much attached that he wants the guru mistakes that they have committed but to pay respect to that attachment. Now, that too in such a soft manner that a which is the way you can solve that problem. Supposing, somebody is very much attached to his wife, say, for person doesn't get any shock. Now, somebody has too much example. Then you should not discuss and attachments say, for the family, for the argue with that person, not at all. Because wife, for the husband, children or he is still coming up slowly slowly up to this stage. Such a person is not absolutely a perfect Sahaja Yogi. So, what do have to do. If he is attached to his wife, let it be. But the divine will work it out something and once they come to Sahaja Yoga, still they have same amount of attachment, alright. doesn't matter. But you how far they will go with that attachment, and you will realise that what he has been how long it will continue is the point. You should be detached. If I say, you cannot thinking, doing and taking decisions is all wrong and once he discovers it himself then he will get detached but, if you go on telling him and try to argue it out, it be, it is a state. It is a state of mind when you are detached but when it comes to doing something for them you will go all out to help them but you are not an will never work out. So, must understand

 Jan - Feb. 2000 8 The Divine Cool Breeze GURU PUJA that as human beings whatever we were detached. But, when you will find the also, as Sahaja Yogis we have problems vibrations are showing or indicating and these should slowly slowly be something serious about that person, dissolved. Not by argument, not by saying what you will do, you will put full things but by love and compassion. If you attention to that, full attention. You put have love for a person, you will be amazed attention but not attachment. So the ninety nine percent (99%) people value attachment doesn't solve the problem, love. This is the third quality of human what solves the problem is attention. But beings, I should say. when you are not detached then your attention is attached attention. It's an First is his inheritance, second is he thinks attention that is not available to every one and thirdly that he values love. Anybody who loves the other person values that love because he thinks that this particular and attention that gets stuck, absolutely stuck into that person with whom you are identified. Try to understand. So, to be person is loving me, not my wealth, not by beauty, not my this thing but, he is loving me and this idea of love, this is something that will get him completely if you are of that level. Whenever you detached from that person easily. How? put attention to that particular person Now, it looks very funny that if you like who needs your attention, it will work. somebody, if you love somebody and then you should get detached. It is only attention on a person because you are identified with someone not actually, what we can say, paying attention to that person. And then your attention will work But if you are all the time wasting your possible in Sahaja Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga attached to that person, your attention your state of mind is such that you are will be tired, it won't work out. It's a big absolutely detached and absolutely paradox that if you are attached to attached. How? For example, I have my someone then your attention doesn't daughter so I am detached. I never work and if you are not attached to that telephone to her, I am not bothered about person, you do everything else. Now, I her because in Sahaja Yoga you know have to give lecture alright, I am giving how is that person. If the vibrations are lecture then I have to do some cooking, I alright, why should you telephone! Why will do cooking, this, that, that. But all should you talk to! Why should you ask the time you are thinking about that for anything, no need. Only on vibrations person, all the time you want to have you will know how the person is and so, connection with that person, it's not it will seem that you are absolutely necessary. That person is alright. What is

 Jan - Feb. 2000 GURU PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze there to be so much worried about that good fellow, he is risen very nice and gone very deep. So, pay attention to those who are not so good and talk to them about it that you have to come up in a very sweet person? After all, you have to do Sahaja Yoga, you have to do so many things, you have to raise Kundalini of so many, now, manner. You have to talk to these other people who are not yet there or who are still struggling. You have to understand, you have to notice- what are they doing? Why is it they are not improving or rising in their attention? What is the problem? Why the divine is not flowing through them? And you will find the reason for this is that people do not have good you are getting attached to one person somewhere, it's not a very good thing. By that kind of attachment your attention also becomes useless, absolutely useless. So, let the attention be free. Attention should not be bound by your attachments. Attention should be absolutely free. So, it works automatically, and you will be amazed, even if you do not pay attention, the attention will work it out. It is such a attention is because it is focused on someone all the time. They feel this is their responsibility that it should be focussed. It is just to give the explanation to say great thing to have this spiritual attention which is nothing but love. It will just act, you will be amazed how it acts! It's another worldl am talking about, not this that, see, naturally I have to be worried mundane world but something higher, about this or worried about that, is just where your attention works and works an explanation. so beautifully that you are amazed how it But, if you really don't fix your attention has worked. But, you should not bound it by your attachments. If it is bound, you to one person or ten persons only then can have very limited sphere-only the your attention looks after the whole people whom you are attached to or you world. It receives all the information and are attached to those person. That's why also it gives all the information, what is identification is made the way a guru to be done to correct the situation. So, should be detached. one has to rise into that state where you do not get angry, annoyed or upset, no, not at all. What happens to you that you see a situation and in that you are not involved. You see the situation and you Now, there are ten disciples and one guru and the guru likes only one. He thinks he is the best and he should be encouraged are away from it. Then you can solve the problem better. But if you are part parcel of that problem, then you cannot and should be given all possible help. But that's not going to help him, but on the contrary he should say he is already, a

 Jan - Feb. 2000 10 The Divine Cool Breeze GURU PUJA solve. It's like this I was telling that those simple things are there that if you who are fighting, say, cannot solve the understand that we suffer because problem but a person who is not fighting everybody feels responsible for us, can solve the problem. So, it's a very everybody thinks they are responsible, simple thing to understand that if you are they have to do, this is responsibility for identified, if you are involved with one us, somebody says, this responsibility we person or with one kind of a thing then have to do, all these things are worrying them and that is the reason today we have a very complex society. They are suffering from all kinds of diseases in which only and can be applied widely, wherever thinking is responsible. By this thinking you are lost. So, our attention has to be always free needed. That is the state one has to reach. all the time, thinking about one person, thinking about one problem, you reach If you reach that state of mind, it's not a I am saying you can do anything about it, it's just a state of mind. Now, how do we do that? Only through introspection. Through introspection you will understand that needs help to solve your problems. Firstly, the problem is how to nowhere. At that moment what you have to do is to leave it to the Paramchaitanya. If it goes to the Paramchaitanya, it will manage, it will solve the problem. Now I will tell you one thing, an experience. This time I was in America and I wanted to face yourself because you are little bit shy have a puja there. So, I said, let them or may be nervous about this. As the time come for the puja. It's nice if they want comes you will be amazed that this to come. Then they told me, "Mother, we nervousness has no meaning at all. When want to bring presents for you, for puja. So, how can we bring the presents?" I said, it's very simple-don't bring but they won't listen to that. They said, we will have to bring and the customs will trouble us and do this and do that. So, only one building ahead there was another building, where they were having a liquidation sale. I said, this is something nice, one can have a look at it. So I went in and I found things so cheap, unbelievable, very very expensive things for throwaway price. I you try to be deliberate about it, then it won't work out but if you are Sahaja, it will work out. So we come to the second point, apart from the attention, that we should leave everything into the hands of Paramchaitanya. Let the Paramchaitanya solve the problem. This is the problem, let Paramchaitanya solve the problem, we are not bothered. So, a detachment comes in, you give the whole thing to Paramchaitanya to solve, so, you are not in it, you are away from it. Very-very was amazed how it is there! So, I told

 Jan - Feb. 2000 11 GURU PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze them I can purchase all these things, they will pay you but you bring all these things to Canajohri. They agreed, alright. They brought all the things all packed nicely and gave it to Sahaja Yogis. We had no problems of customs or anything. I paid them there. How you see things can be easily. But first, we must have pure love in our heart. Not love out of some gain or out of a some sort of a reward but pure love if we have, then we can work it out very easily, anything that you want to do: This is a very lengthy thing which can go on forever because after all the gurus have to know, what are their duties and why improved by understanding what is the most important thing is to love. But love is truth and truth is love. If you have love they are gurus? It's very important, is very important position that they are gurus and they should use that position for exhibiting tremendous understanding of their disciples and also their purpose should be clear cut. People should not doubt him, should not think why he's doing such and such thing. It should not be a mystery. It should be absolutely clear for somebody, genuine love, then anything you want to do with that person will be absolutely obvious because it will be truthful. Anything you say to such a person will be absolutely obvious, clearcut because it is absolutely truthful. So, when you are dealing with somebody also, you should be extremely truthful. cut. Of course, you need not say things that All these things I am telling you today because today we have completed ten will hurt you but you must use such wise methods that will not in anyway hurt the years of stay in Cabella. Cabella has been extremely kind to me. There are lots of other person, it will have an effect on that person. people to Sahaja Yoga, I tell you, very lots of. It is a very far fetched place, So, this kind of gurus we need now very much in Sahaja Yoga because Sahaja everybody discarded it and said where are Yoga has spread a lot. So, first of all, our we going to live and all that. But, here temper has to be brought into proper only it has worked and that should be shape. A guru has no business, I mean, accepted as a very big indication that the Sahaja Yogi guru, has no business to Sahaja Yoga does miraculously, lose temper, at all, on any point, miraculous. But foremost thing is you whatsoever. If they can really do that must know vibrations. If you don't know much, it will save us so much of worries, about vibrations then you can't do anything. For example, when I first came to Cabella somebody told me Mother, so much of problems, so much of mess we create. All this can be solved very

 Jan - Feb. 2000 GURU PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze 12 very lonely place, there are mafias around, only six-seven houses are there, where to struggle with anyone, you don't have to fight with anyone, you don't have to argue with anyone. Just try to meditate and achieve a state which I am describing to you where you get completely surrounded by love and affection. are you going? What is this? They all warned me. So, I came here, I immediately told them where I am going to buy it, tomorrow I will pay the money. They were surprised, how can you do that. I said, don't worry, its perfectly May God Bless You All alright. On vibrations I decided that this, is a wonderful place and my husband There's one thing which is important to understand that you should not go to helped me so much at that time, though everybody discouraged me everybody extremes of everything, which is also a human quality. For example, if they are gave a very big horrible picture, but still, where is the mafia now? It's gone, rational, they go on rationalising everything. I can't do this, I can't do that, something like that goes on. The second finished. part of it is that they become very emotional and they become so emotional that they start doing wrong things in the name of emotionality. You have to Now, to know about the thing you have to meditate and improve your vision, which should be clear cut. It should not be something, a vision which is reflecting your particular ideas about particular overcome these two things. If you have not overcome that what's the use- What's things but it should be clear cut. With the use of calling yourself Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yoga one has to know, the protection of the Goddess is on the top Minimum of minimum is that this much of your head, nothing can go wrong you must do-going to the extremes must with you, nothing will happen to you. It will all work out, I am sure. be avoided, keep a watch upon yourself. If you are going to the extremes, nothing will work out. You might develop cancer, develop horrible diseases on one side and You see, talking about Sahaja Yoga like this, you just get meditative and you feel that one day all of you should become like that, just meditative and this meditative temperament or whatever is the state, emits vibrations. It emits and on the other side you might become a very rational person and no Sahaja Yoga will enter your head. So, you have to keep a balance all the time and with that balance like, somebody is a Sahaja Yogini and she has done something very wrong then you creates path for you, for your work, for your life, for everything. You don't have

 Jan - Feb. 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze GURU PUJA 13 thing can take you anywhere. So, to be should not become emotionally attached, O Mother! what is it? we should forgive emotional is not needed. You must love her, No! You tell her that you must and left is what you can call another improve your vibrations and must come extreme. One side it is emotional and to balance and once you are in balance other is rational. In rationality you can then I will consider your case, then I will start justifying anything like Hitler did. say it is so or not. But if she has no He said, no, this was right, what I was balance, goes into rationality, goes into doing was right. He took something into emotional thing and this emotional his head and now this is right, just his business can take you to, any nonsensical rationality. So, both things are to be thing as it is a psychological case and one properly balanced and you should see that can go into very very things that they are whatever you are doing are giving you a doing out of these emotional things. See, proper result. So thank you very much like even singing songs that are neurotic again and again. or anything, you see. All this emotional May God Bless You

 Jan - Feb. 2000 14 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI KRISHNA PUJA Cabella, 5-9-1999 Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Tonight, we are going to worship Shri Krishna as "Virata". First it is important to understand the incarnation of Shri go beyond all temptations, go beyond all ego, go beyond all kinds of conditionings a sthitapragya. Sthitapragya is where, he doesn't feel like ordinary people, attracted towards things but, he is absolutely detached and this detached person doesn't take to any grievances, jealousy, all these things. That and to become Krishna. Krishna word comes from the word Krishi. Krishi means agriculture. He sowed seeds of spirituality and for that, first of all, He had to think, where are we as far as spirituuality is concermed. How is the land? He told but how to achieve it. He never told. And the second thing he described So. what had happened at the time of Shri is, that you must work, you have to work. Rama that he created lots of maryadas After all you have got all the human and by these maryadas people started tendencies is to work but, the fruit of the mentally thinking about it. "I am not work you leave it at the lotus feet of God supposed to do that. I am not supposed or as we call the Divine power. This is to do this." It was just a mental binding. another trick of His because He realised, It was not spontaneous, it was not Sahaja. how human beings were twisted and how As a result, people became extremely they had a ego, if you tell them something serious. They wouldn't talk much and how they will misinterpret it. So. He took they wouldn't laugh, they wouldn't enjoy the other may round that tell them anything. So. Shri Krishna decided that something absurd. first of all, He must remove them from Now, whatever work we do, your ego is this conditioning and this conditioning has to be removed in such a manner, that they intact and with that ego you can never give it up at the lotus feet of the Divine. Very impossible. So, He made a impossible situation that after sometime people will realise that this cannot be done and they will give up this idea of leaving enjoy themselves. Then, He found out there were three suggestions as far as achieving the goal was concerned. So, first of all, as He says, is to become a realised soul, sthitapragya (feera. To

 Jan- Feb. 2000 15 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI KRISHNA PUJA that, if I tell them directly-do like this, do like that, then they will say, of course, everything at the lotus feet of the Divine. This was the one how He prepared the land. Second thing He said, "Pushpam Falam Toyam", "Flowers, Fruit and Water", whatever you offer me, I will take that. But, when you do that you must have we did it and still we never achieved it. In India, there is a big cult we can call it, people who go to Pandarpur, for one month they walk in rags, singing the songs and on the way they go on eating food at different places. According to them, this is 'Ananya" bhakti and they achieve nothing. They have become very sick and ananya' (T-4) bhakti. Ananya means, completely single minded bhakti, when there is not the other. This is only possible after realisation. Only after realisation you can put the fruits of your work at the lotus very tired and have a very bad old age, feet of the Divine and only after self- realisation you can have 'ananya' bhakti But who can tell them, they are all lost in it. So, this is a way one could tackle means the devotion which is single human beings to show others the minded. stupidity. And so many people come and ask me, as I told you that how is it that we do so much bhakti of Shri Krishna and we have achieved nothing. These absurd conditions you put for human beings because they were so much complicated. So, many people tell me, "Mother, we are doing ananya bhakti" How? Because we are singing on the street, we are taking the name of God all the time, we are going to Pandarpur, you see, in rags and for one month we walk singing, singing, singing. This kind of absurd ideas about bhakti, He never gave. So, He is the one who prepared the land for sowing, we can say he is the one who was like a very great agriculturist. So, His name was Krishi, Krishna. There are so many things I have told you about Him, how His name came as Krishna, who was Radha, who was krishna and all those But, it is the way He wanted to neutralise things. But when He talked of these the absurdities of human beings that they thought this was the bhakti, which is not. Ananya bhakti is only possible when you are a realised soul, when you are things, also He told, that you should become Sthitapragya, that is, they called as Gyanyoga. Gyan means knowledge. So, you should get absolute knowledge. That He didn't say how? That you know what is absolute knowledge which you connected with the Divine, when there is not the other. This is how He tried to make three way attack on human beings can feel it on your fingertips in Sahaja and on their stupidity because He thought Yoga. His speciality was to create

 Jan - Feb. 2000 16 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI KRISHNA PUJA hypocrites. I just left them and sat in the discretion in people. He thought by doing all these things in a stupid manner, they might develop discretion to know that this is not the way you can achieve anything, you have to get your self realisation. Discretion was very important. At this juncture when we are facing a sort of a challenge of this new millennium, that the car, at the right moment. That was not such a good proposition or anything but I could see I am buying it out of my pity or you may call it compassion. But above the compassion was this discretion which said, nothing doing you better get out of it. So, this divine discretion is a very-very whole world is going to be destroyed and all those things people are talking, It is really very important to know through discretion what is good and what is bad. One may talk of something as very good, something as very bad. But the Divine discretion is very different, and it acts by itself. Once you are in the realm of Divine discretion you cannot commit mistakes, even if you want to do it. I will give you my example. We went to buy a house and the fellow was, you see, like a beggar; he came, he said we have nothing, we have important thing which we should see how it works and should be satisfied with it. Not to feel bad that we have missed a chance or anything but you must feel very happy that this thing has happened and that your divine discretion has taken on. So, sometimes it appears that in that divine discretion you may do something wrong, you have done something wrong but, if it is divine ultimately it will turn out to be very good. I gave you a very basic example but that is also very true when you practice Sahaja Yoga. no food, they have taken away all our things and we are just absolutely starving. When he said that we are starving, we have nothing, so, I felt pity for him, I said, alright increase the price. First we The Divine discretion is extremely important to play a very great part in our lives, because this divine discretion gives us the real joy of our being, of ourself, of Sahaja Yoga. So, the third point was, for Him, to make people joyous and happy. But with all these maryadas of Shri Rama, He didn't know how to do it? So, to give people joy He said, alright let us dance, let us sing, let us play Holi, all sorts of things and with that He really originated many things which were sort of not serious, may look frivolous but in that increased the price. Still he was saying no-no, give us more. Still we increased the price. I told my husband, you increase the price. Though reluctantly, he increased the price. Third time again we increased the price then, he said, no we will have something more than this, a little more. Immediately, you see, this discretion worked and I said, these are

 Jan Feb. 2000 17 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze whatever it is or all kinds of restrictions there was joy expressed. All that He did to give them a full idea as for a Sahaja you'll put. But if you have really the Yogi or we can say for a self realised soul; Divine discretion then, you will know what should be the attitude towards with whom he should talk, where he should go, what he should enjoy and you will see that he enjoy his life. Any everything. But it is not that you have to do it but it just works out, it is like that. That in the state of Sahaja you enjoy attachment with anything doesn't give everything, enjoyment and that is what you the full view of that person, of that His idea was to ereate a sense of joy thing. If you are detached then you can among people. There are lots of critics who have criticised this part of His life. According to them, religion means you should become just old at the age of are there. They are very-very beautiful see it, from above-above him. If you are detached you become thoughtlessly aware also. As I said now, see carpets carpets. Now, if they are mine I will be all the time worried because l am attached twenty years you should become an old man of eighty years something like that. Funny ideas of religious achievement. that these carpets should not be spoiled, something will go wrong. But if I am not attached I will look at those carpets and what do I see! The joy, the joy that is put in by the artist who has made them and that joy really tries to reflect in me also, that joy comes in me. So, to have But He talked of joy and He never talked of renunciation. He never talked that you give up your family, give up your children, you give up everything never, never. He said, you must enjoy-enjoy with detachment. For people it is very difficult to understand how can it be with happiness but not joy because joy is single detachment? With attachment you can and happiness is double; happiness and never enjoy. If you are attached to unhappiness, So even if I try to enjoy attachment to anything, there will be something you cannot enjoy anything in a full way. Like, supposing you are attached to your child, very simple thing something I will think still there is this- this point is there. But joy is all pervading. It has no boundaries and you just get dissolved in the ocean of joy. That was what Shri Krishna's ideas was that cut out you are attached to your child. You are attached to your child then you will be bothered about the things which should these maryadas. not be there which will not give joy to Now a days, we see the maryadas of so the child. You will not allow your child say, to go out or to talk to people, many things are really useless. For

 Jan - Feb, 2000 18 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI KRISHNA PUJA example, you have discovered the maryadas of religion. See when they live in maryadas then what happens, they sort of coagulate or they have all kinds of Then we have social maryadas. Social maryadas are there which are sometimes, when abandoned, can become very horrid also. Like, in the west the women think germination inside like the pond which is absolutely bound, which is not flowing like river. So, like that you see it becomes that the less dress they wear, the more beautiful they are. This is a new thing they have started. Now, this is absurd. If you see the discretion behind is very simple a kind of a closed mind with these maryadas and when you have these maryadas you start thinking whether I should do it or not, whether I will enjoy that we have been animals and now we don't want to have any clothes because we were animals. It's an animal heritage. That's why so many women do not want to wear full dresses. It's just the animal behaviour. So, the maryada or good maryadas also people can give up saying that we don't want any maryadas, we are it or not. With these maryadas only you kill the joy. Now, we have other maryadas about say, we have the religion. Many people who love to come to Sahaja Yoga but because they have maryadas of silly things of their religion, they cannot come. They think this is our religion while they don't understand. Falsehood becomes the free, we can do whatever we like. But in that freedom what do you achieve? Your animal instinct works in that freedom and you think you are a very free personality. maryadas and they don't understand that what is the maryada actually made by the Then we have maryadas of our country. religion. You see now in Islam what is happening; with these maryadas they want to have another country, this thing, that God has not made different different countries at all nor it is true that there are thing. In Christian religion same thing is different countries but variety is there. happening. Also, in Hindu religion. All Variety of people, variety of places is these maryadas are really stagnating them there. These varieties must be accepted completely and they are getting crushed as something very artistic and one should into it. There is no discretion because they not get ruined and confused with those have said it, they will do it. They are so ideas that we are Americans, we are Indians, we are this and we are that. You much blind folded about it that they are not. Now, you can know after Sahaja cannot see what is right and what is Yoga that you are all Sahaja Yogis and you don't belong to any country as such. The country may belong to you but you wrong. But after Sahaja, you can see, you can laugh at them when you can see.

 Jan - Feb. 2000 19 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze people who do not live with dharma, they are adharmis. So, you have to fight and that is how His fighting was so much justified because after fighting the war don't belong to the country. I mean the work is today to understand that if you really want to care for all these countries and all that then you must do some work. they got back what they deserved. They were deceived and this is what Shri Work of Sahaja Yoga so that people get rid of these silly ideas of fighting for the Krishna said that you should not by any chance become a slave of these people but you fight it back. territory, for this, for that. All over the world there is going on, we want this land, we want that land. Land belongs to God, not to human beings and what is the use of fighting for this land, I don't So, fighting also is justified in the divine understand. But this confusion is there. discretion. It is again the divine discretion, this illusion is there and people work out where you have to fight because you don't on this confusion and illusion to such an want to be a slave. If you are a slave, you extent that they ruin their lives, the lives are no good. So for that you can fight. of their children. So many people are lost, But when people start fighting for separation or for territory, is not correct. so many people are in the lunatic asylum I should say because they end up in some sort of a refugee camp. They are having a good house, nicely living there and then you become a refugee, why? Because On the contrary, one should never think of separating from the main lands. It creates lots of problems. But now we believe in the global religion, we believe in the global territory. We don't have to they believe that they can have their own land, they can have their own place and ask for anything. Anywhere you go, you are the citizen of that place. Anybody who they should live there. This idea comes I think from some stupid leaders who want to have for themselves these lands and that's how people fight for land. There's no need to fight for land or fight for your country or fight for this or fight for that. wants to go Russia ever, the whole Russians will be with you, you go to America they will be with you. That's how because all these are the ideas of human heings and if the human beings get transformed there will be no problem of But the situation is such that unless and any war or any territory to be achieved. until you fight, you cannot get to the truth and that's why, if you remember that Shri Krishna told Arjuna that you fight. You have to fight, that's your work. You have to fight these people because they are the This was the divine discretion of Shri Krishna which is still within us as you know that this is a part and parcel of Vishudhi chakra where Shri Krishna

 Jan - Feb. 2000 20 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI KRISHNA PUJA resides. But when He rises to your ambitions, everything passes through that and it works. You have seen how many Sahasrara, when He rises to that level then He becomes virat. So, virata's chakra is miracles have taken place in your lives. It placed in the head here above the Agnya and this virat is the form of Shri Krishna is the virat Shakti that works. who has risen above the Agnya. When Now, for that you have to know how to you are risen above the Agnya, you worship virat? First of all, you have to rise above your ego, very important otherwise how can you worship? There become a part and parcel of virata's land, we can say because unless and until you Is your ego standing in between and how can you rise up to the point of virat? You are above your ego you are still involved with your self and with wrong ideas of maryadas. But, when you rise above that and you become the virata, the great, then you are in the land of virata and virata's have to pass through that. Once you are above your ego you enter into the Kingdom of virat. There the king is the virat and you are the subject who are powers are tremendous. looked after completely by Virat Shakti, As was seen by Arjuna the form of virat, by the power of virat. But at that stage the power of virat becomes so you become really a universal personality tremendous that it acts globally. It acts in in a way because whatever are our such a manner that you sit here and problems universally. Now not necessarily anywhere it can act. You have seen that that they should be attached to you or now, many-a-times people say Mother it's connected to you. Supposing, a person is of that level, now there may be a war a miracle. My mother was sick and she was not here and I just prayed and she in some other country, it can stop. got alright. This is all the power of virat. The power of virat is that it can penetrate into the subtle side of human beings in such a manner that everything we are connected with it, we are not separate. As every drop is connected with the Somebody who is being oppressed can win over. Anywhere your compassion moves it works out. Wherever your attention goes it will work out and sometimes you are surprised as to how it works Mother, how these things work ocean, we are connected with the whole out, how these coincidences have taken universe and when you become a citizen, I should say, of Virat then all the things place. Only thing is you have crossed that state of your ego and have gone into the with which you are connected also get your vibrations, your ideas, your state of Virat which is a very important thing to do, is to enter into the area of

 Jan - Feb, 2000 21 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze demonstrative of what they think they are but, in the case of a person who rises above his ego and is a part and parcel of Virata. Then you don't think this is your country, this belongs to you, that belongs to you. This belonging business finishes that virata-shakti, enters into the off, then you belong to virat and He uses Kingdom of virat, he knows, he is very small. He is very small compared to that and he just dissolves into that Shakti and for his own purpose in the sense that when your whole thinking is different, you becomes global thinking, then He acts and then His powers are manifold. As Krishna's power is that He uses a conch this should happen to us that we should humble down, we should humble down and know that our powers, whatever we have if they give us ego, we should get to call people, I have given conches to all the leaders. So, we have to now announce rid of it. and call people. But at the level of virat, you don't have to do all that. At the level of virat people see and they will know. We shouldn't have that ego, we should Just they will match you and they will get rid of it and we should actually achieve know, just they will think you are human that state where you can be called as the beings and you are so sweet, so good, citizens of the virata's power. just like gems, shining all the time. So, May God Bless You All. they will be impressed. This comes through the virata's blessings. When you Now, when you are entering into the become that then you forget about other Kingdom of virata, you have to be like things like your big positions or anything children. You are children there, as or you come from a very rich family. All children you enter. As Christ has said, these nonsensical things which are "when you enter into the Kingdom of actually not true and all these things on God, you have to be like children". And which you want to exist are no more. that's what you have to be today, all of People like to show off their wealth, some you to be innocent like children. You have people like to be very sort of to be innocent like children.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Jan - Feb. 2000 22 SHRI RAM PUJA, (4-10-87) SWITZERLAND TODAY we are celebrating in Switzerland price. May be, we might be able to present you all with one, when you come there. But the story of Rama, they say, was the coronation of Shri Rama on Dussehra day. Many things happened on Dussehra Day. The most important was that Shri Rama was coronated as a king on this written, before he was born. Even before there was any inkling of it. The seer, day. He also killed Ravana on this day. Valmiki wrote the whole story of Shri Many may say that how can it be that he Rama. killed Ravana and he was coronated on Shri Rama's birth and all that are brought the same day. In these days in India we forth by the Agni, the fire. And he was born in the Dynasty of the Surya, the sun. had supersonic aeroplanes. The name of aeroplane was Pushpak, meaning the flower. It was called as Pushpak and it had a tremendous speed. So, after killing Ravana He came to Ayodhya with his wife So with all that, born out of the blessings of the Agni, that is fire, and also was born in the dynasty of Surya. He was one of the mildest Avtaras you have ever had. and that was the day he was crowned. He is known to be a very formal person On the 9th day He worshipped the Goddess, to get strength, Shakti for His in the sense (Sankoch) that he would go weapons and on the 10th day, He killed Ravana. So you can imagine how much problems than to tell others to do advanced people were there at the time something. of Shri Rama and his kingdom. The We still had many people in India like that. reason was, the king was an incarnation; Like, we had one Prime Minister, Lal also he was a benevolent king as described Bahadur Shastri and if he was sitting in a to any extent to bear upon himself the by Socrates. room and the people sitting and the electricity was on, somehow say by light or something and he wants to put it off, Shri Rama's story is very interesting throughout and we have now a beautiful series about him done by our television in India, which is sold for a very good he would not ask anyone to put it off. Slowly he will get up from his seat, walk

 Jan - Feb. 2000 23 SHRI RAM PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze in all his character you see the beauty. Like, he was going by a little boat when upto the switch and just put it off. So that. he shouldn't ask for it. This is one of the he went for his exile. Other one who was greatest quality of Shri Rama that he would not make anyone do anything for him or order anything or would use someone for their purpose. See, he was the blessing of fire and born in the Surya taking him was an ordinary boatman and the boatman was feeling very much upset that he is sitting before the king of Ayodhya and he does not have proper clothes. So, Shri Rama who was himself but what we find, those people who are wearing nothing but valkalas, are the clothes which are worn by the village people or worn by the people who live in the primitive areas, only kind of leaves born, may be, in very lowly families, in the negative families, the left sided as we can call it with all kinds of problems, have a terrible Agnya and a terrible Surya in that they have. He had to wear that them. The person who is born in the Surya because his step mother asked for that has to be extremely humble. He is the one who shows that nothing can affect, nothing can make him feel that he is kind of a boon from his father. And then, Shri Rama just told him why are you worried? I am wearing this, I am no more something great. Now, when we see his a king. I am sitting before you like this. You should be quite comforted and I really don't know how to steer the boat life further, he was a very humble man. You see, now, the people who try to despise others I don't like you, I don't like, this is not good, it is very difficult, is a sign that such a person is extremely low in character, has no character at all but is low in that. Anybody who has any character, is shown by the tolerance he has of other people. Intolerance is a sign while you know how to steer the boat. So, why should you be worried? Like that, he kept even the people whom you would call as low in Society at a very high pedestal, which shows that he respected human beings. of a person who is extremely egoistical and has its weight, its vanity. He himself is called as Maryada Purushotama, means he was the one who Shri Rama was so much loved by the knew how far to go with someone (Maryadas), how to talk to someone, how to approach someone. While we find people who misbehave even with their people, where he ruled in that state and he had the most beautiful wife of the most venerated father Janaka and who was the husbands, with their wives, with their beloved son of his father. But he was such children, with everyone and also outside, an humble man, such an humble man that

 Jan - Feb. 2000 24 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI RAM PUJA they are about to jump on us. That's that none of them are sour. Shri Rama absolutely against Rama, it's like Ravana. didn't like sour fruits, she knew. So, none Even Ravana was not like this. He was of them are sour and you can have them. I mean in a way if it is done to somebody in the west they will hit you hard. also of not that nature. Because he had certain dharmas within him. He was a realised soul but he had become a raksha Immediately Shri Rama rushed forward because he became arrogant. But, even and took the 'bers' from her hands. his arrogance cannot be matched with Kissed her hands, said alright, alright, I many modern people and modern girls am going to have them. With such and men that I hear and see. That it is enthusiasm he ate them. So, Lakshmana surprising they have really surpassed Ravana. Ravana only had ten heads but was little angry at that lady, what's this going on? So, Sitaji said, "Oh, do you like them very much? He said, yes, but I am not going to give you anything." She said, "No! I am your half body. You have to give me." So, he gave some to Sitaji. So, Sitaji said, "Ah! what a thing it is like nectar of heaven I am eating". So, Lakshmana felt very jealous. He said, "sister-in-law, can't I not have a little of it?". She said, "No! I can't give you. You sometimes I feel that the modern men might have or the women specially might have 108 heads. The arrogance, the amount of expression of hatred is so ridiculous and makes a person look so useless. But I see such people very common and in Sahaja Yoga also they crawl somehow. Actually such people are absolutely despised by God Almighty. ask your brother. I am not going to give I have a very little share. Why don't You go further with his life. See, he went you, into the village where a very old woman who was belonging to the primitive class of Bheels, had very few teeth and, she more?" So, Shri Rama smiled and gave brought some fruits, little fruits we call him that 'ber' which was eaten or tasted as ber. And she brought and gave it to or pierced by the teeth of a primitive you ask your brother?" So, he goes to his brother, says, 'Can I have some him that, Shri Rama, you see, I have got woman, who is actually an outcaste according to a brahminic laws of India. these "phal'. I don't have anything else and these, I have tasted all of them. Actually in India, if you put in the month it is 'uthishta'. Nobody will touch it. But she said, I have tasted all of them by The sweetness of Shri Rama, the way he used to make people feel comfortable like, I would say an example of a oyster who piercing my teeth into it and I have seen gets a little stone into the body of the shell,

 Jan - Feb. 2000 25 SHRI RAM PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze takes out a kind of a shiny liquid and covers it with that shiny liquid and makes it into a pearl to be comfortable. Now, he It is an example of Shri Rama. He never cared for the outer side or the outward looks of a person. Because he came before Shri Krishna, he tried to build up didn't want his own comfort. Rama is the inner side of a human being. little bit different that he wanted to make every one into a diamond or a pearl so that, the other person would shine and So, we can say, though he is on the right t heart he acts through your Hamsa chakra and partly through your vishudhi chakra would look ice and that's how he felt comforted. in the inner side of it. Because Shri Krishna, in the inner side of it, is Shri His qualities, if we have to imbibe, first of all, we have to understand the innate Rama; is Shri Vishnu. So, when situation of Shri Rama. Shri Rama is somebody is not say, good looking placed on the right hand side of your according to the western-standards. heart. Right hand side, right heart, he is According to me the western standards are rather funny. Because western standards don't look like neither like placed there. Now, in a human being there is no right heart. If you tell somebody, there is right heart, he will say what? There are two hearts? Or three hearts? Krishna or Shri Rama. The person like Shri Rama was a very healthy, tall person with his hands up to the knees. Ajanubhav In our Sahaja Yoga we have three hearts. One is the left, another is the right and one is the centre. Now, the right heart is a very important thing. Right heart looks after the whole lungs, both the lungs or (3T17). He is the one who has Ajanubhav and he was plump. Both of them were plump. They had to be plump people though, he was born of the Agni but the water, is the main element of Shri the throat, the trachea, the nose the inner Vishnu. So, they were all plump people. They were not thin like sticks as today's part. The outer side is looked after, we can say, the features are given by Shri Krishna but the inner part of it is all done by Shri Rama. They are the same. But one acts as the inner part and the another as the outer part. He gives you the ears from the inner part Shri Rama does. He gives you the eyes and the inner part of the eyes. Now, it's so important to have modern ideas are, to be thin like sticks and like T.B. patients, but it does not mean all plump people are good.We always logically think that plump people are, if Mother says to, then, plump people are good, it's not the point. The inner side of it, I am saying. The inner side of it is just the opposite. Inner side of it is the inner side alright and the outer side.

 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI RAM PUJA Jan - Feb. 2000 26 absolutely beautiful and absolutely full of ugly woman Shurpanakha (T) came love, affection and warmth. A person who to entice him and she said Rama, why does not have these things is a sign of a don't you marry me?" I mean to a person person who is not a Sahaja Yogi, first of like Rama, who is Maryada Purushotama, all. A person who is very loud, talks to ask such a horrible question, somebody loudly, speaks loudly, laughs at wrong would have really beaten her up if not places, must be half mad, but, cannot be anything else. So, Shri Ram smiled. He a Sahaja Yogi. See the softness of Shri said, "Madam I am sorry. I have a wife and I believe in one wife (à¤à¤•à¤ªà¤²à¥à¤¨à¤¿à¤µà¥à¤°à¤¤). So the Sankoch ( ), the formality the I am sorry I cannot marry you but formal but if you see in English language mischievously He says, alright my 'formal' is not the word, Sankoch. He is there, his wife is left in Ayodhya, you was, once when he was fighting Ravana, can ask him". She went to him and asked he was taking out with his arrow his ten Lakshmana, "why don't you marry me?" heads, one after another. And if he took She had become very beautiful. She Rama goes to the extremes where I call brother out the one, then took out the second, transformed herself into a beautiful the first one would come back because, woman. She must have gone to some beauty parlour or something. She made he had a kind of a blessing that nobody can kill him by hitting him on his head. herself like that and she was there. And So, Laksmana says you know for definite he looked at her, & was so angry. He said, that this Ravama cannot be killed by you the ugly, why do you ask such a hitting on his head so, why don't you hit him in his heart? So, he said, the reason question and he cut her nose. When he cut her nose, that was in Nasik & that's is this that just now in his heart is why Nasika means the nose and that's Mahalakshmi, the Sita. Sita is sitting in way you have been to nasik. That's the his heart and how can I hit him on his place where he cut her nose. He was very heart because she is there. She might be hurt. So what's the use of hitting on the angry, but Shri Rama did not. He said in a way that is very convincing that see I have a wife and I am a person who head, he said? He said, because once I start hitting him on the head fast his believes in one wife. attention will go there. As soon as his Now another character about him was attention will go into his head then I can that he was consistent. He was never hit him on his heart. See, the Sankoch, inconsistent like Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna was a diplomat and diplomacy is the way he talked. Then what happened that he was so kind, once when a very

 Jan - Feb, 2000 27 SHRI RAM PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze in being inconsistent. Shri Krishna's style all the poets of India and when Sita left him ultimately, in a very mysterious way, she just disappeared in the mother earth because mother earth had given her the birth. So she disappeared into mother earth. Then Shri Rama became absolutely lost and he jumped in the river Saryu and disappeared in the water element from where he had come. was different. In Sahaja Yoga you can't carry on like Shri Rama. Sometimes you have to be Parshurama also. Otherwise things don't work out. Now when it went ahead with it in his character, which was so beautiful that you find that he was such a consistent person. Whatever he said all the life he carried that. For example, he said, "I am the one who believes in one wife Ekpatnivrat". ( ana Now he Now this man had to give up his wife. In had a very nice wife no doubt, very this contrast you can see the wave rising beautiful wife, but she had gone to Ravana and falling of a personality. The society and he was left alone. When they wanted in which he lived, the state in which he to start a kind of a Yagya called as ruled had an objection for a wife who had Rajsurya Yagya, which was meant to be lived with Ravana and the public started the conquering the whole world. Then tÃ¤lking about it. So, as a good king he they asked him, you have to marry. just decided that his wife should be left because you have to have your wife. He said, "no, I can't marry, because nobody forever. And then he sent her on a beautiful Chariot, with his Prime Minister and his brother, Lakshmana who took her down and left her, told her this is what could be like my wife and I can't marry. I can forgo this kind of Yagya but I can't marry again". So then they said alright. has happened and that Shri Rama had There is one thing you can do, is to make asked her to take her down to the ashram a statue, of Sita in Gold and you have to of Valmiki. As a result of that she got very use her, that statue as a wife representing. upset and she said, She was Adishakti so He said that I will agree. He took away she does not have to bother, She said, you all his ornaments, everything and made Just leave me here, very self respecting that statue, and he did this Yagya. So person. She didn't say no-no-no. I will whatever he said he followed thoroughly. come to him, or I will sue him, I will go In his dharma he was perfect. Another in the courts, get all his money, how dare he throw me out, nothing of the kind. That incident is that when Sita was lost. He is the grace of a woman. Graciously she never slept. he never slept on a bed, said, alright, now you have listened to your brother. I am your sister-in-law, always on the mother earth. The pain he had of his wife is very well described by

 Jan - Feb. 2000 28 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI RAM PUJA elder to you. Now you obey me and I tell and presented to her and said that this is the ring of Shri Rama. She said yes, I know, how is he? He said, he is alright. you as your sister in-law that you can now go. Leave me here alone and I don't want you to go any further with me to deport me with somebody, and she was pregnant. Here if it happens, of course, horrible things can happen. But in India if such a thing happens, the wife will kill herself or All enquiry she had about herself. So he said, Mother, I can take you on my back. I can easily take you, you can come on my back and I will take you. She said, no, I won't go with you. It's Shri Rama who is a brave king. He should come she would not be able to bear it. I think himself, fight this Ravana, kill him because both things are just the same in escape. If he is evil and then I will go with him, with all the glory. She was not frightened of there is no aggression then there is recession. But, she said, "No, I have to give birth to these two children. I can look anything. For her the important thing was that Ravana should be killed. He is evil after myself." Alright graciously it is done. I am nothing please tell him not to worry and should be killed by Rama. Such a great courage for a woman. Both sides if about me and she told Shri Lakshmana you see, you will be surprised that how a woman's character is such a powerful thing. Its not a reactionary thing, my husband is like this, that's why I am like that alright you look after him and that's all I want and she told the Chief Minister, the Mantri, that you must look after the kingdom. See the dignity, see the balance, see the character, the personality of Shri Rama. He was called as Maryada that or my husband doesn't do this for me, that's why I am this. My husband has gone away, so I am finished. What am I to do without my husband? Nothing of Purushotama and look at his wife. She was equal to him in every way. When she was kept by Ravana, Ravana was so frightened of her shakti that he would not touch her. He used to frighten her saying that I will do this to the women of India, the kind. She stands on her feet. She said no, to Hanumana and she stands on her feet and she says when Shri Rama will come, and kill this evil and remove this I will do this to the women of the world, evil from this earth, then only he can take I will do that kind of a horrible things, I me with him. I won't go with you. I won't will take another birth, I will misbehave. escape him. I won't run away. Nothing I She said, do what you like. You can't am going to face it myself here. For a woman it i too much to say to be touch me. He could not touch her hand. He was so frightened. And when imprisoned in a horrible person's jail or in a place which is so dangerous for her. Hanumana brought the ring of Shri Rama

 Jan - Feb. 2000 29 SHRI RAM PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze were standing with their arrows. Then To say that I won't go whatever you may Shri Sita appeared before them and she try, whatever tricks you may try, whatever you may say, I won't go. Just imagine. said, you can't fight, he is your father. This made Hanumana realize and he said And Ravana was such a horrid fellow. He alright I can fight Shri Rama now. Why did all kinds of things to her. But she kept did he leave you like this? See, the sweetness of Shri Hanumana, who was absolutely calm and quiet waiting for her husband to come. Can we think of such such a great devotee, such a great devotee of Shri Rama, could see that he has done women in modern times!! So satisfied with themselves. So much in balance. So much full of confidence and strength. This is the message of Sita's life. injustice to my mother and he stood for that. Its very sweet of Shri Hanumana to do that. Hanumana, as you know, is the angel Gabrial, who is innocence, simplicity and dynamism,. His dynamism The Benevolence of Shri Rama was shown when he started ruling the people. He was the one who cared for the needs was such that as soon as he was born, he said better eat this sun, because the sun of the people. For him it was important that the people whom he ruled should be happy and joyous. He looked after them with great love. He had two sons whom he looked after for a short time because they were lost with the mother, Sita and they are the ones who found him out in a is scorching the people in India. So, he went and gulped down the sun. People had to say that you see, though it is true the sun is scorching but it is of great help. Please release the sun. Why did you eat it off? So then, he released the sun. way that Valmiki taught them how to sing the Ramayana. And they went to Ayodhya and sang the Ramayana. Rama went with in Hanuman's whole life was spent serving Shri Rama and he was such a dedicated Bhakta of Shri Rama. Now them and one day in one of the Yagyas here the contrast is also, that hanumana when they caught the horse of Shri Rama. Hanumana found it impossible to fight had Navdha Sidhis, Nine siddhis-Anima, Garima, Raghuma and all sorts of things those two boys and he couldn't understand. Here now the character of that he could become small, he could great Hanumana one has to describe. He become big, so many things he had. Despite all these siddhis and the amount went and told Shri Rama, I can't understand these two boys. I can't face of power he had that Shri Rama once asked him that my brother Lakshmana is them. I don't know who they are? So, Shri Rama went there and these boys being hit and he is very sick and he is just

 The Divine Cool Breeze Jan - Feb. 2000 30 SHRI RAM PUJA dying. So you go and get a particular kind of a Sanjeevani, a king of a herb, which I That's the sign of a person who is either possessed and under the influence of possession is doing that he is too weak and he is possessed by his anger because he doesn't have that much power to bear anything. The most powerful thing is the mother earth because she has the power to bear. The one who has the power to bear is the powerful. The one who does not have any power to bear. I can't bear, I don't like this. Such a person is useless want to rub on his head. So he went there and he could not find it. So, he brought the whole of the mountain on his hand and gave it to Rama, now you select I don't know, I can't find it. That is the Hanumana Shakti. And with all that power he was such a humble person and such a dedicated person. This is the sign of a powerful Sahaja Yogi. thing for this earth and sometimes I feel why God created them. Its a headache to have a person around. I can't eat this, I don't like this. Then why are you here? Nobody likes you either. No one likes such a person and that's why that person Anybody who is powerful has to be humble and nonviolent. Mahatma Gandhi used to say, that what is the nonviolence of the weak. A weak has to be nonviolent. What is so great! That's a policy or a kind of a protection that he has. So a weak is always I don't like this, I don't like that. So, the power of a person lies in bearing person has to be nonviolent because he cannot face, he cannot protest. But things. How much you can bear! How much vou can undergo? Without feeling nonviolence of the powerful is the sign of the real nonviolence. Those who are it like you are, say, in a jungle you are powerful, if they are nonviolent, that happy, if you are in a palace you are means they are quite confident of their happy. If you are with this colour or that powers. Those people who are confident colour, if you are with this race or that of their powers, why should do they race, if you are with this kind of life or agress others? They just stand. Alright, that kind of life, you can bear it, and that come along, what do you want? Even bearing power gives you the caliber, the saying that people run away. So, those Caliber to have Sahaja Yoga. It's not that who are violent, angry, hot-tempered, this is shown, its not that this is being jump at everyone, torture everyone suffered, don't have to say I suffer being trouble everyone are the people who are like this. No, you don't suffer. Its just by very weak-charactered. Their character is weak. If their character was alright then the way. For a person who wants all the comforts. they would not have done all these things.

 Jan - Feb. 2000 31 SHRI RAM PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze if you know how to detach yourself from A person who wants to live with all the luxuries but not with any kind of defects that. Many people come and tell me or any deficiencies, is a person is a beggar Mother, we have an ego, that is the problem. I said, then give up. I mean it's I would say, in every sense of the word. I simple. Why do you have it. As if you see they want to say that we have a trouble with this thing but still we are clinging on mean best thing to get rid of problems is not to have them. In the sense now I don't drive, so I have no problem of driving I never telephone so I don't have problems of telephone. I don't go to the banks, so I don't have problems of the banks. The to it. Like we are afraid of a crocodile but we want to put our foot into the mouth of the crocodile and we have a problem that our foot will be eaten up by best is I don't have any income so I have the crocodile. Now give up. But they will no problems of Income-tax. Whatever search out the crocodile. Open the mouth bothers you, you just don't have it. Why and put the foot in it and then come to me and say mother, we have a problem. My foot is in the mouth of the crocodile. do you want to have it? Have it and then bother about it. This is very funny that you can get rid of anything that bothers To get to problems you have to get to it. But without getting to it how will you get a problem. Say for example people have very silly stupid problems. Now the first problem somebody may have oh, I have to get my clothes pressed. What's you very easily in this world. So you need not have that kind of a thing on your head. The word problem, specially in the european community problem is a very common word. But in the English language we never heard this word. the need? No problem, Wear them as they problem. You see the problem was used when we were studying geometry; geometrical problem. But, we never knew there is a problem in life. Later on, when are. Who looks at you? You see there are all the people who have pressed clothes, does not matter, what's there if it is not pressed. It's a problem for them, is silly came in contact with European things like that. You see very silly things. community, they will say there is no problem, this is the problem. At least, in But the greatest problem I think you have is your watch. In Switzerland, I shouldn't one day, 100 times they say problem word. So, for a problem the solution is not to have that thing which gives you say so. You see the problem is like this, that now you have to go to the airport. As soon as you tell somebody we have to go to the problem. You can give up anything. Anything that you want you can give up,

 Jan - Feb. 2000 32 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI RAM PUJA airport. Now, I have to go, you don't have to. Everybody gets a sort of a jumping as you are standing on a jumping boat. You see all of them jumping like that. What's the matter? Mother you have to go to the airport. So its Alright, I have to go what's give me or he may not give me. What is the problem? The problem is that you call it a problem and want to avoid to face the truth. If you face the truth you will know one thing that see now this man has to give me money. Alright, I will go and face him. I'll tell him Sir, you have to give me the money. You have to pay me. wrong with you? It's a problem; I said, what's the problem? You just know that This is your duty and if you don't pay me, you are doing wrong. You get at aim and face him and tell him. But you won't you don't have to go at all and you don't have to come to the airport and the aeroplane if it comes and does not take me I am not going to come back on your heads, so, I will stay in a hotel. Don't you worry! But why are you so excited about do that. You will sit at home. Oh God! it's a problem. That man is not giving me money. Oh! God! that's the problem. Sitting here, hitting your head all the time. it? The way people are excited that I must catch the plane, sometimes I feel as if they How will you get it? want to get rid of me. If you face it directly then you will be So, this is a problem for the people who amazed there is no problem for anything. are very meticulous. Now, supposing, I say I know that the plane won't leave me. I know because I know many things. So, I have no problems. But supposing even Say, your car fails, so it fails. Get down enjoy yourself nicely till somebody comes along, takes you or if supposing, you don't get some lift, alright stay there over night; What is in it! No tiger is going to eat you. And if the tiger has to eat you, it will eat. Where is the problem? Still I can't see the problem. If tiger has to eat that's already destined, that the tiger has to eat. In any case nobody dies. You will be born again. If you look at it from that angle then you will be surprised most of the problems do not exist. They are like bubbles, created by our own thinking. The waves of our thinking, this is the problem, that is the problem. Like today, they said if you think the plane you may not get, so it may not get. But, if it gets you alright, if does not get you its alright. So, where is the problem? Either it will take you or it will not take you, what is in between? Where is the problem? I still don't understand? Either it will work out or it will not work out. Keep two possibilities. That's the only two possibilities. What is the third possibility that gives you the problem, you tell me. Say, somebody owns me money alright. So, either he will

 Jan - Feb. 2000 33 SHRI RAM PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze there is no hall on such and such date. in. For the vital air, and that vital air when Alright, where are you having the hall? it gets heated up, we have to know that we are not any more with Shri Ram. It has to be the cool air, should blow through If there is no hall, let us have it in the open. So to make the best of it is the way your nose and your mouth. I don't know Shri Rama shows you. Now, what is the about you people, it happens with me all the time. When you are angry the nostrils way he has helped us, let us see. Shri Rama by his character, by his balance, his go up, swell up and the hot air, the hot peace and his mildness, and his sweetness words and everything hot, the heated eyes has shown us how a king should be a and everything goes up like that, curled benevolent king and at the same time a up and you become ferocious Ravana. Because you have forgotten the beauty very loving husband and a loving father and a person in dharma. Apart from that, of the nature of Shri Rama. What has he he went down to Maharashtra. He done to our centre heart is the greatest thing that he has given you a fatherhood, arranged all these things so that he could walk down to Maharashtra barefeet to within yourself. Because Shri Rama vibrate the land because Sahaja Yogis will represents the fatherhood. Now what sort of father you are, you have to decide. be going one day to Maharashtra and the Maharashtra has to be a vibrated land. In Ayodhya he never took out his shoes. Those people who are not good fathers, Because he was the king there. But when develop problems of the right heart. Also he, and Shri Sita, both of them, went to those people who are not good husbands Maharashtra, they took out their shoes also develop the right heart. This right to vibrate it. On his way he saw a big stone heart is so important, because specially which was nothing but a lady cursed to in the west, where the climate is so funny, be a stone, Ahilaya, and he made her just you have to keep inside your rooms and by touch, she again came back to life. Like clothed up all the time that you get all that one after another he was just, by the dried up inside. At that time if you don't way, as if he was doing. But that was the have that sweetness, that warmth, that kindness of Shri Rama you get the trouble purpose of his life to go there. And that has helped a very great achievement of Asthma. So, many people die of Asthama, in the west. On top of that you within ourselves is the Shri Rama. fight with your wives, you beat them, you Shri Rama stands for the Pranavayu take away their money, you cheat them , is for the vital air that we take in their money, in every way you torture

 Jan - Feb, 2000 34 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI RAM PUJA your women, very important. Otherwise if you fall in this activity of keeping your wives on right lines you might also get right heart and Asthama ultimately. them. Then it becomes even worse. So it has something to do with money, in the sense because Sitaji was Shri laxmi and Sitaji was the one who was the power of Shri Rama. So Shri Laxmi also gets Because your wife and you are part of annoyed with you when you are a bad the society and the society has certain father as a bad husband. That's why the laws which are very important. There is Gruhalaxmi is very important. But the something like stridharma something like woman has to be the Grahalaxmi. She Patidharma, something like Matadharma, should not be a shrew and then the Pitadharma, everything has a dharma. husband is supposed to be kind to her. Then it is quarrelling. That's very bad. The woman has to be a Grahalaxmi, a Those men who torture their wives have very bad heart, in the same way those who play into the hands of their wives also have a very bad right heart. beautiful woman with a very sweet nature and talking to her husband in a very You have to be in the balance. You are the husband and she is your wife and both are responsible for keeping a very good family relationship. It's not one sided. Its Sankoch manner and also looking after the children, looking after the family and looking after the guests who come to their house. But if you encourage and run after such women who are no good, means not the husband only or the wife but both collectively they should be improved. If of them have to be in such a manner, that collectively they do not act well. they act according to their nature of collectively if they are aggressive, woman and man, and respect each other, collectively if they are tormanting others love each other, share everything with each other and exist in a way that people then such women should not be encouraged at all. But Tulsidas says they should see that there are two wheels of the chariot, one on the left, one on the should be beaten up, is a thing looks very right, there is no imbalance. They are bad in modern times if somebody says like equal but not similar as I have told you many a times. that, that women should be beaten in case they have all such qualities which disqualify them from being Grahalaxmis. up Now, in the case of Shri Rama, he left his Of course, there is no need to beat them wife, When it came to Sita she left him but I mean to say that what is it that you too. But she left him as a woman would have to drive out all these badhas from leave and he left her as a man would leave.

 Jan - Feb. 2000 35 SHRI RAM PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze She also left him, but in a way that is again. There are some who do Aartis just suitable for a woman to do and he did it because to show off, some throw flowers in a way that is suitable to a king. In the to show off. They must be the first and somehow or other they get also the position, because of their assertions and same way a woman when she acts, she has to act like a woman. The same things askings. The leaders have to be careful and not to give duties to such people who really upset me very much, because of their arrogance, because of their showing offs. I have to say one thing today, that she may do, as the man does but she has to be a woman and a man has to be a man. So that's the maryada Purushottama (a a a ahaa, is the one who is the highest among all the men, with his all the maryadas, all the boundries that he under the circumstances we have to decide that if the leaders don'thave wives, observes. The boudries are such that you do not try to overpower others, or you do not try to take their seats. For example I have seen, those who are aggressive also show up in our programmes. They will be the first before me, they will be, as soon as I open the gates they will be somewhere there standing. They will be the first in everything. That's not being who are humble, who are kind, who are compassionate and who are Gruhalaxmis, who are very sweet with the collective we have to cancel the husband as well as wife from the leadership. We cannot have leaders who have wives who are horrid, we cannot, because the wife of a leader is like the mother. in maryada. You should be at the back There are 5 types of mothers described, lane. There are leaders, you have got they can sit in the front. Try to be on the back. I want to be first. Then I have said once one of them is the one who is the wife of the Guru or of the leader and if the leader has a wife of that kind its better in all sense the first of the first. You know the story of first of the first. So you become first of the first and that's what happens to you he should be dropped. Improve his wife do whatever is possible. Till she is alright, he should not be the leader. Its a very when you try to show off and I know all important thing because I have seen such women bring down the men, not only that but they bring down the Sahaja Yoga, Sahaja Yogis and the whole organisation of them who are like this. To be at the back ground is the most respectable thing to do. To go forward first, to jump forward first, standing near the door if mother is coming you see. As of God. So one has to be careful and the women have to understand that if they are the wives of the leaders, they have to soon as I see the person I just know, back

 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI RAM PUJA Jan - Feb. 2000 36 be extremely good, kind, generous, be very hard, can be very stiff or could be very mischievous, could be troublesome selfish. You cannot grow in Sahaja Yoga with these qualities. Its such a luck and chance that your husband is the leader, is sharing, looking after, absolutely motherly and should not tolerate non- sense and should correct when people are doing wrong. They should not report anyone to their husbands, should not take over themselves the responsibility of the highest man in your nation, in Sahaja Yoga and where you have to be up to his doing things which they are not supposed to do. If they are not of that level, they ability, capability and his name, otherwise you have no authority. are of no use to people and they have no That is why, I have to tell you that on this day of Dussehra let us decide that we are business to be proud of being the wives of the leaders. going to have Ram Rajya in Sahaja Yoga, where there in benevolence, there is love, From Shri Rama's life we learned a lot and from Sitaji's life also. Both of them compassion, security, peace, joy, have done so much for us, bring forth discipline anmong ourselves. The whole such a great life. All their life they suffered and suffered and suffered. They lived in the villages, they lived in the forests, while they were king and the queen. They had disciplining is within ourselves. What say about Shri Rama is that he himself has put himself into the discipline of maryadas. In the same way we ourselves should put ourselves into the discipline of maryadas. never known what is comfort, travelled all the way bare feet. They went through all kings of tortures of life. Sita was taken It's a very great thing that it should happen in Switzerland because away by Ravana, who was a horrid man. She had to live with a Rakshasa, can you imagine. She lived with a rakshasa and Switzerland needs it the most, the there she showed her greatness. The blessings of Shri Rama. The way it is characters of different nature like Sita and going on in this country, this very selfish, Shri Rama, they were showing the non benevolent activities going on, complimentary attributes that they had, cleaning all the poorer nations by this kind very complimentary and if that is so, then of a selfish attitude, a very narrow the husband-wife's relations are beautiful attitude, very low level attitude towards in Sahaja Yoga, that's the way it should the money of these poorer nations. Its be. I find some people are very nice. Some very important for us today to pray for leaders are extremely nice but wives can the emancipation of the hearts of those

 The Divine Cool Breeze Jan - Feb. 2000 37 SHRI RAM PUJA people who are just butchering. In modern times, you don't have wars but come, then Rama is to be born in the hearts of people who are at the helm of financially they are butchering people, affairs and that's how we have to pray to they are killing them by depriving them Shri Ram that be kind and compassionate of their own money and their own so that you could be born into the hearts benevolence. So if Ram Rajya has to of these people. May God Bless You

 Jan - Feb. 2000 38 The Divine Cool Breeze EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA 1984 TODAY we are doing a special type of puja which is for crowning the glory of stupid you have been! What I am saying is that after realisation, specially, He is Ekadash Rudra. Rudra is the destructive much more sensitive that people who are power of Shiva, of the Spirit. Now one power, which is His nature, is forgiving. He forgives because we are human beings, we commit mistakes, we do forgiven and have been given such a big thing like Self Realisation, still they do wrong things! Then He is much more wrathful. So in the balance the forgiveness wrong things, we get tempted, our attention is disturbed. He forgives us. He starts reducing and wrathfulness starts increasing. But when you forgive and as also forgives us when we spoil our a result of that forgiveness you feel the chastity, we do immoral things, we do gratitude, then His blessings start flowing theiving and when we talk against Him. towards you. He gives you tremendous He also forgives our superficiality, capacity to forgive others. He pacifies jealousy, our lust, our anger. Also He your anger, He pacifies your lust, He forgives our attachment, jealousy, cruelty pacifies your greed. Like beautiful dew- and possessiveness. He forgives our drops His blessings come on our beings egoistical behaviour and also our and we become really beautiful flowers. subordination to wrong things. But as And we start shining in the sunshine of every action has reaction, so when He His blessings. forgives He thinks that He has given you He uses His wrath or destructive power to destroy all that tries to trouble us. He a big grace mark and that reaction builts within Him as a wrath against those up protects realised souls at every point, in every way. Negative forces try to attack the Sahaja Yogis but they are all neutralized by his tremendous power of who are forgiven but try to do greater mistakes, specially after realisation, because such a big blessing there is after realisation. You have got the light and in the light if you are going astray then His wrath goes on because He feels how protection. Through the vibratory awareness we are guided in to right path.

 EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze Jan - Feb. 2000 39 the left side of your void. The first five on the left hand side come if you have bowed yourself to wrong Gurus, or if you have read wrong books; or if you have been in the company of wrong people, or Those who enter in to Sahaja Yoga and if you have been sympathetic towards the All His beautiful blessings are described in the Psalm 23, The Lord is my shepherd? It is all described, how he looks after you like a shepherd. But He does not look after the evil beings. He discards them. still carry on with the evil nature, are destroyed. Those who come to Sahaja Yoga and do not meditate are destroyed people who have been following wrong path, or you have been yourself one of the agents or Guru of these wrong people. Now these five problems can be solved if we completely give up whatever wrongs we have been doing. As Mohammed Saheb has said that you have to beat the or they are thrown out of Sahaja Yoga. Those who murmur against God and live in a way that is not behoving a Sahaja Yogi, He removes that problem. So by one force he protects by another force He throws away. But his destructive forces, when they are built up Satan with shoes but that has to be done not mechanically but from your heart. Like many people who come to Sahaja Yoga will tell me, 'my father is following too much then we say that Ekadash Rudra is active. Now this Ekadash Rudra will this Guru, that Guru' and get involved be expressed when the Kalki itself will with their father, mother, sister, this that start acting; means the destructive power and try to take them out from those will destroy all that is negative on this Gurus, also get entangled. Or some of earth and save all that is positive. So it is them bow to other forces, like I know of very necessary for Sahaja Yogis to expedite their ascent; not to be her child must get baptised. I told her, a Sahaja Yogini whose parents told that satisfied with social life or married life you cannot get this child baptised because or with all the blessing that God has he is a realised soul. But she could not, bestowed upon you. You always think that way, stand up to them and she took the child for baptism and the child became what God has done for us, how He has been showing miracles to us; but we have very funny. It looked like a mad child. I to see what we have done to ourselves? saw myself! Now, then she gave up all that and so she was saved. But supposing What are we doing about our own ascent and growth? she had another child, she would have done the samething and the second child would have been something very very Now, out of the eleven Ekadash Rudra, the five come from the right and five from bad. Now the trouble with Sahaja Yogis

 Jan-Feb. 2000 40 EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze Sahaja Yogi and I am so, and we should is that anybody who comes to Sahaja Yoga programmes thinks he is a Sahaja Yogi. It is not so. Either you should have do like this and we should behave like this and start dictating people, can do anything; and some mediocres or some very strong sensitivity or if you feel it in your body or with your intelligence you should understand what is Sahaja Yoga. The person who is still negative always gets attracted to another one who is very powerfully negative and does not understand that the other person is so half-baked Sahaja Yogis may try to understand. But most of them will know that this person is going-on his way out. He still leads to this left side development or we can call on the head on the right hand side, of your medha, (this place powerfully negative but gets impressed. Under such circumstances, such a person (Forehead) is called Medha in Sanskrit language). Now the right sided one comes from the idea people have that I am myself is hit by that negative person and Shiva cannot protect him. a big Guru. They start preaching about **** Sahaja Yoga also as if they have become great Gurus! We have known some One should not have sympathy with any one who is negative, whether he is mad, people who give big lectures in my whether there is something wrong with him, whether he is your relation or anything. No sympathy of any kind. On the contrary a kind of an anger should be programme and never allow my tape to be played or anything. They think they have become experts. Some of them say that now we have become so great that there for that person; kind of a we have no need to do any foot-soaking detachment, angry detachment. And this angry detachment is the only time meditation. There are some who say that when you have to be angry. But I have thing can never touch us since we are seen people who have anger for very good Sahaja Yogis and very great. But the Sahaja Yogis but not for their own worst of them all are those who just husband and wife who are extremely take my name saying that 'Mother has negative! So when the Ekadash Rudra said so' and I am telling because starts acting on these five on the right side Mother has said so, when I have never it moves from the left and moves to the said such a thing it is all falsehood. right side, then a person starts becoming Now there are some people who use negative but acting with his ego. Such a Sahaja Yoga money and exploit Sahaja person may take up any situation into Yoga in such a way exploit them, Sahaja or anything. There is no need to do hands and say that I am such and such Yogis also sometimes. Such people

 The Divine Cool Breeze EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA Jan - Feb. 2000 41 become very inauspicious. Anyone speaking, now you should watch me who tries such things will go out of constantly so that there is thoughtless Sahaja Yoga with disgrace. But one awareness and Agnya Chakra is soothed out. Don't pay attention here and there all the time, then you will should never go near such a person, have nothing to do with such a person, have no sympathy. Because this inauspicious- find that gradually your attention will neutralize into thoughtless awareness ness will hurt anyone to any extent. So better keep out of such people. When these ten Ekadashas are developed within a person then definitely such a person gets and your attention will be fixed in such a manner that you don't have to worry about anything. In thoughtless diseases like cancer and incurable horrible awareness nobody can touch you, diseases, specially when the eleventh one which is actually here (in the forehead) that's your fortress. By meditation one must establish thoughtless awareness, which is the Virata's Chakra, which is the that is the sign that you are rising higher. Many people do meditation and say alright Mother we are doing, mechanically they do, and say yes, I did collectivity. When it is affected as well then such a person cannot get out of it. But out of these five are combined, this, I did this. supposing with Muladhara or with Agnya, then they get in to very serious type of dirty diseases. That's why I always But did you achieve your thoughtless awareness, minimum of minimum? say that be careful about your Agnya Have you felt your Cool Breeze coming out of your head? Otherwise if you are Chakra because that is one of the worst things that once start getting combined doing something mechanically, it is not with the Ekadashas, part of Ekadasha, then anything can happen to a person. He going to help, help you or help anyone. So after realisation, as you are very well can meet with a horrible accident, He can be suddenly hit by someone, murdered protected, you have all the blessings and a great future, you also have a great by someone, any thing can happen to such possibility of a complete annihilating. I would say, to give an analogy, you are a person who has the right Agnya and also anyone of the Ekadasha-right or left. That means five of these, if they. climbing and everybody supporting you anyone of the five, if they combine with Agnya Chakra, the protective power of God are minimum. So to keep vour protected to be taken upward. There is Agnya Chakra alright, see now I am to climb, holding your hand and there are so many things by which you are no possibility of falling off by mistake

 Jan-Feb. 2000 42 The Divine Cool Breeze EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA also. But if you try to remove your bondages with truth and love and all the time try to hit the people who are trying to support you then you fall from a greater height. Because the greater height you rise the greater you fall, and with the which is penetrating into every atom in to every molecule, into every human being, into every thing that is living and non living. Once it gets disturbed the whole thing gets into jeopardy. So the pleasing of Christ is very important. Now Christ has said that you have to be like greater force also. small children, that is the innocence, the purity of heart is the best way you can Every effort is made by the Divine, every support is given to you every care is please him. As in the west, specially, taken, despite that if you want to fall from that height, then it is very dangerous. But Ekadash rudra, at such a time when somebody tries to harm the cause of people have developed their brain too much, they try to play about with words and think that nobody knows what they are doing! All such people must know that Sahaja Yoga, after being in Sahaja Yoga then it hits you so badly that the wholle every thing you do is known to God. attack is very widespread. But the whole If you are not clean in the heart, it is family can be protected if there are few very dangerous for anybody to pose as people of that family doing Sahaja Yoga if he is a very good Sahaja Yogi. Such work, could be protected, but in case the people are not possessed, nor they are family that is against all the time of Sahaja conditioned, nor they are egoistical, but Yogis and try to trouble them can be they are very cunning, clever people and completely destroyed, very badly. Now they are quite aware as to what they are these Ekadasha Rudras come out of, as I doing. But there are people who get told you, the void. So we can say the possessed also and then in that they try destruction part of it comes from the void to destroy themselves or cry and weep mainly. But these are the powers, all are and do all kinds of things. There are some given in one person, that is the Maha who think that if they hurt themselves and Vishnu, that is the Lord Jesus Christ, do some sort of an extreme thing then because He is the support of the whole God will be happy, are sadly mistaken. If universe. He is the personification of you cannot enjoy in Sahaja Yoga then you *Omkara'. He is the personification of should know that there is something vibrations. So when he gets angry then wrong with you. If you cannot feel the whole universe starts breaking. He happy in Sahaja Yoga than you must personifies the power of the Mother know that something definitely wrong

 Jan - Feb. 2000 43 EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze home, and it is alright. But they do not know what they are missing! Whatever with you. If you cannot enjoy the company of Sahaja Yogis, then be sure there is something wrong with you. If may be your experience with others you cannot love and appreciate the you should stick on together, always greatness of God then there is attend programmes, take leadership, something wrong with you. If you are still worried about negative people and will be blessed thousand folds. go ahead with it, work it out and you their problems then know that there Ekadasha Rudra are all the powers, I is something wrong with you. If you have sympathies with the negative would say, of destruction, together. It is people then also there is something the power, destructive power of Shri Ganesha, is the destructive power of Wrong with you. But if you have anger for negative and all that is negative. Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha. It is the that is against Sahaja Yoga, then you destructive power of the Mother, is a destructive power of Bhairava are there. When this thing gets matured then you become the power Hanumana, Kartikeya and Ganesha. Also the powers of Sadashiva and of the Adishakti. All the destructive powers of of Ekadash Rudra yourself. Anybody who will try to insult you, or do ay harm will collapse. It has happened all the incarnations are Ekadasha. Now with many people who tried to be the last but not the least is the destructive power of Hiranya Garbha, which is the collective Brahamadeva. And this power, insulting to me or tried to harm me in any way. Sometimes I am quite worried when it acts, every atom explodes, the whole atomic energy goes into a about them. destructive power. So the complete total So one has to be in such a way that they destructive power is Ekadasha Rudra. It is extremely powerful, explosive, but it is not blind. Its very discriminating and extremely diligently woven. It avoids all will become the Ekadasha. Nobody can touch such people but such a person is full of compassion and forgiveness. As a result Ekadasha act much faster. The good points and attacks the wrong things and it hits at the right time, at the right more compassionate you are, the more powerful Ekadasha becomes. The more collective you become the more point, direct, without hitting any thing that Ekadasha acts. Many people have a is good in between. Now the glance of habit of receding back into their Ekadash Rudra falls upon someone, for exclusion and saying that better be at example, and there is something in

 Jan Feb. 2000 44 The Divine Cool Breeze EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA between that is Divine or which is a do! He took her child, representing Sahaja positive thing, it penetrates through Yogi, you can say, or representing Christ positive without harming the positive, and or representing any one of the great hits the negative. It cools down children of Hers and put the Child under Her feet. When she was trampling. somebody and burns another. suddenly she saw Her own child under Her feet and such a big tongue came out So that is how it works with such care and such delicacy. And it is tremendously and she stopped. This has happened only sharp also. And its very painful. It is once. So after the Ekadasha Rudra, not like cutting the neck in one shot, it goes on slowly slowly. All the horrible torture, that you have learnt or heard about are the expressions of Ekadasha ultimately complete destruction comes through the anger of Sadashiva. Then the final, total, destruction takes place. So thus we have to know how Ekadasha Rudra. For example take the case of Rudra acts and how Sahaja Yogis have cancer. In the cancer case, the nose is removed, the tongues are removed, and Now to develop this power one has to every thing, one after the another, is develop a tremendous power of to become themselves Ekadash Rudras. removed with terrible pain. Take leprosy -detachment from negative. detachment for example, the lepers cannot feel their For example negativity can come from fingers, they cannot feel it. So any rash very near people like brother, mother, or anything, if it is there, they cannot feel sister, could come from friends, could it. So they start losing their fingers. is how Ekadash eats up people, devours. But this wrathfullness of the father can That come from relatives. It could come from your country, it could come from your political ideas, economic ideas or be very gentle and very sweet when it comes to His own children. The story is can destroy your power of Ekadasha. It about the Mother. Once She got very is not only sufficient to say that I am angry, the primordial mother, so angry surrendered to Sahaja Yoga, and I am a that she wanted to destroy the whole Sahaja Yogi but you must know mentally world with Her Ekadasha power. She also what is Sahaja Yoga. So that anything, like that, Any misidentification tried to destroy the whole world. When she went into that mood the father himself Sahaja Yoga, because in the West. felt that she is bit too much angry. When specially, people are over intelligent. If she started destroying, she was going the light of Sahaja Yoga doesn't enter in intelligently you understand what is right and left. He did not know what to to their intelligence, you can never

 Jan - Feb. 2000 45 EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze Then that cannot be balance. Does not overcome your attachments. That does not mean that you talk too much about Sahaja Yoga or you give lectures on that but mentally you should also understand what is Sahaja Yoga. even have such a precious thing as blessings of God. Any religion that makes you bow to anybody else but incarnation, is no religion. That is another one which is absolutely false. Your real religion will give you a balance and will always talk Today is the special day when it has been asked that we should have Ekadash Rudra about the ascent, but they will not ask for money, or make one man something Puja, and it is for all kinds of false religious sects and false Gurus and false religions which are followed in the name of God; learn to discriminate between or any religion that does not say about falsehood, negative things and real self-realisation and does not achieve self Once we develop that great and venerated. Thus we should things. discrimination through vibratory realisation and does not get connected with God. It is false. So any such thing that is just built and talks of God but has no connection with God, cannot be a true or through your intelligence; you are in control of awareness yourself and then you become that religion. Of course it gives a balance to power of Ekadasha. Then you establish people but in giving that balance if people live on that money and try to enjoy a your maturity. wealth out of that money then it is not Today I bless you all that you all become the power of Ekadasha Rudra and you develop that sincerity which takes you to even at the very low level like balance with the religion. Religion has to give you balance to begin with but in balancing that state. when they tell you that you have to be balanced, but give me money for that. May God Bless You.

 Jan - Feb. 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 46 SHRI ADISHAKTI PUJA Canajohari, U.S.A., 20-6-99 It is such a great pleasure for me to see should not be crushed and destroyed forever. That era is over now, that era of all assembled here. This is such a far- you domination, of entering into somebody fetched place away from the maddening else's land and occupying it; and crowds; is such a beautiful place which has vibrations. I selected this place suddenly from a very thick American news paper. The vibrations were just shooting out and I said what is this, considering it to be a great bravery. All that is over now. The human understanding has gone much beyond and they understand that this is sinful, this is wrong. Whatever we have done was coming from where? There was a very little advertisement and I said this the wrong. But those people are no more and place where we have to go. This place the children and the grand children of has so many vibrations, even in the those children, of these people who were advertisement. the children of God, they used to think, do not like all that. Because they have no right to take somebody's land like that So you can imagine how the guidance comes from vibrations and that's how I and occupy it as your own. Of course the was here and this place was selected by the Divine force. It happened only in one day. Such a miraculous thing happened in one day! It was taking so much time land doesn't belong to anyone. But still wherever you are born, that's your land and that Jand has to be kept with those who are born here, who own it. But this for them even to get this and suddenly I kind of aggression has been going on for told them better get it. It all worked out ages now. Now the time has come to and we are now here in the most beautiful finish this once for all, give up this kind atmosphere. of adventure, to enter into somebody's land or somebody's house and occupy it. Of course, you know that Red Indians were driven out and they came here to There is another kind of aggression, I see hide themselves. They were hiding now, is that they enter into the minds of themselves in this place so that they the people, through their talk, through

 The Divine Cool Breeze Jan - Feb. 2000 47 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA their all kinds of aggressive attitude and to see. It makes you very miserable, the mind mind itself becomes the slave. unhappy. But still so many are there, you are there, saved now and in this last The present times are like that, I think, judgement you have risen from that level where people have no freedom to think to this new level where, I am sure, you will be able to salvage many more. Each what is right, what is wrong and also to take to right thing. They have to accept whatever is happening around; whatever person can salvage at least thousand is immoral, whatever is destructive. One people and so many of you. If you try that it would be of a very very great has to accept because still, I think, we do not have sufficient number of Sahaja emancipation for this world which we Yogis. Who can oppose all these want to save. adventures of modern times. We have So one must know the first duty of every another kind where we find these false Sahaja Yogi now, is to save others. To talk about Sahaja Yoga; to work out Gurus who aggress, specially in America. America is really cursed that way, because Sahaja Yoga, in different places. For it had money. So all the crooks of the world came here. Just imagine! To have money itself is not a blessing. They all example now I am so surprised that they are working on children who are abused. In India, they are working out in various came here and looted rich people and have made so much money for place like prisons, Armies. So you can themselves. This kind of exploitation is enter into all kinds of activities, you can enter into all kinds of aggressed places very much dangerous; much more, because the mind gets ruined. I have seen many people were ruined, especially many and save people. But first of all I think it is the innocece which is under attack. In these western countries specially in seekers were ruined completely. I hope America, the innocence is under attack they are born again and get their self- and this is something very dangerous realization? because the children get this intution at a very young age and what will happen to The seeking is there, no doubt. But all kinds of obstacles have come, all kinds them? So we have to think of all those innocent children. What we can do for them? How we can save them? How we of temptations are there. So despite all that seeking, earnest seeking, honest seeking, they have fallen into traps, which I cannot explain, why should it have happened? But it has happened. One has can work it out? The concern has to go from yourself to others. You have get your realization, alright, you

 Jan - Feb. 2000 48 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA We have to learn so much from the nature corrected yourself, you are absolutely because nature is bound with that love. perfecting yourself, all this is there but Nature has no aggressiveness. It is just under the complete control of the Divine love. With this understanding you should now what is to be done? For what is this light enlightened here? It is for others. Now Sahaja Yogis have to live for others and not for themselves. They will have all the energy? They will have all the also know that when you are talking to Sahaja Yogis, what should be your support and they will have all the blessings. So we have to live for others. How do we live for others, is very simple. It is to have concern, concerned about attitude. How you should move? How you should talk to them? How you should understand them? How you should express your love? This is quite possible. everything, concerned about mother earth concerned about your neighbours, Itis not difficult, you should not be afraid, not feel shy. But in a sweet manner you concerned about the people who are can talk to them, you can communicate with them, you can tell them. suffering all over the world. If you read the newspaper, you will be amazed how Because this was the time, this was to happen. That's the reason Adi Shakti had things are happening, how people are suffering? to come. Without Her it would not have been possible. All other incarnations were there. But firstly they were only on one We have to understand fundamentally that unless and until transformation takes chakra and another one was there to place, we cannot change this world. And establish themselves with other people, you all can transform others. So its your with the people around. They did try, they worked it out, but it did not really work duty, its your job to transform other people and tell them what is divine love. Love is the only way now that we can in the real sense of the word. So Adi work out. It is something which should Shakti had to come, who has all of them with Her. They are all with us, all the time go into this darkness of aggression and which will give many blessings to many wanting to help you, to do every thing hearts, many people. It is an ocean of that you want to achieve. It is their will greatness. This Divine love is so great and that these holy vibrations are with you, so powerful, at the same time so very for every kind of good work you want gentle. As you can see the nature, how to do, any kind of Sahaja work you the trees grow? Every leaf gets the want to do. These vibrations will sunshine. Even tree has its own position. definitely be there to guide you, to help

 Jan - Feb. 2000 49 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA The Divine Cool Breeze is a purpose. It is not just because you have done poorva punyas and all that. Many people say because of previous life we have got it. That is true. The cause may be that but the result is that now you are capable of giving realization to people you, to support you and to love you. You will be amazed how people once they start working for Sahaja Yoga! How they are blessed from every angle. So one has to decide, in their own minds that all your dreams have to come true. So only thing what you have to do is to know only and this is what you have to do. All the that your purpose of life is to spread way you have come here, in this Sahaja Yoga. Even now many Sahaja wilderness. From this wilderness only, Yogis write to me, Mother this is you will rise and you will bless all the happening to me, that is happening to me, people, specially America should be my father is like that, my mother is like blessed again and again because it is the that. But very few, Practically this is over Virata, because it is Shri Krishna's land, now. They used to write, I should say, all because people will always try to follow such letters. But now I think, they are all you, to copy you. Things will improve if you get the blessings of the previous happened. Its a very unique time where lotuses you have within yourself, no doubt. What about you doing something about it? This is what is very important. being perfected. I do not know what has there is light every where, the nature is absolutely with you. You can see how nature acts, how it is trying to help you Now only thing you have to do about and support you and how it wants to work out everything for you. It is to be just yourself is to find out about your own understood and felt that you are activities. What activities you have been something very special and that you have doing? You have to find out what have all the help, every one of you. It is not you done and what you can do? When one person, two persons. Its not ten you meditate you think about yourself. How much you have grown? What have persons. Its the whole lot. As if the whole you done? What have you given to ocean is there to help you, help you to swim over, to save so many. You have others? Whatever you got, unless and not seen such an ocean, where there is so until you distribute it, it will not increase. much depth and all the waves try to save That is a fundamental law and that works. you, to make you float in the realm of Thave seen people who are realized souls, who are very good, who know everything about Sahaja Yoga, but are not yet that much confidant, I should say, or that much joy. All this has happened to you because there

 Jan - Feb. 2000 50 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA by his greatness can disentangle these people. They have funny ideas and those funny ideas should not deter you, should not stop you, for you know, that they are stupid they are destructive and they will deep. All of this is only possible if you yourself get into creating new Sahaja Yogis, and more Sahaja Yogis, not for popularity but for their good and for the good of the whole. I was asked that I destroy all the good qualities. You should know that the responsibility of Americans is much greater than the responsibility of any other Sahaja Yogi, because they are accepted and regarded as the most competent people as the most affective people by the Divine power. The Divine should come and stay in America. So America will improve very much. So now here I am. I came here, I stayed here and I have definitely, put in all my attention because its a very important, very very important chakra which is America. And this very important country is doing sometimes, very stupid things. power thinks that now you can go all ahead, you can do so much. And let us I would not say that you enter into politics, no. I would not say you get into any opposition and form a group, no. But you also know that you have powers, even your thought, your desire has see, like we have the power and the machinery, but the machinery if it doesn't work, what is the use of the power. That is useless, so the machinery has to work and it is working, it is spreading. But we powers. Try to experiment with it. Once you experiment, you will find out that only the attention that you put to these things, it will work out, I am sure it will have to double our efforts. I was thinking of doing some sort of a social work here so that it will go, it will be caught in the eyes of many people. On a subtler level we have worked. But now work out. It is a country which can definitely help the emancipation of the whole human beings. But on the contrary it is going the other way round. I mean American culture, I don't understand at all. What the American culture is. They say something and do something else. They have no proper value system which is accepted by everyone and which is built traditionally from days together. The value system is so convoluted, so twisted, that it is only a Sahaja Yogi, by his nobility, we have to work it on the surface, subtler level we are there, we have achieved and we can achieve much more. But we should come out of it and think, what can we do on the surface? So that people see what Sahaja Yoga is and what it can do to people. Its your personal behaviour, your collective behaviour, your national behaviour, all are going to change the atmosphere which is supposed to be

 Jan - Feb. 2000 51 The Divine Cool Breeze SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA superficial, so that that also becomes subtler. I have been saying this in many go, how to enter, into which area and it gets the things done. It is something you all should experience and work it out with places. But in this puja I think it is fullconfidence. It is the love that we have, important to say that. If you are really facing the Adishakti then you must know your powers are boundless. You have to just assert those powers. Its not the the concern we have. This is the power that has given us self realization and this is the power that has given us this enrichment of achievements. I am sure all stationary power but there is the movement in it and there is the right type of you are here to realize how it was done so quickly! This is one of the things that should just tell you what we are capable of doing. What we are capable of achieving. And when you think of so of movement. It knows where to enter, how to work it out? Now look at this place. Can you imagine me thinking about a place like this? But I just had in mind of course, I must say, ignorance, we should really feel from that we should have some place here inside that concern and that hankering, because American Sahaja Yogis didn't how can I help these people? And you'll have any place to meet. That's all. And see how I have got it! But the desire - to this divine power, this force will come in! do all this, should be there within your Forget about petty things and petty subtler level. Then it works, it works like problems. They are nothing. You have a magic, I tell you. Now you have faith in such a powerful thing behind you. many people who are lost in the mire of be amazed once you think like that. how yourself and decide about it. I am so very This is true that all this universe was happy that it has been achieved with such ease, unbelievable, with such ease, created, everything was created and then you were created and all that is done. But the greatest thing this power has done is to create Sahaja Yogis. This is the greatest thing. Those who have knowledge, those absolutely nothing great was done. The way we got this, was so simple that just like another Sahaja Yogi is the person IS who was to sell us, came down, so who have pure knowledge, and those who excited, and he just sold it to us, finished! We didn't have to do anything to convince him or to talk to him or reduce the price. Nothing! And he sold it out to us. In the same way whatever on a subtler level you have the Divine love in their heart, what a tremendous personality it is! Just think of that and you will get all the opportunities to express that love. desire, it becomes terrific a force which May God Bless You. moves by itself, which knOws where to

 69.81 O'19.00

 of



----------------------

2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
00
Volume : XII issue: 1 & 2
January- February 2000
First of all you should see il you are a peaceful person. Is there peace in
your heart? If you have no peace in your heart then you are not a Sahaja
Yogi. If you get excited and if you start shouting al people and all that, it
means you are nol a Sahaja Yogi. You have to have a very very peaceful
temperament. That is very important.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
1
Editorial
Guru Puja -1.8.99
3.
Shri Krishna Puja-5.9.99
14
Shri Ram Puja
22
381
Ekadash Rudra Puja-1984
Shri Adi Shakti Puja â€“ U.S.A. 20.6.99
46
Edited by : Yogi Mahajan
Published by : V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
that cast an evil eye and understand how
they operate. With the power of our
People all over the world are celebrating
the dawn of the new millennium with
great elan. There is always excitement of
the "New" but its significance is often
Divine mother we are able to ward off all
sinister attempts and neutralise their
impact. Furthermore, with the new
consciousness of Divine love, our pure
eclipsed because in darkness one only sees
shadows. The shadows are not reality.
Although most people sense that
something great is happening, they do not
know what it is. The uniqueness of the
desire is able to work-out individual and
collective problems as our enlightened
attention penetrates them. Not only this.
new millennium is that Shri Adi Shakti but we have discovered that Param
has incarnated and is counselling us in
Chaitanya comes to our rescue at every
step, it even aligns the elements to assist
person. The power of love has penetrated
human consciousness and expanded in
us. From this it becomes evident that in
concentric waves all aspects of human
life. With the help of her power of love
we have resurrected and experienced
collective consciousness. This experience
has led to the knowledge of the Absolute
Truth. In the light of true knowledge it
has become clear that the purpose of our
life is to become instruments of Shri Adi
the dawn of the new millennium the world
does not stand independent, aloof or
isolated but rests under the complete
surveillance and protection of the
Goddess who created it. She is watching
everything that is going on in it and knows
each and every movement of ours.
In the ancient description of the goddess
it is said that "Even if fleeting glance of
Shakti and respect her love.
She has transfoImed us from narrow
goddess falls on someone, he is blessed."
Then when great blessings are upon the
world, revolving before her benevolent
eyes, we have witnessed many dry deserts
that have been transformed into oasis by
individual micro cosmos into collective
macro beings. Through our new macro
vision, we are able to see collective
patterns and are capable of moulding
them towards collective benevolence. We
her power of love. It is thus clear that we
are also able to see the sinister designs
have entered a new millennium of love
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 and Divine Discretion. As human The light of Thy Lotus Feet
consciousness is ascending towards the
ocean of her love, it is leaving behind the
shores of hatred, violence and vengeance.
Has ushered in such a glorious
millennium!
Please grant our eyes
Over the morning sky of the new
millennium a rainbow has emerged, of
Constant Darshan of Thy Lotus Feet,
Though hidden by the fall of Thy Saree.
vibrant colours of forgiveness,
compassion, hope and joy.
Allow our ears, O Mother Divine.
To hear the Sweet melodies of the Golden
Even the fragrance of seasons has altered.
Nirmala season has dawned bringing
Payal
That adorns those beautiful Feet,
sweet cooling fragrance to delight us.
And worship them in our hearts
O Goddess, How could we thank Thee?
Each breath of our lives.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Jan - Feb, 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
GURU PUJA
Pravachna (Talk) by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Cabella (1-8-99)
Since we have come to Cabella, it is the
us-the aggressiveness, the domination,
ten years completed. So, you can imagine
how in these ten years we have been able
to progress in Sahaja Yoga. Today we are
going to have a Guru Puja. As I have said,
peevishsness, fear, grabbing-all these are
our inheritance and they are within us
lingering. We want to grab things of
others. Not you people, of course not,
you all are gurus and you want to worship but people who are not yet in Sahaja
me, as your Guru, is alright. But the main Yoga. They first used to grab lands. Then
thing one should understand is that you they started grabbing people, making
have become Guru, no doubt, because them slaves. Then they were not satisfied
you have the knowledge, you have the with that. so they were grabbing
absolute knowledge and so we can say, Kingdoms, jewellery and all these things.
you have become gurus, no doubt. But They have no legal right, still they would
one has to understand that you have grab. It seems very funny, it seems very
reached a state where you can raise the
inhuman but it is there because of our
Kundalini, you can give realisation to
others. Also, you know, what is the things like jealousy. Among animals there
absolute knowledge. To know the is very little of that. They don't have
absolute knowledge is very important and jealousy so much as we have while we
to assimilate is even much more have inherited this jealousy by our own
important. Though we know the absolute reactions and thinking. People get jealous
knowledge we cannot assimilate it that and they want to put down others. If they
much that means, we can not go deep into cannot achieve any height, they want to
inheritance. Now, there are so many other
it. What is the reason for that?
bring down heights of others. This kind
of jealousy when it grabs human beings,
they think whatever is done in the name
We have to realise that we have all come
out of the heritage that was the animal
Kingdom. From the animal Kingdom you
have evolved. So, there are so many
of jealousy is alright. They become very
conscious that we are lower than another
things of the animal heritage lingering in person, we lack in some talents than
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 4
GURU PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
very good as a guru. As a guru we should
not flare, we should not get angry, we
another person and they try to over power
that person because of the force of
jealousy behind them. Now, the trouble
is, though we are human beings, we have
inherited so many animal qualities like we
are ferocious, we are angry and we get
upset as animals do but, additional to that
human beings can react because of their
should not try to oppress others. What
can we do then, people will ask. We have
another method what we call is love, love.
Instead of getting angry if you show love
and compassion to that person so what
happens that it doesn't give you any anger
and the another person, you don't make
him angry also. Anger begets anger. If you
thinking. They think, they can think and
by thinking all these inherited properties
become perverted. Like, a person wants
to put down another person then he
doesn't behave like an animal straight
get angry with some body, that person
may not retort because he is afraid of you
may be that, but in his heart he will keep
a revenge in his mind that one day I will
show him why should he get angry with
me. So, in Sahaja Yoga please remember
forwardly but he will find out a device, a
method, he will think it over how to do
it.
that love is the only way we can solve the
The main problem with human beings is
that they still have inherited very violent
problem.
Now, if something you wrong say, in the
ashram, if you get angry with that person
what will happen. That person will bear
temper. This violent temper has to be
controlled, has to be seen. When you see
something which you don't like, which is
against your will, may be something like
that immediately you flare up. Just now I good Sahaja Yogi he may realise that it
saw instead of the camphor they had put was a wrong thing to do. But, if he is a
a sugar candy. To sugar candy they were bad Sahaja Yogi, not yet fully equipped
putting the match box there using the to understand then what he will do. He
match stick, it would not take the fire. will just feel that this man has insulted
They tried and tried, it would not so, I me, he has deliberated put me down and
a grudge against you. Perhaps, if he is a
all that and I should try to take a revenge.
said let me see what is that! So, that was
Among animals this activity is very
limited. I don't think they believe in
revenge except for few animals, they say,
that if you hurt a snake it will take its
respite, it will come back on you, that's
a sugar candy if it was camphor, it would
just flare up. So, the quality of the person
is known in the same way. If with the
slightest provocation he gets into temper
and gets annoyed then his quality is not
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Jan - Feb. 2000
GURU PUJA
what is said and this is one quality of the
snake. But, as we have passed through
all these different categories we might be
having some of the qualities of some of
these animals within us. We may be even
snakes at some time. If the snake is within
mean that if he has done wrongs, all kinds
of wrongs you forgive him and he goes
on, still with the same, doesn't mean.
Forgiven means forgotten. Such and such
person has been misbehaving so just
forget it, forget it, completely forget it,
for a guru it is important, for a Sahaja
us then anybody who hurts you, you will
remember him all your life-he has hurt
Yogi guru. I must say other gurus were
me so I will put him right one day, I will
take a revenge- if there's a snake within
us. But now, if there's a tiger within you,
not like that. They were absolutely
would say, extremely hot tempered and
they used to loose temper on people.
so, you will become very ferocious. At
the smallest thing you will get angry, loose Once I met a guru and he told me,
temper. Now, this is not a very good "Mother, you are too kind to them and
situation that we are still at the level of with this kindness you cannot create good
animals and our inheritance is still people. I have had enough of it, he said. I
had made two people into gurus and one
of them got lost in the money. Alright,
So, we have to keep a watch, we have to what happened to the second? And the
working in us.
be good gurus and for good guru you second one got lost in the women."I said,
have to have a very peaceful, now it's alright if they are lost, they are
compassionate, loving temperament. lost but if you can revive them with your
After all, one has to understand that love, affection and kindness better get
people have this inheritance and some
people have more, some people have this
or some people have that. For that if you
get angry with that person, it's not going
to help him or help you but if you are
loving and compassionate and you explain
that person, what is the problem and what
you want to do, I tell you he will definitely
improve and he will feel your love. Of
course, sometimes it is necessary to also
forgive such a person. Such a person is
to be forgiven absolutely. In that doesn't
around them.
So, as a guru you must conclude that they
are still lingering with their inheritance.
But, the second problem is much worse
because human beings can think, of
course, animals also think but it is always
conditioning. Whatever conditioning they
have accordingly they behave but they
don't have ego that kind, as human beings
have developed. So, the gurus develop
also a very bad ego. The first ego is other
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
GURU PUJA
was like this, your grandfather was like
this, your great grand father was like this
and you are also like this or some sort of
a thing that will hurt him. By hurting a
person you are not going to help.
Supposing, while walking you are hurt,
you can't walk. In your spiritual ascent
gurus have seen they told me- that we
have done so much, we have worked so
hard to achieve this state and why should
we give realisation to others or if they
have got realisation then what have they
done? Why should they get realisation?
It becomes a comparison between their
own state and how they have achieved it
and how others have to achieve it. So,
also if you are hurt you cannot go ahead.
So, not to hurt people is very important.
they made all kinds of different torturing,
troubling manoeuvres. For example, they
make the disciple stand on his head, give
up his family, do this, do that, they can
beat also. They will make him stay in the
Once you go on hurting others then you
are not a good guru, you are not one who
is really being kind and understanding the
disciple.
In Sahaja Yoga it's a different thing
water for a long time, make him stand on
altogether because you all have achieved
one feet. Like this they punish and worse
Sahaja Yoga without doing any kind of
penance, any kind of guilty consciousness,
confessions, nothing. As you are, you got
your realisation. Nobody had to stand on
their heads, give up their husbands, wives,
family, this thing nothing of the kind. As
you are, whatever dress you are wearing,
in whatever conditions you are, you are
given realisation, it is a fact. You don't
come to worse, they may beat with sticks
or with stones, they are like that. They
don't want to talk, they don't want to
understand what the other person has to
say or the one's who are the seekers, how
they should be treated?
All this anger and all these things might
have been alright before but, after the
advent of Sahaja Yoga, you must know,
it is not necessary. It is not at all necessary
to give any physical punishment to your
have to pay for it, you don't have to exert
yourself, don't have to do anything. Just
you get it sitting down, wherever you are.
After that this kind of a happening should
prove to you that you have a power of
love, of compassion. Out of love you are
given realisation we never realise that.
Supposing, we are anxious to give
realisation to people, we want to go to
the villages, work there and give them
disciples. Now, also the mental
punishment to your disciples should not
be given. Like people start saying all kinds
of things to their disciples. Say, there's a
leader and the leader finds something
wrong with the disciple then he goes on
saying now you are like this, your father
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Jan-Feb. 2000
GURU PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
7.
realisation. Why? Why do we do it? It is
not for any fame, not for any reward or
anything but just out of the love that is
within your heart that you feel, why am I
enjoying everything? Why others are not
enjoying? And so you go out of the way
to help people, to get their realisation.
attached person. Now, what is the
description of an attached person.
Attached person is always worried about
the other person, goes on thinking about
the other person, cannot think of Sahaja
Yoga, only think of the people with whom
he is attached. Then he is very sensitive,
you can't say anything to his brothers,
sisters or anyone otherwise he jumps.
Attachment is also with the name that he
Now, you have become a greater human
being and you feel concerned. Others are
getting ruined, they are going on a wrong
has. Supposing, he has achieved a certain
path, they are doing wrong things and that
makes you feel very-very upset and youdoes he do. You can't challenge him any
name, or some big position, then what
want to help them and this understanding
once you have then you will know how
to deal with the person with whom you
have to behave like a guru. Mostly it is
way, you cannot, by any words, challenge
because he is so identified with that, he
thinks, he is a big person who has
achieved such a lot of position in life. He
not necessary to say anything harsh to that
person, at the most you can tell the is so much attached that he wants the guru
mistakes that they have committed but to pay respect to that attachment. Now,
that too in such a soft manner that a which is the way you can solve that
problem. Supposing, somebody is very
much attached to his wife, say, for
person doesn't get any shock.
Now, somebody has too much example. Then you should not discuss and
attachments say, for the family, for the argue with that person, not at all. Because
wife, for the husband, children or
he is still coming up slowly slowly up to
this stage. Such a person is not absolutely
a perfect Sahaja Yogi. So, what do
have to do. If he is attached to his wife,
let it be. But the divine will work it out
something and once they come to Sahaja
Yoga, still they have same amount of
attachment, alright. doesn't matter. But
you
how far they will go with that attachment,
and you will realise that what he has been
how long it will continue is the point. You
should be detached. If I say, you cannot
thinking, doing and taking decisions is all
wrong and once he discovers it himself
then he will get detached but, if you go
on telling him and try to argue it out, it
be, it is a state. It is a state of mind when
you are detached but when it comes to
doing something for them you will go all
out to help them but you are not an
will never work out. So, must understand
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 8
The Divine Cool Breeze
GURU PUJA
that as human beings whatever we were
detached. But, when you will find the
also, as Sahaja Yogis we have problems vibrations are showing or indicating
and these should slowly slowly be something serious about that person,
dissolved. Not by argument, not by saying what you will do, you will put full
things but by love and compassion. If you attention to that, full attention. You put
have love for a person, you will be amazed attention but not attachment. So the
ninety nine percent (99%) people value attachment doesn't solve the problem,
love. This is the third quality of human
what solves the problem is attention. But
beings, I should say.
when you are not detached then your
attention is attached attention. It's an
First is his inheritance, second is he thinks
attention that is not available to every one
and thirdly that he values love. Anybody
who loves the other person values that
love because he thinks that this particular
and attention that gets stuck, absolutely
stuck into that person with whom you are
identified. Try to understand. So, to be
person is loving me, not my wealth, not
by beauty, not my this thing but, he is
loving me and this idea of love, this is
something that will get him completely if you are of that level. Whenever you
detached from that person easily. How? put attention to that particular person
Now, it looks very funny that if you like who needs your attention, it will work.
somebody, if you love somebody and then
you should get detached. It is only attention on a person because you are
identified with someone not actually, what
we can say, paying attention to that
person. And then your attention will work
But if you are all the time wasting your
possible in Sahaja Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga
attached to that person, your attention
your state of mind is such that you are
will be tired, it won't work out. It's a big
absolutely detached and absolutely paradox that if you are attached to
attached. How? For example, I have my someone then your attention doesn't
daughter so I am detached. I never work and if you are not attached to that
telephone to her, I am not bothered about person, you do everything else. Now, I
her because in Sahaja Yoga you know have to give lecture alright, I am giving
how is that person. If the vibrations are lecture then I have to do some cooking, I
alright, why should you telephone! Why will do cooking, this, that, that. But all
should you talk to! Why should you ask the time you are thinking about that
for anything, no need. Only on vibrations person, all the time you want to have
you will know how the person is and so, connection with that person, it's not
it will seem that you are absolutely necessary. That person is alright. What is
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000
GURU PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
there to be so much worried about that
good fellow, he is risen very nice and gone
very deep. So, pay attention to those who
are not so good and talk to them about it
that you have to come up in a very sweet
person? After all, you have to do Sahaja
Yoga, you have to do so many things, you
have to raise Kundalini of so many, now,
manner. You have to talk to these other
people who are not yet there or who are
still struggling. You have to understand,
you have to notice- what are they doing?
Why is it they are not improving or rising
in their attention? What is the problem?
Why the divine is not flowing through
them? And you will find the reason for
this is that people do not have good
you are getting attached to one person
somewhere, it's not a very good thing.
By that kind of attachment your attention
also becomes useless, absolutely useless.
So, let the attention be free. Attention
should not be bound by your attachments.
Attention should be absolutely free. So,
it works automatically, and you will be
amazed, even if you do not pay attention,
the attention will work it out. It is such a
attention is because it is focused on
someone all the time. They feel this is their
responsibility that it should be focussed.
It is just to give the explanation to say
great thing to have this spiritual attention
which is nothing but love. It will just act,
you will be amazed how it acts! It's
another worldl am talking about, not this that, see, naturally I have to be worried
mundane world but something higher, about this or worried about that, is just
where your attention works and works an explanation.
so beautifully that you are amazed how it
But, if you really don't fix your attention
has worked. But, you should not bound
it by your attachments. If it is bound, you
to one person or ten persons only then
can have very limited sphere-only the your attention looks after the whole
people whom you are attached to or you world. It receives all the information and
are attached to those person. That's why also it gives all the information, what is
identification is made the way a guru to be done to correct the situation. So,
should be detached.
one has to rise into that state where you
do not get angry, annoyed or upset, no,
not at all. What happens to you that you
see a situation and in that you are not
involved. You see the situation and you
Now, there are ten disciples and one guru
and the guru likes only one. He thinks he
is the best and he should be encouraged
are away from it. Then you can solve the
problem better. But if you are part
parcel of that problem, then you cannot
and should be given all possible help. But
that's not going to help him, but on the
contrary he should say he is already, a
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
GURU PUJA
solve. It's like this I was telling that those
simple things are there that if you
who are fighting, say, cannot solve the understand that we suffer because
problem but a person who is not fighting everybody feels responsible for us,
can solve the problem. So, it's a very everybody thinks they are responsible,
simple thing to understand that if you are they have to do, this is responsibility for
identified, if you are involved with one us, somebody says, this responsibility we
person or with one kind of a thing then have to do, all these things are worrying
them and that is the reason today we have
a very complex society. They are suffering
from all kinds of diseases in which only
and can be applied widely, wherever thinking is responsible. By this thinking
you are lost.
So, our attention has to be always free
needed. That is the state one has to reach.
all the time, thinking about one person,
thinking about one problem, you reach
If you reach that state of mind, it's not a
I am saying you can do anything about it,
it's just a state of mind. Now, how do we
do that? Only through introspection.
Through introspection you will
understand that needs help to solve your
problems. Firstly, the problem is how to
nowhere. At that moment what you have
to do is to leave it to the Paramchaitanya.
If it goes to the Paramchaitanya, it will
manage, it will solve the problem. Now I
will tell you one thing, an experience. This
time I was in America and I wanted to
face yourself because you are little bit shy have a puja there. So, I said, let them
or may be nervous about this. As the time
come for the puja. It's nice if they want
comes you will be amazed that this
to come. Then they told me, "Mother, we
nervousness has no meaning at all. When
want to bring presents for you, for puja.
So, how can we bring the presents?" I
said, it's very simple-don't bring but they
won't listen to that. They said, we will
have to bring and the customs will trouble
us and do this and do that. So, only one
building ahead there was another building,
where they were having a liquidation sale.
I said, this is something nice, one can have
a look at it. So I went in and I found things
so cheap, unbelievable, very very
expensive things for throwaway price. I
you try to be deliberate about it, then it
won't work out but if you are Sahaja, it
will work out. So we come to the second
point, apart from the attention, that we
should leave everything into the hands of
Paramchaitanya. Let the Paramchaitanya
solve the problem. This is the problem,
let Paramchaitanya solve the problem, we
are not bothered. So, a detachment comes
in, you give the whole thing to
Paramchaitanya to solve, so, you are not
in it, you are away from it. Very-very
was amazed how it is there! So, I told
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000
11
GURU PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
them I can purchase all these things, they
will pay you but you bring all these things
to Canajohri. They agreed, alright. They
brought all the things all packed nicely
and gave it to Sahaja Yogis. We had no
problems of customs or anything. I paid
them there. How you see things can be
easily. But first, we must have pure love
in our heart. Not love out of some gain
or out of a some sort of a reward but pure
love if we have, then we can work it out
very easily, anything that you want to do:
This is a very lengthy thing which can go
on forever because after all the gurus have
to know, what are their duties and why
improved by understanding what is the
most important thing is to love. But love
is truth and truth is love. If you have love
they are gurus? It's very important, is very
important position that they are gurus and
they should use that position for
exhibiting tremendous understanding of
their disciples and also their purpose
should be clear cut. People should not
doubt him, should not think why he's
doing such and such thing. It should not
be a mystery. It should be absolutely clear
for somebody, genuine love, then
anything you want to do with that person
will be absolutely obvious because it will
be truthful. Anything you say to such a
person will be absolutely obvious,
clearcut because it is absolutely truthful.
So, when you are dealing with somebody
also, you should be extremely truthful.
cut.
Of course, you need not say things that
All these things I am telling you today
because today we have completed ten
will hurt you but you must use such wise
methods that will not in anyway hurt the
years of stay in Cabella. Cabella has been
extremely kind to me. There are lots of
other person, it will have an effect on that
person.
people to Sahaja Yoga, I tell you, very
lots of. It is a very far fetched place,
So, this kind of gurus we need now very
much in Sahaja Yoga because Sahaja everybody discarded it and said where are
Yoga has spread a lot. So, first of all, our we going to live and all that. But, here
temper has to be brought into proper only it has worked and that should be
shape. A guru has no business, I mean, accepted as a very big indication that
the Sahaja Yogi guru, has no business to Sahaja Yoga does miraculously,
lose temper, at all, on any point, miraculous. But foremost thing is you
whatsoever. If they can really do that must know vibrations. If you don't know
much, it will save us so much of worries, about vibrations then you can't do
anything. For example, when I first came
to Cabella somebody told me Mother,
so much of problems, so much of mess
we create. All this can be solved very
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000
GURU PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
12
very lonely place, there are mafias around,
only six-seven houses are there, where
to struggle with anyone, you don't have
to fight with anyone, you don't have to
argue with anyone. Just try to meditate
and achieve a state which I am describing
to you where you get completely
surrounded by love and affection.
are you going? What is this? They all
warned me. So, I came here, I
immediately told them where I am going
to buy it, tomorrow I will pay the money.
They were surprised, how can you do
that. I said, don't worry, its perfectly May God Bless You All
alright. On vibrations I decided that this,
is a wonderful place and my husband
There's one thing which is important to
understand that you should not go to
helped me so much at that time, though
everybody discouraged me everybody
extremes of everything, which is also a
human quality. For example, if they are
gave a very big horrible picture, but still,
where is the mafia now? It's gone,
rational, they go on rationalising
everything. I can't do this, I can't do that,
something like that goes on. The second
finished.
part of it is that they become very
emotional and they become so emotional
that they start doing wrong things in the
name of emotionality. You have to
Now, to know about the thing you have
to meditate and improve your vision,
which should be clear cut. It should not
be something, a vision which is reflecting
your particular ideas about particular
overcome these two things. If you have
not overcome that what's the use- What's
things but it should be clear cut. With
the use of calling yourself Sahaja Yogis.
Sahaja Yoga one has to know, the
protection of the Goddess is on the top
Minimum of minimum is that this much
of your head, nothing can go wrong
you must do-going to the extremes must
with you, nothing will happen to you.
It will all work out, I am sure.
be avoided, keep a watch upon yourself.
If you are going to the extremes, nothing
will work out. You might develop cancer,
develop horrible diseases on one side and
You see, talking about Sahaja Yoga like
this, you just get meditative and you feel
that one day all of you should become
like that, just meditative and this
meditative temperament or whatever is
the state, emits vibrations. It emits and
on the other side you might become a very
rational person and no Sahaja Yoga will
enter your head. So, you have to keep a
balance all the time and with that balance
like, somebody is a Sahaja Yogini and she
has done something very wrong then you
creates path for you, for your work, for
your life, for everything. You don't have
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
GURU PUJA
13
thing can take you anywhere. So, to be
should not become emotionally attached,
O Mother! what is it? we should forgive
emotional is not needed. You must love
her, No! You tell her that you must and left is what you can call another
improve your vibrations and must come extreme. One side it is emotional and
to balance and once you are in balance other is rational. In rationality you can
then I will consider your case, then I will start justifying anything like Hitler did.
say it is so or not. But if she has no He said, no, this was right, what I was
balance, goes into rationality, goes into doing was right. He took something into
emotional thing and this emotional his head and now this is right, just his
business can take you to, any nonsensical rationality. So, both things are to be
thing as it is a psychological case and one properly balanced and you should see that
can go into very very things that they are whatever you are doing are giving you a
doing out of these emotional things. See, proper result. So thank you very much
like even singing songs that are neurotic
again and again.
or anything, you see. All this emotional
May God Bless You
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 14
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
Cabella, 5-9-1999
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Tonight, we are going to worship Shri
Krishna as "Virata". First it is important
to understand the incarnation of Shri
go beyond all temptations, go beyond all
ego, go beyond all kinds of conditionings
a sthitapragya.
Sthitapragya is where, he doesn't feel like
ordinary people, attracted towards things
but, he is absolutely detached and this
detached person doesn't take to any
grievances, jealousy, all these things. That
and to become
Krishna. Krishna word comes from the
word Krishi. Krishi means agriculture. He
sowed seeds of spirituality and for that,
first of all, He had to think, where are we
as far as spirituuality is concermed. How is
the land?
He told but how to achieve it. He never
told. And the second thing he described
So. what had happened at the time of Shri is, that you must work, you have to work.
Rama that he created lots of maryadas After all you have got all the human
and by these maryadas people started tendencies is to work but, the fruit of the
mentally thinking about it. "I am not work you leave it at the lotus feet of God
supposed to do that. I am not supposed or as we call the Divine power. This is
to do this." It was just a mental binding. another trick of His because He realised,
It was not spontaneous, it was not Sahaja. how human beings were twisted and how
As a result, people became extremely they had a ego, if you tell them something
serious. They wouldn't talk much and how they will misinterpret it. So. He took
they wouldn't laugh, they wouldn't enjoy the other may round that tell them
anything. So. Shri Krishna decided that something absurd.
first of all, He must remove them from
Now, whatever work we do, your ego is
this conditioning and this conditioning has
to be removed in such a manner, that they
intact and with that ego you can never
give it up at the lotus feet of the Divine.
Very impossible. So, He made a
impossible situation that after sometime
people will realise that this cannot be done
and they will give up this idea of leaving
enjoy themselves. Then, He found out
there were three suggestions as far as
achieving the goal was concerned. So,
first of all, as He says, is to become a
realised soul, sthitapragya (feera. To
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Jan- Feb. 2000 15
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
that, if I tell them directly-do like this,
do like that, then they will say, of course,
everything at the lotus feet of the Divine.
This was the one how He prepared the
land. Second thing He said, "Pushpam
Falam Toyam", "Flowers, Fruit and
Water", whatever you offer me, I will take
that. But, when you do that you must have
we did it and still we never achieved it.
In India, there is a big cult we can call it,
people who go to Pandarpur, for one
month they walk in rags, singing the songs
and on the way they go on eating food at
different places. According to them, this
is 'Ananya" bhakti and they achieve
nothing. They have become very sick and
ananya' (T-4) bhakti. Ananya means,
completely single minded bhakti, when
there is not the other. This is only possible
after realisation. Only after realisation you
can put the fruits of your work at the lotus
very tired and have a very bad old age,
feet of the Divine and only after self-
realisation you can have 'ananya' bhakti
But who can tell them, they are all lost in
it. So, this is a way one could tackle
means the devotion which is single human beings to show others the
minded.
stupidity. And so many people come and
ask me, as I told you that how is it that
we do so much bhakti of Shri Krishna and
we have achieved nothing.
These absurd conditions you put for
human beings because they were so much
complicated. So, many people tell me,
"Mother, we are doing ananya bhakti"
How? Because we are singing on the
street, we are taking the name of God all
the time, we are going to Pandarpur, you
see, in rags and for one month we walk
singing, singing, singing. This kind of
absurd ideas about bhakti, He never gave.
So, He is the one who prepared the land
for sowing, we can say he is the one who
was like a very great agriculturist. So, His
name was Krishi, Krishna. There are so
many things I have told you about Him,
how His name came as Krishna, who was
Radha, who was krishna and all those
But, it is the way He wanted to neutralise
things. But when He talked of these
the absurdities of human beings that they
thought this was the bhakti, which is not.
Ananya bhakti is only possible when you
are a realised soul, when you are
things, also He told, that you should
become Sthitapragya, that is, they called
as Gyanyoga. Gyan means knowledge.
So, you should get absolute knowledge.
That He didn't say how? That you know
what is absolute knowledge which you
connected with the Divine, when there is
not the other. This is how He tried to
make three way attack on human beings can feel it on your fingertips in Sahaja
and on their stupidity because He thought Yoga. His speciality was to create
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 16
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
hypocrites. I just left them and sat in the
discretion in people. He thought by doing
all these things in a stupid manner, they
might develop discretion to know that this
is not the way you can achieve anything,
you have to get your self realisation.
Discretion was very important. At this
juncture when we are facing a sort of a
challenge of this new millennium, that the
car, at the right moment. That was not
such a good proposition or anything but
I could see I am buying it out of my pity
or you may call it compassion. But above
the compassion was this discretion which
said, nothing doing you better get out of
it. So, this divine discretion is a very-very
whole world is going to be destroyed and
all those things people are talking, It is
really very important to know through
discretion what is good and what is bad.
One may talk of something as very good,
something as very bad. But the Divine
discretion is very different, and it acts by
itself. Once you are in the realm of Divine
discretion you cannot commit mistakes,
even if you want to do it. I will give you
my example. We went to buy a house and
the fellow was, you see, like a beggar; he
came, he said we have nothing, we have
important thing which we should see how
it works and should be satisfied with it.
Not to feel bad that we have missed a
chance or anything but you must feel very
happy that this thing has happened and
that your divine discretion has taken on.
So, sometimes it appears that in that
divine discretion you may do something
wrong, you have done something wrong
but, if it is divine ultimately it will turn
out to be very good. I gave you a very
basic example but that is also very true
when you practice Sahaja Yoga.
no food, they have taken away all our
things and we are just absolutely starving.
When he said that we are starving, we
have nothing, so, I felt pity for him, I said,
alright increase the price. First we
The Divine discretion is extremely
important to play a very great part in our
lives, because this divine discretion gives
us the real joy of our being, of ourself, of
Sahaja Yoga. So, the third point was, for
Him, to make people joyous and happy.
But with all these maryadas of Shri Rama,
He didn't know how to do it? So, to give
people joy He said, alright let us dance,
let us sing, let us play Holi, all sorts of
things and with that He really originated
many things which were sort of not
serious, may look frivolous but in that
increased the price. Still he was saying
no-no, give us more. Still we increased
the price. I told my husband, you increase
the price. Though reluctantly, he
increased the price. Third time again we
increased the price then, he said, no we
will have something more than this, a little
more. Immediately, you see, this
discretion worked and I said, these are
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Jan Feb. 2000 17
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
whatever it is or all kinds of restrictions
there was joy expressed. All that He did
to give them a full idea as for a Sahaja you'll put. But if you have really the
Yogi or we can say for a self realised soul; Divine discretion then, you will know
what should be the attitude towards with whom he should talk, where he
should go, what he should enjoy and you
will see that he enjoy his life. Any
everything. But it is not that you have to
do it but it just works out, it is like that.
That in the state of Sahaja you enjoy attachment with anything doesn't give
everything, enjoyment and that is what you the full view of that person, of that
His idea was to ereate a sense of joy thing. If you are detached then you can
among people. There are lots of critics
who have criticised this part of His life.
According to them, religion means you
should become just old at the age of are there. They are very-very beautiful
see it, from above-above him. If you are
detached you become thoughtlessly
aware also. As I said now, see carpets
carpets. Now, if they are mine I will be
all the time worried because l am attached
twenty years you should become an old
man of eighty years something like that.
Funny ideas of religious achievement.
that these carpets should not be spoiled,
something will go wrong. But if I am not
attached I will look at those carpets and
what do I see! The joy, the joy that is put
in by the artist who has made them and
that joy really tries to reflect in me also,
that joy comes in me. So, to have
But He talked of joy and He never talked
of renunciation. He never talked that you
give up your family, give up your children,
you give up everything never, never. He
said, you must enjoy-enjoy with
detachment. For people it is very difficult
to understand how can it be with happiness but not joy because joy is single
detachment? With attachment you can and happiness is double; happiness and
never enjoy. If you are attached to unhappiness, So even if I try to enjoy
attachment to anything, there will be
something you cannot enjoy anything in
a full way. Like, supposing you are
attached to your child, very simple thing
something I will think still there is this-
this point is there. But joy is all pervading.
It has no boundaries and you just get
dissolved in the ocean of joy. That was
what Shri Krishna's ideas was that cut out
you are attached to your child. You are
attached to your child then you will be
bothered about the things which should
these maryadas.
not be there which will not give joy to
Now a days, we see the maryadas of so
the child. You will not allow your child
say, to go out or to talk to people, many things are really useless. For
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Jan - Feb, 2000 18
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
example, you have discovered the
maryadas of religion. See when they live
in maryadas then what happens, they sort
of coagulate or they have all kinds of
Then we have social maryadas. Social
maryadas are there which are sometimes,
when abandoned, can become very horrid
also. Like, in the west the women think
germination inside like the pond which is
absolutely bound, which is not flowing
like river. So, like that you see it becomes
that the less dress they wear, the more
beautiful they are. This is a new thing they
have started. Now, this is absurd. If you
see the discretion behind is very simple
a kind of a closed mind with these
maryadas and when you have these
maryadas you start thinking whether I
should do it or not, whether I will enjoy
that we have been animals and now we
don't want to have any clothes because
we were animals. It's an animal heritage.
That's why so many women do not want
to wear full dresses. It's just the animal
behaviour. So, the maryada or good
maryadas also people can give up saying
that we don't want any maryadas, we are
it or not. With these maryadas only you
kill the joy. Now, we have other maryadas
about say, we have the religion. Many
people who love to come to Sahaja Yoga
but because they have maryadas of silly
things of their religion, they cannot come.
They think this is our religion while they
don't understand. Falsehood becomes the
free, we can do whatever we like. But in
that freedom what do you achieve? Your
animal instinct works in that freedom and
you think you are a very free personality.
maryadas and they don't understand that
what is the maryada actually made by the
Then we have maryadas of our country.
religion. You see now in Islam what is
happening; with these maryadas they want
to have another country, this thing, that
God has not made different different
countries at all nor it is true that there are
thing. In Christian religion same thing is different countries but variety is there.
happening. Also, in Hindu religion. All Variety of people, variety of places is
these maryadas are really stagnating them there. These varieties must be accepted
completely and they are getting crushed as something very artistic and one should
into it. There is no discretion because they not get ruined and confused with those
have said it, they will do it. They are so
ideas that we are Americans, we are
Indians, we are this and we are that. You
much blind folded about it that they
are not. Now, you can know after Sahaja
cannot see what is right and what is
Yoga that you are all Sahaja Yogis and
you don't belong to any country as such.
The country may belong to you but you
wrong. But after Sahaja, you can see, you
can laugh at them when you can see.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 19
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
people who do not live with dharma, they
are adharmis. So, you have to fight and
that is how His fighting was so much
justified because after fighting the war
don't belong to the country. I mean the
work is today to understand that if
you
really want to care for all these countries
and all that then you must do some work.
they got back what they deserved. They
were deceived and this is what Shri
Work of Sahaja Yoga so that people get
rid of these silly ideas of fighting for the
Krishna said that you should not by any
chance become a slave of these people
but you fight it back.
territory, for this, for that. All over the
world there is going on, we want this land,
we want that land. Land belongs to God,
not to human beings and what is the use
of fighting for this land, I don't So, fighting also is justified in the divine
understand. But this confusion is there. discretion. It is again the divine discretion,
this illusion is there and people work out where you have to fight because you don't
on this confusion and illusion to such an want to be a slave. If you are a slave, you
extent that they ruin their lives, the lives are no good. So for that you can fight.
of their children. So many people are lost,
But when people start fighting for
separation or for territory, is not correct.
so many people are in the lunatic asylum
I should say because they end up in some
sort of a refugee camp. They are having
a good house, nicely living there and then
you become a refugee, why? Because
On the contrary, one should never think
of separating from the main lands. It
creates lots of problems. But now we
believe in the global religion, we believe
in the global territory. We don't have to
they believe that they can have their own
land, they can have their own place and
ask for anything. Anywhere you go, you
are the citizen of that place. Anybody who
they should live there. This idea comes I
think from some stupid leaders who want
to have for themselves these lands and
that's how people fight for land. There's
no need to fight for land or fight for your
country or fight for this or fight for that.
wants to go Russia ever, the whole
Russians will be with you, you go to
America they will be with you. That's how
because all these are the ideas of human
heings and if the human beings get
transformed there will be no problem of
But the situation is such that unless and
any war or any territory to be achieved.
until you fight, you cannot get to the truth
and that's why, if you remember that Shri
Krishna told Arjuna that you fight. You
have to fight, that's your work. You have
to fight these people because they are the
This was the divine discretion of Shri
Krishna which is still within us as you
know that this is a part and parcel of
Vishudhi chakra where Shri Krishna
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 20
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
resides. But when He rises to your ambitions, everything passes through that
and it works. You have seen how many
Sahasrara, when He rises to that level then
He becomes virat. So, virata's chakra is
miracles have taken place in your lives. It
placed in the head here above the Agnya
and this virat is the form of Shri Krishna
is the virat Shakti that works.
who has risen above the Agnya. When Now, for that you have to know how to
you are risen above the Agnya, you worship virat? First of all, you have to
rise above your ego, very important
otherwise how can you worship? There
become a part and parcel of virata's land,
we can say because unless and until you
Is your ego standing in between and how
can you rise up to the point of virat? You
are above your ego you are still involved
with your self and with wrong ideas of
maryadas. But, when you rise above that
and you become the virata, the great, then
you are in the land of virata and virata's
have to pass through that. Once you are
above your ego you enter into the
Kingdom of virat. There the king is the
virat and you are the subject who are
powers are tremendous.
looked after completely by Virat Shakti,
As was seen by Arjuna the form of virat, by the power of virat. But at that stage
the power of virat becomes so you become really a universal personality
tremendous that it acts globally. It acts in in a way because whatever are our
such a manner that you sit here and problems universally. Now not necessarily
anywhere it can act. You have seen that that they should be attached to you or
now, many-a-times people say Mother it's connected to you. Supposing, a person
is of that level, now there may be a war
a miracle. My mother was sick and she
was not here and I just prayed and she
in some other country, it can stop.
got alright. This is all the power of virat.
The power of virat is that it can penetrate
into the subtle side of human beings in
such a manner that everything we are
connected with it, we are not separate.
As every drop is connected with the
Somebody who is being oppressed can
win over. Anywhere your compassion
moves it works out. Wherever your
attention goes it will work out and
sometimes you are surprised as to how it
works Mother, how these things work
ocean, we are connected with the whole
out, how these coincidences have taken
universe and when you become a citizen,
I should say, of Virat then all the things
place. Only thing is you have crossed that
state of your ego and have gone into the
with which you are connected also get
your vibrations, your ideas, your
state of Virat which is a very important
thing to do, is to enter into the area of
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Jan - Feb, 2000 21
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
demonstrative of what they think they are
but, in the case of a person who rises
above his ego and is a part and parcel of
Virata. Then you don't think this is your
country, this belongs to you, that belongs
to you. This belonging business finishes
that virata-shakti, enters into the
off, then you belong to virat and He uses
Kingdom of virat, he knows, he is very
small. He is very small compared to that
and he just dissolves into that Shakti and
for his own purpose in the sense that
when your whole thinking is different,
you
becomes global thinking, then He acts and
then His powers are manifold. As
Krishna's power is that He uses a conch
this should happen to us that we should
humble down, we should humble down
and know that our powers, whatever we
have if they give us ego, we should get
to call people, I have given conches to all
the leaders. So, we have to now announce
rid of it.
and call people. But at the level of virat,
you don't have to do all that. At the level
of virat people see and they will know. We shouldn't have that ego, we should
Just they will match you and they will get rid of it and we should actually achieve
know, just they will think you are human that state where you can be called as the
beings and you are so sweet, so good, citizens of the virata's power.
just like gems, shining all the time. So, May God Bless You All.
they will be impressed. This comes
through the virata's blessings. When you Now, when you are entering into the
become that then you forget about other Kingdom of virata, you have to be like
things like your big positions or anything children. You are children there, as
or you come from a very rich family. All children you enter. As Christ has said,
these nonsensical things which are "when you enter into the Kingdom of
actually not true and all these things on God, you have to be like children". And
which you want to exist are no more. that's what you have to be today, all of
People like to show off their wealth, some you to be innocent like children. You have
people like to be very sort of to be innocent like children.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Jan - Feb. 2000 22
SHRI RAM PUJA, (4-10-87)
SWITZERLAND
TODAY we are celebrating in Switzerland
price. May be, we might be able to present
you all with one, when you come there.
But the story of Rama, they say, was
the coronation of Shri Rama on Dussehra
day. Many things happened on Dussehra
Day. The most important was that Shri
Rama was coronated as a king on this
written, before he was born. Even before
there was any inkling of it. The seer,
day. He also killed Ravana on this day. Valmiki wrote the whole story of Shri
Many may say that how can it be that he
Rama.
killed Ravana and he was coronated on
Shri Rama's birth and all that are brought
the same day. In these days in India we
forth by the Agni, the fire. And he was
born in the Dynasty of the Surya, the sun.
had supersonic aeroplanes. The name of
aeroplane was Pushpak, meaning the
flower. It was called as Pushpak and it
had a tremendous speed. So, after killing
Ravana He came to Ayodhya with his wife
So with all that, born out of the blessings
of the Agni, that is fire, and also was born
in the dynasty of Surya. He was one of
the mildest Avtaras you have ever had.
and that was the day he was crowned.
He is known to be a very formal person
On the 9th day He worshipped the
Goddess, to get strength, Shakti for His in the sense (Sankoch) that he would go
weapons and on the 10th day, He killed
Ravana. So you can imagine how much problems than to tell others to do
advanced people were there at the time something.
of Shri Rama and his kingdom. The We still had many people in India like that.
reason was, the king was an incarnation; Like, we had one Prime Minister, Lal
also he was a benevolent king as described Bahadur Shastri and if he was sitting in a
to any extent to bear upon himself the
by Socrates.
room and the people sitting and the
electricity was on, somehow say by light
or something and he wants to put it off,
Shri Rama's story is very interesting
throughout and we have now a beautiful
series about him done by our television
in India, which is sold for a very good
he would not ask anyone to put it off.
Slowly he will get up from his seat, walk
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 23
SHRI RAM PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
in all his character you see the beauty.
Like, he was going by a little boat when
upto the switch and just put it off. So that.
he shouldn't ask for it. This is one of the
he went for his exile. Other one who was
greatest quality of Shri Rama that he
would not make anyone do anything for
him or order anything or would use
someone for their purpose. See, he was
the blessing of fire and born in the Surya
taking him was an ordinary boatman and
the boatman was feeling very much upset
that he is sitting before the king of
Ayodhya and he does not have proper
clothes. So, Shri Rama who was himself
but what we find, those people who are
wearing nothing but valkalas, are the
clothes which are worn by the village
people or worn by the people who live in
the primitive areas, only kind of leaves
born, may be, in very lowly families, in
the negative families, the left sided as we
can call it with all kinds of problems, have
a terrible Agnya and a terrible Surya in
that they have. He had to wear that
them. The person who is born in the Surya
because his step mother asked for that
has to be extremely humble. He is the one
who shows that nothing can affect,
nothing can make him feel that he is
kind of a boon from his father. And then,
Shri Rama just told him why are you
worried? I am wearing this, I am no more
something great. Now, when we see his
a king. I am sitting before you like this.
You should be quite comforted and I
really don't know how to steer the boat
life further, he was a very humble man.
You see, now, the people who try to
despise others I don't like you, I don't
like, this is not good, it is very difficult, is
a sign that such a person is extremely low
in character, has no character at all but is
low in that. Anybody who has any
character, is shown by the tolerance he
has of other people. Intolerance is a sign
while you know how to steer the boat.
So, why should you be worried? Like
that, he kept even the people whom you
would call as low in Society at a very high
pedestal, which shows that he respected
human beings.
of a person who is extremely egoistical
and has its weight, its vanity.
He himself is called as Maryada
Purushotama, means he was the one who
Shri Rama was so much loved by the knew how far to go with someone
(Maryadas), how to talk to someone, how
to approach someone. While we find
people who misbehave even with their
people, where he ruled in that state and
he had the most beautiful wife of the most
venerated father Janaka and who was the
husbands, with their wives, with their
beloved son of his father. But he was such
children, with everyone and also outside,
an humble man, such an humble man that
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 24
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI RAM PUJA
they are about to jump on us. That's
that none of them are sour. Shri Rama
absolutely against Rama, it's like Ravana.
didn't like sour fruits, she knew. So, none
Even Ravana was not like this. He was
of them are sour and you can have them.
I mean in a way if it is done to somebody
in the west they will hit you hard.
also of not that nature. Because he had
certain dharmas within him. He was a
realised soul but he had become a raksha
Immediately Shri Rama rushed forward
because he became arrogant. But, even and took the 'bers' from her hands.
his arrogance cannot be matched with Kissed her hands, said alright, alright, I
many modern people and modern girls am going to have them. With such
and men that I hear and see. That it is enthusiasm he ate them. So, Lakshmana
surprising they have really surpassed
Ravana. Ravana only had ten heads but
was little angry at that lady, what's this
going on? So, Sitaji said, "Oh, do you
like them very much? He said, yes, but I
am not going to give you anything." She
said, "No! I am your half body. You have
to give me." So, he gave some to Sitaji.
So, Sitaji said, "Ah! what a thing it is like
nectar of heaven I am eating". So,
Lakshmana felt very jealous. He said,
"sister-in-law, can't I not have a little of
it?". She said, "No! I can't give you. You
sometimes I feel that the modern men
might have or the women specially might
have 108 heads. The arrogance, the
amount of expression of hatred is so
ridiculous and makes a person look so
useless. But I see such people very
common and in Sahaja Yoga also they
crawl somehow. Actually such people are
absolutely despised by God Almighty.
ask your brother. I am not going to give
I have a very little share. Why don't
You go further with his life. See, he went
you,
into the village where a very old woman
who was belonging to the primitive class
of Bheels, had very few teeth and, she more?" So, Shri Rama smiled and gave
brought some fruits, little fruits we call him that 'ber' which was eaten or tasted
as ber. And she brought and gave it to or pierced by the teeth of a primitive
you ask your brother?" So, he goes to
his brother, says, 'Can I have some
him that, Shri Rama, you see, I have got
woman, who is actually an outcaste
according to a brahminic laws of India.
these "phal'. I don't have anything else
and these, I have tasted all of them.
Actually in India, if you put in the month
it is 'uthishta'. Nobody will touch it. But
she said, I have tasted all of them by
The sweetness of Shri Rama, the way he
used to make people feel comfortable like,
I would say an example of a oyster who
piercing my teeth into it and I have seen
gets a little stone into the body of the shell,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 25
SHRI RAM PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
takes out a kind of a shiny liquid and
covers it with that shiny liquid and makes
it into a pearl to be comfortable. Now, he
It is an example of Shri Rama. He never
cared for the outer side or the outward
looks of a person. Because he came
before Shri Krishna, he tried to build up
didn't want his own comfort. Rama is
the inner side of a human being.
little bit different that he wanted to make
every one into a diamond or a pearl so
that, the other person would shine and So, we can say, though he is on the right
t heart he acts through your Hamsa chakra
and partly through your vishudhi chakra
would look ice and that's how he felt
comforted.
in the inner side of it. Because Shri
Krishna, in the inner side of it, is Shri
His qualities, if we have to imbibe, first
of all, we have to understand the innate Rama; is Shri Vishnu. So, when
situation of Shri Rama. Shri Rama is somebody is not say, good looking
placed on the right hand side of your according to the western-standards.
heart. Right hand side, right heart, he is According to me the western standards
are rather funny. Because western
standards don't look like neither like
placed there. Now, in a human being there
is no right heart. If you tell somebody,
there is right heart, he will say what?
There are two hearts? Or three hearts?
Krishna or Shri Rama. The person like
Shri Rama was a very healthy, tall person
with his hands up to the knees. Ajanubhav
In our Sahaja Yoga we have three hearts.
One is the left, another is the right and
one is the centre. Now, the right heart is
a very important thing. Right heart looks
after the whole lungs, both the lungs or
(3T17). He is the one who has
Ajanubhav and he was plump. Both of
them were plump. They had to be plump
people though, he was born of the Agni
but the water, is the main element of Shri
the throat, the trachea, the nose the inner
Vishnu. So, they were all plump people.
They were not thin like sticks as today's
part. The outer side is looked after, we
can say, the features are given by Shri
Krishna but the inner part of it is all done
by Shri Rama. They are the same. But
one acts as the inner part and the another
as the outer part. He gives you the ears
from the inner part Shri Rama does. He
gives you the eyes and the inner part of
the eyes. Now, it's so important to have
modern ideas are, to be thin like sticks
and like T.B. patients, but it does not
mean all plump people are good.We
always logically think that plump people
are, if Mother says to, then, plump people
are good, it's not the point. The inner side
of it, I am saying. The inner side of it is
just the opposite. Inner side of it is
the inner side alright and the outer side.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI RAM PUJA
Jan - Feb. 2000 26
absolutely beautiful and absolutely full of ugly woman Shurpanakha (T) came
love, affection and warmth. A person who to entice him and she said Rama, why
does not have these things is a sign of a don't you marry me?" I mean to a person
person who is not a Sahaja Yogi, first of like Rama, who is Maryada Purushotama,
all. A person who is very loud, talks to ask such a horrible question, somebody
loudly, speaks loudly, laughs at wrong would have really beaten her up if not
places, must be half mad, but, cannot be anything else. So, Shri Ram smiled. He
a Sahaja Yogi. See the softness of Shri said, "Madam I am sorry. I have a wife
and I believe in one wife (à¤à¤•à¤ªà¤²à¥à¤¨à¤¿à¤µà¥à¤°à¤¤). So
the Sankoch ( ), the formality the I am sorry I cannot marry you but
formal but if you see in English language mischievously He says, alright my
'formal' is not the word, Sankoch. He is there, his wife is left in Ayodhya, you
was, once when he was fighting Ravana, can ask him". She went to him and asked
he was taking out with his arrow his ten Lakshmana, "why don't you marry me?"
heads, one after another. And if he took She had become very beautiful. She
Rama goes to the extremes where I call
brother
out the one, then took out the second,
transformed herself into a beautiful
the first one would come back because,
woman. She must have gone to some
beauty parlour or something. She made
he had a kind of a blessing that nobody
can kill him by hitting him on his head.
herself like that and she was there. And
So, Laksmana says you know for definite
he looked at her, & was so angry. He said,
that this Ravama cannot be killed by you the ugly, why do you ask such a
hitting on his head so, why don't you hit
him in his heart? So, he said, the reason
question and he cut her nose. When he
cut her nose, that was in Nasik & that's
is this that just now in his heart is
why Nasika means the nose and that's
Mahalakshmi, the Sita. Sita is sitting in
way you have been to nasik. That's the
his heart and how can I hit him on his
place where he cut her nose. He was very
heart because she is there. She might be
hurt. So what's the use of hitting on the
angry, but Shri Rama did not. He said in
a way that is very convincing that see I
have a wife and I am a person who
head, he said? He said, because once I
start hitting him on the head fast his believes in one wife.
attention will go there. As soon as his
Now another character about him was
attention will go into his head then I can
that he was consistent. He was never
hit him on his heart. See, the Sankoch,
inconsistent like Shri Krishna. Shri
Krishna was a diplomat and diplomacy is
the way he talked. Then what happened
that he was so kind, once when a very
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Jan - Feb, 2000 27
SHRI RAM PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
in being inconsistent. Shri Krishna's style
all the poets of India and when Sita left
him ultimately, in a very mysterious way,
she just disappeared in the mother earth
because mother earth had given her the
birth. So she disappeared into mother
earth. Then Shri Rama became absolutely
lost and he jumped in the river Saryu and
disappeared in the water element from
where he had come.
was different. In Sahaja Yoga you can't
carry on like Shri Rama. Sometimes you
have to be Parshurama also. Otherwise
things don't work out. Now when it went
ahead with it in his character, which was
so beautiful that you find that he was such
a consistent person. Whatever he said all
the life he carried that. For example, he
said, "I am the one who believes in one
wife Ekpatnivrat". ( ana Now he Now this man had to give up his wife. In
had a very nice wife no doubt, very this contrast you can see the wave rising
beautiful wife, but she had gone to Ravana and falling of a personality. The society
and he was left alone. When they wanted in which he lived, the state in which he
to start a kind of a Yagya called as ruled had an objection for a wife who had
Rajsurya Yagya, which was meant to be lived with Ravana and the public started
the conquering the whole world. Then tÃ¤lking about it. So, as a good king he
they asked him, you have to marry. just decided that his wife should be left
because you have to have your wife. He
said, "no, I can't marry, because nobody
forever. And then he sent her on a
beautiful Chariot, with his Prime Minister
and his brother, Lakshmana who took her
down and left her, told her this is what
could be like my wife and I can't marry. I
can forgo this kind of Yagya but I can't
marry again". So then they said alright. has happened and that Shri Rama had
There is one thing you can do, is to make asked her to take her down to the ashram
a statue, of Sita in Gold and you have to of Valmiki. As a result of that she got very
use her, that statue as a wife representing. upset and she said, She was Adishakti so
He said that I will agree. He took away she does not have to bother, She said, you
all his ornaments, everything and made Just leave me here, very self respecting
that statue, and he did this Yagya. So person. She didn't say no-no-no. I will
whatever he said he followed thoroughly. come to him, or I will sue him, I will go
In his dharma he was perfect. Another
in the courts, get all his money, how dare
he throw me out, nothing of the kind. That
incident is that when Sita was lost. He
is the
grace of a woman. Graciously she
never slept. he never slept on a bed,
said, alright, now you have listened to
your brother. I am your sister-in-law,
always on the mother earth. The pain he
had of his wife is very well described by
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 28
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI RAM PUJA
elder to you. Now you obey me and I tell
and presented to her and said that this is
the ring of Shri Rama. She said yes, I
know, how is he? He said, he is alright.
you as your sister in-law that you can now
go. Leave me here alone and I don't want
you to go any further with me to deport
me with somebody, and she was pregnant.
Here if it happens, of course, horrible
things can happen. But in India if such a
thing happens, the wife will kill herself or
All enquiry she had about herself. So he
said, Mother, I can take you on my back.
I can easily take you, you can come on
my back and I will take you. She said,
no, I won't go with you. It's Shri Rama
who is a brave king. He should come
she would not be able to bear it. I think
himself, fight this Ravana, kill him because
both things are just the same in escape. If
he is evil and then I will go with him, with
all the glory. She was not frightened of
there is no aggression then there is
recession. But, she said, "No, I have to
give birth to these two children. I can look
anything. For her the important thing was
that Ravana should be killed. He is evil
after myself." Alright graciously it is done.
I am nothing please tell him not to worry
and should be killed by Rama. Such a
great courage for a woman. Both sides if
about me and she told Shri Lakshmana
you see, you will be surprised that how a
woman's character is such a powerful
thing. Its not a reactionary thing, my
husband is like this, that's why I am like
that alright you look after him and that's
all I want and she told the Chief Minister,
the Mantri, that you must look after the
kingdom. See the dignity, see the balance,
see the character, the personality of Shri
Rama. He was called as Maryada
that or my husband doesn't do this for
me, that's why I am this. My husband has
gone away, so I am finished. What am I
to do without my husband? Nothing of
Purushotama and look at his wife. She
was equal to him in every way. When she
was kept by Ravana, Ravana was so
frightened of her shakti that he would not
touch her. He used to frighten her saying
that I will do this to the women of India,
the kind. She stands on her feet. She said
no, to Hanumana and she stands on her
feet and she says when Shri Rama will
come, and kill this evil and remove this
I will do this to the women of the world,
evil from this earth, then only he can take
I will do that kind of a horrible things, I
me with him. I won't go with you. I won't
will take another birth, I will misbehave. escape him. I won't run away. Nothing I
She said, do what you like. You can't am going to face it myself here. For a
woman it i too much to say to be
touch me. He could not touch her hand.
He was so frightened. And when
imprisoned in a horrible person's jail or
in a place which is so dangerous for her.
Hanumana brought the ring of Shri Rama
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 29
SHRI RAM PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
were standing with their arrows. Then
To say that I won't go whatever you
may
Shri Sita appeared before them and she
try, whatever tricks you may try, whatever
you may say, I won't go. Just imagine.
said, you can't fight, he is your father.
This made Hanumana realize and he said
And Ravana was such a horrid fellow. He
alright I can fight Shri Rama now. Why
did all kinds of things to her. But she kept
did he leave you like this? See, the
sweetness of Shri Hanumana, who was
absolutely calm and quiet waiting for her
husband to come. Can we think of such
such a great devotee, such a great devotee
of Shri Rama, could see that he has done
women in modern times!! So satisfied
with themselves. So much in balance. So
much full of confidence and strength. This
is the message of Sita's life.
injustice to my mother and he stood for
that. Its very sweet of Shri Hanumana to
do that. Hanumana, as you know, is the
angel Gabrial, who is innocence,
simplicity and dynamism,. His dynamism
The Benevolence of Shri Rama was
shown when he started ruling the people.
He was the one who cared for the needs
was such that as soon as he was born, he
said better eat this sun, because the sun
of the people. For him it was important
that the people whom he ruled should be
happy and joyous. He looked after them
with great love. He had two sons whom
he looked after for a short time because
they were lost with the mother, Sita and
they are the ones who found him out in a
is scorching the people in India. So, he
went and gulped down the sun. People
had to say that you see, though it is true
the sun is scorching but it is of great help.
Please release the sun. Why did you eat it
off? So then, he released the sun.
way that Valmiki taught them how to sing
the Ramayana. And they went to Ayodhya
and sang the Ramayana. Rama went with
in
Hanuman's whole life was spent
serving Shri Rama and he was such a
dedicated Bhakta of Shri Rama. Now
them and one day in one of the Yagyas
here the contrast is also, that hanumana
when they caught the horse of Shri Rama.
Hanumana found it impossible to fight
had Navdha Sidhis, Nine siddhis-Anima,
Garima, Raghuma and all sorts of things
those two boys and he couldn't
understand. Here now the character of that he could become small, he could
great Hanumana one has to describe. He become big, so many things he had.
Despite all these siddhis and the amount
went and told Shri Rama, I can't
understand these two boys. I can't face of power he had that Shri Rama once
asked him that my brother Lakshmana is
them. I don't know who they are? So,
Shri Rama went there and these boys
being hit and he is very sick and he is just
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Jan - Feb. 2000 30
SHRI RAM PUJA
dying. So you go and get a particular kind
of a Sanjeevani, a king of a herb, which I
That's the sign of a person who is either
possessed and under the influence of
possession is doing that he is too weak
and he is possessed by his anger because
he doesn't have that much power to bear
anything. The most powerful thing is the
mother earth because she has the power
to bear. The one who has the power to
bear is the powerful. The one who does
not have any power to bear. I can't bear,
I don't like this. Such a person is useless
want to rub on his head. So he went there
and he could not find it. So, he brought
the whole of the mountain on his hand
and gave it to Rama, now you select I
don't know, I can't find it. That is the
Hanumana Shakti. And with all that
power he was such a humble person and
such a dedicated person. This is the sign
of a powerful Sahaja Yogi.
thing for this earth and sometimes I feel
why God created them. Its a headache to
have a person around. I can't eat this, I
don't like this. Then why are you here?
Nobody likes you either. No one likes
such a person and that's why that person
Anybody who is powerful has to be
humble and nonviolent. Mahatma Gandhi
used to say, that what is the nonviolence
of the weak. A weak has to be nonviolent.
What is so great! That's a policy or a kind
of a protection that he has. So a weak
is always I don't like this, I don't like that.
So, the power of a person lies in bearing
person has to be nonviolent because he
cannot face, he cannot protest. But
things. How much you can bear! How
much vou can undergo? Without feeling
nonviolence of the powerful is the sign
of the real nonviolence. Those who are
it like you are, say, in a jungle you are
powerful, if they are nonviolent, that happy, if you are in a palace you are
means they are quite confident of their happy. If you are with this colour or that
powers. Those people who are confident colour, if you are with this race or that
of their powers, why should do they race, if you are with this kind of life or
agress others? They just stand. Alright, that kind of life, you can bear it, and that
come along, what do you want? Even bearing power gives you the caliber, the
saying that people run away. So, those Caliber to have Sahaja Yoga. It's not that
who are violent, angry, hot-tempered, this is shown, its not that this is being
jump at everyone, torture everyone suffered, don't have to say I suffer being
trouble everyone are the people who are like this. No, you don't suffer. Its just by
very weak-charactered. Their character
is weak. If their character was alright then
the way.
For a person who wants all the comforts.
they would not have done all these things.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 31
SHRI RAM PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
if you know how to detach yourself from
A person who wants to live with all the
luxuries but not with any kind of defects that. Many people come and tell me
or any deficiencies, is a person is a beggar Mother, we have an ego, that is the
problem. I said, then give up. I mean it's
I would say, in every sense of the word. I
simple. Why do you have it. As if you see
they want to say that we have a trouble
with this thing but still we are clinging on
mean best thing to get rid of problems is
not to have them. In the sense now I don't
drive, so I have no problem of driving I
never telephone so I don't have problems
of telephone. I don't go to the banks, so
I don't have problems of the banks. The
to it. Like we are afraid of a crocodile
but we want to put our foot into the
mouth of the crocodile and we have a
problem that our foot will be eaten up by
best is I don't have any income so I have
the crocodile. Now give up. But they will
no problems of Income-tax. Whatever
search out the crocodile. Open the mouth
bothers you, you just don't have it. Why
and put the foot in it and then come to
me and say mother, we have a problem.
My foot is in the mouth of the crocodile.
do you want to have it? Have it and then
bother about it. This is very funny that
you can get rid of anything that bothers
To get to problems you have to get to it.
But without getting to it how will you
get a problem. Say for example people
have very silly stupid problems. Now the
first problem somebody may have oh, I
have to get my clothes pressed. What's
you very easily in this world. So you need
not have that kind of a thing on your head.
The word problem, specially in the
european community problem is a very
common word. But in the English
language we never heard this word.
the need? No problem, Wear them as they
problem. You see the problem was used
when we were studying geometry;
geometrical problem. But, we never knew
there is a problem in life. Later on, when
are. Who looks at you? You see there are
all the people who have pressed clothes,
does not matter, what's there if it is not
pressed. It's a problem for them, is silly
came in contact with European
things like that. You see very silly things.
community, they will say there is no
problem, this is the problem. At least, in
But the greatest problem I think you have
is your watch. In Switzerland, I shouldn't
one day, 100 times they say problem
word. So, for a problem the solution is
not to have that thing which gives you
say so.
You see the problem is like this, that now
you have to go to the airport. As soon as
you tell somebody we have to go to the
problem. You can give up anything.
Anything that you want you can give up,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 32
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI RAM PUJA
airport. Now, I have to go, you don't have
to. Everybody gets a sort of a jumping as
you are standing on a jumping boat. You
see all of them jumping like that. What's
the matter? Mother you have to go to the
airport. So its Alright, I have to go what's
give me or he may not give me. What is
the problem? The problem is that you call
it a problem and want to avoid to face
the truth. If you face the truth you will
know one thing that see now this man
has to give me money. Alright, I will go
and face him. I'll tell him Sir, you have to
give me the money. You have to pay me.
wrong with you? It's a problem; I said,
what's the problem? You just know that
This is your duty and if you don't pay
me, you are doing wrong. You get at aim
and face him and tell him. But you won't
you don't have to go at all and you don't
have to come to the airport and the
aeroplane if it comes and does not take
me I am not going to come back on your
heads, so, I will stay in a hotel. Don't you
worry! But why are you so excited about
do that. You will sit at home. Oh God!
it's a problem. That man is not giving me
money. Oh! God! that's the problem.
Sitting here, hitting your head all the time.
it? The way people are excited that I must
catch the plane, sometimes I feel as if they
How will you get it?
want to get rid of me.
If you face it directly then you will be
So, this is a problem for the people who
amazed there is no problem for anything.
are very meticulous. Now, supposing, I
say I know that the plane won't leave me.
I know because I know many things. So,
I have no problems. But supposing even
Say, your car fails, so it fails. Get down
enjoy yourself nicely till somebody comes
along, takes you or if supposing, you
don't get some lift, alright stay there over
night; What is in it! No tiger is going to
eat you. And if the tiger has to eat you, it
will eat. Where is the problem? Still I can't
see the problem. If tiger has to eat that's
already destined, that the tiger has to eat.
In any case nobody dies. You will be born
again. If you look at it from that angle
then you will be surprised most of the
problems do not exist. They are like
bubbles, created by our own thinking. The
waves of our thinking, this is the problem,
that is the problem. Like today, they said
if you think the plane you may not get, so
it may not get. But, if it gets you alright,
if does not get you its alright. So, where
is the problem? Either it will take you or
it will not take you, what is in between?
Where is the problem? I still don't
understand? Either it will work out or it
will not work out. Keep two possibilities.
That's the only two possibilities. What is
the third possibility that gives you the
problem, you tell me. Say, somebody
owns me money alright. So, either he will
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 33
SHRI RAM PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
there is no hall on such and such date.
in. For the vital air, and that vital air when
Alright, where are you having the hall?
it gets heated up, we have to know that
we are not any more with Shri Ram. It
has to be the cool air, should blow through
If there is no hall, let us have it in the
open. So to make the best of it is the way
your nose and your mouth. I don't know
Shri Rama shows you. Now, what is the
about you people, it happens with me all
the time. When you are angry the nostrils
way he has helped us, let us see. Shri
Rama by his character, by his balance, his
go up, swell up and the hot air, the hot
peace and his mildness, and his sweetness
words and everything hot, the heated eyes
has shown us how a king should be a
and everything goes up like that, curled
benevolent king and at the same time a
up and you become ferocious Ravana.
Because you have forgotten the beauty
very loving husband and a loving father
and a person in dharma. Apart from that,
of the nature of Shri Rama. What has he
he went down to Maharashtra. He
done to our centre heart is the greatest
thing that he has given you a fatherhood,
arranged all these things so that he could
walk down to Maharashtra barefeet to
within yourself. Because Shri Rama
vibrate the land because Sahaja Yogis will
represents the fatherhood. Now what sort
of father you are, you have to decide.
be going one day to Maharashtra and the
Maharashtra has to be a vibrated land. In
Ayodhya he never took out his shoes. Those people who are not good fathers,
Because he was the king there. But when develop problems of the right heart. Also
he, and Shri Sita, both of them, went to those people who are not good husbands
Maharashtra, they took out their shoes also develop the right heart. This right
to vibrate it. On his way he saw a big stone
heart is so important, because specially
which was nothing but a lady cursed to in the west, where the climate is so funny,
be a stone, Ahilaya, and he made her just you have to keep inside your rooms and
by touch, she again came back to life. Like clothed up all the time that you get all
that one after another he was just, by the dried up inside. At that time if you don't
way, as if he was doing. But that was the have that sweetness, that warmth, that
kindness of Shri Rama you get the trouble
purpose of his life to go there. And that
has helped a very great achievement of Asthma. So, many people die of
Asthama, in the west. On top of that you
within ourselves is the Shri Rama.
fight with your wives, you beat them, you
Shri Rama stands for the Pranavayu take away their money, you cheat them
, is for the vital air that we take
in their money, in every way you torture
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Jan - Feb, 2000 34
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI RAM PUJA
your women, very important. Otherwise
if you fall in this activity of keeping your
wives on right lines you might also get
right heart and Asthama ultimately.
them. Then it becomes even worse.
So it has something to do with money, in
the sense because Sitaji was Shri laxmi
and Sitaji was the one who was the power
of Shri Rama. So Shri Laxmi also gets Because your wife and you are part of
annoyed with you when you are a bad the society and the society has certain
father as a bad husband. That's why the laws which are very important. There is
Gruhalaxmi is very important. But the something like stridharma something like
woman has to be the Grahalaxmi. She Patidharma, something like Matadharma,
should not be a shrew and then the Pitadharma, everything has a dharma.
husband is supposed to be kind to her.
Then it is quarrelling. That's very bad.
The woman has to be a Grahalaxmi, a
Those men who torture their wives have
very bad heart, in the same way those who
play into the hands of their wives also
have a very bad right heart.
beautiful woman with a very sweet nature
and talking to her husband in a very
You have to be in the balance. You are
the husband and she is your wife and both
are responsible for keeping a very good
family relationship. It's not one sided. Its
Sankoch manner and also looking after
the children, looking after the family and
looking after the guests who come to their
house. But if you encourage and run after
such women who are no good, means
not the husband only or the wife but both
collectively they should be improved. If of them have to be in such a manner, that
collectively they do not act well. they act according to their nature of
collectively if they are aggressive, woman and man, and respect each other,
collectively if they are tormanting others love each other, share everything with
each other and exist in a way that people
then such women should not be
encouraged at all. But Tulsidas says they should see that there are two wheels of
the chariot, one on the left, one on the
should be beaten up, is a thing looks very right, there is no imbalance. They are
bad in modern times if somebody says
like
equal but not similar as I have told you
many a times.
that, that women should be beaten in
case they have all such qualities which
disqualify them from being Grahalaxmis.
up
Now, in the case of Shri Rama, he left his
Of course, there is no need to beat them
wife, When it came to Sita she left him
but I mean to say that what is it that
you
too. But she left him as a woman would
have to drive out all these badhas from
leave and he left her as a man would leave.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 35
SHRI RAM PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
She also left him, but in a way that is again. There are some who do Aartis just
suitable for a woman to do and he did it
because to show off, some throw flowers
in a way that is suitable to a king. In the
to show off. They must be the first and
somehow or other they get also the
position, because of their assertions and
same way a woman when she acts, she
has to act like a woman. The same things
askings. The leaders have to be careful
and not to give duties to such people who
really upset me very much, because of
their arrogance, because of their showing
offs. I have to say one thing today, that
she may do, as the man does but she has
to be a woman and a man has to be a
man. So that's the maryada Purushottama
(a a a
ahaa, is the one who is the
highest among all the men, with his all
the maryadas, all the boundries that he under the circumstances we have to
decide that if the leaders don'thave wives,
observes. The boudries are such that you
do not try to overpower others, or you
do not try to take their seats. For example
I have seen, those who are aggressive also
show up in our programmes. They will
be the first before me, they will be, as soon
as I open the gates they will be
somewhere there standing. They will be
the first in everything. That's not being
who are humble, who are kind, who are
compassionate and who are Gruhalaxmis,
who are very sweet with the collective
we have to cancel the husband as well as
wife from the leadership. We cannot have
leaders who have wives who are horrid,
we cannot, because the wife of a leader
is like the mother.
in maryada. You should be at the back
There are 5 types of mothers described,
lane. There are leaders, you have got they
can sit in the front. Try to be on the back.
I want to be first. Then I have said once
one of them is the one who is the wife of
the Guru or of the leader and if the leader
has a wife of that kind its better in all sense
the first of the first. You know the story
of first of the first. So you become first
of the first and that's what happens to you
he should be dropped. Improve his wife
do whatever is possible. Till she is alright,
he should not be the leader. Its a very
when you try to show off and I know all
important thing because I have seen such
women bring down the men, not only that
but they bring down the Sahaja Yoga,
Sahaja Yogis and the whole organisation
of them who are like this.
To be at the back ground is the most
respectable thing to do. To go forward
first, to jump forward first, standing near
the door if mother is coming you see. As
of God. So one has to be careful and the
women have to understand that if they
are the wives of the leaders, they have to
soon as I see the person I just know, back
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI RAM PUJA
Jan - Feb. 2000 36
be extremely good, kind, generous,
be very hard, can be very stiff or could be
very mischievous, could be troublesome
selfish. You cannot grow in Sahaja Yoga
with these qualities. Its such a luck and
chance that your husband is the leader, is
sharing, looking after, absolutely
motherly and should not tolerate non-
sense and should correct when people are
doing wrong. They should not report
anyone to their husbands, should not take
over themselves the responsibility of
the highest man in your nation, in Sahaja
Yoga and where you have to be up to his
doing things which they are not supposed
to do. If they are not of that level, they
ability, capability and his name, otherwise
you have no authority.
are of no use to people and they have no
That is why, I have to tell you that on this
day of Dussehra let us decide that we are
business to be proud of being the wives
of the leaders.
going to have Ram Rajya in Sahaja Yoga,
where there in benevolence, there is love,
From Shri Rama's life we learned a lot
and from Sitaji's life also. Both of them compassion, security, peace, joy,
have done so much for us, bring forth discipline anmong ourselves. The whole
such a great life. All their life they suffered
and suffered and suffered. They lived in
the villages, they lived in the forests, while
they were king and the queen. They had
disciplining is within ourselves. What
say about Shri Rama is that he himself
has put himself into the discipline of
maryadas. In the same way we ourselves
should put ourselves into the discipline
of maryadas.
never known what is comfort, travelled
all the way bare feet. They went through
all kings of tortures of life. Sita was taken
It's a very great thing that it should
happen in Switzerland because
away by Ravana, who was a horrid man.
She had to live with a Rakshasa, can you
imagine. She lived with a rakshasa and Switzerland needs it the most, the
there she showed her greatness. The blessings of Shri Rama. The way it is
characters of different nature like Sita and going on in this country, this very selfish,
Shri Rama, they were showing the non benevolent activities going on,
complimentary attributes that they had, cleaning all the poorer nations by this kind
very complimentary and if that is so, then of a selfish attitude, a very narrow
the husband-wife's relations are beautiful attitude, very low level attitude towards
in Sahaja Yoga, that's the way it should the money of these poorer nations. Its
be. I find some people are very nice. Some very important for us today to pray for
leaders are extremely nice but wives can
the emancipation of the hearts of those
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Jan - Feb. 2000 37
SHRI RAM PUJA
people who are just butchering. In
modern times, you don't have wars but
come, then Rama is to be born in the
hearts of people who are at the helm of
financially they are butchering people, affairs and that's how we have to pray to
they are killing them by depriving them Shri Ram that be kind and compassionate
of their own money and their own so that you could be born into the hearts
benevolence. So if Ram Rajya has to of these people.
May God Bless You
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 38
The Divine Cool Breeze
EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA
1984
TODAY we are doing a special type of puja
which is for crowning the glory of
stupid you have been! What I am saying
is that after realisation, specially, He is
Ekadash Rudra. Rudra is the destructive
much more sensitive that people who are
power of Shiva, of the Spirit. Now one
power, which is His nature, is forgiving.
He forgives because we are human
beings, we commit mistakes, we do
forgiven and have been given such a big
thing like Self Realisation, still they do
wrong things! Then He is much more
wrathful. So in the balance the forgiveness
wrong things, we get tempted, our
attention is disturbed. He forgives us. He
starts reducing and wrathfulness starts
increasing. But when you forgive and as
also forgives us when we spoil our a result of that forgiveness you feel the
chastity, we do immoral things, we do gratitude, then His blessings start flowing
theiving and when we talk against Him. towards you. He gives you tremendous
He also forgives our superficiality, capacity to forgive others. He pacifies
jealousy, our lust, our anger. Also He your anger, He pacifies your lust, He
forgives our attachment, jealousy, cruelty pacifies your greed. Like beautiful dew-
and possessiveness. He forgives our drops His blessings come on our beings
egoistical behaviour and also our and we become really beautiful flowers.
subordination to wrong things. But as And we start shining in the sunshine of
every action has reaction, so when He His blessings.
forgives He thinks that He has given you
He uses His wrath or destructive power
to destroy all that tries to trouble us. He
a big grace mark and that reaction builts
within Him as a wrath against those
up
protects realised souls at every point, in
every way. Negative forces try to attack
the Sahaja Yogis but they are all
neutralized by his tremendous power of
who are forgiven but try to do greater
mistakes, specially after realisation,
because such a big blessing there is after
realisation. You have got the light and in
the light if you are going astray then His
wrath goes on because He feels how
protection. Through the vibratory
awareness we are guided in to right path.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-40.txt 
 EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
Jan - Feb. 2000 39
the left side of your void. The first five
on the left hand side come if you have
bowed yourself to wrong Gurus, or if you
have read wrong books; or if you have
been in the company of wrong people, or
Those who enter in to Sahaja Yoga and if you have been sympathetic towards the
All His beautiful blessings are described
in the Psalm 23, The Lord is my shepherd?
It is all described, how he looks after you
like a shepherd. But He does not look
after the evil beings. He discards them.
still carry on with the evil nature, are
destroyed. Those who come to Sahaja
Yoga and do not meditate are destroyed
people who have been following wrong
path, or you have been yourself one of
the agents or Guru of these wrong people.
Now these five problems can be solved if
we completely give up whatever wrongs
we have been doing. As Mohammed
Saheb has said that you have to beat the
or they are thrown out of Sahaja Yoga.
Those who murmur against God and
live in a way that is not behoving a
Sahaja Yogi, He removes that problem.
So by one force he protects by another
force He throws away. But his
destructive forces, when they are built up
Satan with shoes but that has to be done
not mechanically but from your heart.
Like many people who come to Sahaja
Yoga will tell me, 'my father is following
too much then we say that Ekadash Rudra
is active. Now this Ekadash Rudra will this Guru, that Guru' and get involved
be expressed when the Kalki itself will with their father, mother, sister, this that
start acting; means the destructive power and try to take them out from those
will destroy all that is negative on this Gurus, also get entangled. Or some of
earth and save all that is positive. So it is them bow to other forces, like I know of
very necessary for Sahaja Yogis to
expedite their ascent; not to be her child must get baptised. I told her,
a Sahaja Yogini whose parents told that
satisfied with social life or married life
you cannot get this child baptised because
or with all the blessing that God has
he is a realised soul. But she could not,
bestowed upon you. You always think
that way, stand up to them and she took
the child for baptism and the child became
what God has done for us, how He has
been showing miracles to us; but we have
very funny. It looked like a mad child. I
to see what we have done to ourselves?
saw myself! Now, then she gave up all
that and so she was saved. But supposing
What are we doing about our own ascent
and growth?
she had another child, she would have
done the samething and the second child
would have been something very very
Now, out of the eleven Ekadash Rudra,
the five come from the right and five from
bad. Now the trouble with Sahaja Yogis
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Jan-Feb. 2000 40
EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
Sahaja Yogi and I am so, and we should
is that anybody who comes to Sahaja
Yoga programmes thinks he is a Sahaja
Yogi. It is not so. Either you should have
do like this and we should behave like
this and start dictating people, can do
anything; and some mediocres or some
very strong sensitivity or if you feel it in
your body or with your intelligence you
should understand what is Sahaja Yoga.
The person who is still negative always
gets attracted to another one who is very
powerfully negative and does not
understand that the other person is so
half-baked Sahaja Yogis may try to
understand. But most of them will know
that this person is going-on his way out.
He still leads to this left side development
or we can call on the head on the right
hand side, of your medha, (this place
powerfully negative but gets impressed.
Under such circumstances, such a person
(Forehead) is called Medha in Sanskrit
language). Now the right sided one comes
from the idea people have that I am myself
is hit by that negative person and Shiva
cannot protect him.
a big Guru. They start preaching about
****
Sahaja Yoga also as if they have become
great Gurus! We have known some
One should not have sympathy with any
one who is negative, whether he is mad, people who give big lectures in my
whether there is something wrong with
him, whether he is your relation or
anything. No sympathy of any kind. On
the contrary a kind of an anger should be
programme and never allow my tape to
be played or anything. They think they
have become experts. Some of them say
that now we have become so great that
there for that person; kind of a
we have no need to do any foot-soaking
detachment, angry detachment. And this
angry detachment is the only time meditation. There are some who say that
when you have to be angry. But I have thing can never touch us since we are
seen people who have anger for very good Sahaja Yogis and very great. But the
Sahaja Yogis but not for their own worst of them all are those who just
husband and wife who are extremely take my name saying that 'Mother has
negative! So when the Ekadash Rudra said so' and I am telling because
starts acting on these five on the right side Mother has said so, when I have never
it moves from the left and moves to the said such a thing it is all falsehood.
right side, then a person starts becoming Now there are some people who use
negative but acting with his ego. Such a Sahaja Yoga money and exploit Sahaja
person may take up any situation into Yoga in such a way exploit them, Sahaja
or anything. There is no need to do
hands and say that I am such and such
Yogis also sometimes. Such people
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-42.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA
Jan - Feb. 2000 41
become very inauspicious. Anyone speaking, now you should watch me
who tries such things will go out of constantly so that there is thoughtless
Sahaja Yoga with disgrace. But one
awareness and Agnya Chakra is
soothed out. Don't pay attention here
and there all the time, then you will
should never go near such a person, have
nothing to do with such a person, have
no sympathy. Because this inauspicious-
find that gradually your attention will
neutralize into thoughtless awareness
ness will hurt anyone to any extent. So
better keep out of such people. When
these ten Ekadashas are developed within
a person then definitely such a person gets
and your attention will be fixed in such
a manner that you don't have to worry
about anything. In thoughtless
diseases like cancer and incurable horrible
awareness nobody can touch you,
diseases, specially when the eleventh one
which is actually here (in the forehead)
that's your fortress. By meditation one
must establish thoughtless awareness,
which is the Virata's Chakra, which is the
that is the sign that you are rising
higher. Many people do meditation and
say alright Mother we are doing,
mechanically they do, and say yes, I did
collectivity. When it is affected as well
then such a person cannot get out of it.
But out of these five are combined,
this, I did this.
supposing with Muladhara or with
Agnya, then they get in to very serious
type of dirty diseases. That's why I always
But did you achieve your thoughtless
awareness, minimum of minimum?
say that be careful about your Agnya
Have you felt your Cool Breeze coming
out of your head? Otherwise if you are
Chakra because that is one of the worst
things that once start getting combined
doing something mechanically, it is not
with the Ekadashas, part of Ekadasha,
then anything can happen to a person. He
going to help, help you or help anyone.
So after realisation, as you are very well
can meet with a horrible accident, He can
be suddenly hit by someone, murdered protected, you have all the blessings and
a great future, you also have a great
by someone, any thing can happen to such
possibility of a complete annihilating. I
would say, to give an analogy, you are
a person who has the right Agnya and
also anyone of the Ekadasha-right or
left. That means five of these, if they. climbing and everybody supporting you
anyone of the five, if they combine with
Agnya Chakra, the protective power of
God are minimum. So to keep vour protected to be taken upward. There is
Agnya Chakra alright, see now I am
to climb, holding your hand and there are
so many things by which you are
no possibility of falling off by mistake
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Jan-Feb. 2000 42
The Divine Cool Breeze
EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA
also. But if you try to remove your
bondages with truth and love and all the
time try to hit the people who are trying
to support you then you fall from a greater
height. Because the greater height you
rise the greater you fall, and with the
which is penetrating into every atom in
to every molecule, into every human
being, into every thing that is living and
non living. Once it gets disturbed the
whole thing gets into jeopardy. So the
pleasing of Christ is very important. Now
Christ has said that you have to be like
greater force also.
small children, that is the innocence, the
purity of heart is the best way you can
Every effort is made by the Divine, every
support is given to you every care is please him. As in the west, specially,
taken, despite that if you want to fall from
that height, then it is very dangerous. But
Ekadash rudra, at such a time when
somebody tries to harm the cause of
people have developed their brain too
much, they try to play about with words
and think that nobody knows what they
are doing! All such people must know that
Sahaja Yoga, after being in Sahaja Yoga
then it hits you so badly that the wholle every thing you do is known to God.
attack is very widespread. But the whole If you are not clean in the heart, it is
family can be protected if there are few very dangerous for anybody to pose as
people of that family doing Sahaja Yoga if he is a very good Sahaja Yogi. Such
work, could be protected, but in case the people are not possessed, nor they are
family that is against all the time of Sahaja conditioned, nor they are egoistical, but
Yogis and try to trouble them can be they are very cunning, clever people and
completely destroyed, very badly. Now they are quite aware as to what they are
these Ekadasha Rudras come out of, as I doing. But there are people who get
told you, the void. So we can say the possessed also and then in that they try
destruction part of it comes from the void to destroy themselves or cry and weep
mainly. But these are the powers, all are and do all kinds of things. There are some
given in one person, that is the Maha who think that if they hurt themselves and
Vishnu, that is the Lord Jesus Christ, do some sort of an extreme thing then
because He is the support of the whole God will be happy, are sadly mistaken. If
universe. He is the personification of you cannot enjoy in Sahaja Yoga then you
*Omkara'. He is the personification of should know that there is something
vibrations. So when he gets angry then wrong with you. If you cannot feel
the whole universe starts breaking. He happy in Sahaja Yoga than you must
personifies the power of the Mother know that something definitely wrong
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-44.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 43
EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
home, and it is alright. But they do not
know what they are missing! Whatever
with you. If you cannot enjoy the
company of Sahaja Yogis, then be sure
there is something wrong with you. If may be your experience with others
you cannot love and appreciate the you should stick on together, always
greatness of God then there is attend programmes, take leadership,
something wrong with you. If you are
still worried about negative people and will be blessed thousand folds.
go ahead with it, work it out and
you
their problems then know that there
Ekadasha Rudra are all the powers, I
is something wrong with you. If you
have sympathies with the negative would say, of destruction, together. It is
people then also there is something
the power, destructive power of Shri
Ganesha, is the destructive power of
Wrong with you. But if you have anger
for negative and all that is negative. Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha. It is the
that is against Sahaja Yoga, then you
destructive power of the Mother, is a
destructive power of Bhairava
are there. When this thing gets
matured then you become the power
Hanumana, Kartikeya and Ganesha. Also
the powers of Sadashiva and of the
Adishakti. All the destructive powers of
of Ekadash Rudra yourself. Anybody
who will try to insult you, or do ay
harm will collapse. It has happened all the incarnations are Ekadasha. Now
with many people who tried to be
the last but not the least is the destructive
power of Hiranya Garbha, which is the
collective Brahamadeva. And this power,
insulting to me or tried to harm me in
any way. Sometimes I am quite worried
when it acts, every atom explodes, the
whole atomic energy goes into a
about them.
destructive power. So the complete total
So one has to be in such a way that they
destructive power is Ekadasha Rudra. It
is extremely powerful, explosive, but it is
not blind. Its very discriminating and
extremely diligently woven. It avoids all
will become the Ekadasha. Nobody can
touch such people but such a person is
full of compassion and forgiveness. As a
result Ekadasha act much faster. The
good points and attacks the wrong things
and it hits at the right time, at the right
more compassionate you are, the more
powerful Ekadasha becomes. The
more collective you become the more point, direct, without hitting any thing that
Ekadasha acts. Many people have a is good in between. Now the glance of
habit of receding back into their Ekadash Rudra falls upon someone, for
exclusion and saying that better be at example, and there is something in
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Jan Feb. 2000 44
The Divine Cool Breeze
EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA
between that is Divine or which is a do! He took her child, representing Sahaja
positive thing, it penetrates through Yogi, you can say, or representing Christ
positive without harming the positive, and or representing any one of the great
hits the negative. It cools down children of Hers and put the Child under
Her feet. When she was trampling.
somebody and burns another.
suddenly she saw Her own child under
Her feet and such a big tongue came out
So that is how it works with such care
and such delicacy. And it is tremendously
and she stopped. This has happened only
sharp also. And its very painful. It is
once. So after the Ekadasha Rudra,
not like cutting the neck in one shot, it
goes on slowly slowly. All the horrible
torture, that you have learnt or heard
about are the expressions of Ekadasha
ultimately complete destruction comes
through the anger of Sadashiva. Then the
final, total, destruction takes place. So
thus we have to know how Ekadasha
Rudra. For example take the case of Rudra acts and how Sahaja Yogis have
cancer. In the cancer case, the nose is
removed, the tongues are removed, and Now to develop this power one has to
every thing, one after the another, is develop a tremendous power of
to become themselves Ekadash Rudras.
removed with terrible pain. Take leprosy
-detachment from negative.
detachment
for example, the lepers cannot feel their For example negativity can come from
fingers, they cannot feel it. So any rash very near people like brother, mother,
or anything, if it is there, they cannot feel sister, could come from friends, could
it. So they start losing their fingers.
is how Ekadash eats up people, devours.
But this wrathfullness of the father can
That
come from relatives. It could come from
your country, it could come from your
political ideas, economic ideas or
be very gentle and very sweet when it
comes to His own children. The story is can destroy your power of Ekadasha. It
about the Mother. Once She got very is not only sufficient to say that I am
angry, the primordial mother, so angry surrendered to Sahaja Yoga, and I am a
that she wanted to destroy the whole Sahaja Yogi but you must know mentally
world with Her Ekadasha power. She also what is Sahaja Yoga. So that
anything, like that, Any misidentification
tried to destroy the whole world. When
she went into that mood the father himself Sahaja Yoga, because in the West.
felt that she is bit too much angry. When specially, people are over intelligent. If
she started destroying, she was going the light of Sahaja Yoga doesn't enter in
intelligently you understand what is
right and left. He did not know what to
to their intelligence, you can never
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 45
EKADASHA RUDRA PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
Then that cannot be balance. Does not
overcome your attachments. That does
not mean that you talk too much about
Sahaja Yoga or you give lectures on that
but mentally you should also understand
what is Sahaja Yoga.
even have such a precious thing as
blessings of God. Any religion that makes
you bow to anybody else but incarnation,
is no religion. That is another one which
is absolutely false. Your real religion will
give you a balance and will always talk
Today is the special day when it has been
asked that we should have Ekadash Rudra
about the ascent, but they will not ask
for money, or make one man something
Puja, and it is for all kinds of false religious
sects and false Gurus and false religions
which are followed in the name of God; learn to discriminate between
or any religion that does not say about falsehood, negative things and real
self-realisation and does not achieve self Once we develop that
great and venerated. Thus we should
things.
discrimination through vibratory
realisation and does not get connected
with God. It is false. So any such thing
that is just built and talks of God but has
no connection with God, cannot be a true
or through your
intelligence; you are in control of
awareness
yourself and then you become that
religion. Of course it gives a balance to
power of Ekadasha. Then you establish
people but in giving that balance if people
live on that money and try to enjoy a
your maturity.
wealth out of that money then it is not
Today I bless you all that you all become
the power of Ekadasha Rudra and you
develop that sincerity which takes you to
even at the very low level like balance
with the religion. Religion has to give you
balance to begin with but in balancing
that state.
when they tell you that you have to be
balanced, but give me money for that.
May God Bless You.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
46
SHRI ADISHAKTI PUJA
Canajohari, U.S.A., 20-6-99
It is such a great pleasure for me to see
should not be crushed and destroyed
forever. That era is over now, that era of
all assembled here. This is such a far-
you
domination, of entering into somebody
fetched place away from the maddening
else's land and occupying it; and
crowds; is such a beautiful place which
has vibrations. I selected this place
suddenly from a very thick American
news paper. The vibrations were just
shooting out and I said what is this,
considering it to be a great bravery. All
that is over now. The human
understanding has gone much beyond and
they understand that this is sinful, this is
wrong. Whatever we have done was
coming from where? There was a very
little advertisement and I said this the wrong. But those people are no more and
place where we have to go. This place the children and the grand children of
has so many vibrations, even in the those children, of these people who were
advertisement.
the children of God, they used to think,
do not like all that. Because they have no
right to take somebody's land like that
So you can imagine how the guidance
comes from vibrations and that's how I
and occupy it as your own. Of course the
was here and this place was selected by
the Divine force. It happened only in one
day. Such a miraculous thing happened
in one day! It was taking so much time
land doesn't belong to anyone. But still
wherever you are born, that's your land
and that Jand has to be kept with those
who are born here, who own it. But this
for them even to get this and suddenly I kind of aggression has been going on for
told them better get it. It all worked out ages now. Now the time has come to
and we are now here in the most beautiful finish this once for all, give up this kind
atmosphere.
of adventure, to enter into somebody's
land or somebody's house and occupy it.
Of course, you know that Red Indians
were driven out and they came here to There is another kind of aggression, I see
hide themselves. They were hiding now, is that they enter into the minds of
themselves in this place so that they the people, through their talk, through
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-48.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Jan - Feb. 2000 47
SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
their all kinds of aggressive attitude and
to see. It makes you very miserable,
the mind mind itself becomes the slave.
unhappy. But still so many are there, you
are there, saved now and in this last
The present times are like that, I think,
judgement you have risen from that level
where people have no freedom to think
to this new level where, I am sure, you
will be able to salvage many more. Each
what is right, what is wrong and also to
take to right thing. They have to accept
whatever is happening around; whatever person can salvage at least thousand
is immoral, whatever is destructive. One people and so many of you. If you try
that it would be of a very very great
has to accept because still, I think, we do
not have sufficient number of Sahaja emancipation for this world which we
Yogis. Who can oppose all these
want to save.
adventures of modern times. We have
So one must know the first duty of every
another kind where we find these false
Sahaja Yogi now, is to save others. To
talk about Sahaja Yoga; to work out
Gurus who aggress, specially in America.
America is really cursed that way, because
Sahaja Yoga, in different places. For
it had money. So all the crooks of the
world came here. Just imagine! To have
money itself is not a blessing. They all
example now I am so surprised that they
are working on children who are abused.
In India, they are working out in various
came here and looted rich people and
have made so much money for place like prisons, Armies. So you can
themselves. This kind of exploitation is
enter into all kinds of activities, you can
enter into all kinds of aggressed places
very much dangerous; much more,
because the mind gets ruined. I have seen
many people were ruined, especially many
and save people. But first of all I think it
is the innocece which is under attack. In
these western countries specially in
seekers were ruined completely. I hope
America, the innocence is under attack
they are born again and get their self-
and this is something very dangerous
realization?
because the children get this intution at a
very young age and what will happen to
The seeking is there, no doubt. But all
kinds of obstacles have come, all kinds
them? So we have to think of all those
innocent children. What we can do for
them? How we can save them? How we
of temptations are there. So despite all
that seeking, earnest seeking, honest
seeking, they have fallen into traps, which
I cannot explain, why should it have
happened? But it has happened. One has
can work it out? The concern has to go
from yourself to others.
You have get your realization, alright, you
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-49.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 48
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
We have to learn so much from the nature
corrected yourself, you are absolutely
because nature is bound with that love.
perfecting yourself, all this is there but
Nature has no aggressiveness. It is just
under the complete control of the Divine
love. With this understanding you should
now what is to be done? For what is this
light enlightened here? It is for others.
Now Sahaja Yogis have to live for others
and not for themselves. They will have
all the energy? They will have all the
also know that when you are talking to
Sahaja Yogis, what should be your
support and they will have all the
blessings. So we have to live for others.
How do we live for others, is very simple.
It is to have concern, concerned about
attitude. How you should move? How
you should talk to them? How you should
understand them? How you should
express your love? This is quite possible.
everything, concerned about mother earth
concerned about your neighbours,
Itis not difficult, you should not be afraid,
not feel shy. But in a sweet manner you
concerned about the people who are can talk to them, you can communicate
with them, you can tell them.
suffering all over the world. If you read
the newspaper, you will be amazed how
Because this was the time, this was to
happen. That's the reason Adi Shakti had
things are happening, how people are
suffering?
to come. Without Her it would not have
been possible. All other incarnations were
there. But firstly they were only on one
We have to understand fundamentally that
unless and until transformation takes
chakra and another one was there to
place, we cannot change this world. And
establish themselves with other people,
you all can transform others. So its your
with the people around. They did try, they
worked it out, but it did not really work
duty, its your job to transform other
people and tell them what is divine love.
Love is the only way now that we can in the real sense of the word. So Adi
work out. It is something which should Shakti had to come, who has all of them
with Her. They are all with us, all the time
go into this darkness of aggression and
which will give many blessings to many wanting to help you, to do every thing
hearts, many people. It is an ocean of that you want to achieve. It is their will
greatness. This Divine love is so great and that these holy vibrations are with you,
so powerful, at the same time so very for every kind of good work you want
gentle. As you can see the nature, how to do, any kind of Sahaja work you
the trees grow? Every leaf gets the want to do. These vibrations will
sunshine. Even tree has its own position. definitely be there to guide you, to help
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-50.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 49
SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
The Divine Cool Breeze
is a purpose. It is not just because you
have done poorva punyas and all that.
Many people say because of previous life
we have got it. That is true. The cause
may be that but the result is that now you
are capable of giving realization to people
you, to support you and to love you.
You will be amazed how people once they
start working for Sahaja Yoga! How they
are blessed from every angle. So one has
to decide, in their own minds that all your
dreams have to come true. So only thing
what you have to do is to know only and this is what you have to do. All the
that your purpose of life is to spread way you have come here, in this
Sahaja Yoga. Even now many Sahaja wilderness. From this wilderness only,
Yogis write to me, Mother this is you will rise and you will bless all the
happening to me, that is happening to me, people, specially America should be
my father is like that, my mother is like blessed again and again because it is the
that. But very few, Practically this is over Virata, because it is Shri Krishna's land,
now. They used to write, I should say, all because people will always try to follow
such letters. But now I think, they are all you, to copy you. Things will improve if
you get the blessings of the previous
happened. Its a very unique time where lotuses you have within yourself, no
doubt. What about you doing something
about it? This is what is very important.
being perfected. I do not know what has
there is light every where, the nature is
absolutely with you. You can see how
nature acts, how it is trying to help you
Now only thing you have to do about
and support you and how it wants to work
out everything for you. It is to be just yourself is to find out about your own
understood and felt that you are
activities. What activities you have been
something very special and that you have doing? You have to find out what have
all the help, every one of you. It is not you done and what you can do? When
one person, two persons. Its not ten you meditate you think about yourself.
How much you have grown? What have
persons. Its the whole lot. As if the whole
you done? What have you given to
ocean is there to help you, help you to
swim over, to save so many. You have others? Whatever you got, unless and
not seen such an ocean, where there is so until you distribute it, it will not increase.
much depth and all the waves try to save That is a fundamental law and that works.
you, to make you float in the realm of Thave seen people who are realized souls,
who are very good, who know everything
about Sahaja Yoga, but are not yet that
much confidant, I should say, or that much
joy.
All this has happened to you because there
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-51.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 50
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
by his greatness can disentangle these
people. They have funny ideas and those
funny ideas should not deter you, should
not stop you, for you know, that they are
stupid they are destructive and they will
deep. All of this is only possible if you
yourself get into creating new Sahaja
Yogis, and more Sahaja Yogis, not for
popularity but for their good and for the
good of the whole. I was asked that I
destroy all the good qualities. You should
know that the responsibility of Americans
is much greater than the responsibility of
any other Sahaja Yogi, because they are
accepted and regarded as the most
competent people as the most affective
people by the Divine power. The Divine
should come and stay in America. So
America will improve very much. So now
here I am. I came here, I stayed here and
I have definitely, put in all my attention
because its a very important, very very
important chakra which is America. And
this very important country is doing
sometimes, very stupid things.
power thinks that now you can go all
ahead, you can do so much. And let us
I would not say that you enter into
politics, no. I would not say you get into
any opposition and form a group, no. But
you also know that you have powers,
even your thought, your desire has
see, like we have the power and the
machinery, but the machinery if it doesn't
work, what is the use of the power. That
is useless, so the machinery has to work
and it is working, it is spreading. But we
powers. Try to experiment with it. Once
you experiment, you will find out that
only the attention that you put to these
things, it will work out, I am sure it will
have to double our efforts.
I was thinking of doing some sort of a
social work here so that it will go, it will
be caught in the eyes of many people. On
a subtler level we have worked. But now
work out. It is a country which can
definitely help the emancipation of the
whole human beings. But on the contrary
it is going the other way round. I mean
American culture, I don't understand at
all. What the American culture is. They
say something and do something else.
They have no proper value system which
is accepted by everyone and which is built
traditionally from days together. The
value system is so convoluted, so twisted,
that it is only a Sahaja Yogi, by his nobility,
we have to work it on the surface, subtler
level we are there, we have achieved and
we can achieve much more. But we
should come out of it and think, what can
we do on the surface? So that people see
what Sahaja Yoga is and what it can do
to people. Its your personal behaviour,
your collective behaviour, your national
behaviour, all are going to change the
atmosphere which is supposed to be
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-52.txt 
 Jan - Feb. 2000 51
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
superficial, so that that also becomes
subtler. I have been saying this in many
go, how to enter, into which area and it
gets the things done. It is something you
all should experience and work it out with
places. But in this puja I think it is
fullconfidence. It is the love that we have,
important to say that. If you are really
facing the Adishakti then you must know
your powers are boundless. You have to
just assert those powers. Its not the
the concern we have. This is the power
that has given us self realization and this
is the power that has given us this
enrichment of achievements. I am sure all
stationary power but there is the
movement in it and there is the right type
of you are here to realize how it was done
so quickly! This is one of the things that
should just tell you what we are capable
of doing. What we are capable of
achieving. And when you think of so
of movement. It knows where to enter,
how to work it out?
Now look at this place. Can you imagine
me thinking about a place like this? But I
just had in mind of course, I must say, ignorance, we should really feel from
that we should have some place here inside that concern and that hankering,
because American Sahaja Yogis didn't how can I help these people? And you'll
have any place to meet. That's all. And
see how I have got it! But the desire - to this divine power, this force will come in!
do all this, should be there within your Forget about petty things and petty
subtler level. Then it works, it works like problems. They are nothing. You have
a magic, I tell you. Now you have faith in such a powerful thing behind you.
many people who are lost in the mire of
be amazed once you think like that. how
yourself and decide about it. I am so very
This is true that all this universe was
happy that it has been achieved with such
ease, unbelievable, with such ease,
created, everything was created and then
you were created and all that is done. But
the greatest thing this power has done is
to create Sahaja Yogis. This is the greatest
thing. Those who have knowledge, those
absolutely nothing great was done. The
way we got this, was so simple that just
like another Sahaja Yogi is the person
IS
who was to sell us, came down, so
who have pure knowledge, and those who
excited, and he just sold it to us, finished!
We didn't have to do anything to convince
him or to talk to him or reduce the price.
Nothing! And he sold it out to us. In the
same way whatever on a subtler level you
have the Divine love in their heart, what
a tremendous personality it is! Just think
of that and you will get all the
opportunities to express that love.
desire, it becomes terrific a force which
May God Bless You.
moves by itself, which knOws where to
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-53.txt 
 69.81
O'19.00
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-54.txt 
 of
