The Divine Cool Breeze 00 July-August, 2000 Volume : XII Issue :7 & 8 Innately, within us, resides the Spirit which wants to enlighten yOu, to give peace, the bliss and the joy of our being. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 In this Issue: The Prayer Birthday Puja 21-03-2000 6. Birthday Puja 21-03-2000 (Translation of Pravachana in Hindi) 77th Birthday Celebrations A Report Random Notes from Foreign Sahaja Yogis 12 77th Birthday Celebrations Programme 16 77th Birthday Felicitation 22-03-2000 20 Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi's Advice to Bride Grooms 28 Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi's Advice to Brides 30 How Realisation should be Allowed to Develop 33 : Yogi Mahajan V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067 Edited by Published by

 Prayer' O Mother Divine ! When incarnated of death, of immortality; the oneness of a man with every other man and as Lord Krishna, you said:- with his God. Then will the world be यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य ग्लानिर्भवति भारत । led to truth, and man will be the truth. अभ्युत्थानम्धर्मस्य तदात्मानं सृजाम्यहम् |॥ When she has come, the Comforter, O Arjuna! When negative forces she will convince the world of sin, and of the truth of what I speak, and take over virtuousness and subjugate the positivity, I incarnate on this earth in Human Form (Sakar) to re-establish virtue (Dharma) at its proper place. of the rightness of the judgement of the just; and then the prince of carnal life will be cast out. And when the Comforter shall come I need not Our Lord Jesus Christ spoke of intercede for you; for you will stand Thy Advent; approved, and God will know you then as he knows me." "And Jesus spoke again unto the eleven and said "Grieve not because I To keep up your promise and to go away, for it is best that I should go uphold the Dharma, O Mother away. If I do not go, the Comforter Divine, very kindly you have will not come to you. These things I incarnated once again in this speak while with you in the flesh, but when the Holy Breath shall come in Kaliyuga and have been kind enough to take up the gigantic task of awakening the Kundalini of all the power, Lo! she will teach you more seekers of the Globe. and more, and bring to your remembrance all the words I have said With Sri Adi Shankaracharya we to you. There are a multitude of things all pray:- yet to be said; things that this age Nityanada kari Varabhaya kari cannot receive because it cannot Sundarya Ratnakari! Nirdhootakhila- ghora- papa-Nikari comprehend. But, lo, I say, before the great day of the Lord shall come, the Holy Breath will make all mysteries pratyksha Maheshwari!! Praleya - chala- vansha - pavanakari Kashipuradhishwari! known. The mysteries of the soul, of life, Bhikshamdehi kripavalambanakari

 July Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze this Yoga Bhoomi, we all, Sahajayogi children pray to Thee, O Devi. Matanna purneshwari!! O Mother Anna-purneshwari! you are the bestower of eternal bliss, you Kindly grant us faith absolute, To Thyself and to Thy Cause Devoted give boon with one hand and fearlessness with other, you are the ocean of beauty and the destroyer all sins. You are verily the supreme we all be Pray! Establish Thy Lotus Feet in our of hearts firmly Shower the boon of perfect attention, goddess. You have purified the elan The state of absolute Thoughtless of Himalaya (parvati was the daughter Awareness of king Himalaya or Himavan). Inviolable Meditation Kindly be pleased and give us the We are blessed with ultimately. alms. Celebrating your 77th Birthday, in Your children.

 July-Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze BIRTHDAY PUJA NIRMAL DHAM (DELHI) 21-03-2000 Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi really understand the value of love, of respect for others, because so far we have based all our theories and I am so very filled with joy and my heart is so full of gratitude for all the Sahaja Yogis who have been able to create this beautiful place. I can't imagine how much they must have worked hard in such a place to create all our ideas on the principle that human beings can't love each other. They are always trying to overpower others or to hate others or to grab such a beautiful area, such a peaceful place. How in Sahaja Yoga people things from others. Such a wrong work together with tremendous we had all these days and thats why respect and love for each other and all the organisations that were created produce something that is to obstruct it also got contaminated unbelievable. This was just a with it. The only way one can really wilderness and you have brought so understand what we are is by knowing much of life and light in this place. yourself. When you know yourself You wanted to celebrate my birthday. you are surprised that the greatest I don't know what is so significant thing for you is to love and to be loved. You enjoy that collective love so much when you have absolutely overcome your baser self. In Sahaja Yoga it is so simple; it works in a very idea about it? But the way you have really shown your understanding and respect, I am just enamoured. I can't understand what have I done for you that you should do so much for simple manner. It is very Sahaja but to grow into it is very important and I am so very happy to see so many of you from all over the world, from Sahaja Yoga? As it is, today is also a very auspicious day which we call as the Holi. We play Holi on this day and show our love and oneness Delhi and also from all over India, enjoying that love among yourself and understanding among yourself. among ourselves. This is the time when we have to never expected that in my lifetime I

 July- Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze would be able to see all this beautiful are all one together. This joy that was expressed by you is like the waves that go to the shores, touch the shores and come back creating beautiful patterns. And I see that happening world of love, trust and peace. But today really I must say it shows what we are capable of doing. We human beings, are very selfish, self-centered and only worried about ourselves. That is what is said but it is surprising that with self-realisation, with self now that these beautiful patterns are showing in your own life, in your life style, in your behavior. There is a very knowledge, with knowing yourself, special type of human race sitting you understand how rich you are before me. I am so much thankful to within, how great you are within, and you, absolutely, that you should take how capable you are! This to this knowledge of yourself and understanding comes to you and then enjoy it with others. It is something that is expressed in such a beautiful remarkable that you know about yourself, that only human beings can manner. Sahaja Yoga took time to grow do. There can be a diamond, very slowly, slowly and that you all are expensive, but it does not know its slowly and slowly grown ups. But value. There could be some dog or today, I must say that, it has reached some animal which must be such a height that it is difficult for something, but it does not know what people to get out of it. When you know yourself, when you know what beings till they get their self- is reality and what is absolute trüth, realisation and after realisation they you just get dissolved into that suddenly become aware of what they knowledge. Of course you are not it is. Samething happens with human are. And then suddenly they become very humble. They become very loving. Now supposing if somebody knows that he is a king or he discovers he is some great musician or Prime knowledgeable in the way people are. You are knowledgeable in the real sense of knowledge because you realise what is within you, is a big Minister or something. He feels very aloof and he thinks no end of himself. power of love. There is a big power of understanding, a big power of But by this knowledge, that you have, you become one with rest of Sahaja Yogis and enjoy it. It is very oneness, of collective. This collectivity works wonders and gives a joy that we are all one, we have no we have no problems. You remarkable. How it works out that enemies,

 July-Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze you enjoy each other so much and to do something for this collective work, you can dedicate yourself to it. without any problems, without any troubles, all enjoying the bliss of this love, this compassion, this Divine Love. Now my experience of 77 years, I must really congratulate Delhi people for coming up so well with this beautiful arrangement and this beautiful Pandal and all the beautiful as you can say, has been really chequered with all kinds of incidents, all kinds of people, all kinds of incidents and its a good vision to see arrangement they have made outside, before your eyes that despite all that, for your stay. I mean really its something, I have done nothing for it. Nothing, I should say. How these people have worked together! There have been no quarrels, fighting, back biting, nothing like that. Its very surprising that such a beautiful thing has been created by them! It shows their maturity in Sahaja Yoga. I must congratulate them again and again for doing this great work in such a short so many beautiful lotuses have come out. They are so fragrant, so beautiful, so colourful, so attractive. All this is because we have an innate value system. Because we have inborn with- in us a great sense of love and compassion. This compassion has to be really understood, and enjoyed and we have to jump in the ocean of compassion. So beautiful, and you will be amazed to see that automatically you will swim, time. automatically you will meet other people also in the same ocean, May God Bless You.

 The Divine Cool Breeze July- Aug 2000 77th BIRTHDAY PUJA NIRMAL DHAM- DELHI (21-03-2000) (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) (Translated from Hindi) First I talked in English because many say with our tongue? With our mind Sahaja Yogis have come from abroad we could think how to express our and, moreover, you have no objection love to other people, how to open to English language. There is no out our hearts to others and give them doubt that Delhi Colleetively has place in it. We should know that if worked wonders and Sahaja Yogis there is no love in the heart then such from Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and a person does not deserve any thing, Haryana have also joined hands and because whatever he may achieve he helped them. With great love and will not get contentment, he will not devotion they have created this be contented. But when the ocean of beautiful temple like auditorium.I contentment is there in your heart was really surprised to see it. There then every thing will grant you are such expert artisans here! I was satisfaction. When you have these not aware of it. From where all this achievements within and the feeling artistry came and decorated this of contentment dawns in you then no place! I am not able to understand. I one could know its limits, no one was not aware that such beautiful art could understand this contentment exists in the Country The Art of Love, The power of Love, The expertise of Love! Only those blessed with the Art of Love could create such artistic piece. This should be learnt as to how with our mind, speech and action (HI, , a h e) we could become artists. So that we could business. It is so sweet, so beautiful that you are enchanted. One cannot understand what he is doing and what others are doing; what I am saying and what others are saying! How they are showering their love on me and how I am pouring my love on them. Day and night one keeps on thinking that become artists of love. What should today I have to meet such and such we talk to give comfort and joy to person, what lovely things shall I say to him? What benevolent things are others? What lovely things we could

 The Divine Cool Breeze July-Aug 2000 because, There is no doubt ordinary people are be talked about, to unnecessary worldly things have full of shortcomings. But you can always done harm and no good at all. make them know themselves. After Anger has done enormous harm to knowing Thyself you are convinced human beings. So there is no need to that other people should also have this teach you non violence. There is no Divine knowledge. They are lost in need to teach you that 'do not the wilderness. They do not know misbehave with others or do not how much Divine treasure you have within. So it must be given to them destroy others, do not misappropriate other's money'. There is no need to teach all this. Spontaneously all of and they should also receive it. Once you realize it than you will take upon yourself the responsibility to give this you have become, so beautiful, like Divine treasure to others. You have lotuses. You know to emit fragrance got the key of it and if somehow you could give this key to them then see how they respect you and become grateful to you. The most significant task before you is to bring more and more people in Sahaja State. Give and nothing else and the joy of giving is a unique experience. Only people with Divine nature could do it. Now you have become masters of it, you have fully utilized the treasure that was lying within you. Secrets have been opened out. Now you have this treasure to them. And when it to enjoy them. There are different happens then you will be so happy kinds of people in this world. But that your joy could not be expressed none could harm you, no one could in words. You have to do it. touch you. The only thing that they Today, you have celebrated my could do is become one with you, part birthday. Thank you very much that and parcel of you. Your lives should you have done it with such make them keen to be transformed. I enthusiasm. As far as I am concerned do not guarantee to transform the every year Sahaja Yoga is spreading whole world but you people could do in such a way that I myself am unable that. If you are able to transform this to understand its limitations. But you world and create virtuous people in have to resolve that from today it, then the whole work will be done. onward we shall all endeavour to The only thing is that you have to get transform others. You are into it and work it out. Find out how transformed, now other should also many people you could transform. contd on page 40

 The Divine Cool Breeze July Aug 2000 8. CELEBRATIONS ON THE OCCASSION OF THE SEVENTY- SEVENTH BIRTHDAY OF HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI AT NIRMAL DHAM-DELHI ON MARCH 21-2000 (A Report) Delhi, the capital city of India, with The Vice President of the United a metropolitan area population of States of America, Governors of around 13 million, situated on the various State in the USA, 10 mayors banks of the "All organisations are obsessed with from main cities river Yamuna the theory that human beings are based in the was a witness to USA, the Prime the joyous cel- ebrations of the The collectivity of Sahaja Yogis are seventy seventh special human beings; having taken to birthday of Her the simple knowledge of self they are Holiness Shri | rich within, capable within they are Mataji Nirmala aware of absolute truth. They knowAustralia, the guided by the lust for power and that they cannot get to love one another... of Minister Canada. Members of Parliament from Cana d a, Devi on March how to share loye, overcome baser President of 21, 2000 by Her instincts, disproving the conventional Medica 1 followers from organisational theory. Association all over the (folk medicines) Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi March 21, 2000 - Nirmal Dham, world. To be Russia, ten precise, 725 fol- mayors of major cities in Canada, Delhi. of lowers Sahaja Yoga from regions of Europe, North America, Latin America, Af- the president of Ivory Coast etc. who had sent their greetings to Her rica, Australia, East Asia, Russia etc. Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi on joined hands with 2500 followers the occasion had the special mention of her role in positive transformation of the individual and in the process the society, to which do they all belong. through the Sahaja Yoga meditation. Special mentions of the from the different states of India at Nirmal Dham-near Chhawla village - on the joyous occasion of their holy Mother's birthday as though to add colour to the Holi merriment.

 The Divine Cool Breeze July Aug 2000 speak on Pollution and Environment, resolution of the New York State not the physical pollution but on the prevailing pollution in the moral fabric of the society. It is well known that Delhi, given its vast and rapidly increasing motor vehicle population, faces an acute air pollution problem associated with the use of energy in the transport sector (Delhi is among the 12 megacities mentioned by WHO/UNEP as having serious particulate pollution and it is estimated that 67% of air pollution is caused by motor vehicles). L.K. Advani's prescription to do away with the "internal" pollution was to Assembly to the two-time nominee for the World Peace Prize on Her role in promoting peace, health and well being of 80 countries through the Sahaja Yoga meditation, laudatory references to her work on adding the new vision in the new millennium that of promoting an enabling environment where people could live in peace, dissolving differences of race and religion. From various other assemblies, sufi saints ete were read out, in brief, by the convener of the felicitation programme - Mr. Nalgirkar spiritually elevate oneself through the Speaking on the occasion, Mr. Balram Sahaja Yoga meditation. Mr. Jhakhar, former speaker of Lok Sunderlal Patwa, former Chief Sabha, mentioned that the true global Minister of Madhya Pradesh, village will come out of the spread of mentioned that he was overwhelmed Sahaja Yoga throughout the world that he was able to surrender at the and wished that she continues to lotus feet of the holy nmother. Dr celebrate Her birthday till the mission Shoba Das, Head, Department of is achieved. He did not forget to seek Physiology, Lady Hardinge Hospital, Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala presented to Her Holiness Nirmala Devi's blessings to achieve positive Devi two theses recognised and results in his proposed difficult accepted by the Delhi University on mission in Kashmir. the role of Sahaja Yoga in stress management; the third ongoing The Minister of Home Affairs, Shri L. K. Advani cited his desire to have research on the effect of Sahaja Yoga on Lipid Peroxidation was also a darshan and an oceasion to listen to briefly referred to. the discourses of Shri Mataji as the prime reason for his travel to Nirmal Sir C. P. Srivastava, who has several Dham. He chose the occasion to citations and awards to his credit

 10 July-Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze all over the world and creating a new during his tenure with International Maritime Organization and Indian civil service, spoke of his transition through the three stages of the humanity. Sir C.P. Srivastava had two proposals to the "assembly" - one to dedicate to the cause of advancement of Sahaja Yoga throughout the world and the other to have the holy mother “bewilderment", "splendour" and the final stage of "surrender". Initially the continue the of stage "The diamond does not know its value; Divine abode so is the human being until he acquires tillevery man/ self-knowledge... Armed with the self- woman knowledge self-realised souls represent transformed. lotuses-they emit divine fragrance, are Yogi Mahajan so colourful, attractive due to their in his capacity bewilder ment when he witnessed is people getting transformed soon transcended to that of splendour when the witnessed innate value system." as he representative transformation of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi of the societies where March 21, 2000 Nirmal Dham, "assembly" Sahaja Yogis/ Yoginis had a positive role to play. In the eightieth year of his birth, he has reached the Delhi. passed both the "resolutions". Shri Mataji in her address mentioned that she holds in esteem persons with strong patriotic feelings for such persons, once they are self-realised, - a surrender to stage of "suIrender' the divine power which has produced the unique assembly of angels (Sahaja Yogis/Yoginis) whose object is to express the pure innocent love for society/country through their each other that goes beyond attention, in the process utilising differences in religions, races and in effectively the potential of Sahaja can improve the conditions of the forging a single Sahaja Yoga family. According to him, this assembly was even more important than the General Assembly of the United Nations for this represented the moral/ethical/ Yoga. Once enlightened, destructive thoughts/activities are automatically dropped - she referred to the instance of the head of Mafia in Taliyati who after embracing Sahaja Yoga spiritual assembly of the world. He referred to the vision of the Holy transformed himself to serve the local population. To buttress the point, She Mother in creating similar assemblies said that in the light of the spirit one

 July-Aug 2000 11 The Divine Cool Breeze souls would be able to intervene could perceive what is wrong with the society, country and have the power to correct them. She referred to the effectively inter-religious hostilities. She likened the Yoga Bhoomi-India offer of some Sahaja Yogis to travel to Kashmir to change people's to the Kundalini of the whole world. She said absolute knowledge could I am overwhelmed that you have be gained only " Once brought light and life to wilderness through vibratory awareness. She attitude. enlightened. (referring to Nirmal Dham which was can prior to setting up of the camp also mentioned you witness the represented wilderness). I am happy that equipped beauty of the that people worked together with love with the true religion... and respect for each other. I am very oneness of the | religion will be the help from Yogis/Yoginis of Uttar could change the understood. Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana was able society/country. knowled ge. Yogis that the Dellhi collectivity with Sahaja happy How can you to achieve so much within such a shortAs an instance fight in the period.. she referred to the name of the Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala recent work of religion, if there is only Devi - March 21, 2000 - Nirmal Dham, Australian Sahaja Yogis in setting Delhi one God? up nine centres of She spoke of the separate religious Sahaja Yoga in Orissa. identity accorded to Vishwa Nirmala Dharma in Russia as this religion The occasion was also a witness to sanctification of thirty three "international" marriages amongst believes only in compassion without any trace of hatred. She said that any visualisation of the "Form" can only Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis from over begin with the understanding of eighty countries - a pointer to the firm formless, a process that is feasible establishment of Vishwa Nirmal only when one is self-realised. Armed Dharma which champions the with the "true knowledge," realised concept of universal brotherhood.

 July- Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 12 RANDOM NOTES FROM FOREIGN SAHAJA YOGIS/YOGINIS AT NIRMAL DHAM R. Venkatesan - March 23, 2000 I asked Sona Alexander - Sahaja Visualisation (meditation of probably Buddhist origin) etc. until she found Yogini from Newzealand- on factors that prompted her to undertake the the "real thing" in Sahaja Yoga. It took three months of Nearly 725 Sahaja Yogis/Yoginis from introspection long route to from Delhi - 40countries had assembled at Nirmal during 1993 - to Australia. Her Dham. Italy had the largest collectivity accept Shri reply spontaneous of 127 yogis & yoginis; Australia came Mataji but then "Because, Shri a close second with 116 Other there has been Mataji cancelled Countries with major representation at was no looking back despite her her scheduled Nirmal Dham were: United Kingdom catholic trip to Australia3B I had to come all (62), Austria (58), Russia (57), background. Switzerland (47), Germany (41), Despite the the way!" I was France (30), Malaysia (24), USA (24), taunting she received from bewildered at South Africa (15) and Turkey (10). her answer for her close she was one of relatives that she has been brain washed for according to her the vibratory awareness gained through Sahaja Yoga is too precious to forego. Such is the love of Sahaja Yogini who the seven hundred and odd foreign yogis/yoginis who had decended on Delhi just to have a "darshan" of Shri Mataji and probably to express their love and affection to Her alongwith thousands of other yogis/yoginis. travels thousands of miles only to express her love for Shri Mataji, silently! Sona who works as a receptionist was a seeker from her young age-she had tried alternative life paths such as Mr. Lev - 34 years old Sahaja Yogi Tiichi (Chinese), Reiki (India), replied without batting an eyelid, Naturopathy, Hatha Yoga (India), "Turkish" when asked about his

 July-Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 13 nationality. He explained his entry the public programme in 1993. into Sahaja Yoga vividly "It was Finally, he met Shri Mataji in 1994 who asked him to "go back and serve seven years ago I felt the inner urge to meditate. I saw Shri Mataji's Africa". In August, 1994, he set about photograph in Russian newspapers. I setting the first collectivity in was attracted by the radiance that Abidjan; as a professor who taught at glowed out of the face. I attended the public programme. Ever since I am a Sahaja Yogi except that now I am a the university he had a social standing. "Besides, I could explain various traditions followed by our Turkish national as I am married to a African brothers. For instance, we Sahaja Yogini from Turkey". For Mr. Lev even his nationality is a natural it represents the divinity for if you choice arising out of Sahaja Yoga don't respect the earth you cannot networking. How does he plan to use have a good meal. When Sahaja Yoga Sahaja Yoga in his life? I may not use refers to the Ganesha Principle of the Sahaja Yoga to enhance the quality Mother Earth, so many qualities of of my life ... I would web my life the Mother Earth are so summarily around Sahaja Yoga . I only wish explained. In our traditions a male believe earth is a living thing and that that I had the necessary depth in with the white beard represents the interpreting signals in the realm of God... We have the concept of vibratory awareness. For the rest I will goddess too.. My desire to speak to be in Turkey and accept whatever the "Goddess" was fulfilled when I comes my way of life. Right now I spoke to Shri Mataji...What are his am busy learning Indian classical ambitions? Well, to spread Sahaja Yoga in neighbouring countries.... I have already finalised plan for the vocal and Instrumental (Dholak). Surprises never seemed to cease at programme in Senegal... May be I would write a book on the Sahaja Nirmal Dham. My next encounter was with Dr Toure from Ivory Coast. Yoga.... the theme would be Why it is not a Foreign Philosophy? While pursuing the doctoral programme in Management with the specialisation on Small Business development from the University of For Ms Galina, an engineer from Estonia, who runs her own furniture business and for her daughter who has specialised in Finance, Sahaja Yoga Paris in 1992, he learnt about the Sahaja Yoga and was able to attend

 14 July Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze is the way of life; although they way she could get deaddicted to hard drugs... Ever since 1987 I overcame my serious problems.. I had tried every other route including a five-year stay at the Tibetan monastery. nothing helped me get rid of my 25 years old problem until I discovered initially took to it to protect themselves from the negativity, the thoughtless awareness and the paramchaitanya dominate their day to day Sahaja practice. Mr. Nitish Mandal, a software Sahaja Yoga.. Her son could not stabilize in the Sahaja Yoga as in the engineer currently based in the United States of America dreads those pre- sahaja days when he used to swallow western society you have so much of distraction and meditation is the only 6 to 7 tablets a day - he was told that, stabilizing factor... you need to meditate regularly to groW... that was to be the pattern of his life as there was no cure for the acute Mr. Richard a retired IBM employee based in Malaysia mentioned that he arthritis problem he had. In 1988 he learnt that he could tackle the whole was attracted to the Sahaja Yoga when he came across a paper insertion on problem armed with lemon, hot water and a little quantity of kerosene to rub those joints. Ever since I said goodbye to those tablets. Now I am happily the "free meditation". His first reaction was why not try it there is married to a German girl (Sahaja Yogini). My three years old son speaks German, English and Hindi... I might teach him Punjabi... Don't get mistaken by my surname... I am a Punjabi from Dehradoon. no expense to it. Richard, adept at the Chikong, a breathing exercise, was to evolve into an expert Sahaja Yogi. He has stayed on for eight years getting younger and younger much to the consternation of his wife and children... Earlier I used to strongly For Ms. Tatiana, a chemical engineer believe on the superiority of the working at a research institute in the area of "pharmacy" in Moscow Kundalini is raised, every one's Chinese race... No more. When during the "office time", seeking truth through the Sahaja Yoga had been an potential increases . only you have to be smart to try it through Sahaja important goal in her life for the last ten years. For Ms. Jelly Brown, a British national who sells hats in For Mr. Ansen More, a Network Yoga. London, Sahaja Yoga was the only Engineer (Hardware Communica-

 15 July-Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze tions) from the University of Yogis in Delhi... It is a splendid Canberra, yoga, meditation, martial feeling. arts-all were subjects of interest... Now I know that meditation refers'to He feels that every majority started the state of "thoughtless awareness" as a minority.. "Wasn't Gandhi a may be even the higher state of minority? He feels that although "doubtless awareness". For him Sahaja Yogis represent a minority at the moment, the minority is capable Sahaja Yoga is such an important el- ement guiding him to correct path (vi- of providing the global vision and the bratory awareness), enhancing life. pursuit of right purpose in life.. he stress free situations.. so much so his lamented on the tendency of Indians life centers on Sahaja Yoga.. He is to adopt more and more westernized happily married to an Indian girl from ways. I see Hindi films while flying to India by Air India.... I see urban Pune. Indian getting more westernized when the enlightened elite of Europe is taking to self-realisation.... Mr. Ezio, a professional photographer from Italy had been a Sahaja Yogi for the last six years. He was attracted to Sahaja Yoga through his friend, a After listening to the cross section of views of Sahaja Yogis/Yoginis of Sahaja Yogi, who seemed - all the time. Mr. Ezio was hungry, thirsty for the SO North America, Europe, Africa, East composed in poise Asia I was overwhelmed that the "Goddess", "Adi Shakti", "Guru" experience... knowledge and his friend obliged him. Ever since the took her birth in India... the yoga "incident" there had been a dramatic bhoomi of the world... May be we change in his life.. He was to give Indian Sahaja Yogis have a daunting up smoking... give up alcohol... His priority was to change from money- and important task of forming the informed "minority" to restore the spiritual glory by firmly establishing recognition to sharing the blessings of Sahaja Yoga with others... so much so that he had undertaken the long Sahaja Yoga in every nook and corner of India. journey to express solidarity, brotherhood with around 7000 Sahaja Jai Shri Mataji.

 The Divine Cool Breeze July-Aug 2000 16 77th Birthday Celebrations Programme Nirmal Dham, Delhi, 22-3-2000 Speech of Shri Balram Jhakhad - everyone else. But the Divine the Former Speaker of Lok Sabha Mother lives for the whole world. Worthy of our obeisance in the Shri Mataji, the spirit yearns for love mornings, O affectionate Adi Shakti and the message of love. Mother! Shri Mataji , elder brother Shri Advaniji, Sir C.P., respected ladies, gentlemen and Sahaja Yogis. man-kind needs your message, needs your Sahaja Yoga to understand humanity, to understand oneself and to think of the well being of all. This Mother, we celebrated your birthday spirit is vanishing in human beings. last year, we are celebrating it this year Shri Mataji my heart aches that and we shall continue to celebrate despite your message of love and your birthday year after year. There truth, the message that this world is is nothing to think about it. Birth and a single nest (a faea yafa a death are meant for the body and not işH'), the message that the world for the spirit. But you yourself are the is a Single family aga , living spirit. Your name represents the world the family is divided; your virtues-pure speech, pure love, spirits are divided. The world is pure message, the message of love, assuming a monstrous form. Shri the message of solace and goodwill, Mataji you know that tomorrow I the message of friendship, the am going to Kashmir. I am not going message to understand oneself and there for a pleasure trip. There is have collective progress in life, the blood shed. Humanity there has message to attain Yoga with the assumed in- human form. Man has Divine. O, Mother let Thy blessings become inhuman. They have nourish our spirit as the water of committed abnormal deeds. I wish Ganga nourishes the Bharat Bhumi. to take your blessings, your love, Human beings are born and they have your coolness, your affection to to live, but living for oneself has them. I wish to give it to them and absolutely no meaning. One should tell them to learn how to live. Lord live for others, one should live for Krishna has said (' a E भारत:) as Tर्म स्य ग्लानिर्भवति

 July-Aug 2000 17 The Divine Cool Breeze transforming the people. I wish your and when there is fall of Dharma and wickedness assumes power, I love transforms the world into incarnate to re-establish the Dharma. universal brotherhood. Shri Mataji, pray grant us this blessing Shri Mataji you have incarnated on this earth to fulfill this promise to re- Thank you very much establish Dharma on this earth. Jai Hind The word Mother' is such that it moves the heart. Mother showers Offering his Obeisance and Praying for Her long life, the Hon'ble Home Minister of India Shri L. K. Advani affection on children. Mother's love is the nourishment of Spirit and with that purpose I have come in your Holy presence. Shri Mataji people from said: Respected Shrivastava ji. Eighty Countries have sent greetings to you, It could not be justa showing colleagues like Shri Balram Jhakhad off. Your love is truth, your message and others who have come from is truth, Thou art the embodiment of different parts of the country and love and goodwill, which is rarity Sahaja Yogis/Yoginis of this great now a days. Man has become selfish Institution. I am grateful to Shri and greedy and this selfishness pushes Rajesh Shah who has given me the them to the lowest ebb. Mother! opportunity to have the Darshan of my nothing will go with us but your Shri Mataji and all of you. Icame with blessings. The blessing of your love will uplift our souls and teach us to the purpose to listen to Shri Mataji's discourse (pravachan), be with Her live and let others live, love other for some time and receive Divine human beings. Mother let your light knowledge. But it happens to be Her enlighten the whole world. There is birthday today. So, along with you all, I and my wife offer our obeisance and good wishes and pray to the Divine for her longevity. We also pray that she should continue to spread dawn and sunset everyday, but you, Mother, continue to be with us every breath of our lives. So Mother, we are assured. Shri Mataji I will not speak the way she has been doing Chaitanya much and bore the Sahaja Yogis but Shri Mataji the present conditions of the country make my heart revolt and with the edge of your love I feel like for a number of years. There is lot of talk these days of environment. But when we speak of

 July-Aug 2000 18 The Divine Cool Breeze environment we have generally only be completely eradicated and with the physical environment in mind. your continuing support in the But the kind of pollution there is there coming millennium we will be able in the mind of human society, it is to save this country from what you tremendous, its enormous. The way have been saying. Shri Balram we ask the polluting industries to Jhakhadji is leaving shortly and we install depolluters, to check the wish him all the best for his trip to pollution, similarly the responsibility Kashmir and we hope that he will be to depollute the moral pollution that exists in the society has come on the accomplish his mission. divine personalities like Shri Mataji. Therefore when one participates in an Felicitating Shri Mataji, Sir C.P. event of this kind, a function of this Srivastava expressed himself as kind, one feels, elevated; one feels able to, with Shri Mataji's blessings, under:- that the pollution within has been Hon. Shri Advaniji, Smt. Advaniji, reduced to some extent if not distinguished VIPS, honoured guests completely obliterated. One feels happy. Joyous. I admit that I am not and my dear Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis. blessed as you people are. I have to We have heard so much today that I move in pollution, you are much wonder what more can I say, but I do above it, you are fortunate, but want to say that I have lived a long whatever opportunities I get to life, 80 years today or yesterday. I would have regarded my life as completely fulfilled if I had only one experience that of being present here this evening to celebrate the Birthday of your Holy Mother. I have been a witness to the development of Sahaja participate I consider myself blessed. On behalf of myself, my wife and my relatives, who are here with me, once again I offer my obeisance again and again and pray to the God almighty that your blessings remain on us for ever. Yoga from one or two to a few, to a larger number to many and I have Answering Shri L.K. Advani Shri Yogi Mahajan said: seen the miracles happening. Initially I was bewildered how could it happen? How can any one addicted to drugs get away from it Shri Advaniji the pollution that you have been talking about, we assure you that through Sahaja Yoga it will 00

 19 July-Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze overnight! So my first experience assembly of United Nations. This is was that of being bewildered. Then the moral assembly of the world. This I saw many number of cases where is the ethical assembly of the world, people got transformed because of this is the spiritual assembly of the her blessings. And then I felt, what world. The vision of your beloved Mother is that similar assemblies you can call, the sense of splendour, bewildered to splendoured, and now in my 80th year I have come to the should be there all over the world to create a new humanity. stage of Surrender. This assembly Now it is to the creator of this new cannot be described in words. This assembly, it is to the creator of the is a very unique assembly. This is an assembly presided over by the Divine Incarnation and comprises what I called angels. Shri Advaniji has referred to pollution. I want to assure him that in this gathering there is total purity. They are bound by pure, innocent love for each other. This is new vision that I bow down with all respect. I have two proposals and I have no doubt that you would agree to it full heartedly. The first is that, apart from felicitation to the Holy Mother, each one of us should rededicate himself a gathering which includes people from all religions, all countries, all or herself to the advancement of Sahaja Yoga throughout the world. races and have forgotten their differences. They belong to one And the second proposal which I am sure you will endorse more single Sahaja Yoga family and what a pride it is! You go anywhere in the world, you meet brothers and sisters. It is a creation which is, normally to senses, unbelievable, but it has enthusiasti-cally is that your Holy Mother should continue to maintain her holy abode, her divine abode on this earth until every single human happened. Now who has created this being, every man, every woman, assembly. In my view this is the most every child has been transformed. important assembly of the world, even more important than the general Thank you all very much. Thank you.

 The Divine Cool Breeze 20 July-Aug 2000 77TH BIRTHDAY FELICITATION Nirmal Dham, Chhawla, Delhi-22-3-2000 Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Our honoured guests, our respected require your attention, so that they should be corrected. Their politicians Home Affairs Minister Mr Advani, who has been always a very great should be corrected. Their citizens should be corrected and that people Deshbhakta, I admire him because he should really evolve into a new consciousness. All of them have been working it out. Now we have here very few Sahaja Yogis from abroad, but its surprising how these Sahaja Yogis have enlightened thousands and thousands of Sahaja Yogis all over the loved his country. He is very patriotic. And as you know, both my father and mother, were very patriotic. They sacrificed everything for the country and I also was always condemned by everyone as being a very patriotic We must love the country in person. which we are born. There is some world. They are the ones who are connection, very great connection working. I am not working like them. between yourself and your country. I They work very hard. You can see the have seen that after Sahaja Yoga all way we have got these felicitations from all these people, all because they approach these people, told them all about Sahaja Yoga, they might have given them self realisation. And that's how they have worked it out. those who have been transformed into new visions and new ideas always know what's wTong in their own country and so conscious of it. I am surprised that everyone of them have been able to tell me what's wrong in So we have to worry about our own their country and what should be country and its problems. Why these problems are there? And I know your wishes and your efforts will definitely improve the conditions of your own country. Its happening everywhere, also should happen in India. Once we done. They never identified with the wrongs or the misdeeds of their country. Its very surprising. On the contrary they said, Mother all these countries

 July-Aug 2000 21 The Divine Cool Breeze: are realized souls, it is our most problems. Now if you can tell them important duty to, first of all, look that you can be transformed, after our own societies, look after our transformed into a being which is own country. If you cannot do that, absolutely above all these worries, what's the use of getting self- above all these problems. How can realization? Because self-realisation that be? One can ask. Actually what stands on one's power, the power of happens that when you get self- love and one's art, art-of selfless love. realization, your attention gets That is there, immediately you start - enlightened by the self, means the spirit and automatically you start dropping your destructive habits, destructive thoughts and destructive seeing the people who are surrounding you, who are in your village, who are also in the neighbour- hood, or also who are in your city and in your country. Immediately you start understanding what is the problem in activities. You suddenly become so constructive. Now I tell you one thing. I was amazed when I was in Talyati your own society. I have seen, after in Russia, a news came to me that the coming to Sahaja Yoga people have head of the mafia has become Sahaja tried to improve so many things in Yogi. I was so touched by it and he their own society. Now we have many came to me and said I was doing all Hindus, many Muslims, many nonsensical things. I never got any Christians, all kinds of people, but I satisfaction, no joy, but this is was amazed at one thing. Once they something. I really can feel joy and got realization they never identify satisfaction within myself. Mother with the wrong things of their society, whatever was my past, will you of their religions. On the contrary they forgive me? I said, "Forgiven." wanted to improve it and work it out. What is important is the present and now you have become a Sahaja Yogi. It is such a credit to your spiritual There is very simple way of doing it. You don't have to go out of the way to change people or to make any growth, the way you have achieved. sacrifices, nothing of the kind. He said, "Now I have that peace, I Everybody today is suffering from have the joy and I want to share it with some sort of anxiety, some sort of others. I could never share my money problems, some sort of worries. Also with others. I used to grab money they are suffering from other from others. I said I don't want to

 July-Aug 2000 22 The Divine Cool Breeze country? Everything you see very clearly and you also have power to correct it. If you are aware of your power and if you have mastered it then you can do it. You can do it not only for yourself but for your family, for your society for everyone. My husband used to say you are a socialist because you can't adjust yourself have any confessions, finished. Now as you have become a 'Sahaja Yogi' what will you do? Surprisingly, he was very sweet. He said I will send some onions to India. I said 'Why?" He said, 'because there is problem about onions.' I thought, look at this man, "how genuine he has become, how humane! I said there is no such problem, you don't worry, and then alone. You must share with others, you see his way of looking at things and working out things was so you are so collective. But we have to understand that we are collective. We can't exist alone anywhere, we are all tremendous that the same fellow who was a big mafia leader has become such a great, honourable person. Then collective. We are not aware of it. But when you are aware of it, are you so surprised that you are part and he wanted to be elected in some municipal election. I said "Go ahead", parcel of the whole. You don't have you will be elected and if you are not elected, does not matter. But he gọt to look for company in your own society, in your own samaj. Nothing. elected also. What you want is just to have the So you see how things work out for a company of all the Sahaja Yogis and person who wants to be the spirit. this has been proved beyond doubt that if you are spiritually awakened, Shivaji has said" स्वधर्म जागवावा" this is the only message he gave for the you have no quarrels with others, no future. Svadharm Jagwawa, 'Sva' hatred, no competition. I have not seen anybody doing that in Sahaja spirit. That is what we have to Yoga. And that is how things have achieve. Because he himself was a become so much better for all of you together and also outside. One of the means the spirit. You awaken your realized soul, so he said, this is what you have to do, to make your spirit awaken. Now with that light of the spirit what happens? You just see clearly, very clearly, you say what's wrong with you? What's wrong with your society? What's wrong with your ambassadors, she told me, that Mother we are very happy because we are not competitive. I said, why? So everybody is happy with us. This is what it is, that you realize that you don't have to worry about getting

 July-Aug 2000 23 The Divine Cool Breeze a drug de-addiction organization. And that's why Sahaja Yogis said that we something higher position, getting something very rich, in say properties, No. Because the satisfaction part is have one million dollars. Can we do with that. They said, No No we wilI within you, you are so satisfied within give you 21 million dollars. What will you do with 21 million dollars, I said, If you want to do something for drug addiction? You only need them to come there. Overnight they will give up their drugs. I have seen that and there are some sitting here. Such a power your spirit has. Such a beauty it has and such love and peace it has. yourself that you don't run after things, like in Economics. Modern economics, as it is, is based on one simple factor that human beings are never satisfied. Today they want something, they will run for it, do all sorts of things, spend money and get it. Then they are not satisfied. They want to have something else. This is the basis of economics, I mean Only it is to be brought into your attention which is going hither, thither-thither. Only if your attention is enlightened by the spirit you modern economics. But Sahaja Yoga is different, Sahaja Yoga economics is that I have got realization, alright, become such a wonderful person. All I must share with others. If I have these things as they had described in Sanskrit, Kam, Krodh, Mada, Lobh, got the satisfaction I must share it with others. Moha, all of them drop by The sharing part is so important in themselves. All the anger, all the Sahaja Yoga and people are doing stupid things we do, and all the with such beauty. As I told you the aggressive things we do, drop out. I other day, we have to learn the art of have asked some Sahaja Yogis to go loving. Its very simple if you know to Kashmir and make them Sahaja how to say few sweet things, how to Yogis. If you can make them Sahaja Yogis this problem will be over. And with others very sweetly. It is not there are some willing to go there. difficult for you at all because you Some foreign Sahaja Yogis specially give something sweetly, how to share have got your spirit to give you the joy. I know Sahaja Yoga has done wonders. People have given up drugs over night. Now in America they have a proposal for us that we should start have offered their services to go and change the people's lives. Now we have changed people, like we have now in a place called Benin, there are 7000 Muslims who were very

 July- Aug 2000 24 The Divine Cool Breeze but Sahaja Yogis, none of them, were fundamentalists, they all have become Sahaja Yogis. In Turkey we have already 2000 Sahaja Yogis. So even fanaticism of any kind among Hindus, among Muslims, among Christians can be easily changed because they will see the beauty of their spirit and their religion itself will get enlightened. They will see the beauty of their religion. They will see the oneness of their religion and like that a global religion can be accepted where all religions will be understood properly. There have been deviation in every religion and that's why there touched. Even their houses were completely alright while the rest were all destroyed. So many places, it has happened. We had a hurricane, there the same thing. All of them are sending me reports that Mother all the Sahaja Yogis are saved. How they are perfectly alright? Because you are protected by the divine power. We have to believe in the divine power which all the religions have believed Then the problem comes whether you should believe in the form or formless? Then you will realize that with the formless only you can are problems. understand the form. Very simple thing it is to look at, but it is really Can you fight in the name of religion, when there is only one God? extremely surprising. For example once I said that They do because they are ignorant; I don't blame them, because they have no light. But once they have the light, they will understand what is the global nature of religion. Now you will be surprised that Sahaja Yoga or we can call the Vishwa Nirmala Dharma has Mecca is Meccashwara Shiva, written down in our scriptures. But I didn't know that I just said it. Now I read an article that they were all worshippers of Shiva and this is really surprising that Mohammad Sahib never talked about been accepted in Russia as a religious identity. But it is not religion like other religions are. It is not at all of any religion. Nobody has read even that, we can say the Koran. Nobody has read. We have a very good book that kind. Its a religion where we written on Koran, which of course I believe only in love and compassion guided, and it so clearly says what and also in our own power that nobody can touch you. Nobody can kill you. You will be amazed that there was such a big earthquake in Turkey Mohammad Sahib has said. I mean also this brings discredit to people. Christ never said things which Christians are saying. Same with the

 July-Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 25 Hindus, they are doing things which are never written in any Shastra. It is very surprising that these people, who are incharge of religion, they are the ones who are spoiling the image of religions and creating this problem. I don't know why they want to do it? quarrel about it. But if you are not a realized soul, how can you say which place is Swayambhu and which isn't? So the whole problem is solved but first you must have the knowledge, knowledge of vibrations. Now if you ask me a very serious question that What is the use? we are having in our country, which I Now regarding Sakara and Nirakar it have right to tell you about, is about is very simple to be understood. After Shri Rama's Mandir. Was Rama born getting realization you can feel the there or not? He was. You can feel it spund (P) or you can call it vibratory on your hands. You can feel it. All of awareness is there. With that you can you can feel it. He was born there. feel what is truth what is not. I would No doubt. For that what is there to say that there is no truth in fight? Whether its a masjid or worshipping a statue which is anything Shri Rama was born there. created by a drunkard or a person Vibrations are there, whatever it is. who is using it for money. But even But to glorify him you must have a in the Bible it is said that whatever temple, doesn't matter. Whether you created by the sky or by the mother- have masjid or a temple is the same earth should not be disrespected. and if you want to have a temple you This is what we call as the must do it after realization not before Swayambhus. But Swayambhus for that, and also you should put there people who are not realized souls is only realized soul who will be just a sort of a ritual, a Karmakand. incharge of the Puja. Then only you They don't understand whether it is a will do real credit to that great soul Swayambhu or not. You being a of Shri Rama. All of them here, from Sahaja Yogi can go and see whatever country they come, they Swayambhus and accept it. I know, know Shri Rama. Not only that, but at Tukarama's place, you were they know where he is within us and jumping and enjoying because you they know how to worship Him. They could feel the Chaitanya, you could also know about Mohammed Saheb, feel the vibrations. So first you should they also know about Jesus Christ. know about Nirakar and then you can They know the truth about them. Within their own body, within find out about Sakara. There is no

 July-Aug 2000 26 The Divine Cool Breeze themselves. Once that is the whatever I know, is mostly from our knowledge, the true knowledge, the shastras. It is not the ritualism. It is absolute knowledge then what is the the deeper knowledge. All saints, quarrel about? Everybody will feel whether you take Kabir, whether you the same way. What will you quarrel take Nanaka, or Mohammed Saheb for. If I say my country India is a Yogabhumi, alright, you ask all of Yourself Within'. Why did they say them whether they came from this so, why did they say so because inside country or that country, also will say is the truth, absolute truth, and with the same thing. So when they come that absolute truth all these stupid from abroad, they bow to this country, stupid things will drop off and you while you Indians may not. Because become an affectionate personality. they know this is Yogabhumi and the As it is, the time has come for the Kundalini of the whole universe is whole world to change and transform, inside this Yogabhumi. So all these you know that. I now request you all great things about our country are to to do lot of work for me. I have done be understood through the vibrations that was possible for me to work it which Adi Shankaracharya called as out and it has worked, no doubt. But Spunda. Actually most of their poetry you all can do it and change first of could not, because they were so all your own society, change your closed, could not explain to normai people what it was. But I think, if you globally. You can go. You can help go deep into these matters and each other. For example some people anyone, all of them have said, 'Seek own countrymen, change also, then, understand absolute knowledge can come to India and help here and through your spunda, through your from India some could go and help vibrations, you will know what is the there. So now you are well equipped truth. What's the use of fighting for with that knowledge. You should falsehood? Its like fighting the come and work it out. I must thank darkness. Why not have light and see people from Australia who went to for yourself? Orissa. They have formed nine centres of Sahaja Yoga. This is happening and you know, you could do it. You are quite capable of giving realization to people. I request all of you to try this gift, that you have, to Today I have taken some liberty with you, Sir, because I wanted to tell you that in this country of ours we have the greatest knowledge about the spirit. Whole Sahaja Yoga is based,

 July-Aug 2000 27 The Divine Cool Breeze spiritualism. A lot has been written be shared with others. Emphasizing the need to in Hindi language, you will wonder, learn Hindi Language Shri what is written in Sahaja Yoga is Mataji said:- I talked in English language because remain confined to English language sitting here are many people from only. It has its own limitations. The abroad. I hope you might have also meaning of 'Spirit' word is soul and understood, what I said, yet I will say also wine. It stands for ghost also. that one must know one's national How could you write about the deep language. I know there are people knowledge in this language? So you from South, Nepal and various other all must learn Hindi language. I am places, who are present here, but the teaching it to foreign Sahaja Yogis knowledge of national language is also. The treasure of knowledge is necessary. My Mother Tongue is stored in Hindi or Sanskrit language. Marathi. It is wonderful for spiritual So the knowledge of Hindi is written in these scriptures. Do not compulsory. ascent. But my father used to say that without the knowledge of Hindi language you are useless. So you should learn Hindi. By learning Hindi May God Bless You. you could read about your culture and

 The Divine Cool Breeze July Aug 2000 HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI'S ADVICE TO BRIDE GROOMS Chhawla, Delhi-23-3-2000 I am very happy to see you all here and you should know that you are going to have a little different life, suffer but you forgive because you are very noble, you are a Sahaja Yogi. So don't try to find faults with your wife all the time. Also do not give her, all that you are getting married in Sahaja Yoga. the time, orders, do this, do that, but join hands with her. Because in Sahaja Yoga we don't believe in an There is a difference between other marriages and Sahaja Yoga marriages individual's rights to dominate in which we understand that marriage has to be a special type of holy alliance in which you have to lead a very Sahaja life with your wife and to understand her. She is also a Sahaja Yogini, so you must respect her and another person. So what you should see is to help her, to understand her and to share all the problems. Not to put problems on to her but to give her all the helping hạnd that is needed. She is your companion. She is not you must love her and she should really understand that you are her your slave. She is not your servant, neither you are a boss of her. So all caring, loving, gentle husband. You these qualities are not be seen in a must show all concer about her Sahaja Yogi and understanding is the because she is a Sahaja Yogini. She best part. You should try to is not an ordinary woman and with understand her side also. Sometimes that respect I am sure you are going they are coming from another country to lead a very happy married Sahajaand are of a different culture. So try life. to understand. This is how you will understand what is the culture of that As it is, in Sahaja Yoga, as you know, country from which she comes. Also it is good for children that you must always respect your wife. You should not have some sort of idea about your we don't criticize each other. We see the good points of another person and we have a great capacity to forgive. So to forgive is not to tolerate or to

 July-Aug 2000 29 The Divine Cool Breeze Please understand that and once you start doing that, you will enjoy helping her and understanding her. wife. Forget about all the conditioning you have had or you have seen in the society. You are very different people. You are absolutely chosen people for the work of Sahaja Yoga. So once you I hope your marriages are very, very successful and that you get very start understanding this point that you are here going to marry a girl who is beautiful, sweet children who are born Sahaja Yogini and who will look after realized souls. I am sure you will have you, then it will work out. I will also a very happy life ahead of you. So go tell them what they have to do. But I for that, go for a happy life by making would request you not to have her happy, by making every one domination of man or thinking that happy and looking after every thing you are the head of the family to in a Sahaja way. May God Bless You All. trouble the wife. Share with her.

 30. July Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI'S ADVICE TO BRIDES Chhawla, Delhi-23-3-2000 It is very nice to see all of you so that, but you must always be humble beautifully dressed and looking so and understand that you have to carry nice. I want to tell you one thing that out the work of Sahaja Yoga through you are marrying in Sahaja Yoga to your marriage. This is a very big Sahaja Yogis. Always remember this responsibility. In your case it is the point. As it is, we see there are so preservation of the society that is of many marriages breaking and all the Sahaja Yoga people. kinds of things happening in Sahaja So you have to love all of them. You Yoga. Also we get sometimes 1% must care for them. Never think this is your own house and you are the queen of the house. But you are the mother, you are the sister, you are the failures. Only 1%, and that is because they understand the responsibility as Sahaja Yogis. So I want all of you to remember that you are getting married to a Sahaja Yogi and you complete relation of these people who are Sahaja Yogis. So when they come must always remember this point. to your house you must show all You must respect him, you must look after him and care for him. respect and regard. Sometimes he may lose little bit of Never complain about them to your his balance. It is you who has to bring husband. He won't like. Also you him back to balance with very gentle must remember that your patience, ways. It is your duty to preserve the your love and your guidance will society of Sahaja Yogis. People will definitely help to build your married come to your house, Sahaja Yogis, life. If you want to be happy, you must their wives, their children. You must know how to make others happy also, look after them because you are the incharge of the society of Sahaja Yogis. You may be earning a lot, you may be very well equipped, must be If you do not know how to make others happy, you can never be happy. You should not think about your own demands, your own needs, your own,

 July-Aug 2000 31 The Divine Cool Breeze you can say, ideas. Whatever is there you have to do in a very gentle manner because you are the women, not mind giving up anything to anyone if they want. You will enjoy your generosity now and in that you should be generous when you forgive others. Forgiveness is very important and then you will never feel the weight of your married life. you are ladies. So your style should be gentle, you should not shout, you should not get angry, you should not treat anybody shabbily. I will immediately know Forgive. Also you have to forgive who is an unkind hostess. People will yourself. Not to feel guilty, not to feel tell me that Mother she is a funny guilty at all about anything because woman, she does not know how to after all you are also Sahaja Yogis and behave. I don't want to hear that. I if you have done anything wrong, it's alright, it doesn't matter. But you want to hear that you are very sweet, nice wife who will look after the should have the sweetness. The husband, who will look after the sweetness of a wife who will emit family of Sahaja Yogis. That's your job. There is nothing to feel degraded love and peace to others. You should not be a dominating personality or a person who is aggressive, not at all. On the contrary you are the one who in that. That's what you have to do in Sahaja can bear lots of things and make fun Yoga. That's why you are so out of every nonsense that you see. important. You don't know that the Nothing is so serious to fight it but to role of woman is so important, so very make a fun out of all that and make a important that she can change the fun for every one. That's what you whole family into a beautiful Garden. It is her sweetness, her own creative mind of love that can work it out. have to be, always smiling and happy. You will be amazed, you can make beautiful marriages for yourself; for Must find out the art of love and work it out on anybody who is disturbed or who is unhappy or who is crossed. You can do it. You should know how your husband and for all Sahaja Yogis. I am also very sure, if you will make a successful marriage, you will have very very good children who to pacify that person and how to impress. will be born realized. So you should be good mothers, mothers who can First quality you must have is the really do good to their children and generosity of character. You should to other children also. All that is

 The Divine Cool Breeze July-Aug 2000 32 stored for you in future. I know you all will be enjoying very much your future life and make it so beautiful which now a days are not available. You don't see people who are happy in the family. So no complaints about the husband, no complaints about anybody to the husband but you make yourself so sweet that everybody wants to take your love, your guidance and they will come to you, that everybody should talk, that 'look at these Sahaja Yoginis?" How great they are! Their lives are happy. It is very very important that we should pay attention to our own mistakes than to the mistakes of others and try I am sure that you can work it out. to correct them. See, they are There are so many Sahaja Yoginis themselves capable of looking after themselves. Only you should care for them and also you should in every way be very kind and gentle. I am sure who brought such credit to me and have done such good work. I accept the same from you. May God Bless You. you all can make very good families

 July-Aug 2000 33 The Divine Cool Breeze HOW REALISATION SHOULD BE ALLOWED TO DEVELOP London -15-10-1979 collective being and of others also. This is 3e or we can call it TTa, Now those who have got realisation, those who have felt the vibrations must know that they are now- which is not seen by any one, which developing into another being. The no one knows about. They talk about germination has started, and you must it, they talked about the kingdom of allow the germination to work out in god. They talked about God's powers, its own way. But normally when we divine powers. It's all talk, talk, talk. get realisation also, we don't realise But once you are triggered into it, you that it is a tremendous thing that has have to grow into it. Unless and until happened within us. That this you grow into it you will be dropped, triggering, which is an impossibility, specially the people who have come has taken place with in us and it has from fake Gurus and from false things to work out słowly. It has to develop that they have been following. They and evolve us into that and because don't know how terrible these things we don't feel it, we don't take it that are? Like you are on a crocodile and suddenly you discover it's a crocodile, how fast you would run from that? But even the understanding that it is a crocodile and it is going to eat you up, doesn't come up so easily. So this one doesn't realise also, as you don't realise that triggering, which is the most difficult thing, has happened to you, It is difficult, but it has happened to you. Know why it has seriously, as we should, our realisation does not grow. Moreover, we are surrounded by people who have not felt the vibrations. They don't know this area, they have never seen it. As Guru Nanaka has called it, it is HE, They have not seen it, they don't know about it, they don't know that there is a power of God that exists, which understands, coordinates, cooperates with you, happened. You take that one for which is working in the collective granted and also you take the devils for granted. At least don't take the being, which makes you aware of that

 July-Aug 2000 34 The Divine Cool Breeze devils for granted, run away from after realisation it is outside. them as soon as possible, meditate, Sometimes it is sucked in and again meditate and try to establish yourself it goes outside. Then we don't in the realm of Divine Love. I say it change our old habits at all. We go is Divine Love. You cann't on sticking to these old habits. Our structure of life, our styles of thinking, understand what is Divine Love. You cann't understand any human being continue to be the same. Again we who loves you only for love's sake, find ourselves lost into the same just because that person loves you. He shambles. goes on loving because he enjoys that loving. In संस्कृत it is called अव्याज, that there is no interest, 3T , just flowing. Even when it corrects you, Now Sahaja Yoga gives you realisation, all right, but also it gives you a long rope to hang yourself. If you don't pay heed to yourself and to it corrects you in love and the protection of Divine Love is the only your being and if you don't love way you are germinating. That Love yourself and understand that you are gives you that warmth needed, that the instruments of God by which for strength needed, that confidence the first time you are going to give realisation to people. You are going to save people from getting drowned and this is the first time you are made needed. Everything is given to you by that Divine Love. So one has to realise that it is love, like that. This capability you never and love is the basis of all this had and no human beings have, which creation. God has created this world you have got now today. Very few this universe only because He loves people had this capability, very very you and He wants to bestow His few people. But now you have got blessings on you because He loves that capacity and you don't want to you. But how far you love yourself is evaluate yourself! How important it the problem. How far you understand is? If you could realise then you yourself is the problem. You don't would work it out? Allow the evaluate yourself and that is the blossoming to come up. On the reason why, though the Kundalini has contrary I find, today because you are risen and you have got realisation, Sahaja Yogis and I can talk to you like your vibrations are flowing, the this, normally it is about Kundalini growth is very slow. Because and all that, but I find that you don see the movements of your attention has been outside and even

 July-Aug 2000 35 The Divine Cool Breeze gas lights. It is he who has to do it, he Kundalini. If you try to understand is appointed for that. that she is the one who loves you the most, because she is your individual mother, if you try to follow her, you Sahaja Yogis must realise what is their value. What have you made out of will see that She is suggesting where Sahaja Yoga? How many people have is the problem within you? What you have to correct, what you have to do. Because She wants to perfect you, She wants to help you. So if you problems for others by talking, by you saved, how many people you have helped? Your own problems are so many and you are creating start watching it carefully, with love, with understanding, She is very discussing, by arguing. You can't playful, extremely sweet, full of discuss it out. You must know, you beautiful play like a little child. She can't argue it out. It has to work by is tickling here and there, call for your attention. She doesn't trouble you. itself. By arguing, discussing, fussing, judging, confusing yourself, you You have to be just alert about Her create a problem for your Kundalini and She really matures you. You have to work it out. Are you not seeking seen people, with time how they have your spirit? Are you not worried matured? But you have to pay attention to Her and yourself, about the salvation of your own spirit? If so, what are you doing about it? That's the most important thing. I otherwise what is your value without enlightenment? What is the value think everybody realises this that only of a human being without achieving self realisation is not the enlightenment? end of it. Because it is just the sprouting that has started. You have What is the use of having human to go further, you have to have beings if they are not enlightened? compassion for others who haven't What is the use of this instrument if got it as yet. You have to think about it is not put to the mains? The rest is all useless, isn't it? It is you who have to raise the people; you have to enlighten the people as we have some gas lights. A man runs up to the gas lights to lighten them. He only has the capacity and power to do it, so he them, you have to give it to them, work it out, put all your minds to it. But still I find people are busy with other things. They go back into the same circle. You should be busy, I don't say that you shouldn't do something for your living, you have to do it. This is one thing very runs up to the street, lighting all the

 35 July-Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze body is so important as well as dispensable. You know what happens in Sahaja Yoga, very common in India, not so much here, Indians do important for us to know that we have to work it out, we have to allow it to grow within ourselves. But if you say that Mother we have all faith in you, this way. They have very good points that's all. Its not sufficient, what faith do you have? What do you mean by like whenever I go I find they are very faith? It is such a vague term. What much matured and very much is faith after all? Have you ever developed, because they are not analysed the word 'faith'? Some thinkers as you are. You are great people think that we have all faith in thinkers, visionaries and intellectuals. Mother if we sing her praise, finished. I was thinking all intellectuals For that one has to reach a stage like Adi Shankaracharya had reached. Have you got faith in yourself is the point? Who is having certain developing horns here, like this, and when you see them you will know that they are intellectuals, who were denouncing God and denouncing all faith in me is the one who has n o His ways. faith in oneself? You have to have faith in yourself and in all vour They are not intellectuals, I would say, fellow beings, all the other Sahaja to that extent, but they fail in certain Yogis. I have already told you that things, while you fail in certain things. Sahaja Yoga is not going to work out They always had this kind of thing individually. Anybody who is that somebody came up like one man thinking that I am something who said, no I am the great, I am this, greater than the others is a gone I am that. He goes on this kind of case. Nobody should work Sahaja harping and he shows down other Yoga for oneself in that way. You people. And then suddenly such a have to work collectively, for Pperson is brought down and the everyone of them. Any one of you people are shocked. Mother what who thinks that he has something happened? You cannot, If you have higher than the others have, then you to pull a spread carpet like that, you are sadly mistaken. Its like one eye cann't pull one side of it, you have to saying that I am higher than the other carry the whole. Only one person or one nose saying that I am higher cann't shoot off in the whole game. than the eyes. Everything has its own Now you take my position. Yes I place in the body of Virata and every know I have all the powers, every

 The Divine Cool Breeze July-Aug 2000 37 thing is there of course, I am supposed to be much higher and all that, supposed to be, I say. But confronting you I have to come down, I have to fight the way with you up the hill. Every step we have to go together hand in hand. You know that. Somebody's some chakras are catching. Alright. So, I put my Chakra into play, it works out that way but you know how much I have to struggle? How much I have to work hard? Its a task, giving realisation. My Kundalini doesn't need anything. You know that but still she has to carry So be careful, in dealing with people you have to deal with love, not with criticism or in anyway showing them down in any way. When you are not in anyway higher than anyone then there is a reason it should be done like that. If you are getting any way higher, you are helping the collective being but in that if you are feeling that you are anyway higher than others, you are again coming down because you are pulling down the collectivity. If you put down anyone, or condemn anyone like that, then you are putting down that person. You should not also correct because I am there to correct. Its not easy to correct others. You may hurt them. You don't know even the your heavy Kundalini on herself and raise it. Its a very heavy thing, only a person of real love can do that. Thats the only criteria. The one who doesn't have love cann't do it. It is too much ways of correcting people. Unless and until you have those powerful a thing to do. The whole body, if I vibrations which are emitting from break into, every centre vibrating, its your being just love. Then you can not easy. But its just the love and the do it. Because of an ego oriented compassion between you and me, society you are very good at hurting which suits me, which covers all the others. You dominate others; you task and the labour and thing that I don't even know that you are have to put in and sometimes it is such dominating others. So many ways, I have learnt in this country we have, by which we dominate in a very subtle way. We talk to people in such a way that we are dominating them. Do we ever think, sit down, how are we a wasteful thing, I feel about some people. It is such a waste with them but still the love that has brought us together gives that soothing feeling and you feel so cheerful. Every morning you get up, with a new fragrance within yourself and you feel so happy about it. going to talk to others, suggesting our love to them? I will tell you again and again that

 July Aug 2000 38 The Divine Cool Breeze Sahaja Yoga is nothing but love, love, have seen how people hate. How they love. How much you love others is treat each other, how they talk about the main point. Despising, criticising each other? There is no tenderness is not good. Yesterday you were just about them, no kindness about them. the same, today you are better off, you How sharp they are with each other? are going to be better off still. You have to change all that now. You Suppose some people who are very have to create a world of people who heavy or very troublesome, you love each other for nothing. Not for should tell them clearly that sorry sir, money, not for positions, not for you are very negative, we cann't bear beauty, not for sex. Only for love's you. There are some cunning people sake. Only because you have been also who may come in and try to blessed by love. trouble you. To a point it is alright, then you have to tell them off that we From next time we will be advertising are sorry. But even to judge whether and many more new people will come a person is negative and what sort of into Sahaja Yoga. But all of you must things he is doing, you are just find out how many people you can thinking about him, you are bring along and work out. Put your rationalising. Not through rationality but through vibrations. Because through rationality a person may mind to something like that. All the time we are thinking about jobs this and that. This is a very precious time that should not be lost. All our lives appear to be a very nice person, may be, or a lady coming in, here could be a terrible stuff. So how much you marrying, having children and dying. meditate means how much you love. This life time let us do something When you think of others, think how special, for which this whole much you love them, just try to think universe was created. Open the how beautiful it is! If it is not love it gates of Heaven for the rest of the is hatred. Its like a scorching heat, you we have done jobs, made money, people. You have to be assiduous. There is no compulsion in Sahaja see, which will completely take away Yoga, you know that very well. There all the beauty, all the smoothness of your heart. is no timing for it, there is no forcing for it because I say it is love. If you don't want to do it, nobody is going Only through love Sahaja Yoga is going to spread. All these years you to force you. have seen the powers of hatred. You

 July-Aug 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 39 But as I said, Sahaja Yoga gives a without even knowing it. Its happening. You are transmitters. Every where you are sitting in meditation you are transmitting vibrations. Do you know that? At that time if you are thinking about your jobs and other things which you have been thinking before, then transmission is poorer. Think of love. Think of the whole country, think of very long rope to hang yourself. Till you go into illusions completely and you would not even know that you have lost your vibrations. It is to that extent. If we have entered into something which was unprecedented, we have to take the ways which are unprecedented. You cann't go the way that you have had before. You have to change your methods, judge every action of yours through love. How much sacrifice the whole world at that time. You are transmitters of these waves of love, and love will flow from you. you can make for others? What can you sacrifice for others? What service I told you once that you are made in can you do for others, Sahaja Yogis I the form of Ganesha and thats what am saying. There is no sacrifice in it. you have to do. You know that If you see, there is no sacrifice, it is vibrations from you are coming out. You are sending vibrations out, you love. know that. That means you are like If you love some one and you want any deity which is thrown out of the to take say a rose for a person and mother earth's womb and a big temple you go to the market. With great is raised and thousands of people go difficulty you get the rose. When you to worship that. They say that it is the get it you feel happy. But then you temple of a Jagrut Devta, means get the thorn in the finger, still you enlightened, awakened and that's just don't mind, its bleeding, doesn't a stone, a stone that comes out and matter. You are just waiting to see the people build a temple on top of that person there and when you see the and go there and worship that. While person, you forget all that had gone there are so many already sitting here, in between and you give that rose just so many Jagrut, realised souls. These to express yourself symbolically. And are living and moving, these are how happy you feel that you have understanding. They manoeuvre. The been able to give that rose to that stones only emit vibrations to clear person! This we do every day in our life. But in Sahaja Yoga you do it Kundalini. They cann't raise the the atmosphere but you can raise the

 The Divine Cool Breeze 40 July-Aug 2000 Kundalini, you can. And what are you brought any happiness to you. You doing about it. Such a precious thing have your friends who are Sahaja you have got. What are you doing Yogis. Change your friends. Change about it? Is it because there is no your methods of life. You will enjoy business in it, that we are taking it so slowly? Supposing its an enterprise, then every body would be up and doing, Isn't it? We have to change our ways and methods of understanding. The reward of God is thousand fold much more. This is for you to understand about yourself and about the importance of Sahaja Yoga. Unless and until it is an enterprise, nobody takes it seriously. This is the style of western thinking. It has to be, than any enterprise can bestow upon whether it is hocus-pocus or real enterprise? Does not matter. As long as money exchanges, everybody is up-and doing it. But when it comes to Sahaja Yoga, they have no time, you. When He blesses you, you wouldn't even have words to thank Him. To that extent He goes. Are we depending on him or on our own old ways? We have to change very much, even to meditate. Because we have we have to transform ourself into a not yet loved we have not felt that love within ourselves. I wish you could all feel that depth of love. Then you would go all out to work it out new style of thinking. It is very very important. I hope you will think about it, what I have talked to you today. Don't take to a life which has not for yourself and for others. May God Bless You continue from page 7 be transformed. Still your joy is Rama made people very serious and sober. The gaiety of life had vanished. So Shri Krishna started this type of celebration. Only Sahaja Yogis could celebrate that way now and play Holi limited, but when you share it with others and when it resounds in others and when you see them in this joyful state, then a unique state of joy will dawn in you. with love; not to trouble any one but to express one's joy and also to give joy to others. I saw the Yuva Shakti boys and girls dancing out of happiness and joy. To bring people in the state of joy Lord Krishna asked them to celebrate Holi. My Blessings to you all. The propriety of conduct of Shri



----------------------

2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
00
July-August, 2000
Volume : XII Issue :7 & 8
Innately, within us, resides the Spirit which wants to enlighten yOu, to give
peace, the bliss and the joy of our being.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
The Prayer
Birthday Puja 21-03-2000
6.
Birthday Puja 21-03-2000
(Translation of Pravachana in Hindi)
77th Birthday Celebrations A Report
Random Notes from Foreign Sahaja Yogis
12
77th Birthday Celebrations Programme
16
77th Birthday Felicitation 22-03-2000
20
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi's
Advice to Bride Grooms
28
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi's
Advice to Brides
30
How Realisation should be Allowed to Develop
33
: Yogi Mahajan
V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
Edited by
Published by
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Prayer'
O Mother Divine ! When incarnated
of death, of immortality; the oneness
of a man with every other man and
as Lord Krishna, you said:-
with his God. Then will the world be
यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य ग्लानिर्भवति भारत ।
led to truth, and man will be the truth.
अभ्युत्थानम्धर्मस्य तदात्मानं सृजाम्यहम् |॥
When she has come, the Comforter,
O Arjuna! When negative forces
she will convince the world of sin,
and of the truth of what I speak, and
take over virtuousness and subjugate
the positivity, I incarnate on this earth
in Human Form (Sakar) to re-establish
virtue (Dharma) at its proper place.
of the rightness of the judgement of
the just; and then the prince of carnal
life will be cast out. And when the
Comforter shall come I need not
Our Lord Jesus Christ spoke of
intercede for you; for you will stand
Thy Advent;
approved, and God will know you
then as he knows me."
"And Jesus spoke again unto the
eleven and said "Grieve not because I
To keep up your promise and to
go away, for it is best that I should go uphold the Dharma, O Mother
away. If I do not go, the Comforter Divine, very kindly you have
will not come to you. These things I incarnated once again in this
speak while with you in the flesh, but
when the Holy Breath shall come in
Kaliyuga and have been kind enough
to take up the gigantic task of
awakening the Kundalini of all the
power, Lo! she will teach you more
seekers of the Globe.
and more, and bring to your
remembrance all the words I have said
With Sri Adi Shankaracharya we
to you. There are a multitude of things
all pray:-
yet to be said; things that this age
Nityanada kari Varabhaya kari
cannot receive because it cannot
Sundarya Ratnakari!
Nirdhootakhila- ghora- papa-Nikari
comprehend. But, lo, I say, before the
great day of the Lord shall come, the
Holy Breath will make all mysteries
pratyksha Maheshwari!!
Praleya - chala- vansha - pavanakari
Kashipuradhishwari!
known.
The mysteries of the soul, of life,
Bhikshamdehi kripavalambanakari
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 July Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
this Yoga Bhoomi, we all, Sahajayogi
children pray to Thee, O Devi.
Matanna purneshwari!!
O Mother Anna-purneshwari! you
are the bestower of eternal bliss, you
Kindly grant us faith absolute,
To Thyself and to Thy Cause Devoted
give boon with one hand and
fearlessness with other, you are the
ocean of beauty and the destroyer
all sins. You are verily the supreme
we all be
Pray! Establish Thy Lotus Feet in our
of
hearts firmly
Shower the boon of perfect attention,
goddess. You have purified the elan
The state of absolute Thoughtless
of Himalaya (parvati was the daughter
Awareness
of king Himalaya or Himavan).
Inviolable Meditation
Kindly be pleased and give us the
We are blessed with ultimately.
alms.
Celebrating your 77th Birthday, in
Your children.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
BIRTHDAY PUJA
NIRMAL DHAM (DELHI) 21-03-2000
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
really understand the value of love,
of respect for others, because so far
we have based all our theories and
I am so very filled with joy and my
heart is so full of gratitude for all the
Sahaja Yogis who have been able to
create this beautiful place. I can't
imagine how much they must have
worked hard in such a place to create
all our ideas on the principle that
human beings can't love each other.
They are always trying to overpower
others or to hate others or to grab
such a beautiful area, such a peaceful
place. How in Sahaja Yoga people things from others. Such a wrong
work together with tremendous we had all these days and thats why
respect and love for each other and all the organisations that were created
produce something that is to obstruct it also got contaminated
unbelievable. This was just a with it. The only way one can really
wilderness and you have brought so understand what we are is by knowing
much of life and light in this place. yourself. When you know yourself
You wanted to celebrate my birthday. you are surprised that the greatest
I don't know what is so significant thing for you is to love and to be
loved. You enjoy that collective love
so much when you have absolutely
overcome your baser self. In Sahaja
Yoga it is so simple; it works in a very
idea
about it? But the way you have really
shown your understanding and
respect, I am just enamoured. I can't
understand what have I done for you
that you should do so much for
simple manner. It is very Sahaja but
to grow into it is very important and I
am so very happy to see so many of
you from all over the world, from
Sahaja Yoga? As it is, today is also a
very auspicious day which we call as
the Holi. We play Holi on this day
and show our love and oneness
Delhi and also from all over India,
enjoying that love among yourself
and understanding among yourself.
among ourselves.
This is the time when we have to
never expected that in my lifetime I
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 July- Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
would be able to see all this beautiful
are all one together. This joy that was
expressed by you is like the waves
that go to the shores, touch the shores
and come back creating beautiful
patterns. And I see that happening
world of love, trust and peace. But
today really I must say it shows what
we are capable of doing. We human
beings, are very selfish, self-centered
and only worried about ourselves.
That is what is said but it is surprising
that with self-realisation, with self
now that these beautiful patterns are
showing in your own life, in your life
style, in your behavior. There is a very
knowledge, with knowing yourself, special type of human race sitting
you understand how rich you are before me. I am so much thankful to
within, how great you are within, and you, absolutely, that you should take
how capable you are! This to this knowledge of yourself and
understanding comes to you and then enjoy it with others. It is something
that is expressed in such a beautiful remarkable that you know about
yourself, that only human beings can
manner.
Sahaja Yoga took time to grow do. There can be a diamond, very
slowly, slowly and that you all are expensive, but it does not know its
slowly and slowly grown ups. But value. There could be some dog or
today, I must say that, it has reached some animal which must be
such a height that it is difficult for something, but it does not know what
people to get out of it. When you
know yourself, when you know what beings till they get their self-
is reality and what is absolute trüth, realisation and after realisation they
you just get dissolved into that suddenly become aware of what they
knowledge. Of course you are not
it is. Samething happens with human
are. And then suddenly they become
very humble. They become very
loving. Now supposing if somebody
knows that he is a king or he discovers
he is some great musician or Prime
knowledgeable in the way people are.
You are knowledgeable in the real
sense of knowledge because you
realise what is within you, is a big
Minister or something. He feels very
aloof and he thinks no end of himself.
power of love. There is a big power
of understanding, a big power of
But by this knowledge, that you have,
you become one with rest of Sahaja
Yogis and enjoy it. It is very
oneness, of collective. This
collectivity works wonders and gives
a joy that we are all one, we have no
we have no problems. You
remarkable. How it works out that
enemies,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
you enjoy each other so much and to
do something for this collective work,
you can dedicate yourself to it.
without any problems, without any
troubles, all enjoying the bliss of this
love, this compassion, this Divine
Love.
Now my experience of 77 years,
I must really congratulate Delhi
people for coming up so well with this
beautiful arrangement and this
beautiful Pandal and all the beautiful
as you can say, has been really
chequered with all kinds of incidents,
all kinds of people, all kinds of
incidents and its a good vision to see
arrangement they have made outside,
before your eyes that despite all that,
for your stay. I mean really its
something, I have done nothing for
it. Nothing, I should say. How these
people have worked together! There
have been no quarrels, fighting, back
biting, nothing like that. Its very
surprising that such a beautiful thing
has been created by them! It shows
their maturity in Sahaja Yoga. I must
congratulate them again and again for
doing this great work in such a short
so many beautiful lotuses have come
out. They are so fragrant, so beautiful,
so colourful, so attractive. All this is
because we have an innate value
system. Because we have inborn with-
in us a great sense of love and
compassion. This compassion has to
be really understood, and enjoyed and
we have to jump in the ocean of
compassion. So beautiful, and you
will be amazed to see that
automatically you will swim, time.
automatically you will meet other
people also in the same ocean,
May God Bless You.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July- Aug 2000
77th BIRTHDAY PUJA
NIRMAL DHAM- DELHI (21-03-2000)
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
(Translated from Hindi)
First I talked in English because many say with our tongue? With our mind
Sahaja Yogis have come from abroad we could think how to express our
and, moreover, you have no objection love to other people, how to open
to English language. There is no out our hearts to others and give them
doubt that Delhi Colleetively has place in it. We should know that if
worked wonders and Sahaja Yogis there is no love in the heart then such
from Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and a person does not deserve any thing,
Haryana have also joined hands and because whatever he may achieve he
helped them. With great love and will not get contentment, he will not
devotion they have created this be contented. But when the ocean of
beautiful temple like auditorium.I contentment is there in your heart
was really surprised to see it. There then every thing will grant you
are such expert artisans here! I was satisfaction. When you have these
not aware of it. From where all this achievements within and the feeling
artistry came and decorated this of contentment dawns in you then no
place! I am not able to understand. I one could know its limits, no one
was not aware that such beautiful art
could understand this contentment
exists in the Country The Art of
Love, The power of Love, The
expertise of Love! Only those blessed
with the Art of Love could create such
artistic piece. This should be learnt
as to how with our mind, speech and
action (HI, , a h e) we could
become artists. So that we could
business. It is so sweet, so beautiful
that you are enchanted. One cannot
understand what he is doing and what
others are doing; what I am saying and
what others are saying! How they are
showering their love on me and how
I am pouring my love on them. Day
and night one keeps on thinking that
become artists of love. What should
today I have to meet such and such
we talk to give comfort and joy to
person, what lovely things shall I say
to him? What benevolent things are
others? What lovely things we could
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July-Aug 2000
because,
There is no doubt ordinary people are
be talked about,
to
unnecessary worldly things have full of shortcomings. But you can
always done harm and no good at all. make them know themselves. After
Anger has done enormous harm to knowing Thyself you are convinced
human beings. So there is no need to that other people should also have this
teach you non violence. There is no Divine knowledge. They are lost in
need to teach you that 'do not the wilderness. They do not know
misbehave with others or do not
how much Divine treasure you have
within. So it must be given to them
destroy others, do not misappropriate
other's money'. There is no need to
teach all this. Spontaneously all of
and they should also receive it. Once
you realize it than you will take upon
yourself the responsibility to give this
you have become, so beautiful, like
Divine treasure to others. You have
lotuses. You know to emit fragrance
got the key of it and if somehow you
could give this key to them then see
how they respect you and become
grateful to you. The most significant
task before you is to bring more and
more people in Sahaja State. Give
and nothing else and the joy of
giving is a unique experience. Only
people with Divine nature could do
it. Now you have become masters of
it, you have fully utilized the treasure
that was lying within you. Secrets
have been opened out. Now you have
this treasure to them. And when it
to enjoy them. There are different happens then you will be so happy
kinds of people in this world. But that your joy could not be expressed
none could harm you, no one could in words. You have to do it.
touch you. The only thing that they Today, you have celebrated my
could do is become one with you, part birthday. Thank you very much that
and parcel of you. Your lives should you have done it with such
make them keen to be transformed. I enthusiasm. As far as I am concerned
do not guarantee to transform the every year Sahaja Yoga is spreading
whole world but you people could do in such a way that I myself am unable
that. If you are able to transform this to understand its limitations. But you
world and create virtuous people in have to resolve that from today
it, then the whole work will be done.
onward we shall all endeavour to
The only thing is that you have to get
transform others. You
are
into it and work it out. Find out how
transformed, now other should also
many people you could transform.
contd on page 40
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July Aug 2000
8.
CELEBRATIONS ON THE OCCASSION OF THE SEVENTY-
SEVENTH BIRTHDAY OF HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI
NIRMALA DEVI AT NIRMAL DHAM-DELHI
ON MARCH 21-2000
(A Report)
Delhi, the capital city of India, with The Vice President of the United
a metropolitan area population of States of America, Governors of
around 13 million, situated on the various State in the USA, 10 mayors
banks of the "All organisations are obsessed with from main cities
river Yamuna the theory that human beings are
based in the
was a witness to USA, the Prime
the joyous cel-
ebrations of the The collectivity of Sahaja Yogis are
seventy seventh special human beings; having taken to
birthday of Her the simple knowledge of self they are
Holiness Shri | rich within, capable within they are
Mataji Nirmala aware of absolute truth. They knowAustralia, the
guided by the lust for power and that
they cannot get to love one another...
of
Minister
Canada.
Members
of
Parliament from
Cana d a,
Devi on March how to share loye, overcome baser President
of
21, 2000 by Her instincts, disproving the conventional Medica 1
followers from organisational theory.
Association
all over the
(folk medicines)
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
March 21, 2000 - Nirmal Dham,
world. To be
Russia,
ten
precise, 725 fol-
mayors of major
cities in Canada,
Delhi.
of
lowers
Sahaja Yoga from regions of Europe,
North America, Latin America, Af-
the president of Ivory Coast etc. who
had sent their greetings to Her
rica, Australia, East Asia, Russia etc.
Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi on
joined hands with 2500 followers
the occasion had the special mention
of her role in positive transformation
of the individual and in the process
the society, to which do they all
belong. through the Sahaja Yoga
meditation. Special mentions of the
from the different states of India at
Nirmal Dham-near Chhawla village
- on the joyous occasion of their holy
Mother's birthday as though to add
colour to the Holi merriment.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July Aug 2000
speak on Pollution and Environment,
resolution of the New York State
not the physical pollution but on the
prevailing pollution in the moral
fabric of the society. It is well known
that Delhi, given its vast and rapidly
increasing motor vehicle population,
faces an acute air pollution problem
associated with the use of energy in
the transport sector (Delhi is among
the 12 megacities mentioned by
WHO/UNEP as having serious
particulate pollution and it is
estimated that 67% of air pollution is
caused by motor vehicles). L.K.
Advani's prescription to do away with
the "internal" pollution was to
Assembly to the two-time nominee
for the World Peace Prize on Her role
in promoting peace, health and well
being of 80 countries through the
Sahaja Yoga meditation, laudatory
references to her work on adding the
new vision in the new millennium that
of promoting an enabling
environment where people could live
in peace, dissolving differences of
race and religion. From various other
assemblies, sufi saints ete were read
out, in brief, by the convener of the
felicitation programme - Mr.
Nalgirkar
spiritually elevate oneself through the
Speaking on the occasion, Mr. Balram Sahaja Yoga meditation. Mr.
Jhakhar, former speaker of Lok Sunderlal Patwa, former Chief
Sabha, mentioned that the true global Minister of Madhya Pradesh,
village will come out of the spread of
mentioned that he was overwhelmed
Sahaja Yoga throughout the world that he was able to surrender at the
and wished that she continues to
lotus feet of the holy nmother. Dr
celebrate Her birthday till the mission Shoba Das, Head, Department of
is achieved. He did not forget to seek Physiology, Lady Hardinge Hospital,
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala presented to Her Holiness Nirmala
Devi's blessings to achieve positive Devi two theses recognised and
results in his proposed difficult accepted by the Delhi University on
mission in Kashmir.
the role of Sahaja Yoga in stress
management; the third ongoing
The Minister of Home Affairs, Shri
L. K. Advani cited his desire to have
research on the effect of Sahaja Yoga
on Lipid Peroxidation was also
a darshan and an oceasion to listen to
briefly referred to.
the discourses of Shri Mataji as the
prime reason for his travel to Nirmal
Sir C. P. Srivastava, who has several
Dham. He chose the occasion to citations and awards to his credit
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
July-Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
all over the world and creating a new
during his tenure with
International Maritime Organization
and Indian civil service, spoke of his
transition through the three stages of
the
humanity. Sir C.P. Srivastava had two
proposals to the "assembly" - one to
dedicate to the cause of advancement
of Sahaja Yoga throughout the world
and the other to have the holy mother
“bewilderment", "splendour" and the
final stage of "surrender". Initially the
continue the
of
stage
"The diamond does not know its value; Divine abode
so is the human being until he acquires tillevery man/
self-knowledge... Armed with the self- woman
knowledge self-realised souls represent transformed.
lotuses-they emit divine fragrance, are Yogi Mahajan
so colourful, attractive due to their in his capacity
bewilder ment
when he witnessed
is
people getting
transformed soon
transcended to that
of splendour when
the
witnessed innate value system."
as
he
representative
transformation of
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
of
the
societies where
March 21, 2000 Nirmal Dham,
"assembly"
Sahaja Yogis/
Yoginis had a
positive role to play. In the eightieth
year of his birth, he has reached the
Delhi.
passed both
the "resolutions".
Shri Mataji in her address mentioned
that she holds in esteem persons with
strong patriotic feelings for such
persons, once they are self-realised,
- a surrender to
stage of "suIrender'
the divine power which has produced
the unique assembly of angels (Sahaja
Yogis/Yoginis) whose object is to
express the pure innocent love for society/country through their
each other that goes beyond attention, in the process utilising
differences in religions, races and in effectively the potential of Sahaja
can improve the conditions of the
forging a single Sahaja Yoga family.
According to him, this assembly was
even more important than the General
Assembly of the United Nations for
this represented the moral/ethical/
Yoga. Once enlightened, destructive
thoughts/activities are automatically
dropped - she referred to the instance
of the head of Mafia in Taliyati who
after embracing Sahaja Yoga
spiritual assembly of the world. He
referred to the vision of the Holy
transformed himself to serve the local
population. To buttress the point, She
Mother in creating similar assemblies
said that in the light of the spirit one
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
11
The Divine Cool Breeze
souls would be able to intervene
could perceive what is wrong with the
society, country and have the power
to correct them. She referred to the
effectively inter-religious hostilities.
She likened the Yoga Bhoomi-India
offer of some Sahaja Yogis to travel
to Kashmir to change people's
to the Kundalini of the whole world.
She said absolute knowledge could
I am overwhelmed that you have be gained only
" Once brought light and life to wilderness through vibratory
awareness. She
attitude.
enlightened. (referring to Nirmal Dham which was
can prior to setting up of the camp
also mentioned
you
witness the represented wilderness). I am happy that equipped
beauty of the that people worked together with love with the true
religion... and respect for each other. I am very
oneness of the |
religion will be the help from Yogis/Yoginis of Uttar could change the
understood. Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana was able society/country.
knowled ge.
Yogis
that the Dellhi collectivity with Sahaja
happy
How can you to achieve so much within such a shortAs an instance
fight in the period..
she referred to the
name of the
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala recent work of
religion, if
there is only
Devi - March 21, 2000 - Nirmal Dham, Australian Sahaja
Yogis in setting
Delhi
one God?
up nine centres of
She spoke of the separate religious Sahaja Yoga in Orissa.
identity accorded to Vishwa Nirmala
Dharma in Russia as this religion
The occasion was also a witness to
sanctification of thirty three
"international" marriages amongst
believes only in compassion without
any trace of hatred. She said that any
visualisation of the "Form" can only Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis from over
begin with the understanding of eighty countries - a pointer to the firm
formless, a process that is feasible establishment of Vishwa Nirmal
only when one is self-realised. Armed Dharma which champions the
with the "true knowledge," realised concept of universal brotherhood.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 July- Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
12
RANDOM NOTES FROM FOREIGN SAHAJA YOGIS/YOGINIS
AT NIRMAL DHAM
R. Venkatesan - March 23, 2000
I asked Sona Alexander - Sahaja
Visualisation (meditation of probably
Buddhist origin) etc. until she found
Yogini from Newzealand- on factors
that prompted her to undertake the the "real thing" in Sahaja Yoga. It took
three months of
Nearly 725 Sahaja Yogis/Yoginis from introspection
long route to
from
Delhi
-
40countries had assembled at Nirmal during 1993 - to
Australia. Her
Dham. Italy had the largest collectivity accept
Shri
reply
spontaneous of 127 yogis & yoginis; Australia came Mataji but then
"Because, Shri a close second with 116 Other there has been
Mataji cancelled Countries with major representation at
was
no looking back
despite
her
her scheduled
Nirmal Dham were: United Kingdom
catholic
trip to Australia3B
I had to come all
(62), Austria (58), Russia (57),
background.
Switzerland (47), Germany (41), Despite
the
the way!" I was
France (30), Malaysia (24), USA (24), taunting she
received from
bewildered at
South Africa (15) and Turkey (10).
her answer for
her
close
she was one of
relatives that she has been brain
washed for according to her the
vibratory awareness gained through
Sahaja Yoga is too precious to forego.
Such is the love of Sahaja Yogini who
the seven hundred and odd foreign
yogis/yoginis who had decended on
Delhi just to have a "darshan" of Shri
Mataji and probably to express their
love and affection to Her alongwith
thousands of other yogis/yoginis.
travels thousands of miles only to
express her love for Shri Mataji,
silently!
Sona who works as a receptionist was
a seeker from her young age-she had
tried alternative life paths such as
Mr. Lev - 34 years old Sahaja Yogi
Tiichi (Chinese), Reiki (India), replied without batting an eyelid,
Naturopathy, Hatha Yoga (India), "Turkish" when asked about his
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
13
nationality. He explained his entry
the public programme in 1993.
into Sahaja Yoga vividly "It was Finally, he met Shri Mataji in 1994
who asked him to "go back and serve
seven years ago I felt the inner urge
to meditate. I saw Shri Mataji's
Africa". In August, 1994, he set about
photograph in Russian newspapers. I setting the first collectivity in
was attracted by the radiance that Abidjan; as a professor who taught at
glowed out of the face. I attended the
public programme. Ever since I am a
Sahaja Yogi except that now I am a
the university he had a social
standing. "Besides, I could explain
various traditions followed by our
Turkish national as I am married to a
African brothers. For instance, we
Sahaja Yogini from Turkey". For Mr.
Lev even his nationality is a natural it represents the divinity for if you
choice arising out of Sahaja Yoga don't respect the earth you cannot
networking. How does he plan to use have a good meal. When Sahaja Yoga
Sahaja Yoga in his life? I may not use refers to the Ganesha Principle of the
Sahaja Yoga to enhance the quality Mother Earth, so many qualities of
of my life ... I would web my life the Mother Earth are so summarily
around Sahaja Yoga . I only wish explained. In our traditions a male
believe earth is a living thing and that
that I had the necessary depth in with the white beard represents the
interpreting signals in the realm of God... We have the concept of
vibratory awareness. For the rest I will goddess too.. My desire to speak to
be in Turkey and accept whatever the "Goddess" was fulfilled when I
comes my way of life. Right now I spoke to Shri Mataji...What are his
am busy learning Indian classical ambitions? Well, to spread Sahaja
Yoga in neighbouring countries.... I
have already finalised plan for the
vocal and Instrumental (Dholak).
Surprises never seemed to cease at
programme in Senegal... May be I
would write a book on the Sahaja
Nirmal Dham. My next encounter
was with Dr Toure from Ivory Coast.
Yoga.... the theme would be Why it
is not a Foreign Philosophy?
While pursuing the doctoral
programme in Management with the
specialisation on Small Business
development from the University of
For Ms Galina, an engineer from
Estonia, who runs her own furniture
business and for her daughter who has
specialised in Finance, Sahaja Yoga
Paris in 1992, he learnt about the
Sahaja Yoga and was able to attend
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
July Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
is the way of life; although they
way she could get deaddicted to hard
drugs... Ever since 1987 I overcame
my serious problems.. I had tried
every other route including a five-year
stay at the Tibetan monastery.
nothing helped me get rid of my 25
years old problem until I discovered
initially took to it to protect
themselves from the negativity, the
thoughtless awareness and the
paramchaitanya dominate their day to
day Sahaja practice.
Mr. Nitish Mandal, a software
Sahaja Yoga.. Her son could not
stabilize in the Sahaja Yoga as in the
engineer currently based in the United
States of America dreads those pre-
sahaja days when he used to swallow
western society you have so much of
distraction and meditation is the only
6 to 7 tablets a day - he was told that,
stabilizing factor... you need to
meditate regularly to groW...
that was to be the pattern of his life
as there was no cure for the acute
Mr. Richard a retired IBM employee
based in Malaysia mentioned that he
arthritis problem he had. In 1988 he
learnt that he could tackle the whole
was attracted to the Sahaja Yoga when
he came across a paper insertion on
problem armed with lemon, hot water
and a little quantity of kerosene to rub
those joints. Ever since I said goodbye
to those tablets. Now I am happily
the "free meditation". His first
reaction was why not try it there is
married to a German girl (Sahaja
Yogini). My three years old son
speaks German, English and Hindi...
I might teach him Punjabi... Don't
get mistaken by my surname... I am a
Punjabi from Dehradoon.
no expense to it. Richard, adept at the
Chikong, a breathing exercise, was to
evolve into an expert Sahaja Yogi. He
has stayed on for eight years getting
younger and younger much to the
consternation of his wife and
children... Earlier I used to strongly
For Ms. Tatiana, a chemical engineer
believe on the superiority of the
working at a research institute in the
area of "pharmacy" in Moscow Kundalini is raised, every one's
Chinese race... No more. When
during the "office time", seeking truth
through the Sahaja Yoga had been an
potential increases . only you have
to be smart to try it through Sahaja
important goal in her life for the last
ten years. For Ms. Jelly Brown, a
British national who sells hats in For Mr. Ansen More, a Network
Yoga.
London, Sahaja Yoga was the only Engineer (Hardware Communica-
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 15
July-Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
tions) from the University of Yogis in Delhi... It is a splendid
Canberra, yoga, meditation, martial feeling.
arts-all were subjects of interest...
Now I know that meditation refers'to
He feels that every majority started
the state of "thoughtless awareness" as a minority.. "Wasn't Gandhi a
may be even the higher state of minority? He feels that although
"doubtless awareness". For him Sahaja Yogis represent a minority at
the moment, the minority is capable
Sahaja Yoga is such an important el-
ement guiding him to correct path (vi- of providing the global vision and the
bratory awareness), enhancing life. pursuit of right purpose in life.. he
stress free situations.. so much so his lamented on the tendency of Indians
life centers on Sahaja Yoga.. He is to adopt more and more westernized
happily married to an Indian girl from ways. I see Hindi films while flying
to India by Air India.... I see urban
Pune.
Indian getting more westernized when
the enlightened elite of Europe is
taking to self-realisation....
Mr. Ezio, a professional photographer
from Italy had been a Sahaja Yogi for
the last six years. He was attracted to
Sahaja Yoga through his friend, a After listening to the cross section of
views of Sahaja Yogis/Yoginis of
Sahaja Yogi, who seemed
- all the time.
Mr. Ezio was hungry, thirsty for the
SO
North America, Europe, Africa, East
composed in poise
Asia I was overwhelmed that the
"Goddess", "Adi Shakti", "Guru"
experience... knowledge and his
friend obliged him. Ever since the took her birth in India... the yoga
"incident" there had been a dramatic bhoomi of the world... May be we
change in his life.. He was to give Indian Sahaja Yogis have a daunting
up smoking... give up alcohol... His
priority was to change from money-
and important task of forming the
informed "minority" to restore the
spiritual glory by firmly establishing
recognition to sharing the blessings
of Sahaja Yoga with others... so much
so that he had undertaken the long
Sahaja Yoga in every nook and corner
of India.
journey to express solidarity,
brotherhood with around 7000 Sahaja
Jai Shri Mataji.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July-Aug 2000
16
77th Birthday Celebrations Programme
Nirmal Dham, Delhi, 22-3-2000
Speech of Shri Balram Jhakhad - everyone else. But the Divine
the Former Speaker of Lok Sabha Mother lives for the whole world.
Worthy of our obeisance in the Shri Mataji, the spirit yearns for love
mornings, O affectionate Adi Shakti and the message of love. Mother!
Shri Mataji , elder brother Shri
Advaniji, Sir C.P., respected ladies,
gentlemen and Sahaja Yogis.
man-kind needs your message, needs
your Sahaja Yoga to understand
humanity, to understand oneself and
to think of the well being of all. This
Mother, we celebrated your birthday spirit is vanishing in human beings.
last year, we are celebrating it this year Shri Mataji my heart aches that
and we shall continue to celebrate despite your message of love and
your birthday year after year. There truth, the message that this world is
is nothing to think about it. Birth and a single nest (a faea yafa a
death are meant for the body and not işH'), the message that the world
for the spirit. But you yourself are the is a Single family aga ,
living spirit. Your name represents the world the family is divided;
your virtues-pure speech, pure love, spirits are divided. The world is
pure message, the message of love, assuming a monstrous form. Shri
the message of solace and goodwill, Mataji you know that tomorrow I
the message of friendship, the am going to Kashmir. I am not going
message to understand oneself and there for a pleasure trip. There is
have collective progress in life, the blood shed. Humanity there has
message to attain Yoga with the assumed in- human form. Man has
Divine. O, Mother let Thy blessings become inhuman. They have
nourish our spirit as the water of committed abnormal deeds. I wish
Ganga nourishes the Bharat Bhumi. to take your blessings, your love,
Human beings are born and they have your coolness, your affection to
to live, but living for oneself has them. I wish to give it to them and
absolutely no meaning. One should tell them to learn how to live. Lord
live for others, one should live for Krishna has said (' a E
भारत:) as
Tर्म स्य ग्लानिर्भवति
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
17
The Divine Cool Breeze
transforming the people. I wish your
and when there is fall of Dharma and
wickedness assumes power, I love transforms the world into
incarnate to re-establish the Dharma. universal brotherhood. Shri Mataji,
pray grant us this blessing
Shri Mataji you have incarnated on
this earth to fulfill this promise to re-
Thank you very much
establish Dharma on this earth.
Jai Hind
The word Mother' is such that it
moves the heart. Mother showers
Offering his Obeisance and Praying
for Her long life, the Hon'ble Home
Minister of India Shri L. K. Advani
affection on children. Mother's love
is the nourishment of Spirit and with
that purpose I have come in your Holy
presence. Shri Mataji people from
said:
Respected Shrivastava ji.
Eighty Countries have sent greetings
to you, It could not be justa showing colleagues like Shri Balram Jhakhad
off. Your love is truth, your message and others who have come from
is truth, Thou art the embodiment of different parts of the country and
love and goodwill, which is rarity Sahaja Yogis/Yoginis of this great
now a days. Man has become selfish Institution. I am grateful to Shri
and greedy and this selfishness pushes Rajesh Shah who has given me the
them to the lowest ebb. Mother! opportunity to have the Darshan of
my
nothing will go with us but your Shri Mataji and all of you. Icame with
blessings. The blessing of your love
will uplift our souls and teach us to
the purpose to listen to Shri Mataji's
discourse (pravachan), be with Her
live and let others live, love other for some time and receive Divine
human beings. Mother let your light knowledge. But it happens to be Her
enlighten the whole world. There is birthday today. So, along with you all,
I and my wife offer our obeisance and
good wishes and pray to the Divine
for her longevity. We also pray that
she should continue to spread
dawn and sunset everyday, but you,
Mother, continue to be with us every
breath of our lives. So Mother, we are
assured. Shri Mataji I will not speak
the way she has been doing
Chaitanya
much and bore the Sahaja Yogis but
Shri Mataji the present conditions of
the country make my heart revolt and
with the edge of your love I feel like
for a number of years.
There is lot of talk these days of
environment. But when we speak of
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
environment we have generally only be completely eradicated and with
the physical environment in mind. your continuing support in the
But the kind of pollution there is there coming millennium we will be able
in the mind of human society, it is to save this country from what you
tremendous, its enormous. The way have been saying. Shri Balram
we ask the polluting industries to Jhakhadji is leaving shortly and we
install depolluters, to check the wish him all the best for his trip to
pollution, similarly the responsibility Kashmir and we hope that he will be
to depollute the moral pollution that
exists in the society has come on the accomplish his mission.
divine personalities like Shri Mataji.
Therefore when one participates in an Felicitating Shri Mataji, Sir C.P.
event of this kind, a function of this Srivastava expressed himself as
kind, one feels, elevated; one feels
able to, with Shri Mataji's blessings,
under:-
that the pollution within has been Hon. Shri Advaniji, Smt. Advaniji,
reduced to some extent if not distinguished VIPS, honoured guests
completely obliterated. One feels
happy. Joyous. I admit that I am not
and my dear Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja
Yoginis.
blessed as you people are. I have to
We have heard so much today that I
move in pollution, you are much
wonder what more can I say, but I do
above it, you are fortunate, but
want to say that I have lived a long
whatever opportunities I get to
life, 80 years today or yesterday. I
would have regarded my life as
completely fulfilled if I had only one
experience that of being present here
this evening to celebrate the Birthday
of your Holy Mother. I have been a
witness to the development of Sahaja
participate I consider myself blessed.
On behalf of myself, my wife and my
relatives, who are here with me, once
again I offer my obeisance again and
again and pray to the God almighty
that your blessings remain on us for
ever.
Yoga from one or two to a few, to a
larger number to many and I have
Answering Shri L.K. Advani Shri
Yogi Mahajan said:
seen the miracles happening.
Initially I was bewildered how could
it happen? How can any one
addicted to drugs get away from it
Shri Advaniji the pollution that you
have been talking about, we assure
you that through Sahaja Yoga it will
00
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 19
July-Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
overnight! So my first experience assembly of United Nations. This is
was that of being bewildered. Then the moral assembly of the world. This
I saw many number of cases where is the ethical assembly of the world,
people got transformed because of this is the spiritual assembly of the
her blessings. And then I felt, what world. The vision of your beloved
Mother is that similar assemblies
you can call, the sense of splendour,
bewildered to splendoured, and now
in my 80th year I have come to the
should be there all over the world to
create a new humanity.
stage of Surrender. This assembly
Now it is to the creator of this new
cannot be described in words. This
assembly, it is to the creator of the
is a very unique assembly. This is an
assembly presided over by the Divine
Incarnation and comprises what I
called angels. Shri Advaniji has
referred to pollution. I want to assure
him that in this gathering there is total
purity. They are bound by pure,
innocent love for each other. This is
new vision that I bow down with all
respect.
I have two proposals and I have no
doubt that you would agree to it full
heartedly. The first is that, apart from
felicitation to the Holy Mother, each
one of us should rededicate himself
a gathering which includes people
from all religions, all countries, all
or herself to the advancement of
Sahaja Yoga throughout the world.
races and have forgotten their
differences. They belong to one
And the second proposal which I am
sure you will endorse more
single Sahaja Yoga family and what
a pride it is! You go anywhere in the
world, you meet brothers and sisters.
It is a creation which is, normally to
senses, unbelievable, but it has
enthusiasti-cally is that your Holy
Mother should continue to maintain
her holy abode, her divine abode on
this earth until every single human
happened. Now who has created this being, every man, every woman,
assembly. In my view this is the most every child has been transformed.
important assembly of the world,
even more important than the general
Thank you all very much.
Thank you.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
20
July-Aug 2000
77TH BIRTHDAY FELICITATION
Nirmal Dham, Chhawla, Delhi-22-3-2000
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Our honoured guests, our respected
require your attention, so that they
should be corrected. Their politicians
Home Affairs Minister Mr Advani,
who has been always a very great
should be corrected. Their citizens
should be corrected and that people
Deshbhakta, I admire him because he
should really evolve into a new
consciousness. All of them have been
working it out. Now we have here
very few Sahaja Yogis from abroad,
but its surprising how these Sahaja
Yogis have enlightened thousands and
thousands of Sahaja Yogis all over the
loved his country. He is very patriotic.
And as you know, both my father and
mother, were very patriotic. They
sacrificed everything for the country
and I also was always condemned by
everyone as being a very patriotic
We must love the country in
person.
which we are born. There is some world. They are the ones who are
connection, very great connection working. I am not working like them.
between yourself and your country. I They work very hard. You can see the
have seen that after Sahaja Yoga all way we have got these felicitations
from all these people, all because they
approach these people, told them all
about Sahaja Yoga, they might have
given them self realisation. And that's
how they have worked it out.
those who have been transformed into
new visions and new ideas always
know what's wTong in their own
country and so conscious of it. I am
surprised that everyone of them have
been able to tell me what's wrong in
So we have to worry about our own
their country and what should be
country and its problems. Why these
problems are there? And I know your
wishes and your efforts will definitely
improve the conditions of your own
country. Its happening everywhere,
also should happen in India. Once we
done.
They never identified with the wrongs
or the misdeeds of their country. Its
very surprising. On the contrary they
said, Mother all these countries
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
21
The Divine Cool Breeze:
are realized souls, it is our most problems. Now if you can tell them
important duty to, first of all, look that you can be transformed,
after our own societies, look after our transformed into a being which is
own country. If you cannot do that, absolutely above all these worries,
what's the use of getting self- above all these problems. How can
realization? Because self-realisation that be? One can ask. Actually what
stands on one's power, the power of happens that when you get self-
love and one's art, art-of selfless love. realization, your attention gets
That is there, immediately you start - enlightened by the self, means the
spirit and automatically you start
dropping your destructive habits,
destructive thoughts and destructive
seeing the people who are
surrounding you, who are in your
village, who are also in the neighbour-
hood, or also who are in your city and
in your country. Immediately you start
understanding what is the problem in
activities. You suddenly become so
constructive. Now I tell you one thing.
I was amazed when I was in Talyati
your own society. I have seen, after in Russia, a news came to me that the
coming to Sahaja Yoga people have head of the mafia has become Sahaja
tried to improve so many things in Yogi. I was so touched by it and he
their own society. Now we have many came to me and said I was doing all
Hindus, many Muslims, many nonsensical things. I never got any
Christians, all kinds of people, but I satisfaction, no joy, but this is
was amazed at one thing. Once they something. I really can feel joy and
got realization they never identify satisfaction within myself. Mother
with the wrong things of their society, whatever was my past, will you
of their religions. On the contrary they forgive me? I said, "Forgiven."
wanted to improve it and work it out. What is important is the present and
now you have become a Sahaja Yogi.
It is such a credit to your spiritual
There is very simple way of doing it.
You don't have to go out of the way
to change people or to make any growth, the way you have achieved.
sacrifices, nothing of the kind. He said, "Now I have that peace, I
Everybody today is suffering from have the joy and I want to share it with
some sort of anxiety, some sort of others. I could never share my money
problems, some sort of worries. Also with others. I used to grab money
they are suffering from other from others. I said I don't want to
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
22
The Divine Cool Breeze
country? Everything you see very
clearly and you also have power to
correct it. If you are aware of your
power and if you have mastered it
then you can do it. You can do it not
only for yourself but for your family,
for your society for everyone. My
husband used to say you are a socialist
because you can't adjust yourself
have any confessions, finished. Now
as you have become a 'Sahaja Yogi'
what will you do? Surprisingly, he
was very sweet. He said I will send
some onions to India. I said 'Why?"
He said, 'because there is problem
about onions.' I thought, look at this
man, "how genuine he has become,
how humane! I said there is no such
problem, you don't worry, and then alone. You must share with others,
you see his way of looking at things
and working out things was so
you are so collective. But we have to
understand that we are collective. We
can't exist alone anywhere, we are all
tremendous that the same fellow who
was a big mafia leader has become
such a great, honourable person. Then
collective. We are not aware of it.
But when you are aware of it, are you
so surprised that you are part and
he wanted to be elected in some
municipal election. I said "Go ahead",
parcel of the whole. You don't have
you will be elected and if you are not
elected, does not matter. But he gọt to look for company in your own
society, in your own samaj. Nothing.
elected also.
What you want is just to have the
So you see how things work out for a
company of all the Sahaja Yogis and
person who wants to be the spirit. this has been proved beyond doubt
that if you are spiritually awakened,
Shivaji has said" स्वधर्म जागवावा" this
is the only message he gave for the you have no quarrels with others, no
future. Svadharm Jagwawa, 'Sva' hatred, no competition. I have not
seen anybody doing that in Sahaja
spirit. That is what we have to Yoga. And that is how things have
achieve. Because he himself was a become so much better for all of you
together and also outside. One of the
means the spirit. You awaken your
realized soul, so he said, this is what
you have to do, to make your spirit
awaken. Now with that light of the
spirit what happens? You just see
clearly, very clearly, you say what's
wrong with you? What's wrong with
your society? What's wrong with your
ambassadors, she told me, that
Mother we are very happy because
we are not competitive. I said, why?
So everybody is happy with us. This
is what it is, that you realize that you
don't have to worry about getting
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
23
The Divine Cool Breeze
a drug de-addiction organization. And
that's why Sahaja Yogis said that we
something higher position, getting
something very rich, in say properties,
No. Because the satisfaction part is
have one million dollars. Can we do
with that. They said, No No we wilI
within you, you are so satisfied within
give you 21 million dollars. What will
you do with 21 million dollars, I said,
If you want to do something for drug
addiction? You only need them to
come there. Overnight they will give
up their drugs. I have seen that and
there are some sitting here. Such a
power your spirit has. Such a beauty
it has and such love and peace it has.
yourself that you don't run after
things, like in Economics. Modern
economics, as it is, is based on one
simple factor that human beings are
never satisfied. Today they want
something, they will run for it, do all
sorts of things, spend money and get
it. Then they are not satisfied. They
want to have something else. This is
the basis of economics, I mean
Only it is to be brought into your
attention which is going hither,
thither-thither. Only if your attention
is enlightened by the spirit you
modern economics. But Sahaja Yoga
is different, Sahaja Yoga economics
is that I have got realization, alright,
become such a wonderful person. All
I must share with others. If I have
these things as they had described in
Sanskrit, Kam, Krodh, Mada, Lobh,
got the satisfaction I must share it with
others.
Moha, all of them drop by
The sharing part is so important in themselves. All the anger, all the
Sahaja Yoga and people are doing stupid things we do, and all the
with such beauty. As I told you the aggressive things we do, drop out. I
other day, we have to learn the art of have asked some Sahaja Yogis to go
loving. Its very simple if you know to Kashmir and make them Sahaja
how to say few sweet things, how to
Yogis. If you can make them Sahaja
Yogis this problem will be over. And
with others very sweetly. It is not there are some willing to go there.
difficult for you at all because you Some foreign Sahaja Yogis specially
give something sweetly, how to share
have got your spirit to give you the
joy. I know Sahaja Yoga has done
wonders. People have given up drugs
over night. Now in America they have
a proposal for us that we should start
have offered their services to go and
change the people's lives. Now we
have changed people, like we have
now in a place called Benin, there are
7000 Muslims who were very
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 July- Aug 2000
24
The Divine Cool Breeze
but Sahaja Yogis, none of them, were
fundamentalists, they all have become
Sahaja Yogis. In Turkey we have
already 2000 Sahaja Yogis. So even
fanaticism of any kind among
Hindus, among Muslims, among
Christians can be easily changed
because they will see the beauty of
their spirit and their religion itself will
get enlightened. They will see the
beauty of their religion. They will see
the oneness of their religion and like
that a global religion can be accepted
where all religions will be understood
properly. There have been deviation
in every religion and that's why there
touched. Even their houses were
completely alright while the rest were
all destroyed. So many places, it has
happened. We had a hurricane, there
the same thing. All of them are
sending me reports that Mother all the
Sahaja Yogis are saved. How they are
perfectly alright? Because you are
protected by the divine power. We
have to believe in the divine power
which all the religions have believed
Then the problem comes whether you
should believe in the form or
formless? Then you will realize that
with the formless only you can
are problems.
understand the form. Very simple
thing it is to look at, but it is really
Can you fight in the name of religion,
when there is only one God?
extremely surprising. For example
once I said that
They do because they are ignorant; I
don't blame them, because they have
no light. But once they have the light,
they will understand what is the global
nature of religion. Now you will be
surprised that Sahaja Yoga or we can
call the Vishwa Nirmala Dharma has
Mecca is
Meccashwara Shiva, written down in
our scriptures. But I didn't know that
I just said it. Now I read an article
that they were all worshippers of
Shiva and this is really surprising that
Mohammad Sahib never talked about
been accepted in Russia as a religious
identity. But it is not religion like
other religions are. It is not at all of
any religion. Nobody has read even
that, we can say the Koran. Nobody
has read. We have a very good book
that kind. Its a religion where we
written on Koran, which of course I
believe only in love and compassion
guided, and it so clearly says what
and also in our own power that
nobody can touch you. Nobody can
kill you. You will be amazed that there
was such a big earthquake in Turkey
Mohammad Sahib has said. I mean
also this brings discredit to people.
Christ never said things which
Christians are saying. Same with the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
25
Hindus, they are doing things which
are never written in any Shastra. It is
very surprising that these people, who
are incharge of religion, they are the
ones who are spoiling the image of
religions and creating this problem. I
don't know why they want to do it?
quarrel about it. But if you are not a
realized soul, how can you say which
place is Swayambhu and which isn't?
So the whole problem is solved but
first you must have the knowledge,
knowledge of vibrations. Now if you
ask me a very serious question that
What is the use?
we are having in our country, which I
Now regarding Sakara and Nirakar it have right to tell you about, is about
is very simple to be understood. After Shri Rama's Mandir. Was Rama born
getting realization you can feel the there or not? He was. You can feel it
spund (P) or you can call it vibratory on your hands. You can feel it. All of
awareness is there. With that you can you can feel it. He was born there.
feel what is truth what is not. I would No doubt. For that what is there to
say that there is no truth in fight? Whether its a masjid or
worshipping a statue which is anything Shri Rama was born there.
created by a drunkard or a person Vibrations are there, whatever it is.
who is using it for money. But even But to glorify him you must have a
in the Bible it is said that whatever temple, doesn't matter. Whether you
created by the sky or by the mother- have masjid or a temple is the same
earth should not be disrespected. and if you want to have a temple you
This is what we call as the must do it after realization not before
Swayambhus. But Swayambhus for that, and also you should put there
people who are not realized souls is only realized soul who will be
just a sort of a ritual, a Karmakand. incharge of the Puja. Then only you
They don't understand whether it is a will do real credit to that great soul
Swayambhu or not. You being a of Shri Rama. All of them here, from
Sahaja Yogi can go and see whatever country they come, they
Swayambhus and accept it. I know, know Shri Rama. Not only that, but
at Tukarama's place, you were they know where he is within us and
jumping and enjoying because you they know how to worship Him. They
could feel the Chaitanya, you could
also know about Mohammed Saheb,
feel the vibrations. So first you should they also know about Jesus Christ.
know about Nirakar and then you can They know the truth about them.
Within their own body, within
find out about Sakara. There is no
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
26
The Divine Cool Breeze
themselves. Once that is the whatever I know, is mostly from our
knowledge, the true knowledge, the shastras. It is not the ritualism. It is
absolute knowledge then what is the the deeper knowledge. All saints,
quarrel about? Everybody will feel whether you take Kabir, whether you
the same way. What will you quarrel take Nanaka, or Mohammed Saheb
for. If I say my country India is a
Yogabhumi, alright, you ask all of Yourself Within'. Why did they say
them whether they came from this so, why did they say so because inside
country or that country, also will say is the truth, absolute truth, and with
the same thing. So when they come that absolute truth all these stupid
from abroad, they bow to this country, stupid things will drop off and you
while you Indians may not. Because become an affectionate personality.
they know this is Yogabhumi and the As it is, the time has come for the
Kundalini of the whole universe is whole world to change and transform,
inside this Yogabhumi. So all these you know that. I now request you all
great things about our country are to to do lot of work for me. I have done
be understood through the vibrations that was possible for me to work it
which Adi Shankaracharya called as out and it has worked, no doubt. But
Spunda. Actually most of their poetry you all can do it and change first of
could not, because they were so all your own society, change your
closed, could not explain to normai
people what it was. But I think, if you globally. You can go. You can help
go deep into these matters and each other. For example some people
anyone, all of them have said, 'Seek
own countrymen, change also, then,
understand absolute knowledge can come to India and help here and
through your spunda, through your from India some could go and help
vibrations, you will know what is the there. So now you are well equipped
truth. What's the use of fighting for with that knowledge. You should
falsehood? Its like fighting the come and work it out. I must thank
darkness. Why not have light and see
people from Australia who went to
for yourself?
Orissa. They have formed nine
centres of Sahaja Yoga. This is
happening and you know, you could
do it. You are quite capable of giving
realization to people. I request all of
you to try this gift, that you have, to
Today I have taken some liberty with
you, Sir, because I wanted to tell you
that in this country of ours we have
the greatest knowledge about the
spirit. Whole Sahaja Yoga is based,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
27
The Divine Cool Breeze
spiritualism. A lot has been written
be shared with others.
Emphasizing the need to in Hindi language, you will wonder,
learn Hindi Language Shri what is written in Sahaja Yoga is
Mataji said:-
I talked in English language because remain confined to English language
sitting here are many people from only. It has its own limitations. The
abroad. I hope you might have also meaning of 'Spirit' word is soul and
understood, what I said, yet I will say also wine. It stands for ghost also.
that one must know one's national How could you write about the deep
language. I know there are people knowledge in this language? So you
from South, Nepal and various other all must learn Hindi language. I am
places, who are present here, but the teaching it to foreign Sahaja Yogis
knowledge of national language is also. The treasure of knowledge is
necessary. My Mother Tongue is stored in Hindi or Sanskrit language.
Marathi. It is wonderful for spiritual So the knowledge of Hindi is
written in these scriptures. Do not
compulsory.
ascent. But my father used to say that
without the knowledge of Hindi
language you are useless. So you
should learn Hindi. By learning Hindi
May God Bless You.
you could read about your culture and
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July Aug 2000
HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI'S
ADVICE TO BRIDE GROOMS
Chhawla, Delhi-23-3-2000
I am very happy to see you all here
and you should know that you are
going to have a little different life,
suffer but you forgive because you are
very noble, you are a Sahaja Yogi. So
don't try to find faults with your wife
all the time. Also do not give her, all
that you are getting married in
Sahaja Yoga.
the time, orders, do this, do that, but
join hands with her. Because in Sahaja
Yoga we don't believe in an
There is a difference between other
marriages and Sahaja Yoga marriages individual's rights to dominate
in which we understand that marriage
has to be a special type of holy
alliance in which you have to lead a
very Sahaja life with your wife and
to understand her. She is also a Sahaja
Yogini, so you must respect her and
another person. So what you should
see is to help her, to understand her
and to share all the problems. Not to
put problems on to her but to give her
all the helping hạnd that is needed.
She is your companion. She is not
you must love her and she should
really understand that you are her your slave. She is not your servant,
neither you are a boss of her. So all
caring, loving, gentle husband. You these qualities are not be seen in a
must show all concer about her
Sahaja Yogi and understanding is the
because she is a Sahaja Yogini. She best part. You should try to
is not an ordinary woman and with understand her side also. Sometimes
that respect I am sure you are going they are coming from another country
to lead a very happy married Sahajaand are of a different culture. So try
life.
to understand. This is how you will
understand what is the culture of that
As it is, in Sahaja Yoga, as you know,
country from which she comes. Also
it is good for children that you must
always respect your wife. You should
not have some sort of idea about your
we don't criticize each other. We see
the good points of another person and
we have a great capacity to forgive.
So to forgive is not to tolerate or to
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
29
The Divine Cool Breeze
Please understand that and once you
start doing that, you will enjoy
helping her and understanding her.
wife. Forget about all the conditioning
you have had or you have seen in the
society. You are very different people.
You are absolutely chosen people for
the work of Sahaja Yoga. So once you
I hope your marriages are very, very
successful and that you get very
start understanding this point that you
are here going to marry a girl who is beautiful, sweet children who are born
Sahaja Yogini and who will look after realized souls. I am sure you will have
you, then it will work out. I will also a very happy life ahead of you. So go
tell them what they have to do. But I for that, go for a happy life by making
would request you not to have her happy, by making every one
domination of man or thinking that happy and looking after every thing
you are the head of the family to
in a Sahaja way.
May God Bless You All.
trouble the wife. Share with her.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30.
July Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI'S
ADVICE TO BRIDES
Chhawla, Delhi-23-3-2000
It is very nice to see all of you so that, but you must always be humble
beautifully dressed and looking so and understand that you have to carry
nice. I want to tell you one thing that out the work of Sahaja Yoga through
you are marrying in Sahaja Yoga to your marriage. This is a very big
Sahaja Yogis. Always remember this responsibility. In your case it is the
point. As it is, we see there are so preservation of the society that is of
many marriages breaking and all the Sahaja Yoga people.
kinds of things happening in Sahaja
So you have to love all of them. You
Yoga. Also we get sometimes 1%
must care for them. Never think this
is your own house and you are the
queen of the house. But you are the
mother, you are the sister, you are the
failures. Only 1%, and that is because
they understand the responsibility as
Sahaja Yogis. So I want all of you to
remember that you are getting
married to a Sahaja Yogi and you
complete relation of these people who
are Sahaja Yogis. So when they come
must always remember this point.
to your house you must show all
You must respect him, you must look
after him and care for him. respect and regard.
Sometimes he may lose little bit of Never complain about them to your
his balance. It is you who has to bring husband. He won't like. Also you
him back to balance with very gentle must remember that your patience,
ways. It is your duty to preserve the your love and your guidance will
society of Sahaja Yogis. People will definitely help to build your married
come to your house, Sahaja Yogis, life. If you want to be happy, you must
their wives, their children. You must know how to make others happy also,
look after them because you are the
incharge of the society of Sahaja
Yogis. You may be earning a lot, you
may be very well equipped, must be
If you do not know how to make
others happy, you can never be happy.
You should not think about your own
demands, your own needs, your own,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
31
The Divine Cool Breeze
you can say, ideas. Whatever is there
you have to do in a very gentle
manner because you are the women,
not mind giving up anything to
anyone if they want. You will enjoy
your generosity now and in that you
should be generous when you forgive
others. Forgiveness is very important
and then you will never feel the
weight of your married life.
you are ladies.
So your style should be gentle, you
should not shout, you should not get
angry, you should not treat anybody
shabbily. I will immediately know Forgive. Also you have to forgive
who is an unkind hostess. People will yourself. Not to feel guilty, not to feel
tell me that Mother she is a funny guilty at all about anything because
woman, she does not know how to after all you are also Sahaja Yogis and
behave. I don't want to hear that. I if you have done anything wrong, it's
alright, it doesn't matter. But you
want to hear that you are very sweet,
nice wife who will look after the should have the sweetness. The
husband, who will look after the sweetness of a wife who will emit
family of Sahaja Yogis. That's your
job. There is nothing to feel degraded
love and peace to others. You should
not be a dominating personality or a
person who is aggressive, not at all.
On the contrary you are the one who
in that.
That's what you have to do in Sahaja can bear lots of things and make fun
Yoga. That's why you are so out of every nonsense that you see.
important. You don't know that the Nothing is so serious to fight it but to
role of woman is so important, so very make a fun out of all that and make a
important that she can change the fun for every one. That's what you
whole family into a beautiful Garden.
It is her sweetness, her own creative
mind of love that can work it out.
have to be, always smiling and happy.
You will be amazed, you can make
beautiful marriages for yourself; for
Must find out the art of love and work
it out on anybody who is disturbed
or who is unhappy or who is crossed.
You can do it. You should know how
your husband and for all Sahaja
Yogis. I am also very sure, if you will
make a successful marriage, you will
have very very good children who
to pacify that person and how to
impress.
will be born realized. So you should
be good mothers, mothers who can
First quality you must have is the really do good to their children and
generosity of character. You should
to other children also. All that is
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July-Aug 2000
32
stored for you in future. I know you
all will be enjoying very much your
future life and make it so beautiful
which now a days are not available.
You don't see people who are happy
in the family. So no complaints about
the husband, no complaints about
anybody to the husband but you make
yourself so sweet that everybody
wants to take your love, your
guidance and they will come to you,
that everybody should talk, that 'look
at these Sahaja Yoginis?" How great
they are! Their lives are happy. It is
very very important that we should
pay attention to our own mistakes
than to the mistakes of others and try
I am sure that you can work it out.
to correct them. See, they are There are so many Sahaja Yoginis
themselves capable of looking after
themselves. Only you should care for
them and also you should in every
way be very kind and gentle. I am sure
who brought such credit to me and
have done such good work. I accept
the same from you.
May God Bless You.
you all can make very good families
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
33
The Divine Cool Breeze
HOW REALISATION SHOULD BE ALLOWED
TO DEVELOP
London -15-10-1979
collective being and of others also.
This is 3e or we can call it TTa,
Now those who have got realisation,
those who have felt the vibrations
must know that they are now- which is not seen by any one, which
developing into another being. The no one knows about. They talk about
germination has started, and you must it, they talked about the kingdom of
allow the germination to work out in god. They talked about God's powers,
its own way. But normally when we divine powers. It's all talk, talk, talk.
get realisation also, we don't realise But once you are triggered into it, you
that it is a tremendous thing that has have to grow into it. Unless and until
happened within us. That this you grow into it you will be dropped,
triggering, which is an impossibility, specially the people who have come
has taken place with in us and it has from fake Gurus and from false things
to work out słowly. It has to develop that they have been following. They
and evolve us into that and because don't know how terrible these things
we don't feel it, we don't take it that are? Like you are on a crocodile and
suddenly you discover it's a
crocodile, how fast you would run
from that? But even the understanding
that it is a crocodile and it is going to
eat you up, doesn't come up so easily.
So this one doesn't realise also, as you
don't realise that triggering, which is
the most difficult thing, has happened
to you, It is difficult, but it has
happened to you. Know why it has
seriously, as we should, our
realisation does not grow. Moreover,
we are surrounded by people who
have not felt the vibrations. They
don't know this area, they have never
seen it. As Guru Nanaka has called
it, it is HE, They have not seen it,
they don't know about it, they don't
know that there is a power of God
that exists, which understands,
coordinates, cooperates with you, happened. You take that one for
which is working in the collective granted and also you take the devils
for granted. At least don't take the
being, which makes you aware of that
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
34
The Divine Cool Breeze
devils for granted, run away from after realisation it is outside.
them as soon as possible, meditate, Sometimes it is sucked in and again
meditate and try to establish yourself it goes outside. Then we don't
in the realm of Divine Love. I say it change our old habits at all. We go
is Divine Love. You cann't on sticking to these old habits. Our
structure of life, our styles of thinking,
understand what is Divine Love. You
cann't understand any human being continue to be the same. Again we
who loves you only for love's sake, find ourselves lost into the same
just because that person loves you. He shambles.
goes on loving because he enjoys that
loving. In संस्कृत it is called अव्याज,
that there is no interest, 3T , just
flowing. Even when it corrects you,
Now Sahaja Yoga gives you
realisation, all right, but also it gives
you a long rope to hang yourself. If
you don't pay heed to yourself and to
it corrects you in love and the
protection of Divine Love is the only your being and if you don't love
way you are germinating. That Love yourself and understand that you are
gives you that warmth needed, that the instruments of God by which for
strength needed, that confidence the first time you are going to give
realisation to people. You are going
to save people from getting drowned
and this is the first time you are made
needed. Everything is given to you
by that Divine Love.
So one has to realise that it is love, like that. This capability you never
and love is the basis of all this had and no human beings have, which
creation. God has created this world you have got now today. Very few
this universe only because He loves people had this capability, very very
you and He wants to bestow His few people. But now you have got
blessings on you because He loves that capacity and you don't want to
you. But how far you love yourself is evaluate yourself! How important it
the problem. How far you understand is? If you could realise then you
yourself is the problem. You don't would work it out? Allow the
evaluate yourself and that is the blossoming to come up. On the
reason why, though the Kundalini has contrary I find, today because you are
risen and you have got realisation, Sahaja Yogis and I can talk to you like
your vibrations are flowing, the this, normally it is about Kundalini
growth is very slow. Because and all that, but I find that you don
see the movements of your
attention has been outside and even
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-36.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
35
The Divine Cool Breeze
gas lights. It is he who has to do it, he
Kundalini. If you try to understand
is appointed for that.
that she is the one who loves you the
most, because she is your individual
mother, if you try to follow her, you
Sahaja Yogis must realise what is their
value. What have you made out of
will see that She is suggesting where
Sahaja Yoga? How many people have
is the problem within you? What
you have to correct, what you have
to do. Because She wants to perfect
you, She wants to help you. So if you problems for others by talking, by
you saved, how many people you
have helped? Your own problems are
so many and you are creating
start watching it carefully, with love,
with understanding, She is very
discussing, by arguing. You can't
playful, extremely sweet, full of discuss it out. You must know, you
beautiful play like a little child. She can't argue it out. It has to work by
is tickling here and there, call for your
attention. She doesn't trouble you.
itself. By arguing, discussing, fussing,
judging, confusing yourself, you
You have to be just alert about Her create a problem for your Kundalini
and She really matures you. You have to work it out. Are you not seeking
seen people, with time how they have your spirit? Are you not worried
matured? But you have to pay
attention to Her and yourself,
about the salvation of your own
spirit? If so, what are you doing about
it? That's the most important thing. I
otherwise what is your value without
enlightenment? What is the value think everybody realises this that only
of a human being without achieving self realisation is not the
enlightenment?
end of it. Because it is just the
sprouting that has started. You have
What is the use of having human to go further, you have to have
beings if they are not enlightened? compassion for others who haven't
What is the use of this instrument if got it as yet. You have to think about
it is not put to the mains? The rest is
all useless, isn't it? It is you who have
to raise the people; you have to
enlighten the people as we have some
gas lights. A man runs up to the gas
lights to lighten them. He only has
the capacity and power to do it, so he
them, you have to give it to them,
work it out, put all your minds to it.
But still I find people are busy with
other things. They go back into the
same circle. You should be busy, I
don't say that you shouldn't do
something for your living, you have
to do it. This is one thing very
runs up to the street, lighting all the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-37.txt 
 35
July-Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
body is so important as well as
dispensable. You know what happens
in Sahaja Yoga, very common in
India, not so much here, Indians do
important for us to know that we have
to work it out, we have to allow it to
grow within ourselves. But if you say
that Mother we have all faith in you,
this way. They have very good points
that's all. Its not sufficient, what faith
do you have? What do you mean by like whenever I go I find they are very
faith? It is such a vague term. What much matured and very much
is faith after all? Have you ever developed, because they are not
analysed the word 'faith'? Some thinkers as you are. You are great
people think that we have all faith in thinkers, visionaries and intellectuals.
Mother if we sing her praise, finished. I was thinking all intellectuals
For that one has to reach a
stage like Adi Shankaracharya had
reached. Have you got faith in
yourself is the point? Who is having
certain
developing horns here, like this, and
when you see them you will know that
they are intellectuals, who were
denouncing God and denouncing all
faith in me is the one who has n
o His ways.
faith in oneself? You have to have
faith in yourself and in all vour They are not intellectuals, I would say,
fellow beings, all the other Sahaja to that extent, but they fail in certain
Yogis. I have already told you that things, while you fail in certain things.
Sahaja Yoga is not going to work out They always had this kind of thing
individually. Anybody who is that somebody came up like one man
thinking that I am something who said, no I am the great, I am this,
greater than the others is a gone I am that. He goes on this kind of
case. Nobody should work Sahaja harping and he shows down other
Yoga for oneself in that way. You people. And then suddenly such a
have to work collectively, for Pperson is brought down and the
everyone of them. Any one of you people are shocked. Mother what
who thinks that he has something happened? You cannot, If you have
higher than the others have, then you to pull a spread carpet like that, you
are sadly mistaken. Its like one eye cann't pull one side of it, you have to
saying that I am higher than the other carry the whole. Only one person
or one nose saying that I am higher cann't shoot off in the whole game.
than the eyes. Everything has its own Now you take my position. Yes I
place in the body of Virata and every know I have all the powers, every
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July-Aug 2000
37
thing is there of course, I am supposed
to be much higher and all that,
supposed to be, I say. But confronting
you I have to come down, I have to
fight the way with you up the hill.
Every step we have to go together
hand in hand. You know that.
Somebody's some chakras are
catching. Alright. So, I put my Chakra
into play, it works out that way but
you know how much I have to
struggle? How much I have to work
hard? Its a task, giving realisation. My
Kundalini doesn't need anything. You
know that but still she has to carry
So be careful, in dealing with people
you have to deal with love, not with
criticism or in anyway showing them
down in any way. When you are not
in anyway higher than anyone then
there is a reason it should be done like
that. If you are getting any way higher,
you are helping the collective being
but in that if you are feeling that you
are anyway higher than others, you
are again coming down because you
are pulling down the collectivity. If
you put down anyone, or condemn
anyone like that, then you are putting
down that person. You should not also
correct because I am there to correct.
Its not easy to correct others. You may
hurt them. You don't know even the
your heavy Kundalini on herself and
raise it. Its a very heavy thing, only a
person of real love can do that. Thats
the only criteria. The one who doesn't
have love cann't do it. It is too much
ways of correcting people. Unless and
until you have those powerful
a thing to do. The whole body, if I vibrations which are emitting from
break into, every centre vibrating, its your being just love. Then you can
not easy. But its just the love and the do it. Because of an ego oriented
compassion between you and me, society you are very good at hurting
which suits me, which covers all the others. You dominate others; you
task and the labour and thing that I don't even know that you are
have to put in and sometimes it is such
dominating others. So many ways, I
have learnt in this country we have,
by which we dominate in a very subtle
way. We talk to people in such a way
that we are dominating them. Do we
ever think, sit down, how are we
a wasteful thing, I feel about some
people. It is such a waste with them
but still the love that has brought us
together gives that soothing feeling
and you feel so cheerful. Every
morning you get up, with a new
fragrance within yourself and you feel
so happy about it.
going to talk to others, suggesting our
love to them?
I will tell you again and again that
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-39.txt 
 July Aug 2000
38
The Divine Cool Breeze
Sahaja Yoga is nothing but love, love, have seen how people hate. How they
love. How much you love others is treat each other, how they talk about
the main point. Despising, criticising each other? There is no tenderness
is not good. Yesterday you were just about them, no kindness about them.
the same, today you are better off, you How sharp they are with each other?
are going to be better off still. You have to change all that now. You
Suppose some people who are very have to create a world of people who
heavy or very troublesome, you love each other for nothing. Not for
should tell them clearly that sorry sir, money, not for positions, not for
you are very negative, we cann't bear beauty, not for sex. Only for love's
you. There are some cunning people sake. Only because you have been
also who may come in and try to blessed by love.
trouble you. To a point it is alright,
then you have to tell them off that we From next time we will be advertising
are sorry. But even to judge whether and many more new people will come
a person is negative and what sort of into Sahaja Yoga. But all of you must
things he is doing, you are just find out how many people you can
thinking about him, you are bring along and work out. Put your
rationalising. Not through rationality
but through vibrations. Because
through rationality a person may
mind to something like that. All the
time we are thinking about jobs this
and that. This is a very precious time
that should not be lost. All our lives
appear to be a very nice person, may
be, or a lady coming in, here could
be a terrible stuff. So how much you marrying, having children and dying.
meditate means how much you love. This life time let us do something
When you think of others, think how special, for which this whole
much you love them, just try to think universe was created. Open the
how beautiful it is! If it is not love it gates of Heaven for the rest of the
is hatred. Its like a scorching heat, you
we have done jobs, made money,
people. You have to be assiduous.
There is no compulsion in Sahaja
see, which will completely take away
Yoga, you know that very well. There
all the beauty, all the smoothness of
your heart.
is no timing for it, there is no forcing
for it because I say it is love. If you
don't want to do it, nobody is going
Only through love Sahaja Yoga is
going to spread. All these years you
to force you.
have seen the powers of hatred. You
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-40.txt 
 July-Aug 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
39
But as I said, Sahaja Yoga gives a
without even knowing it. Its
happening. You are transmitters.
Every where you are sitting in
meditation you are transmitting
vibrations. Do you know that? At that
time if you are thinking about your
jobs and other things which you have
been thinking before, then
transmission is poorer. Think of love.
Think of the whole country, think of
very long rope to hang yourself. Till
you go into illusions completely and
you would not even know that you
have lost your vibrations. It is to that
extent. If we have entered into
something
which
was
unprecedented, we have to take the
ways which are unprecedented. You
cann't go the way that you have had
before. You have to change your
methods, judge every action of yours
through love. How much sacrifice
the whole world at that time. You are
transmitters of these waves of love,
and love will flow from you.
you can make for others? What can
you sacrifice for others? What service I told you once that you are made in
can you do for others, Sahaja Yogis I the form of Ganesha and thats what
am saying. There is no sacrifice in it. you have to do. You know that
If you see, there is no sacrifice, it is vibrations from you are coming out.
You are sending vibrations out, you
love.
know that. That means you are like
If you love some one and you want any deity which is thrown out of the
to take say a rose for a person and mother earth's womb and a big temple
you go to the market. With great is raised and thousands of people go
difficulty you get the rose. When you to worship that. They say that it is the
get it you feel happy. But then you temple of a Jagrut Devta, means
get the thorn in the finger, still you enlightened, awakened and that's just
don't mind, its bleeding, doesn't a stone, a stone that comes out and
matter. You are just waiting to see the people build a temple on top of that
person there and when you see the and go there and worship that. While
person, you forget all that had gone there are so many already sitting here,
in between and you give that rose just so many Jagrut, realised souls. These
to express yourself symbolically. And are living and moving, these are
how happy you feel that you have understanding. They manoeuvre. The
been able to give that rose to that stones only emit vibrations to clear
person! This we do every day in our
life. But in Sahaja Yoga you do it Kundalini. They cann't raise the
the atmosphere but you can raise the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
40
July-Aug 2000
Kundalini, you can. And what are you brought any happiness to you. You
doing about it. Such a precious thing have your friends who are Sahaja
you have got. What are you doing Yogis. Change your friends. Change
about it? Is it because there is no your methods of life. You will enjoy
business in it, that we are taking it so
slowly? Supposing its an enterprise,
then every body would be up and
doing, Isn't it? We have to change our
ways and methods of understanding.
The reward of God is thousand fold
much more. This is for you to
understand about yourself and about
the importance of Sahaja Yoga.
Unless and until it is an enterprise,
nobody takes it seriously. This is the
style of western thinking. It has to be,
than any enterprise can bestow upon
whether it is hocus-pocus or real
enterprise? Does not matter. As long
as money exchanges, everybody is
up-and doing it. But when it comes
to Sahaja Yoga, they have no time,
you. When He blesses you, you
wouldn't even have words to thank
Him. To that extent He goes. Are we
depending on him or on our own old
ways? We have to change very much,
even to meditate. Because we have
we have to transform ourself into a
not yet loved we have not felt that
love within ourselves. I wish you
could all feel that depth of love. Then
you would go all out to work it out
new style of thinking. It is very very
important. I hope you will think about
it, what I have talked to you today.
Don't take to a life which has not for yourself and for others.
May God Bless You
continue from page 7
be transformed. Still your joy is
Rama made people very serious and
sober. The gaiety of life had vanished.
So Shri Krishna started this type of
celebration. Only Sahaja Yogis could
celebrate that way now and play Holi
limited, but when you share it with
others and when it resounds in others
and when you see them in this joyful
state, then a unique state of joy will
dawn in you.
with love; not to trouble any one but
to express one's joy and also to give
joy to others.
I saw the Yuva Shakti boys and girls
dancing out of happiness and joy. To
bring people in the state of joy Lord
Krishna asked them to celebrate Holi.
My Blessings to you all.
The propriety of conduct of Shri
