The Divine Cool Breeze Volume : XII losue : 118 12 November-December, 2000 You can be both alert and relaked because you are Sahaja Yogis. Magnanimity of mind is very pleasing and it attracts others, This magnanimity lies within human beings and is awakened by Kundalint. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 In this Issue: Guru Stuti 1. Guru Puja 11 Easter Puja 22 I.R.S. Officer's Meet 35 Edited by Published by Yogi Mahajan V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze GURU STUTI PRAISE TO SHRI MATAJI Based on Guru Stuti in Chapter 12 to 18 of Shri Jnaneshwari 1) Salutations to you O Guru Mauli 5) O Mother, you bring up your children with love, in the lap of (Mother Guru). You are famous your supporting shakti and in the cradle of your heart put them to as the one who generously showers on Her children the immaculate and eternal joy, the yoga-nidra. Nirananda. You bless us with the "Aarti" 2) O Guru Mauli, the compassionate one, when the snake of sensuality takes a grip on us and stings us, where flame is the spirit, and give us two toys of Manah Shakti and Prana Shakti to play with. Also, the poison, which is difficult to be removed takes awWay our Mother, you adore us with the Ornaments of spiritual bliss. awareness. But O Mother, with just one of your glance, that 7) O Guru Mauli, you give us the poison vanishes and awareness, food of your ambrosia, sing to us the lullaby of Anahad Sound, "SO HAM": HAM SAH" and put us once again, dawns on us. 3) Shri Mataji, our most beloved Guru, when we have the ocean of in the meditative sleep with the enlightenment of spirit. your ambrosia, how can the heat 8) O Shri Mataji our Guru, you are of mundane life torment us or the the mother of all the seekers. All grief overcome us? "Vidyas" (knowledge), originate from your lotus feet. Kindly allow us to be always in the refuge of 4) O most loving Guru, it is by your grace that we, your children, are eternally enjoying the bliss of your lotus feet. yoga and it is you who most lovingly bestow upon us the enlightenment of "SO HAM", "I AM THAT"". 9) Shri Mataji, when you grant to us your shelter of compassion, we become experts in Divine

 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 Knowledge, "Shuddha Vidya". realisation. 10) Salutations to you, O our Guru 15) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, Shri Mataji, the Shuddha Vidya you are the greatest of all gods, you are the Sun that gives the light of the enlightened knowledge in the shelter of your lotus grows feet. Shri Mataji your lotus feet are verily our Spirit. (Prajna). It is by your grace that the joyous life of Nirananda has 11) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, dawned upon your children. your mere remembrance bestows command over the universe of 16) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, words, i.e. we get the power of you are the shelter where all your effective expression of subtle children feel safe and relaxed. feelings, and the Divine Knowledge (Shuddha Vidya) You manifest subtle revelations of "SO HAM" in the hearts of comes on the tip of the tongue. your children. You are like the ocean within whom rise and 12) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, recede all the "LOKAS". your mere remembrance makes ones speech so sweet that it would 17) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, surpass even the nectar in its you are prompt to rescue your sweetness and all moods (Rasas) children when they are in trouble. would become so submissive that You are the eternal ocean of they would readily become manifest through words. compassion. All the Divine knowledge is your inalienable 13) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, by companion. your grace such words come to 18) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, your children as that can properly when we are involved in the play express deeper experience, and subtle revelations coming from of your Maya, we feel as if mundane world is real, but when spirit. you manifest your Brahma 14) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, Roopa, i.e., your true form of Supreme God Almighty, we realise that Mother, you are when our hearts are at your lotus feet, we are blessed with great luck, Divine Knowledge and the omnipresent.

 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 19) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, when a magician castes the spell of his magic, his spectators because of your power and the sky which is seen to be all encompassing, is only but a small part of your cosmic being and has become oblivious to the rest of the world. But the magician to be searched as in a hide and seek game. cannot hide himself. But Shri Mataji, in the spell of your Maya, 24) Not just this Shri Mataji, the the awareness of the truth about Maya is also a small constituent you is lost and the illusory mundane world is taken as reality. of your Virata form and the enlightenment is due to your 20) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, power. Your form could not be you alone are present in everything in the world. To Sahaja Yogis and realised souls, you reveal yourself in your Brahma 25) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, understood even by the Shrutis (Vedas) who made futile efforts to describe you. Roopa and give them the enlightenment, while those engrossed in Maya are ignorant about you. Shri Mataji, this Leela of yours, in relation to yourself is the Vedas were said to be experts in describing the form of god, but it was so only till such time they did not behold your Brahma Roopa, When they start describing your pure form, they wonderful! become silent as we are in our 21) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, it is your Shakti which has given to water its liquid nature and to mother earth her forgiving nature. meditation. 26) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, we your children have cleaned our 22) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, it hearts. May your lotus feet be placed in our hearts. Shri Mataji, we wish to offer puja to your lotus is your Shakti that shines through the Sun and the Moon in three worlds. But for your Shakti they feet in our hearts. would have been merely like 27) Shri Mataji, the feeling of shells of Mother Pearl. oneness, is as the cup of our two 23) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, the wind blows freely anywhere hands, from which we offer at your lotus feet, flower buds which

 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze are our Nadis and Chakras and 35) Shri Mataji, we your children are eternally grateful to have been organs. given this opportunity to offer this puja. Grief has vanished from our 28) We wash your lotus feet with Ananya Bhaava, i.e., the feeling of total surrender and apply the lives, we have forgotten what is sin, and poverty no more exists anywhere. As we have your Holy Darshan, we have the joy of sandalwood paste of dedication to your lotus feet, with our ring finger. fulfillment of our lives. 29) Shri Mataji, our love for you is 36) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji. You are the Sun with whose like gold. Let us purify that gold and make anklets from it and tie rising has bloomed to full glory, them around your ankles. the lotus of non-duality and has 30) Shri Mataji, with the same gold faded away the spell of illusion which is our love, we make toe in which the mundane world is ornaments and put them in your held as reality. toes. 37) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji. 31) Shri Mataji, we offer at your lotus You are the Sun that has devoured feet flowers of Sattwa Guna the night of Avidya of twinkling stars of worldly knowledge, and has brought for seekers the auspicious day of self-realisation. which have the fragrance of joy. 32) We burn the incense of our ego and perform the Aarti to your lotus feet with the flame of the 38) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. feeling "I AM NOT", "NA You are the Sun who has brought auspicious morning hours, wherein birds of our souls having НАМ". 33) Shri Mataji, our body and prana are two sandals (Padukas). Kindly got their vision of enlightenment, have discarded their nests of wear them in your lotus feet. identification with bodies. 34) Shri Mataji may this Puja which your children are offering be 39) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. Our souls were beetles trapped complete at your lotus feet and inside the lotuses of our causal accepted by you, howsoever bodies, enjoying the worldly inadequate it is.

 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze pleasures, during a dark spell of MAYA. Shri Mataji, you are the You are the Sun and as the rays of your grace grow strong, they make a number of miracles and Sun who has liberated those bestow numerous blessings of beetles. prosperity. Shri Mataji, these are but reminders to us that if our 40) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. Our intellect and enlightenment are like a pair of legendary Chakrawada birds who were attention is not at your lotus feet, the same prosperity can become a mirage and mislead us away from spirit and your lotus feet. crying to be united having been separated in dark hours of discussion and controversies. Shri 44) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. You are the Sun that shines at the Mataji, you are the Sun whose meridian in full glory, with rays light has enlightened the sky of of your grace conferring upon your children the experience of SO-HAM (I am that) reducing our intellect and has united the two birds. 41) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. thereby their Bhranti (illusion), like shadows that disappear under You are the Sun with whose advent has vanished from the our feet in the midday Sun. world inauspicious spells of Agurus and has opened the 45) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. You are the Sun. When, by your avenues of ascent to all seekers after getting their self-realisation. grace the night of the spell of Mayaa ceases to exist, it also vanishes the sleep in the form of 42) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. You are the Sun and the rays of Bhranti of intellect accepting this your grace kindle the sparks of divine knowledge in your children like the legendry Suryakant gem giving out sparks 46) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. when touched by the Sun rays. world as reality. Infact this world is like a dream. You are the Sun which is beyond Shri Mataji, the sparks of that knowledge the day and night of knowledge burn Divine and ignorance. Also you are the attachments to worldly pleasures. enlightenment, because you are the light itself. Who can have a 43) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.

 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 glimpse of you, the resplendent Sun of knowledge? Shri Mataji, you are our spirit. In that state, Shri Mataji, three forms of speeches, Vaikhari, Madhyma and Paschyantee merge into the 47) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. You are the Sun by whose grace subtlest form Para-Vani and even the auspicious day of liberation from all bondages and of self realisation has dawned upon your the Para-Vani recedes into absolute silence. children. 51) Salutations to you O, Guru Mauli Shri Mataji, you are the Chief of 48) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. You are the Sun who always Ganas, Shri Ganesha, from whose Yoga Maya comes forth this fully developed universe. shines in the realm of self- realisation. Your grace removes the spell of Bhranti (illusion) over 52) Salutations to you O, Guru Mauli your children and confers upon Shri Mataji, you are Shri Ganesha. By remembering you Shri Shiva liberated the Spirit them the enlightenment of absolute knowledge, transcending above all relative knowledge. trapped inside the fort of soul hood, surrounded by three cities 49) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. of three Gunas. The praise to you in words has its limitations and is therefore, 53) Hence O, Guru Shri Mataji, when inadequate. We can really praise compared with Shri Shiva, being the Guru you are superior, you only in the state of oneness with your lotus feet, wherein the because, gently you are taking intellect who praises and the your children across the ocean of words of praise, become one with illusion. your lotus feet which is the object of praise. 54) Salutations to you O, Guru Mauli Shri Mataji, you are beyond the 50) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. It is really not possible to praise you through words, because knowing understanding of those who are whereas, the ignorant, Knowledgeable ones (self- realised) can understand you. you is to know all unknown, and it can be achieved only in silence, when the spirit manifests itself. 55) Salutations to you O, Shri Guru

 7. November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze to mentally understand you through their relative knowledge. But they remain ignorant. After Mauli Shri Mataji, as Shri Ganesha your eyes may be small but you play, the Leela of Creation and Destruction of the all, even the omniscient “Shabda Bramha" Vedas, are unable to universe just with opening and closing of your eyes. describe you. 56) Salutations to you O, Guru Mauli 60) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, even when we want to be your Shri Mataji, to those who are dear servants, duality, of the servant and the served, still remains. So, to you, separate identity does not exist and hence there is no it is better that we do not keep any identity to ourselves. relationship left, because they become one with you. 61) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, the 57) Salutations to you Shri Guru Shri Mataji, because you sever the bondages of this world, those people who joyfully surrender to you, you unite them with thyself in such a way that their bodies Goddess and the Guru, When we attain that state in which there is no identity left whatsoever, then only we will be able to be one with your lotus feet, which is Puja exist only for the names sake. to you. 62) Salutations to you Shri Adishakti, our Guru Mauli, it is the desire of 58) Salutations to you Shri Mataji you are elusive to those people who, our thinking themselves to be different from you, struggle to our hearts, to be one with your lotus feet and offer the Puja to your lotus feet, like salt dissolved in the sea would offer Puja to the reach you by following the various spiritual practices, like meditation on your form. But Shri Mataji, you are pleased with those Sea. 63) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. As who in devotion surrender an empty pitcher, when dipped into the sea, gets filled in and themselves to your lotus feet and forget their own separate identity. comes to the surface, as the wick of lamp when lit, becomes the 59) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, lamp itself, so we, by offering the those erudite scholars, who do not realise that you are absolute, try Puja to your lotus feet, shall have

 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 8 protecting and correcting them and even restraining their attentions. O Mother, this is just the joy of fulfillment and shall thereafter becomes ideal media for you to work out your will. a Leela for you. You enjoy it the 64) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, the most. Supreme Goddess, our Guru, You bestow all auspiciousness on the 68) Salutations to you O Guru Shri Mataji, your immaculate form is extremely soothing and with just glimpse of your form fills our people, whom you grant shelter at your lotus feet. You are like strong wind that drives away the clouds of birth and old age. a hearts with Nirananda. O Shri Adi Shakti, the cause of creation of 65) Saluations to you Shri Mataji, our this universe, just one of your most beloved Guru, Shri glance destroys all sins. Adishakti the most powerful. You destroy all the inauspicious and 69) Salutations to you our Guru Mauli unholy from its very roots. Your Shri Mataji, the self luminous incarnation is the reward of the one, you have enlightened your prayers of the Vedas and the Upanishadas and you also bestow children. As the sky holds within itself the clouds, so you hold this the reward of the Vedas and the universe within yourself. Shri Upanishadas. Mataji, when we have self realization, this universe does not 66) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, remain a reality to us. our Guru Mauli. You have condescended to incarnate in the 70) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. As world in your complete form and the primordial Mother, you are the Guru to even all gods and ganas, occupied the thrones of your children's hearts. You are most and the whole universe, O, the loving mother to all your children. Purest one, with just one glance Easily you restrain the activities of yours, your children realise the illusory nature of this sense- pleasing world. O Mother, the ocean of compassion, your children are eternally grateful to of the God of death, Yama. 67) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, our most powerful Mother Guru and Supreme Goddess! You stand by your children like a rock, you to have been given the

 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze metaphors, no adjectives, or words are adequate to praise you, because you are beyond everything. So we feel short of words and hence incompetent to powers to overcome temptations of the illusory world. 71) Salutations to you O All Pervading God Almighty and our most loving Mother-Guru, You are the lamp in the hearts of your children. It is your light that praise you. All that we know is: to praise you we have to meditate and work for Sahaja Yoga. enlightens their inner beings, and 75) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, O Spirit of the Universe, the manifests in them as Divine Vibrations, protects them from Supreme One, the All Pervading God Almighty, the Mother Guru to Gods, Ganas and Sahaja Yogis, the tormenting heat of mundane life and relieves them of all evil. 72) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, May you be pleased with this universe. Your children are you are 'Advitiya'. There is none like you. You are unique. You grateful to you to have been given the Divine knowledge of the have great love for all those who are humble, detached, having Spirit. discretion and are surrendered to you, so much so that you are alert 76) Salutations to you Shri Mataji and prompt, to protect them, look after their benevolence and meet May by your grace the wickeds give up their wickedness and take to noble deeds, and may there be friendship of hearts, among all all their pure desires. 73) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. O human beings. Primordial Guru, you are like the celestial Kalpataru which fulfills 77) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, all the desires, We your children We your children are indeed are eternally grateful to have been bestowed upon, the Param eternally grateful to have been given the enlightenment of Self- Realization. May by your grace. Chaitanya. It is the greatest and beyond expression imagination. and the darkness of ignorance go away from the world. May the world see the Sun shine of 74) Salutations to you Shri Mataji the Dharma, of Spirit and may all Primordial Guru! No smile no

 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 10 human beings enjoy the fulfillment of their pure desire. celestial Kalpatarus, like townships of celestial Chintamani gems of awareness, like talking 78) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, ocean of ambrosia. We your children are grateful that you shower upon us Divine Bliss and the most auspicious Param 80) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, we your children are grateful to you, that you have taken us within your Chaitanya. May by your grace, multitudes of devotees of God being and are cleansing us with Almighty, that is Yourself Shri Mataji, in the shower of your love and compassion. Shri Mataji, by your grace May all human beings of the world have auspiciousness meet all human beings with overwhelming love. the Divine Joy to their heart's content and be engrossed in 79) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, we devotion to you, the Primordial your children are grateful to You, that You have given us the Being, the Supreme Spirit, Sakshat Shri Para Brahma. collectivity of realized souls. Salutations to you O Divine May, by your grace, there be the union of hearts among all who are like unblemished moons, heatless Mother, again and again, ОM NAMAН, ОМ NA МАН, suns, and whose congregations are, like moving forests of OM NAMAH.

 November-December 2000 11 The Divine Cool Breeze GURU PUJA Cabella, 23-07-2000 Pravachana by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Today we are here to know about Guru principle. What does a Guru do? Some people get full light and some get it gradually. The essence of all the religions is that you should know Whatever you have, all the precious yourself. Those people who are fighting in the name of religion, you have to go and ask them, you have to enquire from them Did your things within you, he discovers them for your knowledge. Actually it is all there, everything, all the knowledge, all the spirituality, all the joy is there. It's all contained within you. Only religion make you know yourself?' If thing the Guru does, makes you all the religions have said one thing, knowledgeable you have to do all these things just to about your knowledge, about your own spirit. know yourself. But people get into Everyone has the spirit within rituals. They think that by doing all himself, everyone has the spirituality these rituals they are near God. They within himself. There is nothing that live in ignorance absolutely about you get from outside. But before themselves and day in and day out getting this knowledge you are work out something which has delinked or you are living in nothing to do with yourself. Lots of acrobats, prayers, pujas, these things go on. Because it is all ignorance. ignorance. In that ignorance you do not know what treasure you have got People go on paying them money and within yourself. So the Guru's job is they become very rich and their to make you know what you are. That interest is only the money. They want is the first step that it starts that to take all your money absolutely, and awakening within you by which you make a fool out of you. They pamper know that you have not this outside your ego, with pampering of that ego world, this is all an illusion and you you just start drifting into the ocean start getting enlightened within n of illusion and you are drowned into yourself. that illusion thinking that you are very

 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 12 religious and you are just in understand that you have ego, you start looking at yourself or when you find there's something missing or connection with God, which you are not. To know God you should know yourself first, without knowing that you cannot know God. That's essential that you should know something wrong then also you start introspecting. This should be a very, very honest, very honest effort. Some yourself. But when you know people in Sahaja Yoga, at a very early yourself you know partly. The experience is not sufficient, the knowledge has to come and the Guru stage, start thinking that they are very great and they don't need any introspection and they rise again into the clouds of ignorance without achieving Self or I can call Self- Realization. So you have to introspect and see for yourself... What I have gives the knowledge about your self. Now you have to tally it, you should find out whatever your Guru has told, is it true or not? Is it correct or not? Or is it just an another illusion? been doing? What are you? How for Now, in this ascent people get into you have come? Now, the style of lots of problems. First and foremost such a person changes gradually. is the ego problem specially in the How? First of all a person who is West. Ego stands up and you start extremely aggressive, hot tempered thinking you are great, you are better and full of ego starts becoming very than others and there's something gentle and mild. Another type which special about you. This ignorance is is frightened and afraid and very more dangerous than the worldy Cautious starts becoming fearless, at ignorance, because in the worldy that stage you will have no fear, you ignorance you are sure that you are on the right path feel op the and you are moving on the right lines. You are not easily disturbed there but still you have to rise higher and higher where when you meditate you understand that there's something wrong within yourself. consequences of wrong things. But when you are half way, when your ignorance is that about yourself, when you are going to a higher realm then one should always understand that you cannot have ego. You have achieved your self Then what starts is introspection. realisation, you have got the blessings of self-realisation, your health is You start looking at yourself... What's wrong with you? When you

 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 13 good, you have got all kinds of dedication starts and you are cleansed blessings which you cannot count. All by that bhakti. All the bad qualities that is there but still you have to go that you have, I call them, all the further and that is to understand all deficiencies that you have, all the the knowledge about Sahaja Yoga. problems you have, you understand You have to understand through your and you get over it. Now if you see mental capacities first, to begin with, somebody with the same qualities, and then you have to verify how far with the same problems, you in the it is correct? How far you have love of that person try to tolerate. understood it? How far you have Such a person just tolerates, there is no aggression and these people worked our? How far you know. When you start seeing yourself you forgive. Realised souls go on start entering into the realm of bhakti. forgiving, their capacity to forgive is You become a mild person, a sweet tremendous. They do not bear any person. You don't talk too much, you malice against anyone, they don't don't harrass anyone. You are a very have any anger about anyone. They pleasant person, very gentle, very just go on tolerating and forgiving understanding. This person has to This forgiveness is just a music, I verify how he is behaving towards Sshould say, of your bhakti. The amount of forgiveness these masters others. Now the attention starts could have received from the life of moving from one self to another and you start seeing how you behave? Christ. They are tortured, crucified, How you love? What is the quality most of the saints were tortured. People never liked them. But as you know that they never resented, they of your compassion? When you love somebody without any expectations, just love, then you are absolutely never take a revenge, they never did not which anything compassionate. They had compassion and compassion for such people, they felt that O God! Please forgive them. They do not know what they are dedicated to that person, absolutely. You just obey, you will do anything for that person. If there is this love which you call as surrender, this is just was the love. doing. Extremely compassionate and they are that that becomes their nature. When it becomes their nature they become people with complete peace. Surrender is nothing but the love and that love which is extremely joy giving. This bhakti starts, this

 14 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze to bother? I was going to America and They are not disturbed. They are one child fell down, (I was just about never disturbed with whatever is to get up and go) and broke her arm and when I saw the child I said alright I will put the child right. They said, you are going to America. I said, I happening and they think it's God's will because nothing can disturb them, nothing can upset them. They just enjoy their devotion. Devotion to will go in any case. So I cured the their Guru, may be devotion to God. In that devotion they may write child, it took about half an hour and beautiful poetry, they may go on then I came out. Alright, let's go to the airport. They said, Mother you are very late. I said, I am never late, let's dancing, they may go on singing because the peace is within and they go. We went to the airport and the are enjoying themselves. When they plane by which I was going was out are alone they are never alone, they of order. So there was another plane enjoy themselves. They know that we going to Washington not to New York and I wanted to go to Washington only. So, just imagine how things work out and we call them Sahaja. It has worked out Sahaja, that are one with the Divine and the blessings of the Divine they enjoy. Another thing is they never take to artificialities, they are never worried, never upset, they are neither futuristic nor they think of the past but they are in the present. When they are in the means its effortless, but first of all your personality should be such that your devotion is so great that Divine present, they are absolutely silent. If there's any problem or anything happens to them they immediately go is compelled to look after you, compelled to look after you. into thoughtless awareness. That is You have to understand that what there capacity is. Divine force is around and this Divine force is absolute guarantee for your safety, for everything that you want to do. You can say that Mother, you To become a Guru you have to develop that personality, not to be bound by anything. I will tell you my own example. I never hurry, I am never bothered about time, because also, very powerful if you get are very powerful. You can become, completely dedicated to the Divine if you are sure that Divine has plans work. You will also have all the for you, you are not bothered. The Divine is looking after you so, why powers and the Divine will provide

 15 2000 November-December The Divine Cool Breeze problems of your own, of your sur- all the necessary work that you want to do, necessary time that you want to have. Everything is provided by the Divine. But the compassion when it roundings, of your community. So, now you have got your self- extends from other people to God or realisation. How far you have gone in that, I don't know. I have a to Divine person or to your Guru then complaint about women. They don't it becomes very easy to live, very meditate, that they are not looking simple to live, no complications, everything is sorted out and you are after themselves, they are not realised not bothered about anything... just souls and that's why many men want close your eyes and things work out. Everything works out as if that's your will, but you don't have to will it, that. To solve this problem you have to divorce them because they think that these women are good for nothing and some men also are like don't have to think about it, it just to have compassion and you have to works out. The Divine looks after everything, looks after your comfort, looks after your health, everything. some how or other, with compassion you should win over the partner of And this Divine help you do not seck. your life. After all men are much more you do not ask for, but you are a busy than women are, but women personality for which the Divine is indulge into so many other things. responsible. You are a special responsibility of the Divine and it They have to look after their family, their children, everything and their mind is involved into all such mundane things that they have no knows what is good for you and what is not. time to meditate. Without meditation you cannot rise. You have to meditate. People think that now we have got realisation, so it's alright. No! There's an example, I can give you many, where supposing, I thought that somebody is coming to meet me and people told me Mother, he is very Everyday you must meditate because negative, he will never come. All that is the cleansing that takes place. positive things will happen and if With the cleansing you understand negative thing takes place then you what is needed. What is not needed use your compassion. If it is negative you use your compassion and you solve the problem. You can solve the and you are cleansed out. That is done by the Divine but you must religiously meditate. Gradually you will find that

 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 16 you to do the meditation. I deep. You will become very-very immediately know a person who has been meditating and who has not been. They will come to my puja, your meditation will become very deep and your powers will start showing. When you are anywhere the negativity will run away. All sorts of alright, and they will talk about problems can be solved. Whatever Sahaja Yoga, they will go out and do it for popularity. Many people whatever is your desire to help others are like that, they go out and for popularity, they work it out but inside they have not yet traced their own self. So at this development stage you want to do is available to you, or give to someone you just get it. It's my own experience I am telling you. You have to meditate atleast ten minutes every evening and morning you shold be encouraged and about five minutes with complete understand that you can reach that stage very easily through meditation I have seen some people here who and introspection. With introspection have such bhakti, such devotion you will develop a new quality of which is Shradha. It is higher than understanding that you will find solutions to things. That is another devotion, with complete admiration. bhakti, that it becomes part and parcel quality of a person who is a realised soul. He can find solutions to all your problems, he can suggest what is the your being, it just envelopes you completely. When you have that Shradha, it's very miraculous. It of way you can be helped. Then a kind works so many miracles. It's true some people were cured only thinking of brotherhood out of the Shradha of me - it's a fact but that doesn't develops. You may be giving lectures on Sahaja Yoga, you may be doing all kinds of things but unless and untill you have Shradha, you cannot rise mean that they had the Shradha of that level but that means that they have to develop Shradha. and this Shradha is a kind of a love Now, how to develop Shradha within you, I should say, which which is the natural light of the spirit. spreads like gentle fire which doesn't burn, which doesn't give heat but cold beautiful breeze like feeling within, which makes you understand. You will never talk ill about a Sahaja Yogi never. I never listen to anybody who People are trying very hard to develop Shradha but Shradha cannot be developed by mental activity, by any activity but meditation of self. If you do the meditation, I have always told

 17 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze tells me something against Sahaja imagine what I feel about them. This Yogi, upto a point. When it is a joy, this ocean of joy is within you collective complaint then I am a little and when it starts stirring up, it bit bothered and I talk about it to the doesn't torment you. It gives you so beautiful joy that I don't know how leader. But otherwise if one person to use words to express. It is like comes and tells me this and this I just drizzle on your being, it's like a grace tell that peroson to introspect himself, on your being. The love of other it's not so. Finding faults with others is a common game all human beings play, they never see their own faults. What's the use of finding faults with others. By finding faults with others people enthralls you. You don't ask for it but if you see a person who is very loving and kind there is real friendship in that kind of relationship. you are not going to be helped. Try to find faults within you which you is very wrong and then talking to But talking ill about Sahaja Yogis can cure, which you can help, which everyone that this is wrong with this you can work it out. It's a person... he has done this... he has done that, is very-very wrong and responsibility you have, you must know, to yourself, that you better find creating a collective feeling against a out your defects and get them corrected. But some pople are very Always people are in trouble then pround of their fondness. They talk collectively you must help that person instead of helping that person. like this - I like this - I like that. What person, not talk ill of that person, may. be some mistakes but if you start talking against that person and saying that this is wrong with him that is about the spirit? You like this you like that but what about your spirit? Does it like? Does it enjoy? They will go on saying I like this, I don't like this. I don't like this. Its very common wrong with him, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. You are a Sahaja Yogi in the West. as long as you can see your own defects through introspection. Now see some ladies have made these beautiful carpets.They are so thick that when I walk on them I little bit lose balance but the love with Now most of you, I should say, have got your realisation. You have the experience but some of you don't which they have made, makes me so have the knowledge. That knowledge joyous, so happy that you can't you should acquire and verify

 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 18 whether that knowledge is really there have so many imperfections, or not. Like in America in the NIH, specially morally, in the West. which is the institute for health, they People are really, I tell you, like wanted to test Sahaja Yogis. There snake has bitten them. The things that were doctors and one doctor came people do here never come to the forward and said, alright, tell me on minds of people who are not developed. So, development has vibrations what's wrong with your me? So, the girls said, sir, something wrong with your heart. He said, it's correct, because he had a by-pass only meant all kinds of abandonment, all kinds of vegabond temperament and they think they are very free, they can go about and enjoy. This style is very common but you just judge yourseif. Are you one of these types or are you one of the people who are higher than you in their ascent? It's a process I must confess, it is not just you get to that point. Sometimes even very new Sahaja Yogis are better than very old Sahaja Yogis because they had a very one month back and he was out of hospital. Absolutely correct, and this surprised thern that diagnosis you see kills the patient half way. So, this is a very easy way to diagnose a person just by feeling the vibrations and they have given us such a good attention. They want to develop Sahaja Yoga in their hospitals. strong desire. What are we seeking? You should understand, why are we So, you should also testify yourself, examine yourself and find out about yourself what are you. Say, seeking? Because we wanted io know ourself. Somehow we knew that we there is a husband and wife. Now the have to know ourself so we seek, we wife meditates. She knows seek. We do all kinds of things, I mean everything, she knows about her all wrong things also in the name of husband, what's wrong with him and seeking. But it is this seeking that she doesn't tell. She tolerates, she brings you to Sahaja Yoga. Then You doesn't complain, she doesn't ask have to get your self-realisation him. She just tolerates and this which is very easy through tolerance convinces the husband that Kundalini. Kundalini works out most she is a higher personaiity than himself. He may be anything but he overnight she gave up drinking and can understand that this is what she smoking, overnight! I mean I don't of the things, like somebody told me, has achieved - a great personality. We tell that, I never say that, but just

 19 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze overnight she gave up and she said I was very particular about my hair Christ's twelve disciples! Of course dress and I used to make my hair dress those people did many wrong things, in a different manner, I was going to but how they worked and how you have to go all out. Look at intensively they did it! That the hair-dresser, spending so much intensivity if you don't have and if time with the beautician this-that. She you do not completely dedicate to the spreading of Sahaja Yoga, then said, I gave it up. Also she said, I used to wear dresses which were not very moral. Then, I started respecting my collective problems cannot be body and I started wearing proper solved. You are busy with your only dresses. All this knowledge comes to daily mundane things and your other you spontaneously. It is within you jobs and everything. It's alright in because it is all your own.Also if your Sahaja Yoga, no objection. But you should have your attention more on Guru tells you, you are guided. Guru's job is to guide you. to this side of life that what are we doing for the collective? Are we So, at this juncture what is lacking. talking about it? Are we spreading What is lacking in Sahaja Yoga that I Sahaja Yoga? Are we making people know about it? have to tell you. There are so many collective disasters we have, all kinds. I was surprised, once I was We have many earth quakes, we had many floods, rain, then the mud came down like a river and so many coming by plane and a lady sat next to me and she had very bad vibrations. I put myself into bandhan and I asked disasters in the world, and Sahaja her what is she doing for her spirituality? She gave the name of Bahai people. My God! I said, if these Yogis are saved from them. All the Sahaja Yogis are saved from them, no doubt. But after being saved what is people are spread out, they are so your understanding, what do you spread out, they are so many, so, what will happen - disasters. They are such negative people, it's impossible that they can do any good to the world and like that you see you see any false know? Why these disasters are happening? Because Sahaja Yoga is not very collective. It has to become very collective, it has to spread much more, all over, it has to go to many people which we don't do. We are at guru. How people are driven to them, how they take to them and how they a standstill or little bit we do it. But

 20 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze Now, you are so many people spread their message. I have seen people singing on the road, singing here. You all can start giving the praise of their guru and also realisation to at least hundred wearing funny dresses. We don't want people. Go every where, talk about that kind of thing but of course, you Sahaja Yoga, sing the priase of the have got the knowledge, of course Divine and you will save the whole you are realised souls, but what have world. It's not by saving a few people you done for Sahaja Yoga is the point. you can have the great Satya-Yuga You have to spread Sahaja Yoga every but you also have to save this Mother where. For example, you wear a Earth, you have to save the people badge, then they will ask what is this who are in it, I mean the way these people are. supposed to be? Then you have to tell them what is it. Something you start talking about Sahaja Yoga, talk nothing else but Sahaja Yoga. Now I have seen so many of them on the television. Shamelessly they are talking about something which they don't know and they have thousands go on talking about Sahaja Yoga, spreading Sahaja Yoga. Unless and until you do it, it won't become collective and all the disasters which and thousands of people behind them. Not that the people are stupid, not that they want to go on a wrong path but are due to collective nonsense, you these people who are false or who are get it. You are saved from so many wrong know how to entice them, how to capture them, how to talk to them. things. Say, even if there is pollution, for Sahaja Yogi it won't matter. Even if there is disaster of a earthquake with negative vibrations will run the Sahaja Yogis will be saved but away, he will escape such persons, why not save the whole world? will not go near them and say you Calamities after calamities are have got very bad vibrations. So, you coming and if you have compassion, have to be courageous and get into you must think of the people who can these places, talk to people and make get into any calamity or into any it collective, otherwise you cannot trouble. Of course, I can cure many save this world from the wrath of people, no doubt, but I don't know God. God is wrathful no doubt. For how to make Sahaja Yoga very you, He will save you, but what's the But Sahaja Yogi, if he sees somebody collective. use? We have to save this Mother

 November-December 2000 21 The Divine Cool Breeze about it, telling people that if we do Earth and for that you have to be prepared, you have to work it out and wherever you get a chance you must spread Sahaja Yoga. Some people wrong, if we are immoral, if we are cheats, if we try to oppress others and we become so much a power of destruction then these collective told me Mother, if you come then it will be alright. Why? You can be also disasters will be there and I think we will be responsbile for it. Everything like me. You can talk about it to people. I started Sahaja Yoga with one you take, any subject you take up, you person and that time it was complete don't have to start an organisation to darkness everywhere. No seekers fight it up but only your power of nothing and horrible people but it convincing people and bringing them to Sahaja Yoga will make such a many Sahaja Yogis. Why not you difference. I hope you will people do the same and talk about it. understand, as a Guru, what you have Your behaviour, your style, to do. As a Guru you have so many everything will definitely impress things. Yesterday, as they told, how Lao tse has written about the masters, worked. So, one person can get so them. One has to work it out in such how they were above eveything, above turmoil, above jealousies, above talking loose! They are so great, they are the masters and they will be the masters and you will be the Gurus, if you try to do that. This is what you have to acheive. I know a manner that you achieve our goal of collective consciousness. It's not only for Sahaja Yogis, it's for every one so that all these calamities that are happening, horrible things that are happening, stop, completely stop. I assure you, it can be stopped. Because you are always saved, so all the people who will be getting realisation will be saved. Why not talk openly some of you have achieved it but most of you have to achieve with compassion and love May God Bless You

 22 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze EASTER PUJA TURKEY, 23-04-2000 Pravachana by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Today we are celebrating the great that one day your resurection will come. It is the greatest happening for you. It is the greatest event of your life and one must consider it very event of the resurrection of Christ. On the same pattern is your resurrection, that you have risen to the new life of Divine love. You were all in the fortunate that you have been able to acheive it. All this because you desired for it. In many of your lives you have been desiring for the heavenly paradise. People have been going down in the hills and valleys, seeking, doing all kinds of things. That's already done by you. You don't have to give up anything, no need to give up anything. It's a wrong idea, I should say, it's an untimely idea. knowledge that there is something higher that has to happen, that you have to be born again. But, nobody knew how it works? The subtle side of your being was never told to you. The saints only talked as to how you should behave. They only said how you should try to keep a very pure life, sincere life but they didn't tell you how it will work out. Of course, people knew in India about it, very few of them, very-very few. But, now it's a world wide knowledge through This is the time when you have to get your Sahaja resurrection, spontaneous resurrection. You don't have to do you people. anything about it, it's just so simple as that, has worked out so well. I was Now when your Kundalini rises, she is your Mother, she is your individual Mother and she gives you the second birth. That's how you get connected to the Divine paradise. All this, if it is told without realisation has no meaning but people are given great ideas about it and also were promised really very much overjoyed to see that so many people, specially Muslims, about whom I have been so much worried that how can you save these people! They are so much lost in the mess of wrong things. One has to understand that this 'Koran

 23 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze want to write also about resurrection, written forty years after the death of Mohamed Saheb. So, may be, he didn't want to write about there might be some words which Imaculate Conception. All these are being just being shifted, may be, things were in his mind and so and the meaning might be little bit Thomas has to run away to India and John refused to write anything. Because all such people take charge. They become incharge, they think ambiguous. Also, there was another book called Sunna'-came out about the same time and was managed by a they are responsible for it, while they are not at all capable, they don't have the right to do it. As a result of that, person who was not such a great soul I should say, because he was not a realised soul. I can't understand how can you resligiously understand Christianity took a very wrong attitude towards the inner growth of poetry and in the poetry whatever is written, how can you interpret it human beings. You see the result of correctly? I am a poet also. I could have written a poetry about it but I happening with the Catholic Church, that today, when you see what's said, No. Poetry can twist, can be you are amazed. How can such an organisation be a religious organisation where all kinds of nonsensical things are going on? twisted and also people can misuse it, that's the problem with the poetry. In India we had the same problem. I was also born in a Christian family For example, Kabira wrote such beautiful poetry and the way they and I was shocked the way they interpreted was so nonsensical and so interpreted Christ's life and the way much different from the spirit of they talked about it with great authority. Books and books were Kabira's songs. About everything written, they give big-big sermons! I thought there's no truth in it what they are talking. Even my father felt the same way, because all these books they can twist the words according to their own need, I found out if I wrote poetry about Divinity. This is exactly what has happened. In all the religions I have seen, when it comes to poetry people can twist it. Also, like in Bible, it was so much accepted that Paul is the one who is going to organise the came much after, the authors of these books. Secondly, those who tried to write it were not authorised to do that. They were not spiritual people. They all wanted to have power, they wanted publication about Christ and he didn't

 November-December 2000 24 The Divine Cool Breeze to have power in religion. The power guided by absolutely ignorant in religion is inside and that should people. be awakened. I must say, thanks to So, we have to really celebrate the the Sufis of this country and other countries that people still think that unity of these people, the collective there is something beyond all these nature of these people, who had lost words and talks and books. to the truth. They had no idea as to what truth is but still, a seeker can never find consolation with whatever This is something, such a blessing that we have, that in every country we had exists. He is seeking, he is seeking, seeking and seeking till he finds the truth. But also there are many seekers someone who talked about the reality, about the truth, though they were who lose their way. In seeking they condemned, they were tortured and get lost. It's very difficult to convince them that you have lost your way. They should see from their own lives. so many of them were killed. This is happening even today. I find, that people don't want to listen to reality, They should see from their own to the truth. But I was so happy attainment. What have they achieved? Have they got any experience? To be yesterday, really overjoyed, to see even the people who were Muslims, were Islamic, are no convinced of what you have got, you w coming must try to verify it. You can verify on people, you can verify on yourself. Whatever you are, you know on your together, understanding that they have a higher life than these rituals of everyday. All this ritualistic life that they have led, the way they have fingertips as this is. worked so hard, this forty days There are two things-Qayamat and starvation, going for Haj, doing all Kiyama. Two things. Many people kinds of things. But there was no unity don't understand the difference. One among themselves. Even among is when the resurrection time comes themselves there was no unity and and the other is when your destruction some places I was surprised that they comes. For the resurrection of the were killing each other! How can that be? Because these so called practices human beings is the Kiyama in which it is said that your hands will speak, did not make them collective. They should feel the vibrations on that you were not collective. They were all your fingertips. I would say, those separate identities, separate sects who are really Muslims, who are

 November-December 2000 25 The Divine Cool Breeze surrendered and those who have that was the order. But you can ask the question, after all why? That's also just the stone. So, why did Mohamed Saheb asked that you should go round that stone? So many statues were there, made of stone and people started worshipping all kinds of statues as they do in India also. But this stone was a swayambhu and it is mentioned in the Indian scriptures that been selected to be higher people belonging to the God's realm must have hands that can speak. Otherwise they are not Muslims, I would not call them Muslims, They may be human beings but not Muslims. So, it's compulsory that for every Muslim, who thinks himself a Muslim, he should have vibrations in his hands. He should feel the vibrations. His hands must speak at the time of resurrection which is the Kiyama, not there is Meccashwar Shiva. We have Shivas everywhere in India. There are twelve Jyotirlingas. Now, if I tell you, you need not believe me but you can go and verify on your vibrations if it Qayamat. These two words are confused in the minds of the people. So those people who can verify about is a Shiva or not. Same with this black stone. So, Mohamed Saheb found out their achievements themselves that this is a Meccashwar Shiva and through their vibrations on their hands and also about others through their fingertips are the Muslims, according to 'Koran'. But nobody has told them this, they don't know. To them its alright if you go to Mecca and come back from there. You become a Haji, so the people have to go round to achieve Shiva's blessings. But, it became a rirual. The whole thing became like a ritual and nobody could go further from that ritual. Same thing with the Christianity. Today is a day they are talking so big about repentance and about feeling guilty about what they have done. But why did they do it? They are supposed to be incharge of goodness, of virtues. So why did they do it? Why did they do wrong things? And now asking forgiveness from God! Because they were not realised souls, they were not Sahaja Yogis. If the 1 finished. There's another question one should ask, which is very important, that why Mohamed Saheb was so much against stone worshipping, clearly? Why did He ask people to go round that black square stone? What was the purpose of that ? Why was that stone so improtant? If you ask this question to any, so called Muslim, he will say

 26 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze life because in Divine life people are Sahaja Yogis try to do something just the same with each other. You see wrong then they know that they are doing wrong, on their fingertips or we can ask them to get out of Sahaja Yoga. But that seems to be the worst punishment for Sahaja Yogis. If I tell we had sufis all over the world. I have read them. I have read the Sufis of Turkey and also other places. Even in India we had Sufis, though they don't call themselves Sufis. Sufi them to get out of Sahaja Yoga, they don't like it. Why? Because they feel we are separated from reality. All the means, I don't know what ever you may think about it but according to Indian understanding, Sufi means blessings of the reality are lost to them, they think that way. The punishment is nothing because we just ask them to get out of Sahaja Yoga. To look at, its nothing. But Sahaja yoga is complete freedom, Sahaja Yoga is complete blessing, Sahaja Yoga is complete peace and joy. Surprisingly, if you read Koran you will be amazed that Mohammed 'saaf' and 'saaf' means clean, means pure. Those who are pure people are Sufis. In the purity they see nothing but Divine grace, Divine love, Divine peace. They talked of peace only, they could not talk of war. Anybody who talks of war cannot be a person who has got any right to do that. Saheb wanted to bring peace but it's War is absolutely like madness. Even not so. I met one man from Kashmir. animals won't fight like that. We are He said that, where is the peace? They even worse than animals when we think of war and killing each other. are all fighting-fighting. We want peace. But, surprisingly he said, in This should not be done and it has to India you find just peace. But this Kashmir is a mad place where be stopped completely. Nobody has the right to kill anybody unless and everybody is all the time challenged until he is attacked. So, what we hear and everything attacked under the name of Islam itself! So, I said, it's are above so many things. We have not Islam. Islam means surrender. lost all those destructive qualities. In And he said, if you surrender they will Sanskrit they call it 'shudripu' we kill you. We have no protection. It's have six enemies - kaam, krodh, mada very surprising, very, very surprising (43), matsar, lobh, moha. Kaam how now the Muslims themselves are about our resurrection is this that we means sexual perversion, Krodh means anger, moha means attraction, realising that this cannot be Divine

 November-December 2000 27 The Divine Cool Breeze don't know. I asked so many people. mada means the pride, matsar means I asked even some priests who think they are great authorities of Christiany. They didn't know why they give eggs! Secondly, if you read jealously, sixth one is the greed. All these six things that we had in our mind out of our ignorance, out of our upbringing, out of our reading, whatever it is, whatever we had the story about the birth of Shri developed just drops out when your Ganesha and then you proceed on, Kundalini rises and you become one with the divine. Then you are on you will be surprised, it is written down that it was called as Brahmand, sound grounds. You realise that you have found the truth and you no more can enjoy all these destructive habits. They just drop out. means the egg of Brahma. That came into existence and half of it became Mahavishnu means the Christ and half of it remained as Shri Ganesha. And then it is said that when Mahavishnu came out He started crying for his father. Just think of it, He was asking for His father. Now, if you see Christ, he always uses his two fingers. No other incarnation has used So, you go into a new realm of Divine resurrection within you. This is the real resurrection of human beings. Now, you know that certain subtle things still remain despite the fact that people try to destroy the books, to spoil the meaning of things. Despite these two fingers. This means you know this is the Vishuddhi and this is HE that subtle things remain there. For example we offer eggs during Easter. of his father who was Nabhi king. What's the meaning of offering eggs? Who's that? You know that very well. Why should we offer an egg? First of He is the Vishnu and he incarnated as all we offer egg because an egg can Shri Krishna. So, what He is go into a transformation. It can indicating is this that they are my become a small chick, it can be born father. How clearly He has done that. again. The egg has the capacity to be Why not have some other Mudras, born again. So, when you get this egg other style of holding the fingers? as a symbol of Easter it means you But, He held always these two fingers, can become a different person, a meaning my father is one who was the Nabhi. That means HIe is talking reformed person and a great spiritual person. You can become, it means that. Why do we give eggs? People Vishnu and who was Shri Krishna. Then in the lives of Shri Krishna they

 28 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze How can that be if you are the people say Mahavishnu will be your son. who think are baptised? I mean there's All these things are not put together, as I am telling you, separately, but if you have proper understanding, you a big celebration of baptism by these priests. Where is the Sahasrara and can understand the connection where is the Kundalini and how do you have your second birth? There's no second birth, just some priest puts his hand on your head. Actually it makes problem for realised souls, to put hand of the priest who is not a between them. That Christ was the son of Shri Vishnu and Shri Krishna and that he was blessed that you will be the support of the whole universe. Clearly, it is said that you will be supporting the whole universe. realised soul and that creates a Now, the one half is Shri Ganesba problem for children. I have seen who is the support in a way. It many children, they start crying supports the Kundalini. It looks after loudly when they are being blessed by these priests because they are the Kundalini, it looks after the chastity of the Mother. And the other realised souls and the priests are not. It's very interesting. But they say, after one which is expressed is Jesus Christ all you see it's the priests that are bad but not Christ. But how are they who is the support of the whole universe. So naturally it has to be the moral basis as He is a part and parcel of Shri Ganesha, it's the moral basis of human beings. On the moral basis only you will be supported not all related to each other? Christ stood for morality. And about Him also, in these modern times, they are saying all kinds of filthy things. They cannot understand a chracter which is moral. other nonsense that they have but a moral basis which is missing in the To this extent we have gone. Morality lives of Christians. Everything is is out of question. You do whatever you like as long as you go to church and confess, it's alright. allowed, very surprising! You can do whatever you like as long as you don't These are the absurdities of modern take a divorce in the Catholic Church religions. Every religion has problems and the worst, I feel, when you have the support of the world, as your leader. How can you allow people to and also in the other Church which you can call non-Catholic Churches. Even if you are married you can do whatever you like. Even the Vetican, I was told, has all these problems. have such an immoral life? How can

 29 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze you tolerate immorality, when you God, otherwise you cannot. And also follow the example of Christ? Out of the love of another Sahaja Yogi or question! He is the embodiment of Yogini you can only enjoy in morality. He is Shri Ganesha and completeness if your eyes are clean. how can you allow people to come Just imagine! But, if you have roving to Churches, to the temples and eyes and all sorts of things, I don't allow them to have immoral life? know how can you call yourself What is the atonement for such Christians? You cannot. Whatever people? The basis of Christ's life, certificate you may carry, you are not, the whole being of Christ, is because those who follow Christ have to have absolutely a moral life. That's a compulsion of the inner being on morality, to establish purity. Now, it was Shri Ganesha who was created first by the Adishakti because you that you enjoy your morality and She wanted purity around. She wanted human beings to enjoy their about the Western life that the eyes you enjoy. above all, your clean eyes. This is what I have come to know purity and their personality which was emitting light to others. If there is are not clean. They will go to the impurity, say for example, on a glass and if you use that glass on top of the church and their eyes will be moving here and there! How can that be? How can you do that? If you think Christ light, how can the light pass? The impure life cannot give light to others and cannot show your inner is the one who was resurrected and you are to be resurrected, first of all, see that you have pure love in your eyes. Now, pure love is not relative, light also. Both things are absolutely true about impurity.But people say that we have to accept because if you have to have more people for your cannot be contaminated, cannot have lust and greed in it. These two things have to drop out from your mind religion you should accept many completely. These are the days of people having greed, lots of greed they have. I just don't know what sort of things they have because I haven't things. One of them is impurity. Just think of it! Now, at the Agnya where Christ resides, if your eyes are impure, full of lust and greed, then studied so much the immorality of you are against Christ, you are an human beings. Whatever I see are antichrist. If your eyes are clean and beautiful people like you. But when I try to understand the so called pure, then only you can enjoy love of

 30 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 Western culture, I am surprised. something. If you start seeing, you Shakespeare was according to me, might see something white, red, Avadhoota, means a person who has yellow but you are not that. When gone beyond all human destructive you are, you are the reality. Then habits. Avadhoota is a very high you emit reality, you see reality, quality yogi and they show him as a enjoy reality, you live in reality. This stupid man running after a woman. is real life and you don't indulge into They cannot conceive of human something which is unreal, imaginary beings who could be morally perfect, who will have moral sense. They do. You are the reality, is the or beiow Divinity. Now, you don't cannot conceive because those who Hakikat, as they say. You are the reality and you are emitting reality in your behaviour, in your talks, in do this kind of thing are not realised souls. They are not Sahaja Yogis. So, the conception about morality doesn't your lives, in everything. All this come to their head. They think as we brings forth the greatest force of are like that the others are also. spirituality. Whatever is falsehood, Actually mostly they do it to justify whatever is wrong, whatever is themselves. So ugly and so horrifying destructive, will run away from a is the depiction of the character of man who stands in reality. It is such great people, who talk such great things, shows that human beings are automatic. It is absolutely part and parcel of the same personality who is supposed to be a realised soul. really degraded in their value system. They cannot conceive of somebody who is an ideal personality. They So, the resurrection has taken place, no doubt. Your hands are think by saying so they are talking of something beyond reality, they don't know reality. speaking, alright. I don't want to give you any command or any kind of a fixed road that you have Yesterday, Sufi thing, I was so to follow. Now, you are free, impressed when they said about the because you are the light. When four stages that you have. Out of that you are the light why should I tell the Hakikat-means the reality, you you which way to go. You know have to get into the reality. Reality is yourself that you have the light. So what is not a perception. It's not you follow yourself in a way that is seeing something but its being an enlightened path, with your own

 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 31 light, not that somebody has to tell you-don't do this, don't do that, nothing of the kind. You will just weigh, if something is wrong, you will not do it! If you are doing it then know that you have to still rise above Pure appreciation, purity is the message and once you have the purity within yourself you will love yourself. As I love you, you will love all. And then you will understand this word 'love' which comes out of the all this. You are the Nabis that are purity. The blossoming of your purity, the fragrance of your purity, you described in the 'Koran'. You are the ones who are going to resurrect the enjoy all the time and the love that whole world, you are the ones who you have flows, flows towards all are going to help the downtrodden those who are to be loved, who are to people in the filth of immorality. be looked after. Look at few of these people who were Sufis, who were very clean people, Don't worry about the people who how have they been able to channalise are destructive. That's the only word that I can use, because there are so other people into a better life. That is many things one can say about. Let them be destructive because they are destroying themselves. Why should we worry about them? They think they are destroying others but they are not, they are destroying themselves. Forget about them, just forget. You what you are. You have to channalise their lives, that's your job. Don't think about what is happening, how the people are stupid, immoral, forget it. What you have to know what you are. You have to be aware of yourself and of your responsibility as being the think yourself to be responsible for purest of pure. As my name the construction of the whole world, it's not only few. You are very indicates, you are my children and that indicates the children of intelligent, knowledgeable and Nirmal, means purity. Purity is the basis of your existence. You should understanding. You are not like the try to see very clearly, that there is discipies of Christ who were not no mistake in appreciating the art, educated, who didn't understand so appreciating all that is beautiful, much and who did get realisation but appreciating all that is created out of were not of your level. Whatever they beautiful minds but there should be could do, reach to a point where this no lust and greed in that appreciation. kind of a mess of christianity has

 32 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze that. I said, he must be a big come but you can't create that kind. possessed man. He had no mind of You will create a new vibrant religion his own, he didn't know what he which is global. was talking. He would take out one sentence from Bible and go on have people from all over the world. talking, boring everybody! I was It is a global movement all over. It surprised that within fifteen minutes has nothing to do with the limited people wanted to get out of the I was very happy to see that now we ideas of so called religions. That have ruined every religion, Islam is ruined,Christainity is ruined and Hinduism is ruined and Buddhism is the worst. In Buddhism you give up everything-all your belongings, all church. As soon as the sermon was over they would run out and breathe, thank God! Is that what religion gives you? Is that what should happen to you? No! it's not that. What happens to you that you enjoy yourself, you your property, give to the guru, enjoy the collectivity, you enjoy the imagine! And the guru, you see, is so goodness, the morality. The whole greedy, horrible fellow. How can he thing is like the nectar of life. So, give resurrection? Himself is a greedy that changes the whole creature. fellow, misleading others just taking away everything! Then same thing The ritualism is so much. In the about Christianity, that you all Hindu religion there is too much of become Nuns, you become Fathers, ritualism. You sit on the right or you you become Brothers and all sit on the left or you do this at this nonsense! But there's no change time and lots of it. That when your within. Somebody came to me and I sister dies how many days you should starve yourself, if your husband dies then how many days? said, why did you become a priest? He said, because I was jobless, I had Died is died, finished, the body is no job so, I took up the job of a priest, can you imagine? He could not fit into finished now. So, you fast for so any job, so the minimum of minimum many days is very wrong because he took this job. Then what did you by fasting the bhoot might come in do? They told me what I have to to you. But still, all these ritualisms preach and first I had to practice and and all that are created by human remember it by heart and then I don't beings who were claiming to be know, I started talking this, talking something great. They are not, by

 November-December 2000 33 The Divine Cool Breeze walking around with all kinds of bad vibrations. I can't understand! And the other people are very simple, they say oh my Goodness! see now he is a priest, so they must respect him. But, they don't see, they do not ascertain what is the spiritual value of that no means they are people in charge of morality, incharge of higher life. They lead such a mundane useless life! I went to a temple of Shri Ganesha, which is supposed to be swayambhu-one of the eight temples, it is one of them. I was surprised the person who calls himself as a priest! That is your job. You don't have to man who was worshipping, was supposed to be the priest, he was suffering from paralysis and his fight with them, you don't have to brother died of paralysis and his son denounce them, you don't have to need but was also paralysed. He said, what is this Ganesha doing to us, Mother? I describe them, no understand that you are different. You have the right, you have the authority. So with that authority and confidence you have to go about and save people. You are realised souls, you have got your resurrection, you are yogis, I agree but, what is your job? Why, why this has happened? Why this said, what are you doing to Ganesha? How much money you earn out of it? He said, quite a lot. And what do you do with this money? Do you do anything for the society? Do you try to improve their lives? Have you any attention on the society or you are just looking after yourself? As a result he light has come in to you is to take got paralysed. His brother got paralysis, his son got paralysis. And he was blaming Ganesha for that! He said, is it a real Ganesha? I said, yes, the blind in your hands and take them towards the light. This is what is your resurrection for. It's not only for your seeking but also is the grace of the Divine for you to make the it is but you are not. You don't deserve whole world Divine, as far as his blessings. He said, alright you may say whatever you like but you cure me. I said first promise that whatever possible. How many people have you given realisation? How many people money you get out of this temple you have you talked to? I tell you I was will spend it for the betterment of surprised, once I was travelling by plane and there was some lady travelling with me and she started people. But, how can they? They are not realised souls. Such a lot of priests talking to me about her cult, about her nonsensical Guru. Shamelessly she I see walking about in all these funny dresses. These are like dead bodies,

 34 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze was talking! I was listening to her, I said, Sahaja Yogis won't, they won't talk about Sahaja Yoga. Every person who is a Sahaja Yogi has to talk about Sahaja Yoga, may not be with going to give realisation? How the wrong type but with the right people you are going to save? This type of people. That's a thing you is a very simple job for you. You have to do. That's why you are have to just raise the Kundalini, you enlightened. You are not enlightened to be put somewhere in the forest or your hand you can raise the to be lost to the whole world. You Kundalini of others and give them are enlightened, you are resurrected their resurrection. You don't have to enlighten other peopole. That's to do anything and the life is not that the request of your Mother that make use of your realisation. And the attention should be only on realisation. How many people you are many can, you should see how just with difficult for you. Your job is the what you are there for and you can easiest thing. You have just to raise your hand, in your hand you have the power, just to raise your hand and do it. Many have done it. So many of you have done it and I would say all of you whether you are a man or a give them realisation. Instead of woman, you have to do it and that's feeling diffident. That's why I would say you are all resurrected, you are all realised souls and you have to create the Divine paradise on this earth. May God Bless You.

 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 35 I.R.S. OFFICER'S MEET 17-04-2000, DELHI Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi I bow to all the seekers of truth. Just one can understand unless and until now you have been told about the you are in the service. The first and beneficial effects of Sahaja Yoga. But foremost thing that causes us this it has much deeper, much more anxiety is we are all the time worried effects on us. The thing is we are not that how are we to be sustained in the aware of ourselves, we don't know job? What should we do our level best ourselves and we have to know-what to be a good member of this organisation? Whatever you may do. whatever you may try, you will find it at different steps that it is not are we and then we will know why all these problems-physical, mental, emotional are caused, also the spiritual problems that people have. It is important to see that we are made beautifully. This human body is made very beautifully and if you study medicine you will know it even more, rewarded, it is not understood, nor people give you encouragement. Then it is very disappointing that we feel we are working so hard, we are so honest. Actually, government servants due to their honesty suffer a that it's a body which is so much well lot. I know those sufferings and how looked after. You take heart, you take anything, but we are the ones who much one has to cope-with. Despite spoil it sometimes. May be because that when you have to suffer some we are ignorant or we don't know sort of insult, indignation or anything, one feels very desperate, sometimes absolutely degenerated. what to do about ourselves. Specially, when I am today addressing such an august gathering of you Now we have to see what are we? people, I think it's important to tell Once we know what are we, we will you what is the problem with our not feel all that. We are not only lives? Specially, I have been a wife ordinary human beings, no! We are of a government servant and I do not animals, we are not the nature. We know what the problems of the are special people who have been given a very special work to be done. government servants are, which no

 November-December 2000 36 The Divine Cool Breeze So counteract it, first thing I would in that he lost his pay or whatever it say is the love for your country. As was. But I was so very happy that this they have told you about my parents, is the time we have to build up our I have seen Deshbhakti, (Patriotism). country. Of course, I couldn't do How they sacrificed everything for anything because he was in the the country. We are in a much better government service. But, through him I could see that we can work out many things and I need not work, I need not sort of, put in my ideas but he can do that. And it was so interesting how things were worked out by him and how he was so much engrossed into his work. He never took leave for, I state now, we are free. We are free now to enjoy, while these people, my mother went to jail five times, my father went to jail sometimes for two and half years and we were a big family, still we enjoyed. We enjoyed all that because we knew we were soldiers, soldiers fighting for the think all the time when we were there, freedom of our country. Now that not even one day. It's very surprising purpose is lost, in a way-we don't and Shastriji always felt that he is have to fight for the freedom but what sacrificing his family life and all that I feel that we have to understand that but no! not at all. I never felt that way, the time is so important that we have I felt that it is our duty now, as Indians, to build this country. The other day to build this country to be the most before the IAS officers, I told them excellent performing nation. We can, that my husband was selected to the we are very intelligent people. Indian Foreign Services to begin with. I told him (my husband) very frankly You can see now how people are that I am not going with you to foreign doing so well in this new era of country. Just now we have got Internet, softwares? I feel that now the independence and you want to go to Saraswati has joined hands with foreign countries. Moreover, we don't Lakshmi and people are really drink, how are we going to manage showing results of this combination. the parties? I have nothing to do with The time has come for our country to the foreign service. I am going to stay really develop into a new financial here and if you want you can go. He status. But that's not the end of it. was quite surprised at my reaction so, Even if you have lots of financial he said, "I will try if I can get into advantages, even if you become a IAS" and luckily he got it. Of course, very technologically developed

 The Divine Cool Breeze November-December 2000 37 of people called as "Nathpanthis". They knew this, that Kundalini awakening is the only way you can get your self realisation but country, still if you go to such group countries where they are sO developed, they are not happy, they have no peace, there is no love. It's a very funny situation that money could idea about self-realisation was so limited and was so absurd that people not buy anything for them. So now, what is the problem is that didn't want to do it. They said you have to give up your families, you we should know what do we want, have to give your everything, your really? For that, the creator who first created us has really made all the property, everything. You have to become absolutely single, you should have nothing to do with your relations. All these funny ideas came into the heads of so many people who arrangements. Only one step towards the evolutionary process, towards our evolution, towards our resurrection can solve that problem. That capacity wanted to propagate their way of thinking. All such thinking has ruined we have, that actually we are chosen ones, we are chosen ones, especially actually, the reality that exists within this country. This is such a great country, it is a yogabhumi, it is full of vibrations, full of divinity but we us, absolutely, because to say that you give up that, you give up this and all this kind of nonsensical ideas doesn't have to be. You don't give up, it's have become so much alienated from that and that is why we don't know what do we have in this Motherland all there. You just have a outward feeling that you have given it say, to of ours and what we can achieve. A your guru or to someone and that's day will come when all the world will how all kinds of fraudulent things come and worship this Yogabhumi. have started with this kind of things. You don't have to give up anything, is the point that just now as you are this Kundalini exists within you. She is your Mother. She is your individual Mother. You are the only child she has and you don't have to give up anything as such because she is the one who looks after you. She is going Now, I have to tell you about our own things as it has been told that what you have within is these powers. You will be amazed all this was known long time back in our country but all that knowledge was finished because of the British rule you can say or the other rules that came in, that they didn't care for all this. But, there were to give you your second birth and

 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze when your mother gave you the moorakh bhaye". So even if you go birth, did she trouble you? She took on reading, it doesn't work out. So, up all the trouble upon herself and then scientifically or may be she managed that you are born on intellectually. You may say it is all this earth. In the same way for the nonsense. Nobody has gone to find second birth as you call 'Dvija', born out if there is some truth in what twice. To be born again there's these people have been saying! All Mother already placed within you. these saints even today are She exists within you and she is the respected but no body wants to one who can give you self- realisation. This is not told only by the lines. Guru Nanaka has said, me, I tell you. It is told by all the Sahaja samadhi laago" He has said saints of the world. Long time back clearly, you get it Sahaja- Gyandeva in the twelveth century spontaneously. People should and all others who lived there but understand that all these rituals and see what they are saying within even before that Markandeya, all these aadambars are of no value, talked about it. We don't know which they themselves had anything about these people. Then denounced. in the sixteenth century, we should say, Guru Nanaka was there, Kabira There have been so many saints was there. All of them have talked during the sixteenth century and they about it. As Kabira has said, "Ida, have tried to talk about Kundalini. Pingla, Sukhman Nadi re, Shoonya shikhar par anahad baaje re." But they used to write it in poetry. The reason is poetry is the safest way otherwise people would have Nobody understood what they were saying and only reading, reading, threatened them, beaten them, reading, where will you reach? crucified them. So they thought better Adishankaracharya also asked, o is not to talk in prose but talk in poetry Mother! Please remove, please and that is being is misunderstood. somehow or other remove from my You see its such a misunderstanding mind this kind of Ignorance that I Coming out of reading without have, that I read words the knowledge. So you have to have Shabdajalam. Please remove this knowledge first. Sahaja Yoga is a shabdajalam , all of them have said, Gyan Marg, where you get the Kabira has said, "Padhi-padhi- pandit knowledge, the absolute knowledge,

 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 39 sometimes aggressive things, all kinds of things we go on reacting. not just reading knowledge or some sort of a thing. How? When your Kundalini rises she pierces through Now here, for example I see three your fontanelle bone area. "Shoonya flowers put here. It is such a shikhar par anahad baajey rey", has beautiful thing for me. But now many people would say, Oh My God! how much they have spent? been said. And then when it becomes one with the subtle, that is, the Divine God knows, from where they have got it, they should not have done this, have they paid their income tax or not! They might start like this and power of love of God, you can call it anything. Paramchaitanya. When it becomes one with that what happens to you that all these things like Kaam, Krodh, mud (H), matsar, lobh (), moha (F), all of these things drop by itself. They is call say things which have nothing to with the beauty and the joy that these flowers have. The whole reaction of Because now you are in the new arena or area of knowledge where I would say, even Eienstein has written about the mind goes on like that and that's how we get into tension. Why we cannot enjoy, we cannot enjoy? The it. reason is we are still not connected with the mains. Now supposing this instrument is not connected, what is He said, "I was very tired trying to find out the words to express the the use of this instrument? In the theory of relativity and he didn't understand that. So, he said, I got so same way we are all the time thinking and putting our attention in a way that it reacts. Anything, that fed up in the laboratory, I came home and I started playing with the soap they see, one feels we must react bubbles and suddenly from somewhere unknown, the whole think that it's a lost case and they theory dawned upon". This unknown have not understood the point. and if they cannot react then they what he called "Torsion area" and that For this, this happening of self- is the area which is beyond us, beyond our mental-self. What we do normally realisation is called as aatma- is all the time with our mind, we go Saakshaatkaar (a a a Even on reacting. You say something, you Christ has said, "know thyself', said react. Sometimes we react to also it clearly. Every one has said that. It's not I am saying, but how to do it things which are very ugly, may be,

 40 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze action so much, so that it can really spoil all the working of all the centres which are connected with it. First and foremost is the liver. The liver goes out absolutely. Now what is the sign She rises through six centres. Now of liver is that -you can't eat, you these centres are for physical, get constipation. All these things mental and emotional being and also when this is on a very lower level for spiritual and she passes through but when it starts rising, the function them. Firstly, she integrates, then of the liver is to eliminate the heat from your body into the blood also nourishes them. That's how it circulation. So if your liver is out, it is the point. Because you can't enter inside yourself, we can not go into this subtle things. For that the divine has placed the Kundalini in the triangular bone. It is so important. secondly, she enlightens them. She completely balances you and makes doesn't do. So, this heat goes on you a very healthy person. I would passing. It goes from liver to the like to tell you because the kind of heart or before that to the lungs. So, work you do, morning till evening, such a person can suffer from you are very hardworking and all Asthma of a very serious type. In your attention is on your work and Sahaja Yoga Asthma is absolutely curable, no doubt. But you have to you are going out of the way to work out whatever your plans are, first become a realised soul. Secondly, whatever it is. In that doing so what when it rises even on the left hand side then supposing there is a boy and who is about 21 years of age and he The first thing that happens to you plays tennis, with that also he drinks. is that the right side Nadi which we So, he is out for a fatal life because happens to you, let us see. call as Pingla, this Pingla Nadi gets then the same heat attacks the heart over excited, also tired. All the time and the child gets heart attack. But using that for your thinking, for your futuristic plans! All futuristic people suffer from this. Now this Nadi is a this heart attack can come even to much older people. Those who are working very hard and all that, then they are neglecting themselves. When they are neglecting themselves suddenly they get a heart attack. It is very important Nadi which is that force. I mean, medical science doesn't know about it but we can call it, it is the right side sympathetic nervous system. This sympathetic goes in to a common disease with all the government servants because they are

 November-December 2000 41 The Divine Cool Breeze caused by the same. I will explain to not bothered to find out how much energy they are putting in, how much you, how? I am sorry it's turning energy they are using. Now, the energy for our brain goes through these are two chakras from the left one centre which also looks after the and right sympathetic, they join liver. So, if you think too much, all together to form one chakra. Now, the time then this liver is even much what happens, you are working too out to be little medical but this is say, worse. Such a person who thinks too much on right and goes on like that much gets the problem of the liver draining out your right like that. but it doesn't end there. From the Suddenly some shock may take place, heart it might even go to the panereas, one can get diabetes. Just imagine! Diabetes can be easily cured if you stop thinking. But, how to stop thinking is the problem which I will tell you later and then it goes down, it can attack the spleen and something may happen on the left side and it breaks. So, your relationship with the whole is lost. When that relationship with the whole is lost, your right side becomes on its own and the left side becomes on its own, like they become what they call - malignant and also the cells start one can get blood cancer. It's very serious but then it can also affect behaving like that. Also, you can cure cancer. It's not very difficult. If you want to work out you can do but the best thing for you is to get your self- your kidneys and your kidneys can stop working. After that you get constipated, very badly constipated because of the lower intestines not realisation and to establish, that is the äcting. All this heat we generate, all the time by our over work, by our best thing for all the men and all the women. futuristic life. To stop it there's no Now, I have seen that this is only one way out. You are also government servants, conscientious people. You part of it. I have said about right side but the worst thing is that your right want to work very hard and want to think how to improve the situation side can get paralysed. Recently we have one very good doctor working and work for your country. But, at for us. I told him, Sir, now you are the same time we have to know old, you must take rest in the day time, what imbalances we are getting into? there's no harm, must take some rest We are just going to the right side, not to the left but cancer can also be in the day time and sleep early and

 42 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze chakras are catching? If you know how to correct those chakras you can don't exert too much. You are there, is more than sufficient. He wouldn't correct them and also if you know how to correct for others you can also do that. The other thing happens to listen to me, I mean, he would listen but he wouldn't do what I am saying. So, what happened to him that he got a parapligia as they call it, his you that your personality evolves right hand and his left hand into a collective being, you become completely paralysed. Now he is a collective being. As these days you cured, that's different, he is cured have seen we have so many. now but the nature takes its own graduates and now the new respite. And that's how this fellow softwares and all that has come that got his right side completely. Now, we can connect to anyone but that the people who work like this system is within us also. We can find completely mad can have effect on out of anyone, what's wrong with the left side of his head and his body, that person and we can cure that can get paralysed on the right side. person sitting down. Can be done but you have to evolve to that state It is the nature that is trying to correct because you are over doing. and you don't require too much time. Once the Kundalini is So, now how to work out, how to balance it out is the point. But if your ankur', has to develop and if it Kundalini rises, she nourishes all the develops into a tree you just are centres, she integrates them, she puts amazed. You become transformed them right, enlightens them and because all these nonsensical things ultimately connects you to the source that have been within us which I itself, to the ocean of energy. Then have already told you as six 'Shad what can happen to you? Nothing. It's awakened it's like a small little seed, ripus' that we have, they just drop, a life which is tireless, you are never tired, you are full of energy and the they just drop and you become so confident about yourself. You do not energy is flowing from you but not aggress, you do not try to find faults only energy but also the knowledge. with others but you become like a absolute knowledge because your fingers start feeling the Chakras, you everything, see everything, not to witness. You start witnessing start getting the chaitanya on your react. You go beyond your mind finger tips. So, you can make out what

 43 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze you have enlightened another candle and that also can do the same. That's because this reaction is the one that causes most of the troubles. how it has spread. I didn't go to all Now, you get the real Gyana. There is no need to have all these reactions. You actually know what is wrong? these countries. I have been hardly to the twenty countries, at the most. But how it has worked out! It has What is to be corrected? What is the worked out so beautifully and this is the seience of our country, this was solution? Because you are connected with the mains, you are one with that. Without that your personality is not complete. Once it happens, you will be amazed that all these people have has talked about it, but still, I would talked about it. Mohammed Saheb say, that basically this knowledge is has said that at the time of resurrection from India. Indians had all this your hands will speak. Now, what is knowledge but somehow they didn't that? That's the proof of, that you and so I only wanted to develop a from our country. Of course, others also talked about it. William Blake give realisation, collective realisation have got realisation. method by which or by Now, the situation is so simple and understanding the permutations and it's working out. I don't know, may combinations of human beings, I be it's such a ghor kaliyuga (ETT could manage this collective thing, h t hat it has started working in because any discovery which is just on an individual level has really no this time. There are thousands and meaning and it worked. It is working and by all your kindness and goodness. Some people do not thousands of people who are getting self realisation! Even if I am not there. Sahaja Yogis can give realisation to experience because of their sense of guilt. They start saying oh! I have done this wrong, that wrong! But so many people. It is very remarkable that is happening in this world and it's meant for you. You can't pay for whatever is done is done, finished! it. You can't do anything, it's just there! The God Almighty has put it there, the Kundalini. Only thing is that somebody who is a realised soul can only awaken it, like one candle which Now why are you bothered all your life? That's one thing. That is a very bad thing for this kind of a, I should say, love but it is actually very bad for the centre, the left side centre is enlightened can enlighten another candle. That's the only thing but if

 The Divine Cool Breeze 44 November-December 2000 which we call Vishuddhi. And that's should not blame yourself for how the Kundalini doesn't rise. So, anything. You have done nothing you should not feel guity. There's no wrong. What have you done? After need to have confessions and all that. all if you have done anything wrong You just think you are a human being you would have been in jail but you and you all can get your realisation. are not. So what is there to feel I must tell you this is the power of guilty? love, it's not the power of any This, we also have to understand intellectual capacity but the power of love and with the power of love. that some people think that unless if you should believe in it, then also and until we are very dharmic or we are very much in the rituals we will not be saved. It's not so, it's not so. must love yourself. You must forgive yourself and not to have any guilt. We are lost into these things, so Then after forgiving yourself you forget about it. The Kundalini rises have to forgive others also because whether you are Hindu, Muslim, others are also ignorant. They also Christian or you have done so many are not yet well equipped to pujas doesn't matter. Only thing that understand you. So forgive, forgive keeps you cleaner than other things all of them, just forgive. Logically, because your attention is on God, whether you forgive, or don't forgive, But, it won't work out unless and you don't do anything. Nothing is until the Kundalini rises. done, only you are harming yourself and playing into the hands of people I must tell you something I always felt about the women and recently as they said I have started an who have troubled you. So best thing is to forgive them. It just helps a lot organisation to help women who are in distress and also little girls and also to open this centre of forgiveness. These two centres are the real hurdles in the ascending power of the young girls because I feel in our Kundalini. So, what you have to do country women don't have is to forgive yourself and forgive properties. Whatever they have it's others. That's all. Just to say in all due to law and it is very, very heart, that I forgive myself and I cursed state where women are forgive others. That's the only thing definitely helped by law but they go you have to be convinced that you on asking for divorces, the family your

 November-December 2000 45 The Divine Cool Breeze more, we will come again. You have life is ruined. So, it's for men, they should develop real respect for a law but the way it is asserted you should look into it. I think why should women. They are I don't know how many percentage but, definitely you take also the ornaments of woman? I can't understand because much more than men and if you do the poor ladies don't understand any banking. I don't understand myself not respect the women you are really finishing the whole culture of our country. We have to definitely any banking. Then somebody told me that they will be using black respect women. There is one thing I money. I said which husband will give all his money for buying ornaments? And now the black would request you, the Income Tax people, that the way you have a law. I don't know, I have talked to the money is already in the market, they Finance Minister but he doesn't heed don't want to keep it in the are after the 'Stri-dhan' ( that you 7). To touch the stridhan is a "paap' (), it is sinful thing but it is done in such a bad manner! I have seen it ornaments. But women they have only that much support. Everytime I meet some lady like that I feel like because you are all big people. We crying? had a neighbour who was a jeweller We had a neighbour in Bombay. and I was there when these people There were three ladies who came up came in and you see this was the and they told us that there was a raid last story so they had put an artificial this thing, they got it completely torn, completely. They opened all the sofa sets, did all kind of things. I couldn't in their house for ornaments, they took away all our ornaments. I said, why didn't you register it? Our husbands won't register, they are all understand how could they do! And drunkards, so they wanted to sell in that house there was no man, only the women living and then they went into the cupboard and did all those ornaments and use it for their own drinking. So, we have lost all that but I said, why did you keep them? the things. You should have given it to bank. I mean somehow or other it's like a Hitlerish type of an attitude and they found nothing and they told them if Whenever we are in need we can sell it and we can get something for our living, this is our bank. So, it is this side of Indian life we should you report it we will confiscate much

 November-Decermber 2000 46 The Divine Cool Breeze accepting, I have to tell you that this understand, we are not Western is one dharm karya you can do. Please women, we are Indian women but surprisingly nowhere in the world, do not bother women about it. There nowhere, even in Russia there is no is so much of botheration to them, the tax on the ornaments. Then our way they are treated just like country is the industry of making criminals! Moreover in this country, ornaments, is so beautiful, such you know that women have to wear, artists, such creative people. Let they can't do without it. This is a women have their own ornaments. country where we honour the Why do have income tax on that? It's powers of women and that's why not a easy thing. You know you have they have it. This can relieve you to register I know. I know what it is. from lots of worries and troubles I You have to register, you have to tell can tell you. Because I have seen, them and if you want to gift some when they go in the night harass others. Then the report comes to ornament to your daughter, you have you people and you feel so distressed. If something could be done I will be very thankful. It is worth talking to to go to the commissioner to do this, to do that. Who has the time? So, a humble request I wanted to make that you can really think of it that this is you about the pains and troubles of one thing where you allow little women of India who are already down trodden, already being money to heip. I will tell you one thing when oppressed, already being tortured. This is alright but now the Kundalini Mahatma Gandhi had his freedom awakening part of it. Once your struggle, my mother, gave away, Kundalini is awakened, you will except for those which were for us, understand, you will have that love she gave away all her ornaments to and affection for all the people of Gandhiji. It's your sampadaa, it's your the world. property. All the time it is available but why should you not allow women to exist because in the villages also I know there are so many problems in this world. I don't know how to patch them up! For example, another school I have started in Maharashtra, I have seven schemes already started women have no concept of a bank or anything. I wanted to tell you,I thought whether I should talk about it or not, but you people are so much there. But worst of all I feel for

 November-December 2000 47 The Divine Cool Breeze women. They are so helpless and Sometimes my husband says, how there is no way of really getting them do you manage. redressal. They are in such a trouble just I know. You will know how to while they are the Shakti of this manage things and the main thing country. Kundalini is a lady. She is behind is the love that you have for not a man you can say. You have all others. It will work out so beautifully. the avtaras and everything but Your life will become so beautiful Kundalini is what they call, the and you will enjoy it and all the greed, reflection of the Adishakti. She is the I say, I don't know, all nonsense will just drop out. In Shakti these modern times it is very Shakti. We the are worshippers but the way we are important that you all should take treating our women is very your realisation because after all we surprising! We have to understand are Indians. Our culture is such that that these women, if they are we are in for self-realisation. We are awakened, what powers you have! so different from others and here in In any country where they have had this country the women have saved powers, it is through their women. the culture of India. You read about anyone, even S So, by this you can also look after the Mahatma Gandhi all of them, even Shastriji. I thought how much they women, give them realisation, give loved their wives and how much them understanding and also help they cared for them! I tell you it is them but not to harrass them. That's very remarkable how we miss out not the way. I have to request you to on the most important and such a absolutely ban it, to harass women. big part of our population. Now,I Already they are harrassed. They have started this organisation and I don't know what to do and this law am going to give realisation to all of doesn't help them at all. Because the them and I am going to see that after men are the controlling power. It's for men to understand the value of realisation they all learn things very well and stand on their legs. women, men to understand their power of love and then it will work Your administrative capacity, your out. I am not saying because I am a woman but I am saying this what I thinking capacity I should say, your understanding a subject increases so much that you are amazed. have seen. such injustice we have

 November-December 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze are never satisfied, go on from one done to our womanhood. Now, for Kundalini I would say we to another. But after this you are absolutely satisfied with whatever will take hardly ten minutes and you you have. You are not at all on the will get your realisation. Now, about run but you are absolutely in the this whole theory and all that and realm of peace and joy. This happens everything you see the people have written Granthas but that you can read to you and this should happen to all of you. and can find out but just now I think Firstly, I always say that service people, government service people are like the spinal cord of my the best thing is that you all get your realisation, if you permit. One thing you can not force on country. They are the ones, who anyone, you have to ask for it from look after. Without them nothing your heart because Kundalini is the could have happened. If the British power of 'Shudh ichha' (pure desire). gave anything nice, is this idea of That's the real because other 'ichhas' service. Of course all the kings had, are useless. Today we want to buy a everybody had, but the systems they car, after buying the car you are not have started have helped and you satisfied, you want to build a house. are the spinal cord.. You should After building the house I don't never get sick, you should not have know, you want to have an any problems and that's why I am aeroplane, it goes on. It is actually very happy and thankful to your the economics. The modern organisation and to Commissioner economics is based on this that you Saheb who has invited me for this. May God Bless You

 NEG



----------------------

2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume : XII losue : 118 12
November-December, 2000
You can be both alert and relaked because you are Sahaja Yogis.
Magnanimity of mind is very pleasing and it attracts others, This
magnanimity lies within human beings and is awakened by Kundalint.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Guru Stuti
1.
Guru Puja
11
Easter Puja
22
I.R.S. Officer's Meet
35
Edited by
Published by
Yogi Mahajan
V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
GURU STUTI
PRAISE TO SHRI MATAJI
Based on Guru Stuti in Chapter 12 to 18 of Shri Jnaneshwari
1) Salutations to you O Guru Mauli
5) O Mother, you bring up your
children with love, in the lap of
(Mother Guru). You are famous
your supporting shakti and in the
cradle of your heart put them to
as the one who generously
showers on Her children the
immaculate and eternal joy,
the yoga-nidra.
Nirananda.
You bless us with the "Aarti"
2) O Guru Mauli, the compassionate
one, when the snake of sensuality
takes a grip on us and stings us,
where flame is the spirit, and give
us two toys of Manah Shakti and
Prana Shakti to play with. Also,
the poison, which is difficult to
be removed takes awWay our
Mother, you adore us with the
Ornaments of spiritual bliss.
awareness. But O Mother, with
just one of your glance, that 7) O Guru Mauli, you give us the
poison vanishes and awareness,
food of your ambrosia, sing to us
the lullaby of Anahad Sound, "SO
HAM": HAM SAH" and put us
once again, dawns on us.
3) Shri Mataji, our most beloved
Guru, when we have the ocean of
in the meditative sleep with the
enlightenment of spirit.
your ambrosia, how can the heat
8) O Shri Mataji our Guru, you are
of mundane life torment us or the
the mother of all the seekers. All
grief overcome us?
"Vidyas" (knowledge), originate
from your lotus feet. Kindly allow
us to be always in the refuge of
4) O most loving Guru, it is by your
grace that we, your children, are
eternally enjoying the bliss of
your lotus feet.
yoga and it is you who most
lovingly bestow upon us the
enlightenment of "SO HAM", "I
AM THAT"".
9) Shri Mataji, when you grant to us
your shelter of compassion, we
become experts in Divine
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
Knowledge, "Shuddha Vidya".
realisation.
10) Salutations to you, O our Guru
15) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
Shri Mataji, the Shuddha Vidya
you are the greatest of all gods,
you are the Sun that gives the light
of the enlightened knowledge
in the shelter of your lotus
grows
feet. Shri Mataji your lotus feet
are verily our Spirit.
(Prajna). It is by your grace that
the joyous life of Nirananda has
11) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
dawned upon your children.
your mere remembrance bestows
command over the universe of 16) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
words, i.e. we get the power of
you are the shelter where all your
effective expression of subtle
children feel safe and relaxed.
feelings, and the Divine
Knowledge (Shuddha Vidya)
You manifest subtle revelations
of "SO HAM" in the hearts of
comes on the tip of the tongue.
your children. You are like the
ocean within whom rise and
12) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
recede all the "LOKAS".
your mere remembrance makes
ones speech so sweet that it would
17) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
surpass even the nectar in its
you are prompt to rescue your
sweetness and all moods (Rasas)
children when they are in trouble.
would become so submissive that
You are the eternal ocean of
they would readily become
manifest through words.
compassion. All the Divine
knowledge is your inalienable
13) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, by
companion.
your grace such words come to
18) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
your children as that can properly
when we are involved in the play
express deeper experience, and
subtle revelations coming from
of your Maya, we feel as if
mundane world is real, but when
spirit.
you manifest your Brahma
14) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
Roopa, i.e., your true form of
Supreme God Almighty, we
realise that Mother, you are
when our hearts are at your lotus
feet, we are blessed with great
luck, Divine Knowledge and the
omnipresent.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
19) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
when a magician castes the spell
of his magic, his spectators
because of your power and the
sky which is seen to be all
encompassing, is only but a small
part of your cosmic being and has
become oblivious to the rest of
the world. But the magician
to be searched as in a hide and
seek game.
cannot hide himself. But Shri
Mataji, in the spell of your Maya,
24) Not just this Shri Mataji, the
the awareness of the truth about
Maya is also a small constituent
you is lost and the illusory
mundane world is taken as reality.
of your Virata form and the
enlightenment is due to your
20) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
power. Your form could not be
you alone are present in
everything in the world. To Sahaja
Yogis and realised souls, you
reveal yourself in your Brahma 25) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
understood even by the Shrutis
(Vedas) who made futile efforts
to describe you.
Roopa and give them the
enlightenment, while those
engrossed in Maya are ignorant
about you. Shri Mataji, this Leela
of yours, in relation to yourself is
the Vedas were said to be experts
in describing the form of god, but
it was so only till such time they
did not behold your Brahma
Roopa, When they start
describing your pure form, they
wonderful!
become silent as we are in our
21) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, it
is your Shakti which has given to
water its liquid nature and to
mother earth her forgiving nature.
meditation.
26) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
we your children have cleaned our
22) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji, it
hearts. May your lotus feet be
placed in our hearts. Shri Mataji,
we wish to offer puja to your lotus
is your Shakti that shines through
the Sun and the Moon in three
worlds. But for your Shakti they
feet in our hearts.
would have been merely like 27) Shri Mataji, the feeling of
shells of Mother Pearl.
oneness, is as the cup of our two
23) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji,
the wind blows freely anywhere
hands, from which we offer at
your lotus feet, flower buds which
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
are our Nadis and Chakras and 35) Shri Mataji, we your children are
eternally grateful to have been
organs.
given this opportunity to offer this
puja. Grief has vanished from our
28) We wash your lotus feet with
Ananya Bhaava, i.e., the feeling
of total surrender and apply the
lives, we have forgotten what is
sin, and poverty no more exists
anywhere. As we have your Holy
Darshan, we have the joy of
sandalwood paste of dedication to
your lotus feet, with our ring
finger.
fulfillment of our lives.
29) Shri Mataji, our love for you
is
36) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji.
You are the Sun with whose
like gold. Let us purify that gold
and make anklets from it and tie
rising has bloomed to full glory,
them around your ankles.
the lotus of non-duality and has
30) Shri Mataji, with the same gold
faded away the spell of illusion
which is our love, we make toe
in which the mundane world is
ornaments and put them in your
held as reality.
toes.
37) Salutations to you, Shri Mataji.
31) Shri Mataji, we offer at your lotus
You are the Sun that has devoured
feet flowers of Sattwa Guna
the night of Avidya of twinkling
stars of worldly knowledge, and
has brought for seekers the
auspicious day of self-realisation.
which have the fragrance of joy.
32) We burn the incense of our ego
and perform the Aarti to your
lotus feet with the flame of the
38) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
feeling "I AM NOT", "NA
You are the Sun who has brought
auspicious morning hours,
wherein birds of our souls having
НАМ".
33) Shri Mataji, our body and prana
are two sandals (Padukas). Kindly
got their vision of enlightenment,
have discarded their nests of
wear them in your lotus feet.
identification with bodies.
34) Shri Mataji may this Puja which
your children are offering be 39) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
Our souls were beetles trapped
complete at your lotus feet and
inside the lotuses of our causal
accepted by you, howsoever
bodies, enjoying the worldly
inadequate it is.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
pleasures, during a dark spell of
MAYA. Shri Mataji, you are the
You are the Sun and as the rays
of your grace grow strong, they
make a number of miracles and
Sun who has liberated those
bestow numerous blessings of
beetles.
prosperity. Shri Mataji, these are
but reminders to us that if our
40) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
Our intellect and enlightenment
are like a pair of legendary
Chakrawada birds who were
attention is not at your lotus feet,
the same prosperity can become
a mirage and mislead us away
from spirit and your lotus feet.
crying to be united having been
separated in dark hours of
discussion and controversies. Shri 44) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
You are the Sun that shines at the
Mataji, you are the Sun whose
meridian in full glory, with rays
light has enlightened the sky of
of your grace conferring upon
your children the experience of
SO-HAM (I am that) reducing
our intellect and has united the
two birds.
41) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
thereby their Bhranti (illusion),
like shadows that disappear under
You are the Sun with whose
advent has vanished from the
our feet in the midday Sun.
world inauspicious spells of
Agurus and has opened the 45) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
You are the Sun. When, by your
avenues of ascent to all seekers
after getting their self-realisation.
grace the night of the spell of
Mayaa ceases to exist, it also
vanishes the sleep in the form of
42) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
You are the Sun and the rays of
Bhranti of intellect accepting this
your grace kindle the sparks of
divine knowledge in your
children like the legendry
Suryakant gem giving out sparks 46) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
when touched by the Sun rays.
world as reality. Infact this world
is like a dream.
You are the Sun which is beyond
Shri Mataji, the sparks of that
knowledge
the day and night of knowledge
burn
Divine
and ignorance. Also you are the
attachments to worldly pleasures.
enlightenment, because you are
the light itself. Who can have a
43) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
glimpse of you, the resplendent
Sun of knowledge?
Shri Mataji, you are our spirit. In
that state, Shri Mataji, three forms
of speeches, Vaikhari, Madhyma
and Paschyantee merge into the
47) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
You are the Sun by whose grace
subtlest form Para-Vani and even
the auspicious day of liberation
from all bondages and of self
realisation has dawned upon your
the Para-Vani recedes into
absolute silence.
children.
51) Salutations to you O, Guru Mauli
Shri Mataji, you are the Chief of
48) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
You are the Sun who always
Ganas, Shri Ganesha, from whose
Yoga Maya comes forth this fully
developed universe.
shines in the realm of self-
realisation. Your grace removes
the spell of Bhranti (illusion) over
52) Salutations to you O, Guru Mauli
your children and confers upon
Shri Mataji, you are Shri
Ganesha. By remembering you
Shri Shiva liberated the Spirit
them the enlightenment of
absolute knowledge, transcending
above all relative knowledge.
trapped inside the fort of soul
hood, surrounded by three cities
49) Salutations to you Shri Mataji.
of three Gunas.
The praise to you in words has its
limitations and is therefore,
53) Hence O, Guru Shri Mataji, when
inadequate. We can really praise
compared with Shri Shiva, being
the Guru you are superior,
you only in the state of oneness
with your lotus feet, wherein the
because, gently you are taking
intellect who praises and the
your children across the ocean of
words of praise, become one with
illusion.
your lotus feet which is the object
of praise.
54) Salutations to you O, Guru Mauli
Shri Mataji, you are beyond the
50) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. It
is really not possible to praise you
through words, because knowing
understanding of those who are
whereas,
the
ignorant,
Knowledgeable ones (self-
realised) can understand you.
you is to know all unknown, and
it can be achieved only in silence,
when the spirit manifests itself. 55) Salutations to you O, Shri Guru
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 7.
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
to mentally understand you
through their relative knowledge.
But they remain ignorant. After
Mauli Shri Mataji, as Shri
Ganesha your eyes may be small
but you play, the Leela of
Creation and Destruction of the
all, even the omniscient “Shabda
Bramha" Vedas, are unable to
universe just with opening and
closing of your eyes.
describe you.
56) Salutations to you O, Guru Mauli
60) Salutations to you Shri Mataji,
even when we want to be your
Shri Mataji, to those who are dear
servants, duality, of the servant
and the served, still remains. So,
to you, separate identity does not
exist and hence there is no
it is better that we do not keep any
identity to ourselves.
relationship left, because they
become one with you.
61) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, the
57) Salutations to you Shri Guru Shri
Mataji, because you sever the
bondages of this world, those
people who joyfully surrender to
you, you unite them with thyself
in such a way that their bodies
Goddess and the Guru, When we
attain that state in which there is
no identity left whatsoever, then
only we will be able to be one
with your lotus feet, which is Puja
exist only for the names sake.
to you.
62) Salutations to you Shri Adishakti,
our Guru Mauli, it is the desire of
58) Salutations to you Shri Mataji you
are elusive to those people who,
our
thinking themselves to be
different from you, struggle to
our hearts, to be one with your
lotus feet and offer the Puja to
your lotus feet, like salt dissolved
in the sea would offer Puja to the
reach you by following the
various spiritual practices, like
meditation on your form. But Shri
Mataji, you are pleased with those
Sea.
63) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. As
who in devotion surrender
an empty pitcher, when dipped
into the sea, gets filled in and
themselves to your lotus feet and
forget their own separate identity.
comes to the surface, as the wick
of lamp when lit, becomes the
59) Salutations to you Shri Mataji,
lamp itself, so we, by offering the
those erudite scholars, who do not
realise that you are absolute, try
Puja to your lotus feet, shall have
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
8
protecting and correcting them
and even restraining their
attentions. O Mother, this is just
the joy of fulfillment and shall
thereafter becomes ideal media
for you to work out your will.
a Leela for you. You enjoy it the
64) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, the
most.
Supreme Goddess, our Guru, You
bestow all auspiciousness on the
68) Salutations to you O Guru Shri
Mataji, your immaculate form is
extremely soothing and with just
glimpse of your form fills our
people, whom you grant shelter
at your lotus feet. You are like
strong wind that drives away the
clouds of birth and old age.
a
hearts with Nirananda. O Shri Adi
Shakti, the cause of creation of
65) Saluations to you Shri Mataji, our
this universe, just one of your
most beloved Guru, Shri
glance destroys all sins.
Adishakti the most powerful. You
destroy all the inauspicious and
69) Salutations to you our Guru Mauli
unholy from its very roots. Your
Shri Mataji, the self luminous
incarnation is the reward of the
one, you have enlightened your
prayers of the Vedas and the
Upanishadas and you also bestow
children. As the sky holds within
itself the clouds, so you hold this
the reward of the Vedas and the
universe within yourself. Shri
Upanishadas.
Mataji, when we have self
realization, this universe does not
66) Salutations to you Shri Mataji,
remain a reality to us.
our Guru Mauli. You have
condescended to incarnate in the
70) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. As
world in your complete form and
the primordial Mother, you are the
Guru to even all gods and ganas,
occupied the thrones of your
children's hearts. You are most
and the whole universe, O, the
loving mother to all your children.
Purest one, with just one glance
Easily you restrain the activities
of yours, your children realise the
illusory nature of this sense-
pleasing world. O Mother, the
ocean of compassion, your
children are eternally grateful to
of the God of death, Yama.
67) Salutations to you Shri Mataji,
our most powerful Mother Guru
and Supreme Goddess! You stand
by your children like a rock,
you to have been given the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
metaphors, no adjectives, or
words are adequate to praise you,
because you are beyond
everything. So we feel short of
words and hence incompetent to
powers to overcome temptations
of the illusory world.
71) Salutations to you O All
Pervading God Almighty and our
most loving Mother-Guru, You
are the lamp in the hearts of your
children. It is your light that
praise you. All that we know is:
to praise you we have to meditate
and work for Sahaja Yoga.
enlightens their inner beings, and
75) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, O
Spirit of the Universe, the
manifests in them as Divine
Vibrations, protects them from
Supreme One, the All Pervading
God Almighty, the Mother Guru
to Gods, Ganas and Sahaja Yogis,
the tormenting heat of mundane
life and relieves them of all evil.
72) Salutations to you Shri Mataji,
May you be pleased with this
universe. Your children are
you are 'Advitiya'. There is none
like you. You are unique. You
grateful to you to have been given
the Divine knowledge of the
have great love for all those who
are humble, detached, having
Spirit.
discretion and are surrendered to
you, so much so that you are alert
76) Salutations to you Shri Mataji
and prompt, to protect them, look
after their benevolence and meet
May by your grace the wickeds
give up their wickedness and take
to noble deeds, and may there be
friendship of hearts, among all
all their pure desires.
73) Salutations to you Shri Mataji. O
human beings.
Primordial Guru, you are like the
celestial Kalpataru which fulfills
77) Salutations to you Shri Mataji,
all the desires, We your children
We your children are indeed
are eternally grateful to have been
bestowed upon, the Param
eternally grateful to have been
given the enlightenment of Self-
Realization. May by your grace.
Chaitanya. It is the greatest and
beyond expression
imagination.
and
the darkness of ignorance go
away from the world. May the
world see the Sun shine of
74) Salutations to you Shri Mataji the
Dharma, of Spirit and may all
Primordial Guru! No smile no
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
10
human beings enjoy the
fulfillment of their pure desire.
celestial Kalpatarus, like
townships of celestial Chintamani
gems of awareness, like talking
78) Salutations to you Shri Mataji,
ocean of ambrosia.
We your children are grateful that
you shower upon us Divine Bliss
and the most auspicious Param
80) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, we
your children are grateful to you,
that you have taken us within your
Chaitanya. May by your grace,
multitudes of devotees of God
being and are cleansing us with
Almighty, that is Yourself Shri
Mataji, in the shower of
your love and compassion. Shri
Mataji, by your grace May all
human beings of the world have
auspiciousness meet all human
beings with overwhelming love.
the Divine Joy to their heart's
content and be engrossed in
79) Salutations to you Shri Mataji, we
devotion to you, the Primordial
your children are grateful to You,
that You have given us the
Being, the Supreme Spirit,
Sakshat Shri Para Brahma.
collectivity of realized souls.
Salutations to you O Divine
May, by your grace, there be the
union of hearts among all who are
like unblemished moons, heatless
Mother, again and again,
ОM NAMAН, ОМ NA
МАН,
suns, and whose congregations
are, like moving forests of
OM NAMAH.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 November-December 2000
11
The Divine Cool Breeze
GURU PUJA
Cabella, 23-07-2000
Pravachana by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Today we are here to know about
Guru principle. What does a Guru do?
Some people get full light and some
get it gradually. The essence of all the
religions is that you should know
Whatever you have, all the precious
yourself. Those people who are
fighting in the name of religion, you
have to go and ask them, you have to
enquire from them Did your
things within you, he discovers them
for your knowledge. Actually it is all
there, everything, all the knowledge,
all the spirituality, all the joy is there.
It's all contained within you. Only religion make you know yourself?' If
thing the Guru does, makes you all the religions have said one thing,
knowledgeable
you have to do all these things just to
about
your
knowledge, about your own spirit. know yourself. But people get into
Everyone has the spirit within rituals. They think that by doing all
himself, everyone has the spirituality these rituals they are near God. They
within himself. There is nothing that live in ignorance absolutely about
you get from outside. But before themselves and day in and day out
getting this knowledge you are
work out something which has
delinked or you are living in nothing to do with yourself. Lots of
acrobats, prayers, pujas, these things
go on. Because it is all ignorance.
ignorance. In that ignorance you do
not know what treasure you have got
People go on paying them money and
within yourself. So the Guru's job is they become very rich and their
to make you know what you are. That interest is only the money. They want
is the first step that it starts that to take all your money absolutely, and
awakening within you by which you make a fool out of you. They pamper
know that you have not this outside your ego, with pampering of that ego
world, this is all an illusion and you you just start drifting into the ocean
start getting enlightened
within
n
of illusion and you are drowned into
yourself.
that illusion thinking that you are very
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
12
religious and you are just in understand that you have ego, you
start looking at yourself or when you
find there's something missing or
connection with God, which you are
not. To know God you should know
yourself first, without knowing that
you cannot know God. That's
essential that you should know
something wrong then also you start
introspecting. This should be a very,
very honest, very honest effort. Some
yourself. But when you know
people in Sahaja Yoga, at a very early
yourself you know partly. The
experience is not sufficient, the
knowledge has to come and the Guru
stage, start thinking that they are very
great and they don't need any
introspection and they rise again into
the clouds of ignorance without
achieving Self or I can call Self-
Realization. So you have to introspect
and see for yourself... What I have
gives the knowledge about your self.
Now you have to tally it, you should
find out whatever your Guru has told,
is it true or not? Is it correct or not?
Or is it just an another illusion?
been doing? What are you? How for
Now, in this ascent people get into you have come? Now, the style of
lots of problems. First and foremost such a person changes gradually.
is the ego problem specially in the How? First of all a person who is
West. Ego stands up and you start extremely aggressive, hot tempered
thinking you are great, you are better and full of ego starts becoming very
than others and there's something gentle and mild. Another type which
special about you. This ignorance is is frightened and afraid and very
more dangerous than the worldy Cautious starts becoming fearless, at
ignorance, because in the worldy that stage you will have no fear, you
ignorance you
are sure that you are on the right path
feel
op
the
and you are moving on the right lines.
You are not easily disturbed there but
still you have to rise higher and higher
where when you meditate you
understand that there's something
wrong within yourself.
consequences of wrong things. But
when you are half way, when your
ignorance is that about yourself, when
you are going to a higher realm then
one should always understand that
you cannot have ego.
You have achieved your self
Then what starts is introspection.
realisation, you have got the blessings
of self-realisation, your health is
You start looking at yourself... What's
wrong with you? When you
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
13
good, you have got all kinds of dedication starts and you are cleansed
blessings which you cannot count. All by that bhakti. All the bad qualities
that is there but still you have to go that you have, I call them, all the
further and that is to understand all deficiencies that you have, all the
the knowledge about Sahaja Yoga. problems you have, you understand
You have to understand through your and you get over it. Now if you see
mental capacities first, to begin with, somebody with the same qualities,
and then you have to verify how far with the same problems, you in the
it is correct? How far you have love of that person try to tolerate.
understood it? How far you have Such a person just tolerates, there is
no aggression and these people
worked our? How far you know.
When you start seeing yourself you forgive. Realised souls go on
start entering into the realm of bhakti. forgiving, their capacity to forgive is
You become a mild person, a sweet tremendous. They do not bear any
person. You don't talk too much, you malice against anyone, they don't
don't harrass anyone. You are a very have any anger about anyone. They
pleasant person, very gentle, very just go on tolerating and forgiving
understanding. This person has to This forgiveness is just a music, I
verify how he is behaving towards Sshould say, of your bhakti. The
amount of forgiveness these masters
others. Now the attention starts
could have received from the life of
moving from one self to another and
you start seeing how you behave? Christ. They are tortured, crucified,
How you love? What is the quality most of the saints were tortured.
People never liked them. But as you
know that they never resented, they
of your compassion? When you love
somebody without any expectations,
just love, then you are absolutely never take a revenge, they never did
not
which
anything
compassionate. They had compassion
and compassion for such people, they
felt that O God! Please forgive them.
They do not know what they are
dedicated to that person, absolutely.
You just obey, you will do anything
for that person. If there is this love
which you call as surrender, this is just
was
the love.
doing. Extremely compassionate and
they are that that becomes their nature.
When it becomes their nature they
become people with complete peace.
Surrender is nothing but the love
and that love which is extremely joy
giving. This bhakti starts, this
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
to bother? I was going to America and
They are not disturbed. They are
one child fell down, (I was just about
never disturbed with whatever is
to get up and go) and broke her arm
and when I saw the child I said alright
I will put the child right. They said,
you are going to America. I said, I
happening and they think it's God's
will because nothing can disturb
them, nothing can upset them. They
just enjoy their devotion. Devotion to
will go in any case. So I cured the
their Guru, may be devotion to God.
In that devotion they may write child, it took about half an hour and
beautiful poetry, they may go on
then I came out. Alright, let's go to
the airport. They said, Mother you are
very late. I said, I am never late, let's
dancing, they may go on singing
because the peace is within and they
go. We went to the airport and the
are enjoying themselves. When they
plane by which I was going was out
are alone they are never alone, they
of order. So there was another plane
enjoy themselves. They know that we
going to Washington not to New
York and I wanted to go to
Washington only. So, just imagine
how things work out and we call them
Sahaja. It has worked out Sahaja, that
are one with the Divine and the
blessings of the Divine they enjoy.
Another thing is they never take to
artificialities, they are never worried,
never upset, they are neither futuristic
nor they think of the past but they are
in the present. When they are in the
means its effortless, but first of all
your personality should be such that
your devotion is so great that Divine
present, they are absolutely silent. If
there's any problem or anything
happens to them they immediately go
is compelled to look after you,
compelled to look after you.
into thoughtless awareness. That is
You have to understand that
what there capacity is.
Divine force is around and this Divine
force is absolute guarantee for your
safety, for everything that you want
to do. You can say that Mother, you
To become a Guru you have to
develop that personality, not to be
bound by anything. I will tell you my
own example. I never hurry, I am
never bothered about time, because also, very powerful if you get
are very powerful. You can become,
completely dedicated to the Divine
if you are sure that Divine has plans
work. You will also have all the
for you, you are not bothered. The
Divine is looking after you so, why powers and the Divine will provide
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 15
2000
November-December
The Divine Cool Breeze
problems of your own, of your sur-
all the necessary work that you want
to do, necessary time that you want
to have. Everything is provided by the
Divine. But the compassion when it
roundings, of your community.
So, now you have got your self-
extends from other people to God or realisation. How far you have gone
in that, I don't know. I have a
to Divine person or to your Guru then
complaint about women. They don't
it becomes very easy to live, very meditate, that they are not looking
simple to live, no complications,
everything is sorted out and you are
after themselves, they are not realised
not bothered about anything... just souls and that's why many men want
close your eyes and things work out.
Everything works out as if that's your
will, but you don't have to will it, that. To solve this problem you have
to divorce them because they think
that these women are good for
nothing and some men also are like
don't have to think about it, it just
to have compassion and you have to
works out. The Divine looks after
everything, looks after your comfort,
looks after your health, everything.
some how or other, with compassion
you should win over the partner of
And this Divine help you do not seck. your life. After all men are much more
you do not ask for, but you are a busy than women are, but women
personality for which the Divine is indulge into so many other things.
responsible. You are a special
responsibility of the Divine and it
They have to look after their family,
their children, everything and their
mind is involved into all such
mundane things that they have no
knows what is good for you and what
is not.
time to meditate. Without meditation
you cannot rise. You have to meditate.
People think that now we have got
realisation, so it's alright. No!
There's an example, I can give you
many, where supposing, I thought that
somebody is coming to meet me and
people told me Mother, he is very Everyday you must meditate because
negative, he will never come. All that is the cleansing that takes place.
positive things will happen and if With the cleansing you understand
negative thing takes place then you what is needed. What is not needed
use your compassion. If it is negative
you use your compassion and you
solve the problem. You can solve the
and you are cleansed out. That is done
by the Divine but you must religiously
meditate. Gradually you will find that
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
16
you to do the meditation. I
deep. You will become very-very immediately know a person who has
been meditating and who has not
been. They will come to my puja,
your meditation will become very
deep and your powers will start
showing. When you are anywhere the
negativity will run away. All sorts of alright, and they will talk about
problems can be solved. Whatever Sahaja Yoga, they will go out and
do it for popularity. Many people
whatever is your desire to help others are like that, they go out and for
popularity, they work it out but
inside they have not yet traced their
own self. So at this development stage
you want to do is available to you,
or give to someone you just get it. It's
my own experience I am telling you.
You have to meditate atleast ten
minutes every evening and morning you shold be encouraged and
about five minutes with complete understand that you can reach that
stage very easily through meditation
I have seen some people here who and introspection. With introspection
have such bhakti, such devotion you will develop a new quality of
which is Shradha. It is higher than understanding that you will find
solutions to things. That is another
devotion, with complete admiration.
bhakti, that it becomes part and parcel
quality of a person who is a realised
soul. He can find solutions to all your
problems, he can suggest what is the
your being, it just envelopes you
completely. When you have that
Shradha, it's very miraculous. It
of
way you can be helped. Then a kind
works so many miracles. It's true
some people were cured only thinking of brotherhood out of the Shradha
of me - it's a fact but that doesn't develops. You may be giving lectures
on Sahaja Yoga, you may be doing
all kinds of things but unless and untill
you have Shradha, you cannot rise
mean that they had the Shradha of that
level but that means that they have to
develop Shradha.
and this Shradha is a kind of a love
Now, how to develop Shradha within you, I should say, which
which is the natural light of the spirit.
spreads like gentle fire which doesn't
burn, which doesn't give heat but cold
beautiful breeze like feeling within,
which makes you understand. You
will never talk ill about a Sahaja Yogi
never. I never listen to anybody who
People are trying very hard to develop
Shradha but Shradha cannot be
developed by mental activity, by any
activity but meditation of self. If you
do the meditation, I have always told
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
tells me something against Sahaja imagine what I feel about them. This
Yogi, upto a point. When it is a joy, this ocean of joy is within you
collective complaint then I am a little and when it starts stirring up, it
bit bothered and I talk about it to the doesn't torment you. It gives you so
beautiful joy that I don't know how
leader. But otherwise if one person
to use words to express. It is like
comes and tells me this and this I just
drizzle on your being, it's like a grace
tell that peroson to introspect himself,
on your being. The love of other
it's not so. Finding faults with others
is a common game all human beings
play, they never see their own faults.
What's the use of finding faults with
others. By finding faults with others
people enthralls you. You don't ask
for it but if you see a person who is
very loving and kind there is real
friendship in that kind of relationship.
you are not going to be helped. Try
to find faults within you which you is very wrong and then talking to
But talking ill about Sahaja Yogis
can cure, which you can help, which
everyone that this is wrong with this
you can work it out. It's a
person... he has done this... he has
done that, is very-very wrong and
responsibility you have, you must
know, to yourself, that you better find
creating a collective feeling against a
out your defects and get them
corrected. But some pople are very Always people are in trouble then
pround of their fondness. They talk collectively you must help that
person instead of helping that person.
like this - I like this - I like that. What
person, not talk ill of that person, may.
be some mistakes but if you start
talking against that person and saying
that this is wrong with him that is
about the spirit? You like this you
like that but what about your spirit?
Does it like? Does it enjoy? They will
go on saying I like this, I don't like
this. I don't like this. Its very common
wrong with him, then you are not a
Sahaja Yogi. You are a Sahaja Yogi
in the West.
as long as you can see your own
defects through introspection.
Now see some ladies have made
these beautiful carpets.They are so
thick that when I walk on them I little
bit lose balance but the love with
Now most of you, I should say,
have got your realisation. You have
the experience but some of you don't
which they have made, makes me so
have the knowledge. That knowledge
joyous, so happy that you can't
you should acquire and verify
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
18
whether that knowledge is really there
have so many imperfections,
or not. Like in America in the NIH, specially morally, in the West.
which is the institute for health, they People are really, I tell you, like
wanted to test Sahaja Yogis. There snake has bitten them. The things that
were doctors and one doctor came people do here never come to the
forward and said, alright, tell me on minds of people who are not
developed. So, development has
vibrations what's wrong with
your
me? So, the girls said, sir, something
wrong with your heart. He said, it's
correct, because he had a by-pass only
meant all kinds of abandonment, all
kinds of vegabond temperament and
they think they are very free, they can
go about and enjoy. This style is very
common but you just judge yourseif.
Are you one of these types or are you
one of the people who are higher than
you in their ascent? It's a process I
must confess, it is not just you get to
that point. Sometimes even very new
Sahaja Yogis are better than very old
Sahaja Yogis because they had a very
one month back and he was out of
hospital. Absolutely correct, and this
surprised thern that diagnosis you see
kills the patient half way. So, this is
a very easy way to diagnose a person
just by feeling the vibrations and they
have given us such a good attention.
They want to develop Sahaja Yoga
in their hospitals.
strong desire. What are we seeking?
You should understand, why are we
So, you should also testify
yourself, examine yourself and find
out about yourself what are you. Say,
seeking? Because we wanted io know
ourself. Somehow we knew that we
there is a husband and wife. Now the
have to know ourself so we seek, we
wife meditates. She knows seek. We do all kinds of things, I mean
everything, she knows about her all wrong things also in the name of
husband, what's wrong with him and seeking. But it is this seeking that
she doesn't tell. She tolerates, she brings you to Sahaja Yoga. Then You
doesn't complain, she doesn't ask have to get your self-realisation
him. She just tolerates and this which is very easy through
tolerance convinces the husband that Kundalini. Kundalini works out most
she is a higher personaiity than
himself. He may be anything but he overnight she gave up drinking and
can understand that this is what she smoking, overnight! I mean I don't
of the things, like somebody told me,
has achieved - a great personality. We
tell that, I never say that, but just
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 19
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
overnight she gave up and she said I
was very particular about my hair Christ's twelve disciples! Of course
dress and I used to make my hair dress those people did many wrong things,
in a different manner, I was going to but how they worked and how
you have to go all out. Look at
intensively they did it! That
the hair-dresser, spending so much
intensivity if you don't have and if
time with the beautician this-that. She
you do not completely dedicate to
the spreading of Sahaja Yoga, then
said, I gave it up. Also she said, I used
to wear dresses which were not very
moral. Then, I started respecting my collective problems cannot be
body and I started wearing proper solved. You are busy with your only
dresses. All this knowledge comes to daily mundane things and your other
you spontaneously. It is within you jobs and everything. It's alright in
because it is all your own.Also if your Sahaja Yoga, no objection. But you
should have your attention more on
Guru tells you, you are guided. Guru's
job is to guide you.
to this side of life that what are we
doing for the collective? Are we
So, at this juncture what is lacking. talking about it? Are we spreading
What is lacking in Sahaja Yoga that I
Sahaja Yoga? Are we making people
know about it?
have to tell you. There are so many
collective disasters we have, all kinds.
I was surprised, once I was
We have many earth quakes, we had
many floods, rain, then the mud came
down like a river and so many
coming by plane and a lady sat next
to me and she had very bad vibrations.
I put myself into bandhan and I asked
disasters in the world, and Sahaja
her what is she doing for her
spirituality? She gave the name of
Bahai people. My God! I said, if these
Yogis are saved from them. All the
Sahaja Yogis are saved from them, no
doubt. But after being saved what is
people are spread out, they are so
your understanding, what do you
spread out, they are so many, so, what
will happen - disasters. They are such
negative people, it's impossible that
they can do any good to the world
and like that you see you see any false
know? Why these disasters are
happening? Because Sahaja Yoga is
not very collective. It has to become
very collective, it has to spread much
more, all over, it has to go to many
people which we don't do. We are at
guru. How people are driven to them,
how they take to them and how they
a standstill or little bit we do it. But
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
Now, you are so many people
spread their message. I have seen
people singing on the road, singing here. You all can start giving
the praise of their guru and also realisation to at least hundred
wearing funny dresses. We don't want people. Go every where, talk about
that kind of thing but of course, you Sahaja Yoga, sing the priase of the
have got the knowledge, of course Divine and you will save the whole
you are realised souls, but what have world. It's not by saving a few people
you done for Sahaja Yoga is the point. you can have the great Satya-Yuga
You have to spread Sahaja Yoga every but you also have to save this Mother
where. For example, you wear a Earth, you have to save the people
badge, then they will ask what is this who are in it, I mean the way these
people are.
supposed to be? Then you have to tell
them what is it. Something you start
talking about Sahaja Yoga, talk
nothing else but Sahaja Yoga. Now
I have seen so many of them on
the television. Shamelessly they are
talking about something which they
don't know and they have thousands
go on talking about Sahaja Yoga,
spreading Sahaja Yoga. Unless and
until you do it, it won't become
collective and all the disasters which
and thousands of people behind them.
Not that the people are stupid, not that
they want to go on a wrong path but
are due to collective nonsense, you
these people who are false or who are
get it. You are saved from so many
wrong know how to entice them, how
to capture them, how to talk to them.
things. Say, even if there is pollution,
for Sahaja Yogi it won't matter. Even
if there is disaster of a earthquake with negative vibrations will run
the Sahaja Yogis will be saved but away, he will escape such persons,
why not save the whole world? will not go near them and say you
Calamities after calamities are have got very bad vibrations. So, you
coming and if you have compassion, have to be courageous and get into
you must think of the people who can these places, talk to people and make
get into any calamity or into any it collective, otherwise you cannot
trouble. Of course, I can cure many save this world from the wrath of
people, no doubt, but I don't know God. God is wrathful no doubt. For
how to make Sahaja Yoga very you, He will save you, but what's the
But Sahaja Yogi, if he sees somebody
collective.
use? We have to save this Mother
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 November-December 2000
21
The Divine Cool Breeze
about it, telling people that if we do
Earth and for that you have to be
prepared, you have to work it out and
wherever you get a chance you must
spread Sahaja Yoga. Some people
wrong, if we are immoral, if we are
cheats, if we try to oppress others and
we become so much a power of
destruction then these collective
told me Mother, if you come then it
will be alright. Why? You can be also
disasters will be there and I think we
will be responsbile for it. Everything
like me. You can talk about it to
people. I started Sahaja Yoga with one
you take, any subject you take up, you
person and that time it was complete don't have to start an organisation to
darkness everywhere. No seekers fight it up but only your power of
nothing and horrible people but it convincing people and bringing them
to Sahaja Yoga will make such a
many Sahaja Yogis. Why not you difference. I hope you will
people do the same and talk about it. understand, as a Guru, what you have
Your behaviour, your style, to do. As a Guru you have so many
everything will definitely impress things. Yesterday, as they told, how
Lao tse has written about the masters,
worked. So, one person can get so
them. One has to work it out in such
how they were above eveything,
above turmoil, above jealousies,
above talking loose! They are so
great, they are the masters and they
will be the masters and you will be
the Gurus, if you try to do that. This
is what you have to acheive. I know
a manner that you achieve our goal
of collective consciousness. It's not
only for Sahaja Yogis, it's for every
one so that all these calamities that
are happening, horrible things that are
happening, stop, completely stop. I
assure you, it can be stopped. Because
you are always saved, so all the
people who will be getting realisation
will be saved. Why not talk openly
some of you have achieved it but most
of you have to achieve with
compassion and love
May God Bless You
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
EASTER PUJA
TURKEY, 23-04-2000
Pravachana by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Today we are celebrating the great
that one day your resurection will
come. It is the greatest happening for
you. It is the greatest event of your
life and one must consider it very
event of the resurrection of Christ. On
the same pattern is your resurrection,
that you have risen to the new life of
Divine love. You were all in the
fortunate that you have been able to
acheive it. All this because you
desired for it. In many of your lives
you have been desiring for the
heavenly paradise. People have been
going down in the hills and valleys,
seeking, doing all kinds of things.
That's already done by you. You don't
have to give up anything, no need to
give up anything. It's a wrong idea, I
should say, it's an untimely idea.
knowledge that there is something
higher that has to happen, that you
have to be born again. But, nobody
knew how it works? The subtle side
of your being was never told to you.
The saints only talked as to how you
should behave. They only said how
you should try to keep a very pure
life, sincere life but they didn't tell
you how it will work out. Of course,
people knew in India about it, very
few of them, very-very few. But, now
it's a world wide knowledge through
This is the time when you have to get
your Sahaja resurrection, spontaneous
resurrection. You don't have to do
you people.
anything about it, it's just so simple
as that, has worked out so well. I was
Now when your Kundalini rises, she
is your Mother, she is your individual
Mother and she gives you the second
birth. That's how you get connected
to the Divine paradise. All this, if it
is told without realisation has no
meaning but people are given great
ideas about it and also were promised
really very much overjoyed to see that
so many people, specially Muslims,
about whom I have been so much
worried that how can you save these
people! They are so much lost in the
mess of wrong things. One has to
understand that this 'Koran
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 23
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
want to write also about resurrection,
written forty years after the death
of Mohamed Saheb. So, may be, he didn't want to write about
there might be some words which Imaculate Conception. All these
are being just being shifted, may be, things were in his mind and so
and the meaning might be little bit Thomas has to run away to India and
John refused to write anything.
Because all such people take charge.
They become incharge, they think
ambiguous. Also, there was another
book called Sunna'-came out about
the same time and was managed by a
they are responsible for it, while they
are not at all capable, they don't have
the right to do it. As a result of that,
person who was not such a great soul
I should say, because he was not a
realised soul. I can't understand how
can you resligiously understand Christianity took a very wrong
attitude towards the inner growth of
poetry and in the poetry whatever is
written, how can you interpret it human beings. You see the result of
correctly? I am a poet also. I could
have written a poetry about it but I happening with the Catholic Church,
that today, when you see what's
said, No. Poetry can twist, can be you are amazed. How can such an
organisation be a religious
organisation where all kinds of
nonsensical things are going on?
twisted and also people can misuse
it, that's the problem with the poetry.
In India we had the same problem.
I was also born in a Christian family
For example, Kabira wrote such
beautiful poetry and the way they and I was shocked the way they
interpreted was so nonsensical and so
interpreted Christ's life and the way
much different from the spirit of they talked about it with great
authority. Books and books were
Kabira's songs. About everything
written, they give big-big sermons! I
thought there's no truth in it what they
are talking. Even my father felt the
same way, because all these books
they can twist the words according to
their own need, I found out if I wrote
poetry about Divinity. This is exactly
what has happened. In all the religions
I have seen, when it comes to poetry
people can twist it. Also, like in Bible,
it was so much accepted that Paul is
the one who is going to organise the
came much after, the authors of these
books. Secondly, those who tried to
write it were not authorised to do that.
They were not spiritual people. They
all wanted to have power, they wanted
publication about Christ and he didn't
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 November-December 2000
24
The Divine Cool Breeze
to have power in religion. The power guided by absolutely ignorant
in religion is inside and that should people.
be awakened. I must say, thanks to So, we have to really celebrate the
the Sufis of this country and other
countries that people still think that unity of these people, the collective
there is something beyond all these nature of these people, who had lost
words and talks and books.
to the truth. They had no idea as to
what truth is but still, a seeker can
never find consolation with whatever
This is something, such a blessing that
we have, that in every country we had
exists. He is seeking, he is seeking,
seeking and seeking till he finds the
truth. But also there are many seekers
someone who talked about the reality,
about the truth, though they were
who lose their way. In seeking they
condemned, they were tortured and
get lost. It's very difficult to convince
them that you have lost your way.
They should see from their own lives.
so many of them were killed. This is
happening even today. I find, that
people don't want to listen to reality,
They should see from their own
to the truth. But I was so happy
attainment. What have they achieved?
Have they got any experience? To be
yesterday, really overjoyed, to see
even the people who were Muslims,
were Islamic, are no
convinced of what you have got, you
w coming
must try to verify it. You can verify
on people, you can verify on yourself.
Whatever you are, you know on your
together, understanding that they have
a higher life than these rituals of
everyday. All this ritualistic life that
they have led, the way they have fingertips as this is.
worked so hard, this forty days There are two things-Qayamat and
starvation, going for Haj, doing all Kiyama. Two things. Many people
kinds of things. But there was no unity
don't understand the difference. One
among themselves. Even among
is when the resurrection time comes
themselves there was no unity and
and the other is when your destruction
some places I was surprised that they
comes. For the resurrection of the
were killing each other! How can that
be? Because these so called practices
human beings is the Kiyama in which
it is said that your hands will speak,
did not make them collective. They
should feel the vibrations on
that
you
were not collective. They were all your fingertips. I would say, those
separate identities, separate sects
who are really Muslims, who are
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 November-December 2000
25
The Divine Cool Breeze
surrendered and those who have
that was the order. But you can ask
the question, after all why? That's
also just the stone. So, why did
Mohamed Saheb asked that you
should go round that stone? So many
statues were there, made of stone and
people started worshipping all kinds
of statues as they do in India also. But
this stone was a swayambhu and it is
mentioned in the Indian scriptures that
been selected to be higher people
belonging to the God's realm must
have hands that can speak. Otherwise
they are not Muslims, I would not call
them Muslims, They may be human
beings but not Muslims. So, it's
compulsory that for every Muslim,
who thinks himself a Muslim, he
should have vibrations in his hands.
He should feel the vibrations. His
hands must speak at the time of
resurrection which is the Kiyama, not
there is Meccashwar Shiva. We have
Shivas everywhere in India. There are
twelve Jyotirlingas. Now, if I tell you,
you need not believe me but you can
go and verify on your vibrations if it
Qayamat. These two words are
confused in the minds of the people.
So those people who can verify about
is a Shiva or not. Same with this black
stone. So, Mohamed Saheb found out
their achievements themselves
that this is a Meccashwar Shiva and
through their vibrations on their hands
and also about others through their
fingertips are the Muslims, according
to 'Koran'. But nobody has told them
this, they don't know. To them its
alright if you go to Mecca and come
back from there. You become a Haji,
so the people have to go round to
achieve Shiva's blessings. But, it
became a rirual. The whole thing
became like a ritual and nobody could
go further from that ritual.
Same thing with the Christianity.
Today is a day they are talking so big
about repentance and about feeling
guilty about what they have done. But
why did they do it? They are
supposed to be incharge of goodness,
of virtues. So why did they do it?
Why did they do wrong things? And
now asking forgiveness from God!
Because they were not realised souls,
they were not Sahaja Yogis. If the
1
finished.
There's another question one should
ask, which is very important, that why
Mohamed Saheb was so much
against stone worshipping, clearly?
Why did He ask people to go round
that black square stone? What was the
purpose of that ? Why was that stone
so improtant? If you ask this question
to any, so called Muslim, he will say
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 26
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
life because in Divine life people are
Sahaja Yogis try to do something
just the same with each other. You see
wrong then they know that they are
doing wrong, on their fingertips or
we can ask them to get out of Sahaja
Yoga. But that seems to be the worst
punishment for Sahaja Yogis. If I tell
we had sufis all over the world. I have
read them. I have read the Sufis of
Turkey and also other places. Even
in India we had Sufis, though they
don't call themselves Sufis. Sufi
them to get out of Sahaja Yoga, they
don't like it. Why? Because they feel
we are separated from reality. All the
means, I don't know what ever you
may think about it but according to
Indian understanding, Sufi means
blessings of the reality are lost to
them, they think that way. The
punishment is nothing because we
just ask them to get out of Sahaja
Yoga. To look at, its nothing. But
Sahaja yoga is complete freedom,
Sahaja Yoga is complete blessing,
Sahaja Yoga is complete peace and
joy. Surprisingly, if you read Koran
you will be amazed that Mohammed
'saaf' and 'saaf' means clean, means
pure. Those who are pure people are
Sufis. In the purity they see nothing
but Divine grace, Divine love, Divine
peace. They talked of peace only, they
could not talk of war. Anybody who
talks of war cannot be a person who
has got any right to do that.
Saheb wanted to bring peace but it's War is absolutely like madness. Even
not so. I met one man from Kashmir. animals won't fight like that. We are
He said that, where is the peace? They
even worse than animals when we
think of war and killing each other.
are all fighting-fighting. We want
peace. But, surprisingly he said, in This should not be done and it has to
India you find just peace. But this
Kashmir is a mad place where
be stopped completely. Nobody has
the right to kill anybody unless and
everybody is all the time challenged until he is attacked. So, what we hear
and everything attacked under the
name of Islam itself! So, I said, it's are above so many things. We have
not Islam. Islam means surrender. lost all those destructive qualities. In
And he said, if you surrender they will Sanskrit they call it 'shudripu' we
kill you. We have no protection. It's have six enemies - kaam, krodh, mada
very surprising, very, very surprising (43), matsar, lobh, moha. Kaam
how now the Muslims themselves are
about our resurrection is this that we
means sexual perversion, Krodh
means anger, moha means attraction,
realising that this cannot be Divine
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 November-December 2000
27
The Divine Cool Breeze
don't know. I asked so many people.
mada means the pride, matsar means
I asked even some priests who think
they are great authorities of
Christiany. They didn't know why
they give eggs! Secondly, if you read
jealously, sixth one is the greed. All
these six things that we had in our
mind out of our ignorance, out of our
upbringing, out of our reading,
whatever it is, whatever we had the story about the birth of Shri
developed just drops out when your Ganesha and then you proceed on,
Kundalini rises and you become one
with the divine. Then you are on
you will be surprised, it is written
down that it was called as Brahmand,
sound grounds. You realise that you
have found the truth and you no more
can enjoy all these destructive habits.
They just drop out.
means the egg of Brahma. That came
into existence and half of it became
Mahavishnu means the Christ and
half of it remained as Shri Ganesha.
And then it is said that when
Mahavishnu came out He started
crying for his father. Just think of it,
He was asking for His father. Now, if
you see Christ, he always uses his two
fingers. No other incarnation has used
So, you go into a new realm of Divine
resurrection within you. This is the
real resurrection of human beings.
Now, you know that certain subtle
things still remain despite the fact that
people try to destroy the books, to
spoil the meaning of things. Despite
these two fingers. This means you
know this is the Vishuddhi and this is
HE
that subtle things remain there. For
example we offer eggs during Easter. of his father who was Nabhi king.
What's the meaning of offering eggs? Who's that? You know that very well.
Why should we offer an egg? First of He is the Vishnu and he incarnated as
all we offer egg because an egg can Shri Krishna. So, what He is
go into a transformation. It can indicating is this that they are my
become a small chick, it can be born father. How clearly He has done that.
again. The egg has the capacity to be Why not have some other Mudras,
born again. So, when you get this egg other style of holding the fingers?
as a symbol of Easter it means you But, He held always these two fingers,
can become a different person, a meaning my father is one who was
the Nabhi. That means HIe is talking
reformed person and a great spiritual
person. You can become, it means
that. Why do we give eggs? People
Vishnu and who was Shri Krishna.
Then in the lives of Shri Krishna they
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 28
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
How can that be if you are the people
say Mahavishnu will be your son.
who think are baptised? I mean there's
All these things are not put together,
as I am telling you, separately, but if
you have proper understanding, you
a big celebration of baptism by these
priests. Where is the Sahasrara and
can understand the connection where is the Kundalini and how do
you have your second birth? There's
no second birth, just some priest puts
his hand on your head. Actually it
makes problem for realised souls, to
put hand of the priest who is not a
between them. That Christ was the
son of Shri Vishnu and Shri Krishna
and that he was blessed that you will
be the support of the whole universe.
Clearly, it is said that you will be
supporting the whole universe.
realised soul and that
creates a
Now, the one half is Shri Ganesba problem for children. I have seen
who is the support in a way. It
many children, they start crying
supports the Kundalini. It looks after loudly when they are being blessed
by these priests because they are
the Kundalini, it looks after the
chastity of the Mother. And the other
realised souls and the priests are not.
It's very interesting. But they say, after
one which is expressed is Jesus Christ
all you see it's the priests that are bad
but not Christ. But how are they
who is the support of the whole
universe. So naturally it has to be the
moral basis as He is a part and parcel
of Shri Ganesha, it's the moral basis
of human beings. On the moral basis
only you will be supported not all
related to each other? Christ stood for
morality. And about Him also, in
these modern times, they are saying
all kinds of filthy things. They cannot
understand a chracter which is moral.
other nonsense that they have but a
moral basis which is missing in the To this extent we have gone. Morality
lives of Christians. Everything is
is out of question. You do whatever
you like as long as you go to church
and confess, it's alright.
allowed, very surprising! You can do
whatever you like as long as you don't
These are the absurdities of modern
take a divorce in the Catholic Church
religions. Every religion has problems
and the worst, I feel, when you have
the support of the world, as your
leader. How can you allow people to
and also in the other Church which
you can call non-Catholic Churches.
Even if you are married you can do
whatever you like. Even the Vetican,
I was told, has all these problems.
have such an immoral life? How can
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 29
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
you tolerate immorality, when you God, otherwise you cannot. And also
follow the example of Christ? Out of the love of another Sahaja Yogi or
question! He is the embodiment of Yogini you can only enjoy in
morality. He is Shri Ganesha and completeness if your eyes are clean.
how can you allow people to come Just imagine! But, if you have roving
to Churches, to the temples and eyes and all sorts of things, I don't
allow them to have immoral life? know how can you call yourself
What is the atonement for such Christians? You cannot. Whatever
people? The basis of Christ's life, certificate you may carry, you are not,
the whole being of Christ, is because those who follow Christ have
to have absolutely a moral life. That's
a compulsion of the inner being on
morality, to establish purity.
Now, it was Shri Ganesha who was
created first by the Adishakti because you that you enjoy your morality and
She wanted purity around. She
wanted human beings to enjoy their about the Western life that the eyes
you enjoy. above all, your clean eyes.
This is what I have come to know
purity and their personality which was
emitting light to others. If there is are not clean. They will go to the
impurity, say for example, on a glass
and if you use that glass on top of the
church and their eyes will be moving
here and there! How can that be? How
can you do that? If you think Christ
light, how can the light pass? The
impure life cannot give light to
others and cannot show your inner
is the one who was resurrected and
you are to be resurrected, first of all,
see that you have pure love in your
eyes. Now, pure love is not relative,
light also. Both things are absolutely
true about impurity.But people say
that we have to accept because if you
have to have more people for your
cannot be contaminated, cannot have
lust and greed in it. These two things
have to drop out from your mind
religion you should accept many
completely. These are the days of
people having greed, lots of greed
they have. I just don't know what sort
of things they have because I haven't
things. One of them is impurity. Just
think of it! Now, at the Agnya where
Christ resides, if your eyes are
impure, full of lust and greed, then studied so much the immorality of
you are against Christ, you are an
human beings. Whatever I see are
antichrist. If your eyes are clean and
beautiful people like you. But when I
try to understand the so called
pure, then only you can enjoy love of
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30
The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
Western culture, I am surprised. something. If you start seeing, you
Shakespeare was according to me, might see something white, red,
Avadhoota, means a person who has yellow but you are not that. When
gone beyond all human destructive you are, you are the reality. Then
habits. Avadhoota is a very high you emit reality, you see reality,
quality yogi and they show him as a enjoy reality, you live in reality. This
stupid man running after a woman. is real life and you don't indulge into
They cannot conceive of human something which is unreal, imaginary
beings who could be morally perfect,
who will have moral sense. They do. You are the reality, is the
or beiow Divinity. Now, you don't
cannot conceive because those who
Hakikat, as they say. You are the
reality and you are emitting reality
in your behaviour, in your talks, in
do this kind of thing are not realised
souls. They are not Sahaja Yogis. So,
the conception about morality doesn't your lives, in everything. All this
come to their head. They think as we brings forth the greatest force of
are like that the others are also. spirituality. Whatever is falsehood,
Actually mostly they do it to justify
whatever is wrong, whatever is
themselves. So ugly and so horrifying destructive, will run away from a
is the depiction of the character of
man who stands in reality. It is
such great people, who talk such great
things, shows that human beings are
automatic. It is absolutely part and
parcel of the same personality who
is supposed to be a realised soul.
really degraded in their value system.
They cannot conceive of somebody
who is an ideal personality. They
So, the resurrection has taken
place, no doubt. Your hands are
think by saying so they are talking of
something beyond reality, they don't
know reality.
speaking, alright. I don't want to
give you any command or any
kind of a fixed road that you have
Yesterday, Sufi thing, I was so to follow. Now, you are free,
impressed when they said about the because you are the light. When
four stages that you have. Out of that you are the light why should I tell
the Hakikat-means the reality, you you which way to go. You know
have to get into the reality. Reality is yourself that you have the light. So
what is not a perception. It's not you follow yourself in a way that is
seeing something but its being an enlightened path, with your own
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
31
light, not that somebody has to tell
you-don't do this, don't do that,
nothing of the kind. You will just
weigh, if something is wrong, you
will not do it! If you are doing it then
know that you have to still rise above
Pure appreciation, purity is the
message and once you have the
purity within yourself you will love
yourself. As I love you, you will love
all. And then you will understand this
word 'love' which comes out of the
all this. You are the Nabis that are
purity. The blossoming of your purity,
the fragrance of your purity, you
described in the 'Koran'. You are the
ones who are going to resurrect the
enjoy all the time and the love that
whole world, you are the ones who you have flows, flows towards all
are going to help the downtrodden those who are to be loved, who are to
people in the filth of immorality. be looked after.
Look at few of these people who were
Sufis, who were very clean people, Don't worry about the people who
how have they been able to channalise are destructive. That's the only word
that I can use, because there are so
other people into a better life. That is
many things one can say about. Let
them be destructive because they are
destroying themselves. Why should
we worry about them? They think
they are destroying others but they are
not, they are destroying themselves.
Forget about them, just forget. You
what you are. You have to channalise
their lives, that's your job. Don't think
about what is happening, how the
people are stupid, immoral, forget it.
What you have to know what you are.
You have to be aware of yourself and
of your responsibility as being the
think yourself to be responsible for
purest of pure. As my name
the construction of the whole world,
it's not only few. You are very
indicates, you are my children and
that indicates the children of
intelligent, knowledgeable and
Nirmal, means purity. Purity is the
basis of your existence. You should understanding. You are not like the
try to see very clearly, that there is discipies of Christ who were not
no mistake in appreciating the art, educated, who didn't understand so
appreciating all that is beautiful, much and who did get realisation but
appreciating all that is created out of were not of your level. Whatever they
beautiful minds but there should be could do, reach to a point where this
no lust and greed in that appreciation. kind of a mess of christianity has
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 32
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
that. I said, he must be a big
come but you can't create that kind.
possessed man. He had no mind of
You will create a new vibrant religion
his own, he didn't know what he
which is global.
was talking. He would take out one
sentence from Bible and go on
have people from all over the world. talking, boring everybody! I was
It is a global movement all over. It surprised that within fifteen minutes
has nothing to do with the limited people wanted to get out of the
I was very happy to see that now we
ideas of so called religions. That have
ruined every religion, Islam is
ruined,Christainity is ruined and
Hinduism is ruined and Buddhism is
the worst. In Buddhism you give up
everything-all your belongings, all
church. As soon as the sermon was
over they would run out and breathe,
thank God! Is that what religion gives
you? Is that what should happen to
you? No! it's not that. What happens
to you that you enjoy yourself, you
your property, give to the guru, enjoy the collectivity, you enjoy the
imagine! And the guru, you see, is so goodness, the morality. The whole
greedy, horrible fellow. How can he thing is like the nectar of life. So,
give resurrection? Himself is a greedy that changes the whole creature.
fellow, misleading others just taking
away everything! Then same thing The ritualism is so much. In the
about Christianity, that you all Hindu religion there is too much of
become Nuns, you become Fathers, ritualism. You sit on the right or you
you become Brothers and all sit on the left or you do this at this
nonsense! But there's no change time and lots of it. That when your
within. Somebody came to me and I sister dies how many days you
should starve yourself, if your
husband dies then how many days?
said, why did you become a priest?
He said, because I was jobless, I had
Died is died, finished, the body is
no job so, I took up the job of a priest,
can you imagine? He could not fit into finished now. So, you fast for so
any job, so the minimum of minimum many days is very wrong because
he took this job. Then what did you by fasting the bhoot might come in
do? They told me what I have to to you. But still, all these ritualisms
preach and first I had to practice and and all that are created by human
remember it by heart and then I don't beings who were claiming to be
know, I started talking this, talking something great. They are not, by
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 November-December 2000
33
The Divine Cool Breeze
walking around with all kinds of bad
vibrations. I can't understand! And
the other people are very simple, they
say oh my Goodness! see now he is a
priest, so they must respect him. But,
they don't see, they do not ascertain
what is the spiritual value of that
no means they are people in charge
of morality, incharge of higher life.
They lead such a mundane useless
life! I went to a temple of Shri
Ganesha, which is supposed to be
swayambhu-one of the eight temples,
it is one of them. I was surprised the
person who calls himself as a priest!
That is your job. You don't have to
man who was worshipping, was
supposed to be the priest, he was
suffering from paralysis and his fight with them, you don't have to
brother died of paralysis and his son
denounce them, you don't have to
need but
was also paralysed. He said, what is
this Ganesha doing to us, Mother? I
describe them, no
understand that you are different. You
have the right, you have the authority.
So with that authority and confidence
you have to go about and save people.
You are realised souls, you have got
your resurrection, you are yogis, I
agree but, what is your job? Why,
why this has happened? Why this
said, what are you doing to Ganesha?
How much money you earn out of it?
He said, quite a lot. And what do you
do with this money? Do you do
anything for the society? Do you try
to improve their lives? Have you any
attention on the society or you are just
looking after yourself? As a result he
light has come in to you is to take
got paralysed. His brother got
paralysis, his son got paralysis. And
he was blaming Ganesha for that! He
said, is it a real Ganesha? I said, yes,
the blind in your hands and take
them towards the light. This is what
is your resurrection for. It's not only
for your seeking but also is the grace
of the Divine for you to make the
it is but you are not. You don't deserve
whole world Divine, as far as
his blessings. He said, alright you may
say whatever you like but you cure
me. I said first promise that whatever
possible. How many people have you
given realisation? How many people
money you get out of this temple you have you talked to? I tell you I was
will spend it for the betterment of surprised, once I was travelling by
plane and there was some lady
travelling with me and she started
people. But, how can they? They are
not realised souls. Such a lot of priests
talking to me about her cult, about her
nonsensical Guru. Shamelessly she
I see walking about in all these funny
dresses. These are like dead bodies,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 34
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
was talking! I was listening to her, I
said, Sahaja Yogis won't, they won't
talk about Sahaja Yoga. Every person
who is a Sahaja Yogi has to talk
about Sahaja Yoga, may not be with going to give realisation? How
the wrong type but with the right people you are going to save? This
type of people. That's a thing you is a very simple job for you. You
have to do. That's why you are have to just raise the Kundalini, you
enlightened. You are not enlightened
to be put somewhere in the forest or your hand you can raise the
to be lost to the whole world. You Kundalini of others and give them
are enlightened, you are resurrected their resurrection. You don't have
to enlighten other peopole. That's to do anything and the life is not that
the request of your Mother that make
use of your realisation. And the
attention should be only on
realisation. How many people you are
many
can, you should see how just with
difficult for you. Your job is the
what you are there for and you can
easiest thing. You have just to raise
your hand, in your hand you have
the power, just to raise your hand and
do it. Many have done it. So many of
you have done it and I would say all
of you whether you are a man or a
give them realisation. Instead of
woman, you have to do it and that's
feeling diffident. That's why I would
say you are all resurrected, you are
all realised souls and you have to
create the Divine paradise on this
earth.
May God Bless You.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
35
I.R.S. OFFICER'S MEET
17-04-2000, DELHI
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
I bow to all the seekers of truth. Just
one can understand unless and until
now you have been told about the you are in the service. The first and
beneficial effects of Sahaja Yoga. But foremost thing that causes us this
it has much deeper, much more anxiety is we are all the time worried
effects on us. The thing is we are not
that how are we to be sustained in the
aware of ourselves, we don't know
job? What should we do our level best
ourselves and we have to know-what to be a good member of this
organisation? Whatever you may do.
whatever you may try, you will find
it at different steps that it is not
are we and then we will know why
all these problems-physical, mental,
emotional are caused, also the
spiritual problems that people have.
It is important to see that we are made
beautifully. This human body is made
very beautifully and if you study
medicine you will know it even more,
rewarded, it is not understood, nor
people give you encouragement.
Then it is very disappointing that we
feel we are working so hard, we are
so honest. Actually, government
servants due to their honesty suffer a
that it's a body which is so much well
lot. I know those sufferings and how
looked after. You take heart, you take
anything, but we are the ones who much one has to cope-with. Despite
spoil it sometimes. May be because that when you have to suffer some
we are ignorant or we don't know sort of insult, indignation or anything,
one feels very desperate, sometimes
absolutely degenerated.
what to do about ourselves.
Specially, when I am today addressing
such an august gathering of you Now we have to see what are we?
people, I think it's important to tell Once we know what are we, we will
you what is the problem with our not feel all that. We are not only
lives? Specially, I have been a wife ordinary human beings, no! We are
of a government servant and I do not animals, we are not the nature. We
know what the problems of the are special people who have been
given a very special work to be done.
government servants are, which no
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 November-December 2000
36
The Divine Cool Breeze
So counteract it, first thing I would
in that he lost his pay or whatever it
say is the love for your country. As
was. But I was so very happy that this
they have told you about my parents,
is the time we have to build up our
I have seen Deshbhakti, (Patriotism).
country. Of course, I couldn't do
How they sacrificed everything for anything because he was in the
the country. We are in a much better
government service. But, through him
I could see that we can work out many
things and I need not work, I need not
sort of, put in my ideas but he can do
that. And it was so interesting how
things were worked out by him and
how he was so much engrossed into
his work. He never took leave for, I
state now, we are free. We are free
now to enjoy, while these people, my
mother went to jail five times, my
father went to jail sometimes for two
and half years and we were a big
family, still we enjoyed. We enjoyed
all that because we knew we were
soldiers, soldiers fighting for the think all the time when we were there,
freedom of our country. Now that
not even one day. It's very surprising
purpose is lost, in a way-we don't and Shastriji always felt that he is
have to fight for the freedom but what sacrificing his family life and all that
I feel that we have to understand that but no! not at all. I never felt that way,
the time is so important that we have I felt that it is our duty now, as Indians,
to build this country. The other day to build this country to be the most
before the IAS officers, I told them excellent performing nation. We can,
that my husband was selected to the we are very intelligent people.
Indian Foreign Services to begin with.
I told him (my husband) very frankly You can see now how people are
that I am not going with you to foreign doing so well in this new era of
country. Just now we have got Internet, softwares? I feel that now the
independence and you want to go to Saraswati has joined hands with
foreign countries. Moreover, we don't Lakshmi and people are really
drink, how are we going to manage showing results of this combination.
the parties? I have nothing to do with The time has come for our country to
the foreign service. I am going to stay really develop into a new financial
here and if you want you can go. He status. But that's not the end of it.
was quite surprised at my reaction so, Even if you have lots of financial
he said, "I will try if I can get into advantages, even if you become a
IAS" and luckily he got it. Of course,
very technologically developed
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
November-December 2000
37
of people called as
"Nathpanthis". They knew this, that
Kundalini awakening is the only way
you can get your self realisation but
country, still if you go to such group
countries where they are
sO
developed, they are not happy, they
have no peace, there is no love. It's a
very funny situation that money could
idea about self-realisation was so
limited and was so absurd that people
not buy anything for them.
So now, what is the problem is that didn't want to do it. They said you
have to give up your families, you
we should know what do we want,
have to give your everything, your
really? For that, the creator who first
created us has really made all the property, everything. You have to
become absolutely single, you should
have nothing to do with your
relations. All these funny ideas came
into the heads of so many people who
arrangements. Only one step towards
the evolutionary process, towards our
evolution, towards our resurrection
can solve that problem. That capacity
wanted to propagate their way of
thinking. All such thinking has ruined
we have, that actually we are chosen
ones, we are chosen ones, especially
actually, the reality that exists within
this country. This is such a great
country, it is a yogabhumi, it is full
of vibrations, full of divinity but we
us, absolutely, because to say that you
give up that, you give up this and all
this kind of nonsensical ideas doesn't
have to be. You don't give up, it's
have become so much alienated from
that and that is why we don't know
what do we have in this Motherland
all there. You just have a outward
feeling that you have given it say, to
of ours and what we can achieve. A
your guru or to someone and that's
day will come when all the world will how all kinds of fraudulent things
come and worship this Yogabhumi.
have started with this kind of things.
You don't have to give up anything,
is the point that just now as you are
this Kundalini exists within you. She
is your Mother. She is your individual
Mother. You are the only child she
has and you don't have to give up
anything as such because she is the
one who looks after you. She is going
Now, I have to tell you about our own
things as it has been told that what
you have within is these powers. You
will be amazed all this was known
long time back in our country but all
that knowledge was finished because
of the British rule you can say or the
other rules that came in, that they
didn't care for all this. But, there were
to give you your second birth and
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
when your mother gave you the moorakh bhaye". So even if you go
birth, did she trouble you? She took on reading, it doesn't work out. So,
up all the trouble upon herself and then scientifically or may be
she managed that you are born on intellectually. You may say it is all
this earth. In the same way for the nonsense. Nobody has gone to find
second birth as you call 'Dvija', born out if there is some truth in what
twice. To be born again there's these people have been saying! All
Mother already placed within you. these saints even today are
She exists within you and she is the respected but no body wants to
one who can give you self-
realisation. This is not told only by the lines. Guru Nanaka has said,
me, I tell you. It is told by all the Sahaja samadhi laago" He has said
saints of the world. Long time back clearly, you get it Sahaja-
Gyandeva in the twelveth century spontaneously. People should
and all others who lived there but understand that all these rituals and
see what they are saying within
even before that Markandeya,
all these aadambars are of no value,
talked about it. We don't know which they themselves had
anything about these people. Then denounced.
in the sixteenth century, we should
say, Guru Nanaka was there, Kabira There have been so many saints
was there. All of them have talked during the sixteenth century and they
about it. As Kabira has said, "Ida, have tried to talk about Kundalini.
Pingla, Sukhman Nadi re, Shoonya
shikhar par anahad baaje re."
But they used to write it in poetry.
The reason is poetry is the safest way
otherwise people would have
Nobody understood what they were
saying and only reading, reading, threatened them, beaten them,
reading, where will you reach? crucified them. So they thought better
Adishankaracharya also asked, o is not to talk in prose but talk in poetry
Mother! Please remove, please and that is being is misunderstood.
somehow or other remove from my
You see its such a misunderstanding
mind this kind of Ignorance that I Coming out of reading without
have, that I read words
the knowledge. So you have to have
Shabdajalam. Please remove this knowledge first. Sahaja Yoga is a
shabdajalam , all of them have said, Gyan Marg, where you get the
Kabira has said, "Padhi-padhi- pandit knowledge, the absolute knowledge,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
39
sometimes aggressive things, all
kinds of things we go on reacting.
not just reading knowledge or some
sort of a thing. How? When your
Kundalini rises she pierces through Now here, for example I see three
your fontanelle bone area. "Shoonya flowers put here. It is such a
shikhar par anahad baajey rey", has
beautiful thing for me. But now
many people would say, Oh My
God! how much they have spent?
been said. And then when it becomes
one with the subtle, that is, the Divine
God knows, from where they have
got it, they should not have done
this, have they paid their income tax
or not! They might start like this and
power of love of God, you can call it
anything.
Paramchaitanya. When it becomes
one with that what happens to you that
all these things like Kaam, Krodh,
mud (H), matsar, lobh (), moha
(F), all of these things drop by itself.
They
is
call
say things which have nothing to
with the beauty and the joy that these
flowers have. The whole reaction of
Because now you are in the new arena
or area of knowledge where I would
say, even Eienstein has written about
the mind goes on like that and that's
how we get into tension. Why we
cannot enjoy, we cannot enjoy? The
it.
reason is we are still not connected
with the mains. Now supposing this
instrument is not connected, what is
He said, "I was very tired trying to
find out the words to express the
the use of this instrument? In the
theory of relativity and he didn't
understand that. So, he said, I got so
same way we are all the time
thinking and putting our attention in
a way that it reacts. Anything, that
fed up in the laboratory, I came home
and I started playing with the soap they see, one feels we must react
bubbles and suddenly from
somewhere unknown, the whole think that it's a lost case and they
theory dawned upon". This unknown have not understood the point.
and if they cannot react then they
what he called "Torsion area" and that
For this, this happening of self-
is the area which is beyond us, beyond
our mental-self. What we do normally realisation is called as aatma-
is all the time with our mind, we go Saakshaatkaar (a a a Even
on reacting. You say something, you Christ has said, "know thyself', said
react. Sometimes we react to also it clearly. Every one has said that.
It's not I am saying, but how to do it
things which are very ugly, may be,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 40
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
action so much, so that it can really
spoil all the working of all the centres
which are connected with it. First and
foremost is the liver. The liver goes
out absolutely. Now what is the sign
She rises through six centres. Now of liver is that -you can't eat, you
these centres are for physical, get constipation. All these things
mental and emotional being and also when this is on a very lower level
for spiritual and she passes through but when it starts rising, the function
them. Firstly, she integrates, then of the liver is to eliminate the heat
from your body into the blood
also nourishes them. That's how it circulation. So if your liver is out, it
is the point. Because you can't enter
inside yourself, we can not go into
this subtle things. For that the divine
has placed the Kundalini in the
triangular bone. It is so important.
secondly, she enlightens them. She
completely balances you and makes doesn't do. So, this heat goes on
you a very healthy person. I would passing. It goes from liver to the
like to tell you because the kind of heart or before that to the lungs. So,
work you do, morning till evening, such a person can suffer from
you are very hardworking and all Asthma of a very serious type. In
your attention is on your work and Sahaja Yoga Asthma is absolutely
curable, no doubt. But you have to
you are going out of the way to work
out whatever your plans are, first become a realised soul. Secondly,
whatever it is. In that doing so what when it rises even on the left hand
side then supposing there is a boy and
who is about 21 years of age and he
The first thing that happens to you plays tennis, with that also he drinks.
is that the right side Nadi which we So, he is out for a fatal life because
happens to you, let us see.
call as Pingla, this Pingla Nadi gets then the same heat attacks the heart
over excited, also tired. All the time and the child gets heart attack. But
using that for your thinking, for your
futuristic plans! All futuristic people
suffer from this. Now this Nadi is a
this heart attack can come even to
much older people. Those who are
working very hard and all that, then
they are neglecting themselves. When
they are neglecting themselves
suddenly they get a heart attack. It is
very important Nadi which is that
force. I mean, medical science doesn't
know about it but we can call it, it is
the right side sympathetic nervous
system. This sympathetic goes in to
a common disease with all the
government servants because they are
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 November-December 2000
41
The Divine Cool Breeze
caused by the same. I will explain to
not bothered to find out how much
energy they are putting in, how much you, how? I am sorry it's turning
energy they are using. Now, the
energy for our brain goes through these are two chakras from the left
one centre which also looks after the and right sympathetic, they join
liver. So, if you think too much, all together to form one chakra. Now,
the time then this liver is even much what happens, you are working too
out to be little medical but this is
say,
worse. Such a person who thinks too much on right and goes on like that
much gets the problem of the liver draining out your right like that.
but it doesn't end there. From the Suddenly some shock may take place,
heart it might even go to the
panereas, one can get diabetes. Just
imagine! Diabetes can be easily
cured if you stop thinking. But, how
to stop thinking is the problem which
I will tell you later and then it goes
down, it can attack the spleen and
something may happen on the left
side and it breaks. So, your
relationship with the whole is lost.
When that relationship with the whole
is lost, your right side becomes on its
own and the left side becomes on its
own, like they become what they call
- malignant and also the cells start
one can get blood cancer. It's very
serious but then it can also affect
behaving like that. Also, you can cure
cancer. It's not very difficult. If you
want to work out you can do but the
best thing for you is to get your self-
your kidneys and your kidneys can
stop working. After that you get
constipated, very badly constipated
because of the lower intestines not
realisation and to establish, that is the
äcting. All this heat we generate, all
the time by our over work, by our
best thing for all the men and all the
women.
futuristic life. To stop it there's no
Now, I have seen that this is only one
way out. You are also government
servants, conscientious people. You
part of it. I have said about right side
but the worst thing is that your right
want to work very hard and want to
think how to improve the situation side can get paralysed. Recently we
have one very good doctor working
and work for your country. But, at
for us. I told him, Sir, now you are
the same time we have to know
old, you must take rest in the day time,
what imbalances we are getting into?
there's no harm, must take some rest
We are just going to the right side,
not to the left but cancer can also be
in the day time and sleep early and
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 42
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
chakras are catching? If you know
how to correct those chakras you can
don't exert too much. You are there,
is more than sufficient. He wouldn't
correct them and also if you know
how to correct for others you can also
do that. The other thing happens to
listen to me, I mean, he would listen
but he wouldn't do what I am saying.
So, what happened to him that he
got a parapligia as they call it, his you that your personality evolves
right hand and his left hand into a collective being, you become
completely paralysed. Now he is a collective being. As these days you
cured, that's different, he is cured have seen we have so many.
now but the nature takes its own graduates and now the new
respite. And that's how this fellow softwares and all that has come that
got his right side completely. Now, we can connect to anyone but that
the people who work like this system is within us also. We can find
completely mad can have effect on out of anyone, what's wrong with
the left side of his head and his body, that person and we can cure that
can get paralysed on the right side. person sitting down. Can be done
but you have to evolve to that state
It is the nature that is trying to correct
because you are over doing.
and you don't require too much
time. Once the Kundalini is
So, now how to work out, how to
balance it out is the point. But if your ankur', has to develop and if it
Kundalini rises, she nourishes all the develops into a tree you just are
centres, she integrates them, she puts amazed. You become transformed
them right, enlightens them and because all these nonsensical things
ultimately connects you to the source that have been within us which I
itself, to the ocean of energy. Then have already told you as six 'Shad
what can happen to you? Nothing. It's
awakened it's like a small little seed,
ripus' that we have, they just drop,
a life which is tireless, you are never
tired, you are full of energy and the they just drop and you become so
confident about yourself. You do not
energy is flowing from you but not aggress, you do not try to find faults
only energy but also the knowledge. with others but you become like a
absolute knowledge because your
fingers start feeling the Chakras, you everything, see everything, not to
witness. You start witnessing
start getting the chaitanya on your
react. You go beyond your mind
finger tips. So, you can make out what
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-44.txt 
 43
November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
you have enlightened another candle
and that also can do the same. That's
because this reaction is the one that
causes most of the troubles.
how it has spread. I didn't go to all
Now, you get the real Gyana. There
is no need to have all these reactions.
You actually know what is wrong?
these countries. I have been hardly to
the twenty countries, at the most.
But how it has worked out! It has
What is to be corrected? What is the
worked out so beautifully and this is
the seience of our country, this was
solution? Because you are connected
with the mains, you are one with that.
Without that your personality is not
complete. Once it happens, you will
be amazed that all these people have has talked about it, but still, I would
talked about it. Mohammed Saheb say, that basically this knowledge is
has said that at the time of resurrection from India. Indians had all this
your hands will speak. Now, what is knowledge but somehow they didn't
that? That's the proof of, that you and so I only wanted to develop a
from our country. Of course, others
also talked about it. William Blake
give realisation, collective realisation
have got realisation.
method by which or by
Now, the situation is so simple and understanding the permutations and
it's working out. I don't know, may combinations of human beings, I
be it's such a ghor kaliyuga (ETT could manage this collective thing,
h t hat it has started working in because any discovery which is just
on an individual level has really no
this time. There are thousands and
meaning and it worked. It is working
and by all your kindness and
goodness. Some people do not
thousands of people who are getting
self realisation! Even if I am not there.
Sahaja Yogis can give realisation to
experience because of their sense of
guilt. They start saying oh! I have
done this wrong, that wrong! But
so many people. It is very remarkable
that is happening in this world and
it's meant for you. You can't pay for
whatever is done is done, finished!
it. You can't do anything, it's just
there! The God Almighty has put it
there, the Kundalini. Only thing is that
somebody who is a realised soul can
only awaken it, like one candle which
Now why are you bothered all your
life? That's one thing. That is a very
bad thing for this kind of a, I should
say, love but it is actually very bad
for the centre, the left side centre
is enlightened can enlighten another
candle. That's the only thing but if
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
44
November-December 2000
which we call Vishuddhi. And that's should not blame yourself for
how the Kundalini doesn't rise. So, anything. You have done nothing
you should not feel guity. There's no wrong. What have you done? After
need to have confessions and all that. all if you have done anything wrong
You just think you are a human being you would have been in jail but you
and you all can get your realisation. are not. So what is there to feel
I must tell you this is the power of guilty?
love, it's not the power of any This, we also have to understand
intellectual capacity but the power
of love and with the power of love. that some people think that unless
if you should believe in it, then also
and until we are very dharmic or we
are very much in the rituals we will
not be saved. It's not so, it's not so.
must love yourself. You must forgive
yourself and not to have any guilt.
We are lost into these things, so
Then after forgiving yourself you forget about it. The Kundalini rises
have to forgive others also because whether you are Hindu, Muslim,
others are also ignorant. They also Christian or you have done so many
are not yet well equipped to pujas doesn't matter. Only thing that
understand you. So forgive, forgive keeps you cleaner than other things
all of them, just forgive. Logically, because your attention is on God,
whether you forgive, or don't forgive, But, it won't work out unless and
you don't do anything. Nothing is until the Kundalini rises.
done, only you are harming yourself
and playing into the hands of people
I must tell you something I always
felt about the women and recently
as they said I have started an
who have troubled you. So best thing
is to forgive them. It just helps a lot
organisation to help women who are
in distress and also little girls and also
to open this centre of forgiveness.
These two centres are the real hurdles
in the ascending power of the young girls because I feel in our
Kundalini. So, what you have to do country women don't have
is to forgive yourself and forgive properties. Whatever they have it's
others. That's all. Just to say in all due to law and it is very, very
heart, that I forgive myself and I cursed state where women are
forgive others. That's the only thing definitely helped by law but they go
you have to be convinced that you on asking for divorces, the family
your
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-46.txt 
 November-December 2000
45
The Divine Cool Breeze
more, we will come again. You have
life is ruined. So, it's for men, they
should develop real respect for a law but the way it is asserted you
should look into it. I think why should
women. They are I don't know how
many percentage but, definitely you take also the ornaments of
woman? I can't understand because
much more than men and if you do
the poor ladies don't understand any
banking. I don't understand myself
not respect the women you are
really finishing the whole culture of
our country. We have to definitely any banking. Then somebody told
me that they will be using black
respect women. There is one thing I
money. I said which husband will
give all his money for buying
ornaments? And now the black
would request you, the Income Tax
people, that the way you have a law.
I don't know, I have talked to the
money is already in the market, they
Finance Minister but he doesn't heed
don't want to keep it in the
are after the 'Stri-dhan' (
that you
7). To touch the stridhan is a "paap'
(), it is sinful thing but it is done
in such a bad manner! I have seen it
ornaments. But women they have
only that much support. Everytime
I meet some lady like that I feel like
because you are all big people. We crying?
had a neighbour who was a jeweller We had a neighbour in Bombay.
and I was there when these people
There were three ladies who came up
came in and you see this was the
and they told us that there was a raid
last story so they had put an artificial
this thing, they got it completely torn,
completely. They opened all the sofa
sets, did all kind of things. I couldn't
in their house for ornaments, they
took away all our ornaments. I said,
why didn't you register it? Our
husbands won't register, they are all
understand how could they do! And
drunkards, so they wanted to sell
in that house there was no man,
only the women living and then they
went into the cupboard and did all
those ornaments and use it for their
own drinking. So, we have lost all that
but I said, why did you keep them?
the things.
You should have given it to bank.
I mean somehow or other it's like a
Hitlerish type of an attitude and they
found nothing and they told them if
Whenever we are in need we can sell
it and we can get something for our
living, this is our bank. So, it is this
side of Indian life we should
you report it we will confiscate much
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-47.txt 
 November-Decermber 2000
46
The Divine Cool Breeze
accepting, I have to tell you that this
understand, we are not Western
is one dharm karya you can do. Please
women, we are Indian women but
surprisingly nowhere in the world, do not bother women about it. There
nowhere, even in Russia there is no is so much of botheration to them, the
tax on the ornaments. Then our way they are treated just like
country is the industry of making criminals! Moreover in this country,
ornaments, is so beautiful, such you know that women have to wear,
artists, such creative people. Let they can't do without it. This is a
women have their own ornaments.
country where we honour the
Why do have income tax on that? It's
powers of women and that's why
not a easy thing. You know you have they have it. This can relieve you
to register I know. I know what it is. from lots of worries and troubles I
You have to register, you have to tell can tell you. Because I have seen,
them and if you want to gift some when they go in the night harass
others. Then the report comes to
ornament to your daughter, you have
you people and you feel so distressed.
If something could be done I will be
very thankful. It is worth talking to
to go to the commissioner to do this,
to do that. Who has the time? So, a
humble request I wanted to make that
you can really think of it that this is you about the pains and troubles of
one thing where you allow little women of India who are already
down trodden, already being
money to heip.
I will tell you one thing when oppressed, already being tortured.
This is alright but now the Kundalini
Mahatma Gandhi had his freedom
awakening part of it. Once your
struggle, my mother, gave away, Kundalini is awakened, you will
except for those which were for us, understand, you will have that love
she gave away all her ornaments to
and affection for all the people of
Gandhiji. It's your sampadaa, it's your
the world.
property. All the time it is available
but why should you not allow women
to exist because in the villages also
I know there are so many problems
in this world. I don't know how to
patch them up! For example, another
school I have started in Maharashtra,
I have seven schemes already started
women have no concept of a bank or
anything. I wanted to tell you,I
thought whether I should talk about
it or not, but you people are so much there. But worst of all I feel for
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-48.txt 
 November-December 2000
47
The Divine Cool Breeze
women. They are so helpless and Sometimes my husband says, how
there is no way of really getting them do you manage.
redressal. They are in such a trouble just I know. You will know how to
while they are the Shakti of this manage things and the main thing
country. Kundalini is a lady. She is behind is the love that you have for
not a man you can say. You have all others. It will work out so beautifully.
the avtaras and everything but Your life will become so beautiful
Kundalini is what they call, the and you will enjoy it and all the greed,
reflection of the Adishakti. She is the
I say, I don't know,
all nonsense will just drop out. In
Shakti these modern times it is very
Shakti. We
the
are
worshippers but the way we are important that you all should take
treating our women is very your realisation because after all we
surprising! We have to understand are Indians. Our culture is such that
that these women, if they are we are in for self-realisation. We are
awakened, what powers you have! so different from others and here in
In any country where they have had this country the women have saved
powers, it is through their women. the culture of India.
You read about anyone, even
S
So, by this you can also look after the
Mahatma Gandhi all of them, even
Shastriji. I thought how much they women, give them realisation, give
loved their wives and how much
them understanding and also help
they cared for them! I tell you it is them but not to harrass them. That's
very remarkable how we miss out
not the way.
I have to request you to
on the most important and such a absolutely ban it, to harass women.
big part of our population. Now,I Already they are harrassed. They
have started this organisation and I don't know what to do and this law
am going to give realisation to all of doesn't help them at all. Because the
them and I am going to see that after
men are the controlling power. It's for
men to understand the value of
realisation they all learn things very
well and stand on their legs.
women, men to understand their
power of love and then it will work
Your administrative capacity, your
out. I am not saying because I am a
woman but I am saying this what I
thinking capacity I should say, your
understanding a subject increases so
much that you are amazed.
have seen. such injustice we have
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-49.txt 
 November-December 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
are never satisfied, go on from one
done to our womanhood.
Now, for Kundalini I would say we to another. But after this you are
absolutely satisfied with whatever
will take hardly ten minutes and you you have. You are not at all on the
will get your realisation. Now, about run but you are absolutely in the
this whole theory and all that and realm of peace and joy. This happens
everything you see the people have
written Granthas but that you can read
to you and this should happen to all
of you.
and can find out but just now I think
Firstly, I always say that service
people, government service people
are like the spinal cord of my
the best thing is that you all get your
realisation, if you permit.
One thing you can not force on
country. They are the ones, who
anyone, you have to ask for it from look after. Without them nothing
your heart because Kundalini is the could have happened. If the British
power of 'Shudh ichha' (pure desire). gave anything nice, is this idea of
That's the real because other 'ichhas' service. Of course all the kings had,
are useless. Today we want to buy a everybody had, but the systems they
car, after buying the car you are not have started have helped and you
satisfied, you want to build a house. are the spinal cord.. You should
After building the house I don't never get sick, you should not have
know, you want to have an any problems and that's why I am
aeroplane, it goes on. It is actually very happy and thankful to your
the economics. The modern organisation and to Commissioner
economics is based on this that you Saheb who has invited me for this.
May God Bless You
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-50.txt 
 NEG
