The Divine Cool Breeze 00 September-October, 200 olume: X ue:98 10 In Sahaja Yoga we have to be extra-brilliant, extra-sacrificing, extra-dynamic and extra-compassionate people. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 In this Issue: Editorial Shivratri Puja, 5-3-2000; Pune 2. IAS Officers' Meet, 8-4-2000; Delhi Reception - Delhi; 5-12-99 22 How to Influence People; 17-9-86; Holland 25 Sahasrara Puja, 7-5-2000; Cabella 40 Edited by Published by Yogi Mahajan V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Editorial Our Divine Mother has blessed us years old, started dancing on the with so many blessings. One of the stage. sweetest is the childlike quality of The joy of his innocence electrifies Shri Ganesha is innocence. the whole audience and all the newly Every human being is born with married couples sprang to their feet innocence. It is an innate quality and and started dancing with him. His can never be lost. But, after it gets innocence transported everyone into eclipsed in the blaze of a burning right another world. Everyone became a side. The ego starts giving funny manifestation of our Divine Mother's notions of another identity and one joy. Imagine how much power is in a starts assuring a false identity. The little child's innocence that it could identity falls into worldly illusions trigger the entire adult world into such primarily that it has to project itself a ecstasy. to achieve national success. In this process it not only estranges itself From this one can realize that inner from its natural quality of innocence joy comes from the simplest thing of but also depletes its own natural life, which is innocence whereas one reservoir, which stems from does so much and yet falls into joyless life. Shakespeare has humorously innocence. One may achieve worldly success but described human effort as much ado one is unable to derive joy from it because one loses the natural capacity Today we are indeed fortunate that we to enjoy. This natural capacity is are allowed to worship Shri Ganesha innocence. Joy is the fragrance of at the Lotus Feet of H.H. Shri Adi innocence e.g. in our homes we get Shakti Mataji Nirmala Devi. We the greatest joy from our children. thank her again and again for making The whole family delights in the us aware of our power of innocence. innocent things that a child does. With her innocence it is possible to Imagine how much joy a little child enter Her Kingdom. As Christ had brings to every member of the house. said we have to become like children In a recent instance after the Sahaj to enter into the Kingdom of God, marriages were solemnized in May the blessings of innocence lead Canajohari, Shri Mataji's great all humanity into our Divine Mother's grandson who was less than three Kingdom,. about nothing.

 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze SHIVRATRI PUJA 5-3-2000 (PUNE) Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi First I will speak in English language also the other extreme of a very because we have so many people destroying character. He can destroy the whole world. He can finish all the from foreign countries and specially creatures that have been created, if he from Madras and also from Kerala, Hyderabad and Bangalore. All these gets into a temper. You all must be people have come here and I don't knowing the story how he went into ecstasy. There was a devil who had know what other people are here who taken the form of a child and the have come from South and who do mother cannot kill the child. She not really understand Hindi language. cannot. And she thought she won't be able to save the world from the wrath or anger of Shiva if He sees the whole world destroyed by this devil. So she withdrew from her act of sacrificing the child or killing the child and it was Shiva who took over and he just stood on the back of the child and killed This Shivratri has a special meaning, I think, because there is so much, if you read any newspaper in the morning, such horrible news is there about the people who are trying to create all kinds of violence, corruption and immoral behaviour. You are surprised how these days it is so full of all these criminalities going around us. This is the time as if for the Tandav Nritya of Shri Shiva. Otherwise one feels things cannot improve. It is his anger if it starts throwing wrath on people of this character and this type, I don't know him. That child was a devil and so he saved the world from destruction of this horrible Raksha, and then he danced with joy. That's what they call as cosmic joy. Many people don't understand why he is standing on top of the little child. But the reason was this. So even people may camouflage how anyone can be saved from his today as small children, as very wrath. He is a god who is full of love, innocent people, as very holy Gurus, full of tremendous Compassion, but Shiva can destroy all of them. This

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 destruction has already started and is and also completely surrendered, going at full speed all over I think, nothing can happen to them. They through so many things that are are always protected and you all have happening. We have got hurricanes, experience of that protection. But first storms, earthquakes, many accidents you should have faith in yourself and and so many destructive things are complete surrendering to Sahaja working out which are the outcome Yoga. of Kalki incarnation. But at the same time there is another work going on, here mostly from north, south east We are so many Sahaja Yogis sitting of the same incarnation, is the and west of India and also from other resurrection of the people. Such foreign countries. Every country is, today, under the control of, we should say, these negative forces. What we have to do is to make people positive people can never be hurt. Nothing can happen to them. They will always be saved, everything will be saved for them because they are under the protection of their Mother. through Kundalini awakening. This you all can do. This you can achieve, Now the problem is how can the for this you don't have to do Sahaja Yogis deal with such people something special. In day to day life and could see that they go out of the you can achieve it and you should do circulation of evolution. The only it. This is the only thing that is needed solution is raising the Kundalini. If today, to transform people and you you raise the Kundalini of human all can do it. All of you can do it in a beings who are even very bad and very sincere and a good manner. gone cases, either they will be Don't have to get to temper, jump at destroyed or they will be saved and people, get angry with rude people, become good people. They will stop but with peaceful attitude you should all these horrible things they are achieve it, so that this wrathful thinking and planning in their heads and they will become really very, very good people. It may fail in some cases, I won't say that Sahaja Yoga would be successful in every case. But if Sahaja Yogis meditate and keep themselves in complete peace temperament of Shiva, as they say the third eye of Shiva, won't open. That is something horrible. We all can do it in a very constructive manner. So what we should do is to first of all establish our own Shiva principle, the principle of joy, principle of love and

 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze principle of truth, I should say. There balance we must keep and go on are big problems also because people moving till you reach your Taloo have no idea as to Shiva's global bhag (a where sits Sada temperament. For example I have Shiva (HGIa. You can experience heard people quarreling and fighting it. You can see for yourself whatever over Shiva principle and Vishnu I am saying you know it very well. principle. Now Vishnu is there, his The only thing is when I am telling power is there, for you to rise upto you you can verify it. Sahaja Yoga the Shiva principle. Both are not can be verified very easily and you different. One is supplementary for know that. You now know the only another. But if you go on fighting even on that point, I cannot understand. You cannot reach Shiva truth. The truth which is absolute. This is also the principle which starts showing results when these two powers meet. Its very surprising that where these two powers meet or when you reach Shiva principle through the Vishnu principle then you realize that these two powers are complimentary and so much related to each other. There is no difference in a way between these two powers and so keep your road, the madhyamarg (TE ) clean and let the Kundalini pass through it. When the Kundalini will pass through it you without Vishnu and you cannot stick to Shiva's principle if you have not understood the Vishnu's principle. Kundalini itself rises through the Sushumna Nadi. She is the principle, so she is the tatva of Shiva and she rises through the channel that is made by Vishnu out of evolutionary process. So how can you do away with one of them. One is the road, another is the destination. So I hope you understand how important it is that your centres should be corrected, your road should will be amazed that the same Kundalini is going through the Vishnu path and reaching at the lotus be alright, that your Sushumna should are be clear because we madhyamargis. We have to go by the centre, by the central path and we have to have the balance, not to go to feet of Shiva. May God Bless You. the left and not to go to the right. This

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 IAS Officers' Meet 8-4-2000, DELHI Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi I bow to all the seekers of truth. Today services. I had never heard of services and all that. So I said, now what's that foreign services? But I said, I am not going to go to any foreign country. as they say is a "Ghor Kaliyuga" and all sorts of horrible things we can see here, read in the newspapers. It is a fact that its a very bad times we are passing through. Also we find very low graded people, we can call them of very low value system. Just now we have got freedom and we have to work. We have to work out many things for this country. Not only that, but I realised that civil service is the spinal cord of this But it was also predicted long-long country. It has to bear all the brunts, time back that at this time only the all the troubles, all the burdens. At people who are seeking the truth in the same time it has a great the hills and valeys of Himalayas, all responsibility to build this country kinds of forgotten places, will find and that's why I put my, I should say, the truth. It is already described by all effort that my husband gets many, many great astrologers, also by saints. So at this time we are placed selected to IAS and somehow or other we lost lot of money, everything. Its alright, I said, I can live with anything. in very fortunate circumstances. I must say I have a great love for all the people who are in the I AS and IPS and all civil services, becauseI But to live in the foreign countries and wasting your energy there, it's time now for us to live here. I think this know what one has to go through. Its the life of great termoil and sacrifice, also for the wife (of these officers). patriotism is the only thing by which we can live doing our civil service, understanding our responsibility and But I always felt that this is like a soldier fighting in the war. We are Government of this country which is, here to build up this country. My though run by parties after parties, the husband was first in the foreign lot of the civil services to go through also that we are the mainstay of the

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 all kinds of, all types of, problems to solve for the public. Its a life I learnt where women have to be extremely forbearing, sacrificing and always very much keeping happy. It's a question of why are we here in this service? We are special people, no doubt, we have special powers, no doubt. But without misusing the required for thinking, for futuristic planning, all these things, comes from where we don't know, but according to Sahaja Yoga it comes from a centre which creates the energy for the brain cells which are used all the time. We go on taxing our brain, using its energy all the time but we don't know how it is replaced and replaced by one powers, what are you? Nothing! If you misuse it then it is not proper and centre. This centre is looking after so many organs, that this overflow of if you don't use it,you are powerless. energy to the brain for this futuristic life can create lots of problems, not This is really the situation. But the enjoyment and the happiness and the satisfaction comes from the fact that Only tension but lots of other problems also, because this energy Starts getting exhausted and when we are in the struggle this energy starts you are working for your country. So this patriotism, which I imbibed from my parents and also from Mahatma getting, sort of, finished or may be we develop tremendous imbalances Gandhi, I felt that we are duty bound to workout in such a manner that within ourselves. As shown in the every one of us does something which body chart, you can see here very clearly that our autonomous nervous is very constructive and which is very helpful. But at the same time while system is in three channels and either doing that because of such a difficult we can go to the right side or to the situation we develop all kinds of left, but in the centre we cannot problems and that's what I am going remain. If you are too much futuristic, if you think too much, if you are working out too much then this right The first thing is when we see side comes and this is a very, very to talk to you about. something, we react. This reaction can important thing to understand that we create two problems within us. One start losing the balance. of conditioning or another of ego. Both are troublesome things and they The first thing that happens to a person like that-that he develops make us very nervous and tense. The very bad liver. His liver goes out of main thing is that the energy that is

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 7. But it can be a serious paralysis which order because the centre looks after the liver. Now the heat of the liver can affect all the right side-right from when it is created starts rising. So we the mouth to all this area, and also might develop Asthma, very serious hands, legs everything become type of Asthma and they say now its paralysed. So this is another thing incurable. But it is curable. If you can which is awaiting such people who balance the person, it can easily be don't care for balancing themselves. cured. This Asthma then, if it does They are all serious diseases I should say of the upper part of the body. To the lower part of the body this heat not happen, this heat goes towards the heart. passes towards the pancreas. So In childhood if you are born with bad pancreas you get diabetes. Then it goes little lower and in the spleeen understand but if there is a boy say you can get even blood cancer. Sahaja 21-22 years of age who plays tennis Yoga has cured definitely the blood and also drinks a lot and all that, he cancer. Can be cured. Then it can even gets a fatal heart attack, very fatal and effect the kidneys - Kidneys can be he dies. But if he didn't work out that very badly affected and you might way gradually it starts moving develop kidney trouble. You can try towards a massive heart attack. It transplantation but doesn't help could be for anyone at any age but much. Then it comes to your stomach specially as the old age starts it can where you get constipated and always heart or anything then one can really show its business. So this is a common disease we have that our happen to a right sided person that heart is in a trouble; then you try in anger, temper. All these things can we cannot help it because he is so pacemaker, this thing-that thing. Instead of that if you take to Sahaja Yoga, you do not have to worry about your heart. It will be excellent. Then much busy with his planning and with everything that his brain has no rest. So he gets irritated where he says something not according to his own desire as his own plans. With all these another thing that can happen to you on the brain side that if right side is things happened this right side too much then our left side brain gets problem, I think, is a very serious affected and we get peripheria by problem which all of us are facing. which our hands become absolutely Now it comes as I told you from our dead and also legs can become dead. reactions. So our reactions are

 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze because of our mind. Now if you develop that witness state because now you go beyond your mind. You have a mind that reacts then how to don't react, you see, you just see, stop this mind from reacting? Einstein has already told that when watch and surprisingly your attention becomes extremely powerful. You he was looking for the theory that he have all these things within you. Just wanted to produce some relativity, he think that we have to have, say, some got so tired doing it, went to the light, it has to be connected. I am speaking here. This instrument has to garden and started playing with the soap bubbles and suddenly he says be connected to the mains, Otherwise from somewhere unknown the whole thing, the whole scientific explanation came into his mind. That he called as it is useless. In the same way we are to be connected. We have to decide that we should be connected to that the "torsion area". We all have that Divine power. Once you are "torsion area". The subtle energy that connected to that Divine power, such surrounds us, which looks after us, I call it the Divine love, that helps us in every way to balance oursleves, to a change takes place within you. First of all your hands start speaking. It is written in the Koran that at the time enrich ourselves and to give the absolute knowledge, not relative knowledge but absolute knowledge. So this is the Gyan Marga we are of resurrection, Kiyama, your hands will speak. So, I say, I will only accept muslim rules, that hands are speaking. Means on your hands, on these five talking about, of the absolute knowledge. Now this torsion area is the wonderful thing. Because this fingers, here and here, seven places, you can feel your centres, then you can feel the centres of others because Kundalini when she rises, she not you become a collective being. Who only nourishes all the six centres is the other! You can feel everyone enlightens them and integrates them on your fingertips. A person may look but also connects you to this torsion area of Einstein. Suddenly you are alright, normal to you but you realise amazed at yourself. How it has no-no, he is not. Something very serious he's got. On the fingertips you happened that you get so many can feel it, what's wrong with others. solutions of problems which are solvable. Your temperament changes. Now, if you, somehow or other, You are so relaxed, that means you master this art, at the most you take

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 one month, if you do it you can raise other's Kundalini. That's how they say the Sahaja Yoga has spread in eighty six countries. It has spread, no doubt, it has spread in eighty six injustice to them, they are quite alright. He said, don't interfere. I said, I am not interfering but I will prove it to you that these girls are innocent and simple girls and unnecessarily you people are thinking that they are bad countries but I have not been to all these countries. I have not visited all women. So, I went with them. That these countries, I myself might have gone to about say twenty countries, at the most, but people who got time of course we had only one car. So I went by rickshaw with them to that place where the man had written that they are bad persons. So, I went and asked him, are these the two girls who were living in your upper flat? realization in these countries went down to all these places and gave realisation to others. Are these the girls who did like this? He said, not at all, those are very Now, imagine a country called Benin in Africa has got seven thousand different, not these. And I came and told them, see I judged them from Sahaja Yogis. They were all muslims and they all have got realisation. That vibrations and they cannot be bad doesn't mean that you are no more a Muslim or a Hindu. You are that but persons. So sometimes we punish you know the essence of that. So you people, we get angry with people who respect every religion. You respect all the incarnations because now you because we don't know what they are. have the true knowledge about We also follow wrong path, we get religion, about yourself and about the whole universe. You can feel it on don't know what is the right one. your fingertips. do not deserve that kind of a treatment lost into so many things because we Now, with this happening of the Kundalini, physically you are alright, physically your problems are solved, physically you don't have to bother. Actually it's hardly any trouble to cure people physically, we also have a hospital, where they don't charge anything except for the room, where Once when my husband was the city magistrate, two ladies came to me from the backdoor and they said see now, these police people are putting us into trouble, we are good women, we have done nothing. I just felt their vibrations. I told my husband that I think you people are doing some they have to live. Sometimes, the

 September-October 2000 10 The Divine Cool Breeze all about chakras, we knew everything doctors also work free and work it out so well that so many people have been but we don't know how to raise the cured. We are getting people from ali Kundalini. They knew the word over the world. Very highly placed Kundalini also. So I thought I must people come there and they are find out. Who has told you all this? getting cured. Now for that you don't Two saints came from India long-long have to go to the whole with maroon of feeling, what's wrong with them, Machindernath and Gorakh-nath had putting them for diagnosis. In gone everywhere. They went to diagnosis only the patient dies half Ukraine also. So they might have told way. But this is only on the finger tips. them about this Kundalini and the You know what's wrong with the awakening of the Kundalini. But, they person, you need not tell that person said we don't know how to raise the what's wrong. You know how to cure Kundalini. Once you are entitled as time back. May be, I thought it and how to work it out. Sahaja Yogi, you can raise the Kundalini of any person, you can cure Today only a friend of ours came to see me, much younger to me, looking any person. You can do whatever you so very old and haggered. He said, I have got paralysis. I said, how. He was another one of the same kind, I have seen the tension is more a want to do as far as the physical side is concerned, even the mental side. working too hard, too hard and within twenty minutes or so after raising his Kundalini his face became alright, his hands became alright and he said, I quite and you don't know how to can't walk without a stick. I said, handle the situation. This also is the alright now you walk, he started same reaction of your mind that walking. I have seen people running, who come on wheel chairs. Its very mind then you will be amazed the idea mental side of human beings where you get very tensed up, get very angry, annoyed or you become extremely works it out but if you go beyond the surprising how it works out. But for that comes to you are absolute, the this we must know this is the solution that comes to you are knowledge of our country. Not that others didn't know, they knew. absolutely perfect and the people who are against you also become your friends. Those who are troubling you In Bolivia, I was surprised, Bolivia is very much, also become very-very so far off, people told me we know

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 11 sweet. It's a changing and only six, but now-a-days, I think, there are more. But as it is accepted these are six. So, once you get transforming of human beings. The other day I had met a newspaper connected with this Divine power of reporter. His name was Mr. Abbas. He was extremely aggressive with love, all these things just drop out as useless. No jealousies, no me. He asked me funny questions. He competition, nothing. We have many said, how did you know that you are people also in the foreign service and Divine? I said, how did you know that you are a human being? He reacted. I they told us that people are very said, see, because I would not react. I happy with us, Mother. I said, why? Because we are not competitive. We used to watch, I used to see and I are all becoming ambassadors, this, that but nobody is angry with us found that I am different from others, so I didn't like to show off this thing. Nobody wants to understand it that because we are not competitive. When the mind starts thinking of way. You have to prove, that's the best competition, one can go into any way Sahaja Yoga can be told. So, he said but how can I get the proof?I wrong alleys, into any dark alleys and said, I don't believe in any really can be a very much a different fundamentalism, alright. I do believe person. But with this you are in the centre, you have complete balance in yourself. And at that moment his within yourself and all the hankering, Kundalini rose, just like this, you see. He said, what's happening? How this everything drops out. You don't cool breeze is flowing into my hanker after this, you don't hanker after people, you don't hanker after great publicity or anything. You just automatically become so balanced fingertips? How is it? I said, also feel it out of your fontanelle bone area and he was completely changed. He said, whatever I have asked you the and you are not bothered as to what's quetions I am not going to put it up. frightened. For example, if you are happening and that you are not it's all nonsense (I was stupid). Now standing in the water you are afraid of the waves, alright, but supposing I have become a sensible man. Actually this Kundalini changes, you get into the boat then you can really transforms you. Now they say even enjoy the waves. But suppose that we have six enemies-kaam, you learn how to swim, you can jump krodh, mad, matsar, loabh, moha, down and you can save people. This

 September-October 2000 12 The Divine Cool Breeze is how Sahaja Yoga works, in a simple problems and cured out of your thinking, just relaxed. There's no thinking, which is thoughtless manner. As I have said that I have tremendous awareness has been already told to us concern for you people, always had%3; but because of my husband's strict by A. Yung. You know A. Yung who rules I could not touch his office was a disciple of Frieud, whom he people, I could not talk to them, I revolted against and he talked about the mother instinct. could not meet anyone even a peon, leave alone the IAS officer. He was We Indians you see are Shakti pujaris. very strict about it. I said, alright, I Now, these days the Navaratras are will try some other areas. But now he on but we have never going has retired, luckily. Now I am free, understood the message of Mother's even to talk to you, surprisingly, Love. It is the Mother's Love that otherwise he could never allow me works, I think, and you also become to talk to you people because he thought it's not proper. You must compassionate. How can a human maintain a certain distance. So even very motherly, very kind, very being, be cruel to anyone who is in the parties and all these places I suffering, who is in trouble, who is was quite amused the way people in poverty! The love that you have used to discuss and talk about things within yourself starts flowing just like and I used to keep quiet. So, they an ocean and you become extremely thought I don't even know English or be I am so quite because perhaps generous. All the generous people, I have seen, are always very much looked after. I will give you an example of my father who was a very generous man, very-very generous may may be I am good for nothing. But now all the same persons, those same ladies and gentlemen are now doing meditation. person. Once what happened... he Now, for meditation you don't have always used to say don't close the to hang yourself with anything, you houses, we should not close our don't have to have too much time. house, always open the windows, Even ten minutes before sleeping you open the doors. If you tell him that do meditation, you will feel so thieves might come in, he said, let relaxed and so very absolutely them come. After all they need completely cured out of your something that's why they come. So,

 September-October 2000 13 The Divine Cool Breeze he used to keep all the doors open. wrong. It should come, we should He was fond of music so he had a big prosper, our country should prosper, we should create more things. I agree there, but this hankering should go gramophone, - a big horn like thing and one day one thief came, the door was open, and he took away that gramophone. So, next day he was sitting very seriously. So my mother said, are you sorry for that? He said, away. Now, the hankering becomes the other way round, like what should I give to this lady? What should I do for this gentleman? I mean the worry no-no, that I can buy, but I am only goes to the other side... that what to sorry, this man, he seems to be a connoisseur of music, has taken away the gramophone! now what will he play, he has not taken any records. So, my mother said, alright, you advertise in the newspaper- the one who has taken the gramophone should please come and take the records so that he do... what should I give that they won't feel bribed, because sometimes you know Sarkari Naukar, as they are, they are very strict. So if you give them, they think you have given them a bribe. I said, this is not a bribe. I am just giving because I want to give you. So will you take it? With very great enjoy the gramophone. difficulty they take. But you see, it is I have seen very generous people and a way of expression of your love. at the time when Gandhiji declared With this love you will be so very the war of independence they not only Popular, so very popular in your went to jail but they gave away office, in your work. In the whole of everything that they had. We used to the country people will remember you live in huge big houses, then we that this was the man who really shifted to some sort of huts like looked after us, who has done so things. We enjoyed because you see much for others. the enjoyment was rashtrabhakti and this has helped that be just worried about yourself and time. Mahatma Gandhi was helped this thing. And the ladies also of the because that time people were like IAS, thank you very much for inviting of our If you don't have a concern you will that. me but I would like to tell you that Today it is coming from the west too ladies have to help the husbands. much of this, too much of that. It's They should try to understand that alright there's nothing wrong-nothing their energy is the Shakti and they

 September-October 2000 14 The Divine Cool Breeze very-very important. You somehow or other manage to talk to him, he will get your husband a very good job and will get a very good house. (and should give to men this energy so that they can work better. But sometimes I have funny experiences which I will relate to you. It was very interesting. First of all I who comes there was my husband) She said, you know him? I said, Yes. How? He is my husband; After that never knew about your seniorities- juniorities, anything I don't know much about this, I don't understand. she didn't talk to me. She never said it to me. To know that to live in Meena I came to Delhi, I mean my husband Bagh is bad in itself is quite a big came here, to Delhi, to work for knowledge about things, isn't it? That Shastriji. So, we met in a party a only people of this much pay live in Meena Bagh. It's really impossible, I friend of mine who was from my college. She asked me, arey! how are you here, Nirmal! I said, my husband mean I don't know the state officer knows this much but the lady knew has come here. She said, what does that Meena Bagh was not meant for he do? I said, he is a government an IAS Officer. Can you imagine? So, servant... Everybody is a government these indulgences of the women is of servant here but what he is doing? I no use. said, I don't know that but he is I am very happy to hear about this organisation that it is doing such a good constructive work. I was really something here. Where do you live? first thing she asked. I said, I live in Meena Bagh. Aah! Meena Bagh! very happy. He says I am a socialist because I always think of the social problems... Somehow or other I am a socialist, alright because this is a what is your husband doing? You could have got a much better husband. Why did you marry a man who takes you to Meena Bagh? Baba! I didn't know Meena Bagh was that bad. You collective sense and when I heard that these people are doing this kind of a work, I said, amazing. I can't imagine! Those days women used to talk of something else, they would never talk of something social. It was so see, Shastriji asked us to come here and there was no house so, they gave us Meena Bagh. I thought it was very bad to live in Meena Bagh the way she was talking. Then she said, alright, this gentleman who is coming, this tall gentleman... you know, he is difficult to make them understand social work, funny type of

 September-October 2000 15 The Divine Cool Breeze country. I would say these days our atmosphere was there. The Britishers had left their legacy on our heads and country is in a very big turmoil-very we were quite enamoured by that. For big turmoil and all these things are example, I would say that it was not for them to concieve of something going to help us to solve these problems, so many problems we can solve. Once some of these problems higher or better. are solved I am sure we will be one of the greatest countries. We have no dearth of talent, no doubt. We have no dearth of hard work, only there's So, I was the president of the blind... this was the friends of the blind society and for that they were going to have a programme and these blind no one, it's difficult to get a person were going to act and the governor. Mr. Charion was to come. When he who can put them to the yojna and if such a person gets his self-realisation came they wanted to know who will he is so self-confident, so peaceful be sitting next to him. Being a within himself, he is not bothered as chairman of course, they would ask me to sit down, the rest started to what others are doing and all this quarelling and fighting and discussing so much. I got such a fright. I thought now take to humour, that's the best way to solve the problem. So, I said alright we will get a big plank on top can change, transform you into a beautiful personality. You give up all your destructive habits, absolutely. I don't have to say, give up. I never say. If I say that half of people might leave but I have seen people over night give of the governor's head and all sit like up bad habits. In London there were sparrows on that. Immediately all their anger vanished and they became were taking drugs, they were drug twelve people who had come, who alright. addicts... they left their drugs So, what I am saying is that the quality overnight, overnight, can you of women has changed. You can see imagine! I was amazed, how could that very clearly, the quality has they leave it, overnight! Our problems changed and though you might think of drugs, of all other things, we can that they are rather self centred or solve them without any difficulty and whatever you may think, but one you are placed for that, for that kind thing I have noticed that they are of a job. Your situation is very social minded. They read, they difficult because you have a understand what's going on in this responsibility, great very

 16 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze responsibility and that responsibility humble so nice. I don't know why in has to be understood. If we do not Bombay they have developed this understand our responsibility we will kind of a superiority complex or not achieve but once you get your something. We had very bad reports realisation you will. You will become about them but suddenly they have extremely responsible and also you changed so much and in the same way will not feel that responsibility on you all should change and you your head, you will feel extremely, become so collective. It's not joint, absolutely relaxed and such a person it's collective and you just think of to meet, you are sometimes surprised. helping each other and living that kind The face changes, the body changes of a life and all over the world we everything-the transformation takes have brothers and sisters, wherever place and you are surprised. All this you go. You may go anywhere you is within you, all this you have got it, will find them waiting for you. They all this is working out within you. also come here. When they come here Only thing we have to get our self they touch this motherland of ours. realisation. This is a knowledge of our They touch this Bharatbhumi with inner being, very subtle knowledge. I their lips and kiss it. I say, why do pray and thank you very much, all the you do it? Because it's a yoga bhumi, ladies also, for calling me here. This it's a special country, it's a yoga is a very unique experience I have bhumi. Here we have got our because I have never known that IAS realisation and you will be amazed people could be so receptive to this kind of a subtle thing. But they are. I that this country is a yoga bhumi. Once I was travelling with my was surprised when I had this programme in Bombay. Now they are husband in the plane and I told him regularly going for meditation in a we have reached India. He said, how hall that they have, surprising! How do you know... I feel the vibrations can they do it. I don't know but they all over, you can see. So, he went to are doing it, the way they have the pilot to verify as usual, verify what I was saying was correct or not. The received me actually I used to say that the Bombay IAS people are very pilot said, Sir, we have, reached India. I said, see this is our land, this has proud, very proud. They won't look at you, they won't see you but I am surprised they have become so spirituality. Everything that is written we have to verify. Why some places

 September-Ootober 2000 17 The Divine Cool Breeze You all are capable of getting self- realisation, you all are. Whatever are swayambhus? How can you make it out? Anywhere you go there is a temple-how do you know? You can must be your past, doesn't matter, we have to be in the present. Past is finished, future doesn't exist, you will be in the present and that's the reality. You all can feel the vibrations. So feel it on your fingertips. Now, you will be surprised to know that Mecca has got a big stone. black stone. Mohmmed Saheb said, don't workship any stone because people used to make money out of making some statues and all. But this stone he said, you should go round. That is the biggest thing for muslims to go round the stone. Now ask them, why many saints in this country have said that it is within yourself, find out within yourself, the peace is within yourself. This is the way, by Kundalini awakening and when they have written about it also nobody understands. Kabira has said about it, do you go and worship the stone? They don't know. But I know. Because in our Shastras it's written about this-'ida, Pingla, Sukhman nadi re', 'shoonya shikhar pur anahad baajey re'. So many things they have that it's a Meccashwar Shiva. I say it said, but who understand Kabira? and vibrations start flowing... it's a Now, Guru Nanaka has said also very clearly that, Kaahey re ban khojan Meccashwar Shiva. It's a Shiva in the stone. It's the vibrations of the Shiva jayee, sada nivasi, sada alepa, tohe and it's a fact. sang samayee'. But that's only saying, The other day I read a very nice article that's only reading. Then Kabira has also said... Padhi, Padhi Pandit in Marathi that the Shiva was worshipped before the Islamic religion came. But the way they were doing it, because they were going to all kinds of temples and rituals, too moorakh Adishankaracharya has prayed to Even bhaye. Mother... Mother! please remove my shabdajalam. So, we are lost in the many rituals and because of that ritualism.... Mohammed Saheb said, shabdjalam. don't worship the stone. But we have Even in Maharashtra, you will be swayambhus, we have really the surprised, they will get one big bag swayambhus. But when you will gö full of all the kinds of statues and and verify with your vibrations, you early in the morning 4o' clock they will know they are Swayambhus. will get up, start worshipping,

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 18 worshipping, worshipping till about 9 o' clock. Then they will have their saying, it's very simple, it will hardly take any time, just a matter of bath, have something to eat and go to office. It's a common practice and this happening. First of all you should forgive everyone. Now so many is that one has to understand that these people say, Mother! we cannot are ritualisms. You should really forgive specially in the west. They know what is the reality and who cannot forgive, they just cannot should be worshipped, not to waste forgive. But just think what do you your energy on all such things. It's very easy to become that knowledge. don't do anything but you don't That knowledge is also the truth, also forgive then you play into wrong do when you do not forgive. You the absolute, I should say, the Divine hands and torture yourself. So, better love and you don't know how you forgive everyone of them, everyone. become so nice, you don't know how I know there have been so many you become so loving and so horrible people also who must have respectful to everyone? It's such a troubled you, tortured you, must have remarkable thing within you which done all kinds of things. But forgive you should just have for nothing at them. Now, forgive yourself also, you all. You can't pay for it. It's a living should not feel guilty for anything. process of your evolution. How much Whatever has happened, has did we pay for our evolution? happened, that's forgotten, finished. Nothing. We don't have to pay What's the use of remembring it now anything. It just works, just sprouts that I feel guilty. I mean, sometimes like a small little seed; sprouts but it this guilty business goes too far. Like has to grow, for that you should one day I asked a gentleman, what are meditate for sometime. It's not a you guilty for? I spilled some coffee process or anything but which can on the president. So what! you didn't clarify these chakras. Sometimes you mean it.. no! So, why are you feeling have problems on chakras which guilty? But, I did. I said, you didn't should be clarified and that can be do it, it happened. Then somehow or done with meditation. It's absolutely other he forgave himself that he energy giving, absolutely joy giving. spilled some coffee on the president's clothes. Can you imagine such a thing bothering him all his life? I hope it will work out if you want to have self realisation. As they are

 19 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze cannot forgive others, you see, I don't So, one should not have any such ideas that I have done this wrong, how know why there is this kind of a can I get realisation? This is different attitude but we should unnecessary, you should not, you forgive oursleves also. God has should never-never think that you are created you as human beings not to guilty. If you were you would have be ruined like this, not to be shattered been in the jail, you would not have like this but to achieve your glory. been here. So, don't think you are guilty, don't judge yourself. You don't towards me like this. I think if you know yourself. It is to know yourself have shoes you will have to take it you have to do this and don't judge. out. Why? Because this Mother Earth You must have great respect and love also helps us a lot. You are sitting in for yourself and I am sure it will work Delhi, you are here in this Bharat You have to just put your hands out tonight as desired by these people Bhumi, in this yoga bhumi. In this country it works very fast and also with you people because you love this country very much. You work so hard for this country. So it works very fast. So, don't have any apprehensions, but those who don't want to have self realisation, I would say, they can go becuase I don't want them to disturb others. Supposing if you don't want, cannot be forced, it has to be asked for. You cannot force it on anyone, just put your both the hands like this. you cannot pay for it, you cannot doO Again I would request you must anything about it, but if the Kindalini doesn't rise, it's alright. We have a centre where you can go and get it corrected, may be, something wrong in the chakras which you do not know forgive yourself and others. That's very important because if you don't do that then your centre here, we call the Vishudhi chakra, will be blocked. I mean the guilty part will be blocked and they will find out. and if you don't forgive others then So, it will take hardly anytime, have this Agnya Chakra will be blocked. faith in yourself. First of all have faith Please put your hands like this, little in yourself and this will work out. lower. Now first you will start feeling First, I think to forgive others is some cool or hot breeze on your difficult. You see the Western people finger tips and also on your thumb. they cannot forgive themselves and for Indians the other way round, they Then in the palm you will start feeling a cool or a hot breeze. Some people

 20 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze start thinking that-this conditioning... it has nothing to do with this air-conditioning. So please have faith in yourself. Now, please nirvikalpa, when there is no doubt in air- you, you become into doubtless awareness where you are sure you got it, you are sure you can do everything put your right hand towards me and that is the state one has to rise. Now, put down your head a little and feel all those who have felt on their with your left hand on top of your fingertips a cool or a hot breeze or fontanelle bone area which was called out of the fontanelle bone area, cool as Taalu. If there's a cool or hot breeze or hot breeze, please raise both your hands. Most of you have got it, most coming out now. Please put down your head a little and see for yourself, of your have got it. move your hand. It might be coming very far may be, very close but don't Congratulations! And those who put your hand on top but above. Just haven't got, will also get it. You have move, please move it on the sides and to just little bit join one of the centres see for yourself if there's a cool or that we have or if you want anyone hot breeze coming. It is hot means you of them to come and give realisation. have not forgiven, it means only that I don't think there is any hindrance in really you have to say, I forgive. You that but sometimes it happnes that the don't have to do anything except you Kundalini doesn't rise. She is your have to say in your heart, forgive mother, your individual Mother. She doesn't have any other child, this Kundalini knows everything about everyone. That's a very great quality. Now, please put your left hand you. She knows your aspirations, she towards me and see with your right hand. Again bend your head please knows your past, she knows and see for yourself if there's a cool everything. Also, she knows what or a hot breeze coming out of your physical problems you have. She is head. Just see for yourself. Now, very kind as your mother when she gave you birth she took up all the please put your right hand again and see for yourself. Now, again put both the hands towards me and don't think, just-just don't think. You can stop thinking even for a second, it's very important. This is called as nirvichara, labour pains upon herself. This is the Kundalini that out of her love, that motherly love she does everything and then it just works. It works because that's what you are in for. The time has come for all of us to be then comes the state to become

 21 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze the permutations and transformed, to get into a new аге generation of beautiful people. It's a combinations of problems in the wonderful time. If I have done human beings and why should not they all get it? This collective happening has been a great blessing all over the world. Again I would like anything so far is this that I found a way of collective awareness, that's the only work I have done. Otherwise it to thank you very much. Very kind of you that you have invited me here. was already there, Nathpanthis used to do it, it was quite a well known thing among people but what I have done is, I have tried to find out what May God Bless You

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 22 ON - RECEPTION DELHI 5.12.99 Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi I bow to all the seekers of truth. I am it is working out and it will work out. overwhelmed to see so many of you sitting here. I couldn't even imagine that so many people will experience The joy that you are receiving, you should give to others also. India of course is my country and the the truth in my own life time. Life joy of coming here is undescribable. without truth has absolutely no When I see you all on the Airport then I know how many hearts are full of meaning since man keeps groping in the dark. Without experiencing the this joy and how many are being nurtured by it! This joy will protect our children and also our youth. It is not the end of this. It will bring truth, one goes astray. But I do not regard it as his fault; the darkness that surrounds him is to be blamed. As I have said, you have to spread Sahaja wisdom and self-rule (Svarajya) in the Yoga. real sense of the word. 'Sva' means This is my keen desire that you should spread Sahaja Yoga and you work it out. Everyone should think that we have experienced the truth, spirit' and Rajya' means kingdom. Kingdom of the Spirit is Swarajya and Swatantra is the "Reign' of the Spirit'. Both of these should come now we should give it to others and make it grow. It will not only help Sahaja Yoga grow but also make this world heavenly, peaceful and prosperous. Now it is up to you. Do it sincerely. This is being worked out and they are there. You people have accepted and adopted it in your lives. Now others have to adopt them. Now is the time of their salvation. It should be adopted now. I notice with surprise that how the millennium is affecting! Many of our foreign Sahaja Yogis came to India. They went to Orissa, gave realisation to many people and started nine Sahaja Yoga centres there. Cyclone was the result of the sins which were being committed there. with full force in India, because it is Yoga Bhumi, Punya Bhumi and it was destined to be worked out in this Punya Bhumi. Still I never expected it to work out with such speed and make the Sahaja family mature. But

 The Divine Cool Breeze 23 September-October 2000 None of the Sahaja Yogis was harmed think in those terms then a lot could in the cyclone nor were their houses be done in India. I think it is not at all difficult because there is absolutely no problem in it - no quarrel, no damaged. Absolutely no harm was done to them. The people in Turkey are Muslims but after Sahaja Yoga difficult, no medicine, no rituals, nothing at all. Only you have to raise they have become real Muslims. the Kundalini of the seekers. This There more than two thousand people who are doing Sahaja Yoga. There also, terrible earthquake came twice power has been bestowed upon you; you have to use this power. If you do not use the power that is given to you then what is the purpose of it. All of but none of the Sahaja Yogis was harmed. Even their relatives were you should use this power and decide saved. Such calamities were there in that each one of you will awaken at Italy also. But I have seen that all the Sahaja Yogis are fully protected and least one hundred persons. Talk to everyone about it. There is no cause you are growing in this protection. It means the last judgement has begun to feet shy or to be embarrassed because we are standing on truth. The with full force. only remedy to check the false Gurus (Guru Ghantals) of today is that we should talk openly to the people about Sahaja Yoga and tell them to be at their guards against these people. Otherwise they will be finished. To All of you meditate regularly and you have grown in Sahaja Yoga. But now you should have the desire to give it to others. May be that you have this desire, but some how it is not being fulfilled. You have to do it with full enthusiasm. The worldly and save the sinking ship of this world is our duty. Only you could do it. You should try to give self realisation to domestic activities go on always but amongst all these activities you have to take time to give realisation to more and more people. This joy could not be confined to one's own heart. others and uplift them. This is your If it were possible to confine then why pious duty. It all depends on you. should I leave my house and move in Only you could do it and many of the whole world to give self you are already doing. But if you think over it seriously, this comfort, this joy which we have received realisation to people? This is a state in which you wish to use your power collectively. If you are in this state should also be given to others. If you then use it fully and go ahead in that

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 24 direction. could see at the Airport itself that how people were mad in love for me. So this is the glory of the love and to I hope next year when I come to India many more people will have become share this love with others is a great Sahaja Yogis. You have honoured me thing. If it is achieved in this life time then it will be the reward of all the and arranged this reception. What do I say about it? There was no need of it. Yet it was your desire and I had to bow before it. But the day I arrived I punyas. Abundant Blessings to all of you

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 25 Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Hague, Holland, 17-09-1986 To influence other people we must absolutely late. Also if you tell know how much control we have somebody that I have to meet at such upon ourselves also. That is very and such a time, and this should be important. For example some people arranged at such and such a time, then do not have proper image and they you should be absolutely punctual. Its try to influence others. So its a very important that the punctuality mockery. Nobody gets influenced by is to be maintained by you. such a person who himself has no Now, I've seen in the West specially that people get up very late, are very image of his own. So before working out the exterior the interior must be lazy; they walk in a limpy manner; and the whole thing shows that they are not interested in the world, they are just pushed into it and somehow or other they are doing. Such a person can never influence anyone, because people also see your image, that you yourself are dragging your life somehow, so why to do the same thing? - Whatever he is doing. He cannot tell us anything. So that is another reason why you cannot influence people at all, if you are yourself a lazy person. So, the person worked out. For example a person who always comes late to the office and is always delayed, who has no time-sense, is never respected. So when you tell people that they should be in time, you should be the first to arrive at the right time. You must always keep the time, absolutely. You should be known for keeping time. So if you have to go to the office at ten o'clock, you reach the office in such a way that you are there five minutes early, wait outside and enter the office at the time who has to influence others must be when you have to go there. That an early riser, must have proper punctuality is very important. That habits of sleeping, must get up in the helps people and people get an awe morning and be properly brushed, for you. They think, this gentleman washed and everything, and should is so regular and I'm the one who is be what we call a smart man.

 26 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze Now, many people believe that if you try to be a fashionable type, that you wear dresses of a fashionable style comes with a person when he realises that he is completely secure. And in Sahaja Yoga you know that if your center heart is secure, tell yourself, and all that, that will influence others. "Mother is with me. Mother is It's not true. Because they think that you have no conviction of any kind, helping me, and I'm with Mother. I have nothing to worry." Then your center heart will be alright. Of course, this you cannot tell to others, but still if you have personality you can instill you see, you must build up an image of yourself that you are such and such a kind of a character, as we have in a drama, a character. A person speaks with the same that into others very simply. But if you character, talks with the same are diffident about yourself then you character. And the style should be absolutely known to people that this is your style, that is how you are. That you don't compromise on things. cannot do it. So confidence is to be established first of all within yourself. For Sahaja Yogis it's very easy to say, "I am the spirit, and I am the child, I am the one who has been chosen by the Adi Shakti herself." So It is very important that when you are talking to people you should have a proper style of talking, walking; a proper style. This should all be trimmed down properly, that you there should be a tremendous amount of confidence in you. For example when you are with the people, how do you eat your food? don't walk in a languid manner, in a manner of throwing your legs here Some people open their mouth all the and there but straight, and sit down time, eat their food with a sort of sound. All these things are watched by others. How you eat. How you straight. And let people see that you have faith in yourself first of all. If you don't have faith in yourself; I talk. Normally things are watched by mean any behaviour that shows that others. How you eat. How you talk. you have no faith in yourself; you Normally you should not keep your cannot influence. So your self- mouth open. You can never influence confidence must be shown through people. Keep your moth - not pursed all your behaviour like talking, either but in a normal way closed, walking sitting and communicating. so that people don't think that you are There should be a feeling of just gaping at them if you keep your moth open all the time. Or they should confidence. But the confidence

 27 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze not think that you are aggressive with feel that this gentleman is very them or angry. Have a normal face, a face that is neither aggressive, nor pleasant. Another way to impress people is to allow others to talk, - listen to them subservient. Suppose if you keep a gaping mouth, they'll think, "Oh, he's an idiot.", and if you purse your lips they'll think you are a person of a properly, - do not talk yourself. Listen to them, and once they've said aggressive nature. So one has to something, say, "That is true no understand how you are sitting before others, talking to others. And to doubt. I agree with you but.." Then you can start. So you don't just stun them by your, "No! Not at all!" like that. But on the contrary, you see what influence others, first of all, as I said, you must respect your own personality, and then respect the they say, You can watch me, I do that personality of other people in your many times. When somebody says something, "Oh, that is true, but, you see, this is it..." So they don't mind. Like when somebody comes in, you They think that you have seen the should talk to them in a very gentle other side of the thing also, that you manner - knowing that there is another have a balance, you don't just impress God who is coming in. If there is your idea upon others. In a way you Spirit in me, there is Spirit in him also. are, but you do it in such a way that So you must see that he sits properly, nobody feels the impact that you are that he is comfortable, and ask him if doing something of that kind. behaviour. he wants any tea. Make him comfortable. Make him feel that you Now, as far as possible don't tell are not in any way disturbed, nor that anybody to do anything. That hurts you are irritated, but you are very people. For example, when I tell happy to meet him and you should people, "Do this. Put the lights off." settle down with kindness. Sometimes After all you are my children, it's also in diffidence one might feel alright, it is a different relationship. nervous about a person. That But when you are dealing with others, nervousness is a sign of insecurity. like somebody is there sitting - if you One should not be nervous if one is want to put on the light, slowly, while talking to someone. One should be talking, you get up and put on the you in a way that another person should light. Ask him, "Do you mind if I put on the light?" Any behavioural feel absolutely confident and should

 28 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 But if you try to do the fashions of the world, then it changes everyday. Today the hair will be this side, tomorrow that side. So make the hair style as an official would do. That is to properly comb it. In the olden days, if you see, even the heroes of the film used to have oil in their hair. They never had this kind of hair that is dry. I mean, it need not be oil, but should be properly groomed as they say. in you. They should trust you that There are lots of things available in whatever you are saying is the truth. the market which can just groom your That you are not telling them hair without oiling it. It should be something that is false or you have properly groomed hair so that it no faith in. The way you tell them shows that you have paid attention to influences them very much that this your appearance and hairstyle. So you man is telling the truth. So the whole make an image out of yourself that is thing should start from your absolutely suitable for a particular aggression is the first impression. It is the other way round in Sahaja Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga first is the Kundalini, then, do this, do that. It is the other way round. You have to build them up from the foundation if you have to impress them from outside. To build them up from the foundation, the first thing is that you must infuse in them a kind of a trust behavioural style. type of a job. Now the dress also is very important in influencing others. Now supposing you are connected with somebody in an official way, or in any way that you Now, for example, if a cook appears in a swimming suit - what would you think of that? It's horrid! A cook has to dress up like a cook. In the same way a businessman also has to dress up like a businessman. You cannot go about in jeans to your office, because if you do it, everybody will do it. And all these things create laxity. Laxity is alright outside the office, outside your business; alright, but not when you have the business. Like we have want to influence him in the business and all that. The best thing is to wear a business dress, not a dress that is relaxed or casual. You must wear a dress that is a business dress, like a deep blue suit with a lot of strips, a proper three-piece smart thing, and smart, clean shoes, and the hair nicely done, may be a little bit oiled, it's a drawing room. Now a drawing alright. Looks like a smart business room is a drawing room, it is not a bedroom. You should not mix them person.

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 29 up. Once you start mixing them up know, I never wrote about a serpent. there's no end to it. It can go to any If somebody else has written why limit. I've seen people going to the should I explain it? I never call it a office in dresses that really look like serpent's energy because that a swimming suit. So this has to be confuses people. But if somebody has revived, and can be revived very called it a serpent's energy it doesn't easily if you tell people that they matter. What can you do about it" won't be able to influence people And when you say such a thing, bring unless and until they keep that kind it to a ridiculous conclusion of the of a form and an upright behaviour. whole thing, so the person himself keeps quiet. In dealing with others there is another point, that you have to be truthful. Don't tell lies. Whatever you have to tell you should say; this much, that is all. But you shouldn't tell one thing But you should not suddenly change the topic, that means that you are evading the issues, that you don't know how to handle it. This is what today, tomorrow another thing, the people do sometimes. They say, day-after-tomorrow another thing. "Alright, let's talk about this." You That creates a very big gap in the cannot do that. A diversion like that mind of a human being. Unconsciously he thinks, "Oh, he's a cheat, and he is trying to evade the can create a big problem. And another thing; while talking to others, don't talk about yourself, "I am this and I am that." No one likes that. Its issue." stupid, to talk about yourself. "I have this thing. I am this thing." Nothing. Supposing now I'm talking to you, and then I start looking at the watch. Now, you just ask, "What are you That is insulting. Supposing you are talking about something particular are you." This. That. All sorts of doing? What is your profession? How and suddenly I change the topic, then questions to him. it is again insulting, because everybody is intelligent to see that you are trying to avoid the issues. But up to a point you should take it, and then, if the whole thing is ridiculous, you should bring it to a point to show that. Like yesterday, I said that, "You Then you have to talk, say, about your organization, you shouldn't say I', you should always say 'we'. We don't do. We'; always refers to the organisation and never to yourself. "I would not do such a thing. I hate it. I

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 30 believe in it." That is absolutely women. When they serve people, they take good care and the food is lavish, absolutely lavish, - eat as much as you like, a lot of food. They give you five, six times food, whatever you like. And you feel quite happy to have all that. You press the button and immediately they are available to you. absurd. "What we have to do. That we believe. We think this way; - and what is your opinion. We have this kind of a thing." Or anything that you want to tell them about your own organisation or your own product or anything. You have to tell them; "Now, see this is what is available. So what I am saying is, when you are Now it is here, and we have seen that it has done a lot of good, and it works marketing people you are at the other this way. And we have got very good end. You are not to be serviced, but reports about it. You can see what it you have to service. Once you realise is. And, if you please, you can try it, that you have to service others your and see for yourself." attitude changes. You have to service others. Only through your services they are going to work out. I'll tell The amount of service you give to the person is very much appreciated by another person. It is not only ego, but you how. Specially with the English its a big it makes a person very comfortable. Like, people like to travel by Air India very much. Many people say that they problem. That's why they are losing so much. They are extremely arrogant. If you get to an Englishman and ask him, "Can I see what product would like to travel by Air India. Try to understand why. Because these you have?"- "What do you want? "I would like to see the product that days its difficult, because they examine you too much, and also because of bombing and this and that. you have!" - "Alright. We just now So I thought I would be very difficult. don't have any arrangements here to And they have raised the prices for give you anything, but if you leave the travel because they have to do your note we'll send it!! Finished. extra spending on getting people checked. The reason why people take You should be properly equipped all to Air India is this, the ladies who work there are extremely modest. organisation, suppose you are having They look after the people very well. They are not cheap, they are not cheap all about it. The brochures should be That person is not bothered. the time to attend to it. In an some product, then you should know

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 31 from whom I bought it, and the experiences I've had. I think I'd always go to a person who was kind to me, who is not shouting at me, who there, it is all the time available whenever you want it. It should be properly priced, systematically kept. If somebody comes, if you know the person, if it has validity, the one who can do some business with you, "Here it is. Please have it. You can see yourself." Explain to him what it is. "This is what it is, and we can give is well behaved. His behaviour is nice, he just doesn't try to make fun of me, and also, on the contrary, he gives me all the information and everything. It is absolutely acceptable. you so much concession in that. Like, I went to see Lloyds. It is a company where I wanted to put some money. I mean, it is a very big thing Could be so much." All those things are going to capture the mind. The market doesn't capture so much because of the product, but because to put some money into some bank. They should understand, It's a of the way it is put forward. customer. Now, they had put a little The way it is put forward is very important. You have a proper brochure done, by proper people, or you yourself see to it that it is done beautifully. Spending a little money on that doesn't matter. Whatever is spent is a prop of the capital that you have to put in for the product. It is a part of it. If you think that just to put a product somewhere is enough it won't sell. These are part and parcel, in these modern times, of any product being made or sold. It's part of the product. girl there. After all, the people who are to be contacting others should be people of personality. So some little girl was there. As soon as I came in she asked me, "Who are you?" I told her, "I am this and this." "Oh, no we cant help you. You've got to have this and, please . we can't do it." So I said alright, and I gave the name of the high commissioner of India and all those things. I mean, she should understand, then she would not say like that. So, the only thing is that she did not realise that I was with a driver. I had a chauffeur-driven car. I have a To influence people you don't have to advertise so much as you have to deal with them. I tell you this much, that when I had to buy something anywhere I remember the people Mercedes with me. I was wearing an expensive saree. I looked quite respectable, and she should have

 September-October 2000 32 The Divine Cool Breeze understood that she should behave to inquiring. You should not in any way me in a different way than to an show that you know about him. ordinary labourer. Here is a real So, that kind of secrecy helps a lot, customer. So she said, "I'd like to have identification, and then I have because you do not become arrogant. You do not become blunt, or you say to do this, and - no, no no, no, no!" it bluntly if you tell somebody. I got so fed up with them that I went to another bank, that is North West. I Nobody likes you that way, of if you try to put down another person, or you have got a bank account somewhere try to doubt another person. There are else, but I wanted one near my house. the three things that you look after - Though it is far away, though it is not that you put the person in a in such a good locality, when I entered comfortable position and tell him in, immediately she could see that I everything; listen to him, what he has was an intelligent woman, she could to say, trusting him. Then the person see this is a good customer. She could looks up on you. see that I was wearing diamonds, this, So, in an organisation, if you have to that. You should see from my run any administration, your personality has to be absolutely sensible. Secondly, what you talk, you must follow. Supposing I tell you that you shouldn't take money, and I start grabbing money supposing, - then what will you do? You'll have no faith in me, will you? personality that there is a good customer coming in. Immediately she said, "Please, let us go into the V.I.P. room." I didn't say anything. She took me inside, she talked very gently to from you, me and she asked me and she said, "Can I take one minute?" She went in and she told somebody to Actually, when you give me money for pujas I keep them in a packet and telephone and find out about my things and all that .. use that money for buying the silver and all that for you. I need not. I mean it is out of the question. You have given it in puja, it is supposed to be mine, and I have said, alright, to keep You see, it is not to be done in the presence of a person, but you can verify the person's personality secretly, in a way that he doesn't feel bad or; something may be wrong with this man, is he correct or not? But he should not know that you are the protocol alright you use that silverware, which is my own, but you can use it. I mean, it's just a joke, but

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 33 be something absurd. everybody knows that Mother is so clear cut, so clear cut. You have to be clear cut with people. They should When you have to deal with three persons, or five or ten persons, then you have to understand that you should always try to create a good understand that you do not play tricks with them, or you are not doing some sort of a backhand outwitting. feeling among them. Like now for Some people do it, you see, at the example, I would like you to marry - back of a person they try some sort of a trick. Such a person is never liked. then I will tell you about her, what she is, in a way that will not hurt you Nobody respects such a person. But straight forward dealing with a person as he is. If somebody is not alright, in or hurt her, but prepare you. Because later on you may hear about her, that somebody was saying so, and Mother never told. So, in a very gentle way you should say, "You see, she has a little of these things, but it's alright, she can be very, very gentle. She can manage it." And it depends on you. How you manage it. So that you feel a mild way you should say what the problem is. "We are facing this problem. Now, tell me what is the solution." Then the person does not feel bad. If you tell a person directly they won't like it. No, they won't. You won't like it, if I tell you so directly, informed, knowledgeable about a person, and also responsible about it, that how it is my responsibility. but I tell you everything, - and I tell you in a way that is mild, that is congenial, that is easily understood and assimilated. That is very So, to make people responsible is also a very important part administration. If you start doing of important, that you have a style that people understand, and a proper kind every work yourself then people may never share your work. They will of behaviour. Actually by not influencing others, never do anything. To make them you influence others. Art lies in hiding responsible the best way is by art. There should be no deliberation rewarding them. You must reward exposed about it. When talking to them if somebody has done good someone also, even if you don't work. "Oh you have done such a good understand what they are talking, you work." But not directly like that, but should not show that you are in a very indirect manner you must understanding and listening. It may reward that person. Not only in

 September-October 2000 34 The Divine Cool Breeze works, but in kind words you can do it with kind small things. saris for myself. I was buying some saris and I thought, I've bought quite a lot now. I liked one saree very, very much, but I didn't buy it. I thought it I'll give you an example of Rajesh. Rajesh is very sweet, and does not need anything. I mean, he is such a rich man, what can we give him? was too much money, - I shouldn't waste all this money, that will not be Once he was taking me somewhere good. Whatever it is. I gave it up. and he had this swiss knife, and he Next day Gregoire bought the sari as a present to me. Really, I treasured that sari. I remember. gave it to the driver to cut the fruit or something. And then it vanished. And You see, every incident can be made into some sort of a very valid thing, we can say: like a puja. But like an official makes a difference in an he was very angry, you see. He couldn't bear this fellow cheating him. He took him to the police station and all that, but he couldn't get it. The organisation where you work. Little, little things like that. Also they should feel that you are responsible for them in an organisation, very important. driver had managed it somehow you see. It was a taxi. He was very angry with the driver. I saw that and said, "Alright, it doesn't matter." The next time I went to India, I took Once in my husband's office one a very nice knife for him. When he fellow joined another organisation saw it, he just melted away. He said, and he was told not to join another organisation, but he joined it because there was more money. And when he "Mother, how did you remember?" I said, "You were so upset at that went there he found it was all a very time." horrible thing. There was nothing good happening except for the money. He was very unhappy there, He said, 'Not because of a knife, but because of the way this fellow cheated so he wanted to come back. And he came back my husband was very annoyed, "I told you not to go there. Why did you go? What was the need me." But the whole thing neutralised you see. So, little, little things if you watch of a person, its very sweet. to do such a thing? Now I can not take you back." Like I'll tell you about Gregoire. So the fellow came to me. I don't Once we went to a shop to find some

 The Divine Cool Breeze 35 September-October 2000 like a family. What's wrong with her? know why he thought of it, but he came to me. He told me what had Is she all right? Do you need any help? This thing, that thing. Send happened and that he wanted to come back to the shipping corporation and, I made some mistakes. I think I made sometimes the flowers when the husband is sick, or the wife is sick, - or make enquiries about the children. All these things mean a lot. a big mistake, and Mr. Shrivastava is somehow angry with me. He doesn't want to take me back. So when Mr. Shrivastava came home I said that he Normally, what people do, on a had come to see me."Oh! So he Christmas day. At the most they may came to see you. As if you are my send a card or something. But you can I have in the organization a proper card said, "He wants to join your system. You should sign them yourself, and one line somewhere in boss."- and he got very angry. So I corporation. I think you should give the thing - I hope your wife is alright. I hope the children are alright. 'If you know the wife, 'Please give my regards to her.' There is no need to consideration to him." He said, "Why did he come to you?" I said, "I think he thought I am more make them drink like fish, but it is forgiving than you are perhaps!" more to make them feel that they are That put him right. He said, "What loved and they are liked in the do you mean? I can be forgiving too." organisation. They are very important. This kind of a thing. "So then forgive him!" Even the suggestion like you are These are the tricks, you see, which I changing the position of a person. have naturally. But you can imbibe Now, for example if I want Christine them also, not difficult to impress to be the leader in America and others. Such little, little things make Gregoire to be there and not to a difference, you see. When they are interfere with Christine, I said, sick you must look after them. Find "Gregoire, see now, she is there and out if their children are sick, if their she is handling people better. She wives are sick. You should be knows them, people have love and concerned and you should be respect. Suddenly you are a new identified. You must treat an person going there and you will be her husband. So, as it is, you are one organisation like a family. Absolutely

 September-October 2000 36 The Divine Cool Breeze know what is wrong with them, but of the world leaders, and you should have nothing to do with the local please take care and all that. And stuff." And he understood it. But if I things work out. People take you had said, "Now you don't talk seriously and they understand that anything there! Now you keep quiet!" you are responsible for yourself, and I mean, it would not have worked out. that you are putting that responsibility And that he is, he knows that very on them. That is how it should be worked out. well. He is the one who have come up like that. Anywhere in the world you can go and do anything you like. There is a shop in Lucknow that I would say Rajesh is another one who is coming up. makes very good sweets, very famous for it's sweets. Now his father is gone but the son is sitting there. Big stomach he has got. And everybody goes there to his shop. You can't take a car, you have to walk quite a long distance. Now his trick is such, which Unless and until you make proper arrangements you should not shift a person suddenly. You should try to see that this person who is suddenly shifted is alright. But you should find out if you really want to shift a person or not. If you are uncertain better keep it hanging. Time is the best way to allow things to happen like this. Allow a little time to pass-away. Give a little hint to a person., "People are complaining. What to do? I'd like you to help me." So that he also thinks that you give him sufficient time to improve. But if you don't give any time and you just tell a person, I have noticed, he'll first take your order, then you are sitting there and he says (to his boys), "What are you doing? Why don't you give her things? She has been sitting here for such a long time. Look at these people. They just go on taking so much time of people. Now I hope you don't have to go by the aeroplane just now." I said, "No, I am alright!" So, on an apology all the time, you see. So then he said, "Why not taste these "Now, you get out!" - he'll become things I've made specially, just try." your enemy. So you eat something and you say, "Alright, give me some of these too." But, on the contrary, you should say, "I'm sorry, but these people are such, they are trying to trouble us and Like that, he goes on, you see, giving trouble me all the time, and I don't time. And then after some time he

 37 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze "Look now at these people, how horried they are. They don't know how to finish the work. Hey! What which is sensible, which receives says, people sensibly, respects them and delivers the things in time, and a thing are you doing there? Why don't you give some sweets to the lady. She has to go now. Why are you taking so much time? I'm Sorry, will you taste that is not useless. of course, you must find out what is the good with the other organisation. What they are having. What they are them? They'll bring it." selling. You should find out, and why people like that? But most of all, what I've seen, that works out is nothing but your relationship with the So, you eat something else. So you say, "Alright." You eat this and by the time you have left the shop all your money is finished and you bought all customer. the sweets of the shop. And that is the trick he plays. Then after some But also your relationship in the office time you discover it and you say, "I should be good. First of all your know all these tricks. Now will you please give me what ever I want!" who wear fashionable dresses in the Then he'll give it. personality should be good. People office cannot be good administrators because you see, they become a little loose, and people start taking advantage of a loose personality. But you should be tight - in a sense. Wear an official dress. Always. People have So what I am saying is that a relationship of sweetness devélops when you see him sweetly selling his things, his products to us. On the contrary, - "This is my product. If you an awe of them. want, you have it. Otherwise, get out. In the same way, this new data, like in the office people will call - "Alright, you get out first!" The whole attitude of selling is now everybody the driver will call the boss, - "Tom, how are you?" turning back to a proper relationship between the seller and the purchaser. It is just a relationship that works, not No respect. It starts like that. Or if the product. Let the product go to hell! the boss takes a drug or something, Nobody is bothered about the like in India they take what you call product. Of course, if you have five tobacco. Tobacco they eat. What products, and they are equally good, happens, even a peon goes to the boss then people will go to the organisation and the boss says, "Have you got

 38 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze little bit of zarda?" - "Yes, yes.", dresses. Because that really makes a difference, you see. Always a finished. The whole relationship is dress makes a difference for proper takes out his own and gives it, - articulation. Absolutely. finished. So at that time, if you are taking Now, yesterday, I didn't have a white drugs, if you take drinks, anything, Sari. They never forget white saris for whatever habits you have that are my programme. O, I always wear a really detrimental, try to cut them. white sari for my programme. But I Even if you cannot, you do not had worn this one, white with a red expect your subordinates to support border. It makes a difference. If I had that. No one likes cheap type of jokes and things, but these happened. But suppose I am coming subordinates pass cheap types of to see you, what sari I wear has an jokes and they think they are effect on you. "Oh, Mother wore this popular. They are not. Popularity is to be gained by aloofness and is like your light. Your dress, your singleness. Not by just becoming like behaviour is like your light. Whatever worn another sari it could not have sari while coming just to meet us." It them. you are inside shows out with that. And all these compromises that Another incident I'll give you. In C.P.'s office there was a lady who people have nowadays are spoiling came in jeans, and C.P. called her and the administration. You must keep yourself, you must keep your position. said, - "Madame, I will not have this. You can wear trousers, or you can Now in the offices I've seen, people answer back. Your own people answer back. But if you see a Japanese firm, one person will speak, nobody else. They'll all sit tight. wear some sensible dress but not these jeans." You can wear it in the street, you can wear it in the house, you can wear it anywhere but not in the office." When this one person asks them a She said, "No sir, it cannot be so!" question, they'll say, otherwise they don't speak. A kind of an allegiance He said, "Alright, then will you please resign. I won't have you. exists between them. The trick is like this; before going to any programme or all that he'll call his five people.- And she started wearing proper

 September-October 2000 39 The Divine Cool Breeze feeling, no sense of jealousy or anything. Jealousy is something that plays among your own people. You have to tell, "Everybody has his own job. Everything has to be done, and We do the same with our children. has to be done well - and we are all When Indians have to go to together and we are one. No question somebody's house, they tell the of this hand having a jealousy with children, "When you go there you are this one, but you are on the right hand not to ask for anything. You should and you are on the left hand, so do not touch anything there. You are not your right hand work and do your left to eat much, or say no to that. Even if hand work. And the whole thing will you have to eat, take very little. Then work out. The whole organisation has before going you say, "Thank you", to come up. If the organisation comes When you go there you must say, up, we'll all get advantages." So “Namaskar", "All these things are always build them up in the form of taught in the house first of all. an allegiance as far the organisation "Otherwise next time we'll not take is concerned. If we have more profits, This is what we are going to do. Now you have to say this, and you have to this. It's already decided. Nobody is free to talk in the presence of others. say you." we have better bonuses. So in this way, what happens is that May be, I understand your they are already warned. Actually Kundalini's very well-innately. I they are knowledgeable about what to do. Suppose you take five people, know how to deal with things, innately. Now, sometimes you have to say about someone, say, I may Then they start arguing among say about you to him, "Look after themselves in the same organisation. him and do this.' May be he is rather Now Sahaja Yogis in the beginning careless. He won't understand what used to do the same. They would I've told and he might just say, come along for a meeting, sit down. argue with me in the presence of "Mother was saying so!" So I have others and it created a problem. So I to warm him, "You just say yourself." had to tell them. - in the presence of Otherwise it won't work out. Why others don't argue. If you want to tell am I telling you? But all these things me, you tell me. must be made clear before he And between them to create a good cont'd on page No. 52

 40 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze SAHASRARA PUJA Cabella (7-05-2000) Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi accept that they are not yet complete Thirty years back when Sahasrara was opened I found darkness all over. People were so ignorant. There was and they have to have their realization. Also there style of life was such that no awareness, what they have to find. they had no time for themselves. I Of course I found they wanted to find found it very difficult to convince people that you must take your self something that was unknown but they didn't know, what was unknown, what they have to find? And they realization because they thought it is something imaginary. Which is very were extremely ignorant about farfetched and they only believe in themselves and about their gurus who would say alright "Do this surroundings and about the aim of their life. I did know how to start that much of rituals, Karamkands." That's all and they were doing all kinds of rituals with the kind guidance of their topic. Gurus without knowing that you have to first know yourself, which is said thought of trying self-realization only by all the great incarnations, all the on one lady. She was an old lady and saints, clearly. It is not that it was only there was another lady who also my idea that people should get their When Sahasrara was opened I started to come. self-realization but it was the idea of all those people. They said one after another, for centuries that seek This old lady got the realization and then the another lady who was much younger told me that she gets fits and she gets possessed. Oh my God! I said "how will I give her realization?" But somehow she got cured very fast and yourself". Even Christ said know thyself". Mohammed Saheb said the same. Nanak Saheb said the same. But nobody tried to know that these she also got realization. Its a very rituals are not the end of life, they will unknown knowledge. Also human not serve the purpose and they have beings in their ego do not want to to have realization. So those two

 41 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze those days people were such that if you tell them anything like that, they would turn their faces. Only the kind of false Guru who would say 'alright, ladies only got self realization and with that I thought let's go to the sea- shore and about thirty people came with me and they were talking in a very funny manner as to how they can you give me five rupees'. They will get self realization? They don't be very happy that they have deserve it. They have not been very purchased the Guru and now they good people. All kinds of things, don't have to bother about anything. condemning themselves and in that You don't have to do anything. So lot I got about twelve people with that gradually it started working altogether, inclusive of those two out and I remember that these people ladies who got realization. who got their realization asked me "Mother you allow us to do Durga This is a sign that the movement of Puja." Durga Puja was regarded as knowing yourself is very very slow something very difficult and and people don't understand why they Brahmins were not normally ready to should know themselves. I was quite do it, because they were not realized disappointed because nobody souls. So they used to get into fits and understood me. But one day it so into all kinds of problems. So they happened that in one of the programmes one lady came. She was possessed and she started talking in called the Brahmins, seven of them, and told them "you just don't worry." Nothing will happen to you because Sanskrit language. She was just a now you are facing the reality, not maid-servant! Everybody was surprised and she said "you don't anything. Its a human being. They know who she is?" and then she were quite frightened and they some sort of the Murti Puja or started describing me from the camedown. But something happened Saundarya Lahiri. I was wondering to them that with great confidence what is the matter with this lady! Like they started Mantras and everything. flowing a man she spoke. Her voice was like Vibrations started a man. People may believe it or not but she was very posssessed and then they came and asked mother "What she is saying, is it true?" I said you should find out yourself. Because everywhere. We were very close to the sea and I found that the sea was roaring but people didn't understand. Except for these seven people, they said that nothing has happened to us!

 September-October 2000 42 The Divine Cool Breeze We did everything so well: I think should have somebody to take that was the first miracle also. money, otherwise they don't have it. I said but you cannot sell it. It is See the trouble with human minds at false hood. You cannot sell self- this level or at this time is that they realization to people. He said then have too much of self importance and they think no end of themselves. So you see you won't be successful, with other gurus this is main thing already they think that we are great. that they just accept money and What is there to know ourselves? We even they tell people, bring so much money, do this, that is the fees and know ourselves. So the basic seeking power is humility. If you think that that's how only in Ego you satisfy you know everything, you cannot humble down and you can not seek. Even if you seek, they don't want to follow anybody's path. They will say that we will follow our own path. We and people take to falsehood. This falsehood, they may realize later on because they suffer a lot with all kinds of physical, mental problems but by that time they are gone cases. do whatever we want to do. I faced many people in different countries who just came to listen to my lecture and that's all. They would not take Now the Sahastrara has not been described in any of the books. Though they have talked about in our ancient books in India also. They have talked about Sahastrara but nobody has described it except that it has got a thousand petals. At least if they had mentioned something about it, it would have been easier for me to realization, and some of them did take their realization. They got it but they got it lost. Somehow this was such a funny story for me that I am giving them realization. I am taking no money for it, nothing. I used to travel on my own. But despite that why is it, that the people don't realize the show that see it is written in the book. Because people are like that! It has to be written in some book and that only they accept. Its a very difficult situation, because nobody had given a collective realization. So nobody had written to that extent except for value of self-realization. Then a gentle man who got realization in the first lot, told me that today it is a consumer society, as they call it, what ever it is unless and until you take money from one or two people who wrote clearly about Kundalini. But I would not say them, they will never value it. Let them feel that we have paid for it, for our realization. So at the gate only you it was so clear because it was all in

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 43 poetry. So people would sing the songs but they won't understand. But I was thinking how these people who and that's how people became so clean, so beautiful and started enjoying their lives. But nobody would believe them. When they went round and talked to people, they would say they have gone mad! They could not believe, how they have stopped drinking? How they are not smoking. So the identification I found of these people were mostly with the were lost here and there under some sort of seeking, what will happen to them and how will I be able to give them self-realization? Experiences were so horried but doesn't matter. I went on and on and on and I worked it out. Of course you met some people who were also very cruel and nasty, who troubled me and troubled Sahaja Yogis. All these things should have very loose type of enjoyment. They enjoyed very loose type of enjoyment, which has nothing to do really tampering my enthusiasm but on the contrary I started thinking why, with the spirit. Gradually of course it started working why people are like this? out. But still I must say that we cannot Then I realized onething that we expect, in this Kaliyuga, to have cannot have the whole world to get billions and billions of people in Sahaja Yoga, though it is my desire, it is your desire and you want them to get their self-realization, by which so many good things can happen. understand what they are doing. Its Firstly your physical self improves. not just having the big number that Many people have been cured. Christ will help us but really solid Sahaja cured only twentyone people. I don't Yogis. Then I found there were people know how many thousands have been who got cured of many diseases but cured in Sahaja Yoga? Also there is most of them got lost. Some of them another very big problem with human who were drug addicts, drinking, they beings that they read all kinds of gave up, smoking they gave up. I have books and they have no clear cut idea never said a word, that you give up as to what they should find? What is this or give up that. I know, when the their seeking? It's a very big problem and whatever is in one boook, they try self-realization. This is the last judgement. At this time people have to decide what is the most important. They have to know themselves and Kundalini rises they will automatically give up and it happened to follow that. I mean they are like

 September-October 2000 44 The Divine Cool Breeze shifting type of people. They shift tips. Without the experience you from one to another and their progress should not believe it. That means a new dimension has come now in your nerves. That you can feel the system which has not been known to you. The sympathetic nervous system was there but you never knew how it is in Sahaja Yoga is much more difficult. Because if you are going on one path and you start shifting from one to another then you may go back. But in that they find it is their freedom. Actually without realization you working. The knowledge about don't have your freedom, of yourself was so poor but after anything. Freedom is that in which realization suddenly the whole thing you know what you are. You know got enlightened, Suddenly you start what you are capable of. In the feeling the newness among yourself. freedom you are the one who should Still sometimes you have to fight your receive all the blessings. If these ego. You have to get over your blessings are not there then you are ignorance of things. Because not free. There is something wrong realization gives you absolute somewhere in your own life. Because knowledge, absolute knowledge. It can not be challenged. Its signal, as they call, is Ekmeva Satya, (the only truth) and when you get that knowledge then you can tally it also. once you get your realization you become absolutely free people. Free means your own spirit guides you, Spirit as you know is the reflection of the Divine, the God Almighty. If You can find out whether if it is correct or not. This is something that has happened to all of you and you everybody has the same reflection and he is awakened, then in the awareness have already got those vibrations with it works as if they know what is right and what is wrong. What is which you can feel. constructive and what is destructive. For example there may be some It is not some sort of a false satisfaction that you have but in dissatisfied souls with Sahaja Yoga reality it is. You feel the reality and who are these people? What are they but you can find out on vibrations that is what it has to happen. doing? On vibrations you can make out if those people have reached such The first thing in Sahaja Yoga is that stage of reality or not. You can make out if these people who are trying to you get the experience, of feeling, the spanda, the cool breeze on your finger

 45 September-Oclober 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze oppose you or trying to tell you reached it. You can see in the life of something else, how far are they? On all the great people that they think this your finger tips you know. This is is the truth, not by just reading, not what is 'Kyama' about which by just believing but as an experience. If on their central nervous system they can feel the truth, then it is impossible The other day I must tell you an to change them. Like you can see a Mohammed Saheb has said. experience with me. There was one fellow who came from the television change the tree into a seed. Seed is a and known as staff and he started seed. When the seed changes into the asking me very funny questions tree then you cannot bring it back into which had no relevance. His name seed which may create more seeds, was Abbas. So I said, Abbas Miyan, its different. In the same way once seed becomes a tree, then you cannot you are wasting your time and my you have got your realization and time. Will you come to the right once you have become one with the questions? So he said I am against all Divine, then there is no question of fundamentalism. But I am not you going down and listen to yourself. Its very very remarkable, fundamentalist. How do you know I am that or not? So he said, I am trying how you get this property, how you to find out. "Alright," I said, you put get this ability and this capability and your hands toward me. Mohammed after that you don't use it! Of course Saheb has said that at the time of first you must grow and for that you "Kyama" your hands will speak and, have to meditate. But this meditation, you will be amazed, immediately he once you do it, the whole being itself started feeling cool breeze on his gets so enlightened and so beautiful hands. He said what is happening to that you don't want to change it. You me. I said that's what it is." No use want to be there and enjoy it forever. arguing, no use talking about it, no But of course you want to give it to use enquiring. Just see yourself. others because you are enjoying so Experience it. He just got so stunned much. Like on the street you find and after that whatever he talked to somebody starving and you are me he never published. So what I am having food then you would feel like saying is that if the people reach the truth and they know this is the truth, nothing can change it, if they have giving food to that person. In the same way you see in this world people are madly seeking running up and down,

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 46 doing all kinds of things. You want enjoy the turmoil, the torture. to tell them. They may or may not Everything you can enjoy if you see believe. They may try to, sort of, the point that nothing can happen to absolutely deny you, defy you. They your spirit which is the real light. Whatever you may suffer, wherever you may think is troubling you is actually this silent light of the spirit makes you absolutely, perfectly joyous and you give joy to others. You don't design it, you don't plan it, how to give joy, but it just automatically gives joy, and this giving joy is also can do anything. But you know for definite that you are on the right path, you are on the right state of mind which is a Sahaja state. In Sanskrit it is called 'Sahajavastha'. In Sahajavastha you do not react. You just see and appreciate. Now see, I came, I saw this beautiful, such an effortless, Sahaja, because you are in idea of Sahastrara, all the chakras, the Sahaja state. In the Sahaja state they are crossed over, gone up there and from there then, very good feel, its different styles, different you just see things. Its a drama you expression. But any other person Oh, combination is not good, Why? Why did they use this? Why don't they use types, you just see and watch and get the joy out of it. It is not important to this colour would say, see, I like this, I like that, no. That I, which likes, is nothing but ego. This something else? Like that, finding keeps you out of the enjoyment which faults with others! This finding faults actually comes from your brain which is not yet enlightened. You cann't is reality, which is real. Everything in this world, that you find is troublesome, if you see from another enjoy anything because you react, all the time you go on reacting. If angle, from Sahaja sthiti (feefa) you somebody says something nice, still won't feel the troubles. But that higher standard should be built-in within you. you are reacting. If someone says something bad, of course you are reacting. No question! So for us it is The other day I had a meeting with the bureaucrats and I told them I know to understand that we are not free to that the pay is less. You may think that the others get much more pay they have much more facilities. But react. We are not that cheap to react. We are on a very high pedestal. What is our job, is to enjoy. Enjoy everything and that enjoyment is the blessing of the Divine. Even you can there is one way you can really enjoy your work. If you have patriotism,

 September-October 2000 47 The Divine Cool Breeze Deshbhakti. If you have patriotism for in the ocean of purity. Where there is your country, no amount of sacrifice no idea at all of hurting anyone or will satisfy you. You wan to give troubling anyone. Such a protection everything and you can go through is there for them. They cannot be all kinds of depressive states without harmed because after all you have even feeling anything. And at the entered into the kingdom of God, so same time your feelings become very who can harm you or trouble you? Such a prosperity I have seen among Sahaja Yogis and such a generosity deep. For example you are travelling and suddenly you find somebody who is sick. You can feel it on your vibrations that this person is sick and such that they have, and understanding about things. I don't have to give lectures; now don't do this and don't do that. No, no need. immediately your sympathy and your love flows to that person. You try to help that person. If possible you try to even cure that person. Just like that, your whole being becomes like an ocean which absorbs all the rivers and And these who are not yet already matured in Sahaja Yoga should try to mature and those who are not matured and troubling, don't worry about them. You should have pity, have pity for such people that they are all kinds of watery things, whatever it is within its abdomen, I should say. it just takes all that is there. It doesn't immature. hurt. It doesn't trouble someone. It is like over powering a person with his Today it is something great, I feel, love. He doesn't show his power. He because for thirty years I have been does not bother about its self- running up and down every where and importance. If somebody tries to I have been able to gather so many insult you, alright, what is there the of you. There are so many Sahaja insult part of it, and such people who Yogis all over the world. This is just have reached that Sahajavastha are the a wee-bit of them. So this is. greatest creators of art, of music, of something was to happen, has been great thoughts and that's why these already described has been predicted survive. So many people create but by people that such and such thing nobody bothers. But those who are will be happen that so many people will get their self-realization. Unbelievable, It was, of course. But realized souls, whatever they create is of eternal nature. Because they are as now, you see, how sweet is the now in the ocean of eternity. They are

 48 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze people who are around you, with your feeling that we are all one, there is no quarrel, no fight, no bad ideas own country and other countries, and nobody likes cheap things. They everywhere, the whole atmosphere. want to have something that is The Brahmand (universe) becomes pleasing and has a quality of part and parcel of you and you are understanding. I have seen people not separated from that. Then, that echoes. You can call the 'naad'. The becoming poets, writing beautiful echoes of your being, of your life can be easily seen, not in material advancement or in any other kind of a thing but in the spiritual area which poetry. I have seen people becoming oraters. Also I have seen people becoming very good organisers. But one thing that is very important is is the highest. Everywhere, in every country, there have been people of that quality and till today they are the humility. I said in the beginning and again I would say that what will appeal to the people is your humility. You should be a humble person. all remembered. In the same way you all will be representing a very Do not think that you are something great knowledge about reality in special, or that you are some sort of your life, in your creation or in your working. In every way you can do it. The only thing that now we have to do is to decide how many people a, I should say, self important person. Once you think that you are important then you are not part and parcel of the whole. If my one hand starts thinking I am important, its What we can do for realization? stupid. How can one hand be What we should do? This is the only important? All hands are needed, thing, if you go on with your everything is needed, legs are needed. complete emancipation, you will be How can one part be so important? If surprised that its like climbing up a you start thinking like that anywhere big mountain. But when you reach in your journey of Sahaja Yoga, then the peak, you can see everything I must say, that you are not in the very well, and you feel so satisfied Sahajavastha. So my own effort was that you are at the peak. That to take you into that beautiful arena climbing part even some of you have of Sahaja, where you will be we are going to give realization? to do it. It is all right, there is no absolutely one with your-self, one problem. You can do it. You must with the nature, one with all the have respect for yourself, love

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 yourself and understand that you very loving because you are capable have to reach the peak of the of love and it is not forced on you. mountain, and once you have agree that from the ocean the clouds reached the peak of the mountain rise and they give rain and all that you will know that you are there but it is in the cycle of life, they are and then you start showering all your doing it. They are not conscious of love, affection and everything that it. They don't think that they are flows down the mountain. If that is doing something great because they the life for you, its the greatest type are in the cycle. You are out of the of life. Forget all other people, cycle and still you are doing the politicians and all other people who work without any feeling of self are supposed to be great. Forget importance. You are doing because them. You are much higher than you have to do. them because you are already Another cycle, not the natural cycle, butanother cycle of awareness, where you are aware as to what you are chiselled like a diamond with Sahaja style of life, which is very satisfying and also which is very much absolutely peace giving. It gives you joy, it gives you peace, it gives you capabilities, it gives you so many things that you cannot count, like the doing. At the same time you are very humble, you are very loving, you are very kind. You don't shout, you don't beat anyone. You don't say anything harsh to anyone and you can manage the most difficult persons. If thousand petals of your Sahasrara, which are enlightened. God knows someone tries to be funny, you can what all you can have with this. This is such a tremendous area you are always raise the Kundalini and be in, the thousand petals. And from satisfied. If you secretly raise the there the people have gained all the Kundalini, the other person is knowledge about knowledge about all the great forget it. Forget it, he is a difficult discoveries are from there. So this person, he may be a stone. What can is what one has to realize one's own you do? You can not make love flow esteem. Self esteem is different form and the dignity and these qualities. It self importance. You should have is not possible for the stone-hearted self-esteem. With that you would person. Forget it, it is not your job. become humble. You will become finished, if you can't raise it, then seience, Its not your job at all. I would request

 The Divine Cool Breeze 50 September-October 2000 that first of all you should see how a lot. Climbing for about three hours. much humble you are? You have to Naturally we all got tired and there be very humble and that is your was a little resting place, made of decoration, that is your beauty. So marble. So we said let us spread out you have your love, which is pure, ourselves here. So when we spread without any lust or greed. You love out, they said. "Why we have come others only because you are in love here, of all the things, this or that, and then secondly you are blessed grudging. "Then suddenly, there was with peace. You are absolutely at a joy point. Suddenly I saw the peace with yourself and you will be carvings of elephants. So I said "Can amazed that with peace, wisdom will you see these elephants, everyone's come to you. You will be regarded tail is differently made." They said, as the wisest man, wisest woman, "Mummy, how do you see the because you are at peace with elephants' tails, we are so tired. I said, **You also see." Because it is the joy yourself. Only in peace you can that shifts, your mind from nonsense. discover the truth, you can discover every solution that you It is saying just nonsense. You just shift your mind. This is the way you want to. You become a very wise and sensible person, outstandingly can shift and go to the thing that is greater than others. You are not like joyous. Supposing there is a person common people. Then you have joy. who is quite boring. Then what Joy in something cannot be expressed happens, you just see the humour in words but still joy as I have told behind it, how a person bores you? you many a times, it is similar. It is And what you learn out of it is never not happiness or unhappiness. It is just bore anyone. So this joy has a joy. Just you enjoy. You enjoy speciality that it teaches you the everything, enjoy every company, every incident, every scene, every bad person, alright, still you enjoy happening in your life. You know because you say how bad it is. how to enjoy. See just joy has a great Suppose, of course if it is a good capacity. essence of joy of everything. If it is a friend, you can always see. But you do not go with a mind how to criticize it. This criticism business goes out of your mind. So what happens, your I remember once I had gone with my son-in-law and daughter to see some historical place and we had to climb

 September-October 2000 The Divine Cool Breeze 51 mind shifts immediately from been very critical of others. I don't know the reason, why it is so? But something that is ridiculous to something interesting in the may be that they think no end of samething. So you don't criticize themselves! But this is what is very and you don't feel bad about it. Sometimes it so happens that people knowledge, then you become really are amazed that how I tolerate such humble. Absolutely humble and people. I don't tolerate. I am not sweet, gentle and kind. common, f you know the absolute paying any attention, whatever the So today is a great day, for me also. I didn't know that I will survive so person may be doing. If you are of that nature, that you can call a condition, where you are absolutely many years to see this beautiful at Turya" state about which Kabira world. Because after all, it was a very has said "Jab Mast hue phir kya hard life, according to other Bolen,-when I have gone into that standards. But what is most joy giving state of joy why should I say anything? It is like that, à to me is creating Sahaja Yogis, and listening to them and talking to them. The way they are so sweet, so kind temperament which you have to understand and respect it. That is and so respectful! All this has helped within you, respect it. Do not me so much and I must thank you for compare it with others. Others are not that. With your support, with your at your level. So you are at a different help, with your understanding I could level and you just try to enjoy, never achieve it. If I could have achieved it feel that you are something higher or on my own, I would have never asked greater. No, never feel. What you for this help of yours. But you are just should feel is that thankfulness that like my hands, you are just like my you are not mixed up with all those eyes and I need you very much funny ideas and funny styles of life because without you I cannot do. Its where you go on criticising this is not like channelising. Unless and until good. I don't like it. Who are you? you have channels, what's the use of You don't know yourself. When you being Adishakti or anything? How will you channalise it? If there is say, I don't like it, you are not movement, it needs channels. Otherwise its a static thing. knowing yourself. How do you say, I electrical don't like it. 1 have seen people with In the same way I felt always that I very poor knowledge. Who have just

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October 2000 52 needed more and more channels. so you have a responsibility also to give realization to others. Don't keep very very great spirit. So I thank you it to yourself. This has to be given very much again for this day that to others and you can explain, you has come and I bless you from my can talk to them, you can very well heart that now you take over understand, try to understand them When it worked out, I was really in a responsibility. You are a Sahaja Yogi, and talk to them. And you must give realization to others, otherwise you won't feel complete. To feel complete, you have to do that. May God Bless You. Cont'd from page No. 39 speaks. Because once he has done place. And your relations remain it, what is the use? alright. So relationships are to be maintained by your own dignity, by Then, if he comes for your your own sense of respect of yourself explanation to you, you should be and the respect of others. As you treat yourself, you treat others. But if you have no respect for yourself, how can you respect others? prepared to tell him, "Why did you have to tell him, and I didn't tell him, directly?" So that the other person who has tried to be stupid is put in his own



----------------------

2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
00
September-October, 200
olume: X ue:98 10
In Sahaja Yoga we have to be extra-brilliant, extra-sacrificing, extra-dynamic
and extra-compassionate people.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this Issue:
Editorial
Shivratri Puja, 5-3-2000; Pune
2.
IAS Officers' Meet, 8-4-2000; Delhi
Reception - Delhi; 5-12-99
22
How to Influence People; 17-9-86; Holland
25
Sahasrara Puja, 7-5-2000; Cabella
40
Edited by
Published by
Yogi Mahajan
V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Editorial
Our Divine Mother has blessed us years old, started dancing on the
with so many blessings. One of the stage.
sweetest is the childlike quality of The joy of his innocence electrifies
Shri Ganesha is innocence.
the whole audience and all the newly
Every human being is born with married couples sprang to their feet
innocence. It is an innate quality and and started dancing with him. His
can never be lost. But, after it gets innocence transported everyone into
eclipsed in the blaze of a burning right another world. Everyone became a
side. The ego starts giving funny manifestation of our Divine Mother's
notions of another identity and one joy. Imagine how much power is in a
starts assuring a false identity. The little child's innocence that it could
identity falls into worldly illusions trigger the entire adult world into such
primarily that it has to project itself a ecstasy.
to achieve national success. In this
process it not only estranges itself From this one can realize that inner
from its natural quality of innocence joy comes from the simplest thing of
but also depletes its own natural life, which is innocence whereas one
reservoir, which stems from does so much and yet falls into joyless
life. Shakespeare has humorously
innocence.
One may achieve worldly success but described human effort as much ado
one is unable to derive joy from it
because one loses the natural capacity Today we are indeed fortunate that we
to enjoy. This natural capacity is are allowed to worship Shri Ganesha
innocence. Joy is the fragrance of at the Lotus Feet of H.H. Shri Adi
innocence e.g. in our homes we get Shakti Mataji Nirmala Devi. We
the greatest joy from our children. thank her again and again for making
The whole family delights in the us aware of our power of innocence.
innocent things that a child does. With her innocence it is possible to
Imagine how much joy a little child enter Her Kingdom. As Christ had
brings to every member of the house. said we have to become like children
In a recent instance after the Sahaj to enter into the Kingdom of God,
marriages were solemnized in May the blessings of innocence lead
Canajohari, Shri Mataji's great all humanity into our Divine Mother's
grandson who was less than three Kingdom,.
about nothing.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
SHIVRATRI PUJA
5-3-2000 (PUNE)
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
First I will speak in English language also the other extreme of a very
because we have so many people destroying character. He can destroy
the whole world. He can finish all the
from foreign countries and specially
creatures that have been created, if he
from Madras and also from Kerala,
Hyderabad and Bangalore. All these gets into a temper. You all must be
people have come here and I don't knowing the story how he went into
ecstasy. There was a devil who had
know what other people are here who
taken the form of a child and the
have come from South and who do
mother cannot kill the child. She
not really understand Hindi language.
cannot. And she thought she won't be
able to save the world from the wrath
or anger of Shiva if He sees the whole
world destroyed by this devil. So she
withdrew from her act of sacrificing
the child or killing the child and it was
Shiva who took over and he just stood
on the back of the child and killed
This Shivratri has a special meaning,
I think, because there is so much, if
you read any newspaper in the
morning, such horrible news is there
about the people who are trying to
create all kinds of violence,
corruption and immoral behaviour.
You are surprised how these days it
is so full of all these criminalities
going around us. This is the time as
if for the Tandav Nritya of Shri Shiva.
Otherwise one feels things cannot
improve. It is his anger if it starts
throwing wrath on people of this
character and this type, I don't know
him. That child was a devil and so he
saved the world from destruction of
this horrible Raksha, and then he
danced with joy. That's what they call
as cosmic joy. Many people don't
understand why he is standing on top
of the little child. But the reason was
this. So even people may camouflage
how anyone can be saved from his today as small children, as very
wrath. He is a god who is full of love,
innocent people, as very holy Gurus,
full of tremendous Compassion, but
Shiva can destroy all of them. This
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
destruction has already started and is and also completely surrendered,
going at full speed all over I think, nothing can happen to them. They
through so many things that are are always protected and you all have
happening. We have got hurricanes, experience of that protection. But first
storms, earthquakes, many accidents you should have faith in yourself and
and so many destructive things are complete surrendering to Sahaja
working out which are the outcome Yoga.
of Kalki incarnation. But at the same
time there is another work going on, here mostly from north, south east
We are so many Sahaja Yogis sitting
of the same incarnation, is the
and west of India and also from other
resurrection of the people. Such
foreign countries. Every country is,
today, under the control of, we should
say, these negative forces. What we
have to do is to make people positive
people can never be hurt. Nothing can
happen to them. They will always be
saved, everything will be saved for
them because they are under the
protection of their Mother.
through Kundalini awakening. This
you all can do. This you can achieve,
Now the problem is how can the for this you don't have to do
Sahaja Yogis deal with such people something special. In day to day life
and could see that they go out of the you can achieve it and you should do
circulation of evolution. The only it. This is the only thing that is needed
solution is raising the Kundalini. If today, to transform people and you
you raise the Kundalini of human all can do it. All of you can do it in a
beings who are even very bad and very sincere and a good manner.
gone cases, either they will be Don't have to get to temper, jump at
destroyed or they will be saved and people, get angry with rude people,
become good people. They will stop but with peaceful attitude you should
all these horrible things they are achieve it, so that this wrathful
thinking and planning in their heads
and they will become really very, very
good people. It may fail in some
cases, I won't say that Sahaja Yoga
would be successful in every case.
But if Sahaja Yogis meditate and
keep themselves in complete peace
temperament of Shiva, as they say the
third eye of Shiva, won't open. That
is something horrible. We all can do
it in a very constructive manner. So
what we should do is to first of all
establish our own Shiva principle, the
principle of joy, principle of love and
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
principle of truth, I should say. There balance we must keep and go on
are big problems also because people moving till you reach your Taloo
have no idea as to Shiva's global bhag (a where sits Sada
temperament. For example I have Shiva (HGIa. You can experience
heard people quarreling and fighting it. You can see for yourself whatever
over Shiva principle and Vishnu I am saying you know it very well.
principle. Now Vishnu is there, his The only thing is when I am telling
power is there, for you to rise upto you you can verify it. Sahaja Yoga
the Shiva principle. Both are not can be verified very easily and you
different. One is supplementary for know that. You now know the only
another. But if you go on fighting
even on that point, I cannot
understand. You cannot reach Shiva
truth. The truth which is absolute.
This is also the principle which starts
showing results when these two
powers meet. Its very surprising that
where these two powers meet or when
you reach Shiva principle through the
Vishnu principle then you realize that
these two powers are
complimentary and so much related
to each other. There is no difference
in a way between these two powers
and so keep your road, the
madhyamarg (TE ) clean and let
the Kundalini pass through it. When
the Kundalini will pass through it you
without Vishnu and you cannot stick
to Shiva's principle if you have not
understood the Vishnu's principle.
Kundalini itself rises through the
Sushumna Nadi. She is the principle,
so
she is the tatva of Shiva and she rises
through the channel that is made by
Vishnu out of evolutionary process.
So how can you do away with one of
them. One is the road, another is the
destination. So I hope you understand
how important it is that your centres
should be corrected, your road should will be amazed that the same
Kundalini is going through the
Vishnu path and reaching at the lotus
be alright, that your Sushumna should
are
be clear because we
madhyamargis. We have to go by the
centre, by the central path and we
have to have the balance, not to go to
feet of Shiva.
May God Bless You.
the left and not to go to the right. This
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
IAS Officers' Meet
8-4-2000, DELHI
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
I bow to all the seekers of truth. Today
services. I had never heard of services
and all that. So I said, now what's that
foreign services? But I said, I am not
going to go to any foreign country.
as they say is a "Ghor Kaliyuga" and
all sorts of horrible things we can see
here, read in the newspapers. It is a
fact that its a very bad times we are
passing through. Also we find very
low graded people, we can call them
of very low value system.
Just now we have got freedom and
we have to work. We have to work
out many things for this country. Not
only that, but I realised that civil
service is the spinal cord of this
But it was also predicted long-long country. It has to bear all the brunts,
time back that at this time only the all the troubles, all the burdens. At
people who are seeking the truth in the same time it has a great
the hills and valeys of Himalayas, all responsibility to build this country
kinds of forgotten places, will find and that's why I put my, I should say,
the truth. It is already described by all effort that my husband gets
many, many great astrologers, also by
saints. So at this time we are placed
selected to IAS and somehow or other
we lost lot of money, everything. Its
alright, I said, I can live with anything.
in very fortunate circumstances. I
must say I have a great love for all
the people who are in the I AS and
IPS and all civil services, becauseI
But to live in the foreign countries and
wasting your energy there, it's time
now for us to live here. I think this
know what one has to go through. Its
the life of great termoil and sacrifice,
also for the wife (of these officers).
patriotism is the only thing by which
we can live doing our civil service,
understanding our responsibility and
But I always felt that this is like a
soldier fighting in the war. We are Government of this country which is,
here to build up this country. My though run by parties after parties, the
husband was first in the foreign lot of the civil services to go through
also that we are the mainstay of the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
all kinds of, all types of, problems to
solve for the public. Its a life I learnt
where women have to be extremely
forbearing, sacrificing and always
very much keeping happy. It's a
question of why are we here in this
service? We are special people, no
doubt, we have special powers, no
doubt. But without misusing the
required for thinking, for futuristic
planning, all these things, comes from
where we don't know, but according
to Sahaja Yoga it comes from a centre
which creates the energy for the brain
cells which are used all the time. We
go on taxing our brain, using its
energy all the time but we don't know
how it is replaced and replaced by one
powers, what are you? Nothing! If
you misuse it then it is not proper and
centre. This centre is looking after so
many organs, that this overflow of
if you don't use it,you are powerless.
energy to the brain for this futuristic
life can create lots of problems, not
This is really the situation. But the
enjoyment and the happiness and the
satisfaction comes from the fact that
Only tension but lots of other
problems also, because this energy
Starts getting exhausted and when we
are in the struggle this energy starts
you are working for your country. So
this patriotism, which I imbibed from
my parents and also from Mahatma getting, sort of, finished or may be
we develop tremendous imbalances
Gandhi, I felt that we are duty bound
to workout in such a manner that within ourselves. As shown in the
every one of us does something which body chart, you can see here very
clearly that our autonomous nervous
is very constructive and which is very
helpful. But at the same time while system is in three channels and either
doing that because of such a difficult we can go to the right side or to the
situation we develop all kinds of left, but in the centre we cannot
problems and that's what I am going remain. If you are too much futuristic,
if you think too much, if you are
working out too much then this right
The first thing is when we see side comes and this is a very, very
to talk to you about.
something, we react. This reaction can
important thing to understand that we
create two problems within us. One
start losing the balance.
of conditioning or another of ego.
Both are troublesome things and they The first thing that happens to a
person like that-that he develops
make us very nervous and tense. The
very bad liver. His liver goes out of
main thing is that the energy that is
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
7.
But it can be a serious paralysis which
order because the centre looks after
the liver. Now the heat of the liver can affect all the right side-right from
when it is created starts rising. So we the mouth to all this area, and also
might develop Asthma, very serious hands, legs everything become
type of Asthma and they say now its paralysed. So this is another thing
incurable. But it is curable. If you can which is awaiting such people who
balance the person, it can easily be don't care for balancing themselves.
cured. This Asthma then, if it does They are all serious diseases I should
say of the upper part of the body. To
the lower part of the body this heat
not happen, this heat goes towards the
heart.
passes towards the pancreas. So
In childhood if you are born with bad
pancreas you get diabetes. Then it
goes little lower and in the spleeen
understand but if there is a boy say you can get even blood cancer. Sahaja
21-22 years of age who plays tennis Yoga has cured definitely the blood
and also drinks a lot and all that, he cancer. Can be cured. Then it can even
gets a fatal heart attack, very fatal and effect the kidneys - Kidneys can be
he dies. But if he didn't work out that very badly affected and you might
way gradually it starts moving develop kidney trouble. You can try
towards a massive heart attack. It transplantation but doesn't help
could be for anyone at any age but much. Then it comes to your stomach
specially as the old age starts it can where you get constipated and always
heart or anything then one can
really show its business. So this is a
common disease we have that our happen to a right sided person that
heart is in a trouble; then you try
in anger, temper. All these things can
we cannot help it because he is so
pacemaker, this thing-that thing.
Instead of that if you take to Sahaja
Yoga, you do not have to worry about
your heart. It will be excellent. Then
much busy with his planning and with
everything that his brain has no rest.
So he gets irritated where he says
something not according to his own
desire as his own plans. With all these
another thing that can happen to you
on the brain side that if right side is
things happened this right side
too much then our left side brain gets problem, I think, is a very serious
affected and we get peripheria by problem which all of us are facing.
which our hands become absolutely Now it comes as I told you from our
dead and also legs can become dead.
reactions. So our reactions are
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
because of our mind. Now if you develop that witness state because
now you go beyond your mind. You
have a mind that reacts then how to
don't react, you see, you just see,
stop this mind from reacting?
Einstein has already told that when watch and surprisingly your attention
becomes extremely powerful. You
he was looking for the theory that he
have all these things within you. Just
wanted to produce some relativity, he
think that we have to have, say, some
got so tired doing it, went to the
light, it has to be connected. I am
speaking here. This instrument has to
garden and started playing with the
soap bubbles and suddenly he says
be connected to the mains, Otherwise
from somewhere unknown the whole
thing, the whole scientific explanation
came into his mind. That he called as
it is useless. In the same way we are
to be connected. We have to decide
that we should be connected to that
the "torsion area". We all have that
Divine power. Once you are
"torsion area". The subtle energy that
connected to that Divine power, such
surrounds us, which looks after us, I
call it the Divine love, that helps us
in every way to balance oursleves, to
a change takes place within you. First
of all your hands start speaking. It is
written in the Koran that at the time
enrich ourselves and to give the
absolute knowledge, not relative
knowledge but absolute knowledge.
So this is the Gyan Marga we are
of resurrection, Kiyama, your hands
will speak. So, I say, I will only accept
muslim rules, that hands are speaking.
Means on your hands, on these five
talking about, of the absolute
knowledge. Now this torsion area is
the wonderful thing. Because this
fingers, here and here, seven places,
you can feel your centres, then you
can feel the centres of others because
Kundalini when she rises, she not
you become a collective being. Who
only nourishes all the six centres is the other! You can feel everyone
enlightens them and integrates them
on your fingertips. A person may look
but also connects you to this torsion
area of Einstein. Suddenly you are
alright, normal to you but you realise
amazed at yourself. How it has no-no, he is not. Something very
serious he's got. On the fingertips you
happened that you get so many can feel it, what's wrong with others.
solutions of problems which are
solvable. Your temperament changes. Now, if you, somehow or other,
You are so relaxed, that means you
master this art, at the most you take
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
one month, if you do it you can raise
other's Kundalini. That's how they
say the Sahaja Yoga has spread in
eighty six countries. It has spread, no
doubt, it has spread in eighty six
injustice to them, they are quite
alright. He said, don't interfere. I said,
I am not interfering but I will prove it
to you that these girls are innocent and
simple girls and unnecessarily you
people are thinking that they are bad
countries but I have not been to all
these countries. I have not visited all
women. So, I went with them. That
these countries, I myself might have
gone to about say twenty countries,
at the most, but people who got
time of course we had only one car.
So I went by rickshaw with them to
that place where the man had written
that they are bad persons. So, I went
and asked him, are these the two girls
who were living in your upper flat?
realization in these countries went
down to all these places and gave
realisation to others.
Are these the girls who did like this?
He said, not at all, those are very
Now, imagine a country called Benin
in Africa has got seven thousand
different, not these. And I came and
told them, see I judged them from
Sahaja Yogis. They were all muslims
and they all have got realisation. That
vibrations and they cannot be bad
doesn't mean that you are no more a
Muslim or a Hindu. You are that but persons. So sometimes we punish
you know the essence of that. So you people, we get angry with people who
respect every religion. You respect all
the incarnations because now you because we don't know what they are.
have the true knowledge about We also follow wrong path, we get
religion, about yourself and about the
whole universe. You can feel it on don't know what is the right one.
your fingertips.
do not deserve that kind of a treatment
lost into so many things because we
Now, with this happening of the
Kundalini, physically you are alright,
physically your problems are solved,
physically you don't have to bother.
Actually it's hardly any trouble to cure
people physically, we also have a
hospital, where they don't charge
anything except for the room, where
Once when my husband was the city
magistrate, two ladies came to me
from the backdoor and they said see
now, these police people are putting
us into trouble, we are good women,
we have done nothing. I just felt their
vibrations. I told my husband that I
think you people are doing some they have to live. Sometimes, the
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 September-October 2000
10
The Divine Cool Breeze
all about chakras, we knew everything
doctors also work free and work it out
so well that so many people have been
but we don't know how to raise the
cured. We are getting people from ali Kundalini. They knew the word
over the world. Very highly placed Kundalini also. So I thought I must
people come there and they are find out. Who has told you all this?
getting cured. Now for that you don't Two saints came from India long-long
have to go to the whole with maroon
of feeling, what's wrong with them, Machindernath and Gorakh-nath had
putting them for diagnosis. In gone everywhere. They went to
diagnosis only the patient dies half Ukraine also. So they might have told
way. But this is only on the finger tips. them about this Kundalini and the
You know what's wrong with the awakening of the Kundalini. But, they
person, you need not tell that person said we don't know how to raise the
what's wrong. You know how to cure Kundalini. Once you are entitled as
time back. May be, I thought
it and how to work it out.
Sahaja Yogi, you can raise the
Kundalini of any person, you can cure
Today only a friend of ours came to
see me, much younger to me, looking any person. You can do whatever you
so very old and haggered. He said, I
have got paralysis. I said, how. He
was another one of the same kind, I have seen the tension is more a
want to do as far as the physical side
is concerned, even the mental side.
working too hard, too hard and within
twenty minutes or so after raising his
Kundalini his face became alright, his
hands became alright and he said, I quite and you don't know how to
can't walk without a stick. I said, handle the situation. This also is the
alright now you walk, he started same reaction of your mind that
walking. I have seen people running,
who come on wheel chairs. Its very mind then you will be amazed the idea
mental side of human beings where
you get very tensed up, get very angry,
annoyed or you become extremely
works it out but if you go beyond the
surprising how it works out. But for
that comes to you are absolute, the
this we must know this is the
solution that comes to you are
knowledge of our country. Not that
others didn't know, they knew.
absolutely perfect and the people who
are against you also become your
friends. Those who are troubling you
In Bolivia, I was surprised, Bolivia is
very much, also become very-very
so far off, people told me we know
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
11
sweet. It's a changing and only six, but now-a-days, I think,
there are more. But as it is accepted
these are six. So, once you get
transforming of human beings.
The other day I had met a newspaper
connected with this Divine power of
reporter. His name was Mr. Abbas.
He was extremely aggressive with love, all these things just drop out as
useless. No jealousies, no
me. He asked me funny questions. He
competition, nothing. We have many
said, how did you know that you are
people also in the foreign service and
Divine? I said, how did you know that
you are a human being? He reacted. I they told us that people are very
said, see, because I would not react. I
happy with us, Mother. I said, why?
Because we are not competitive. We
used to watch, I used to see and I
are all becoming ambassadors, this,
that but nobody is angry with us
found that I am different from others,
so I didn't like to show off this thing.
Nobody wants to understand it that
because we are not competitive.
When the mind starts thinking of
way. You have to prove, that's the best
competition, one can go into any
way Sahaja Yoga can be told. So, he
said but how can I get the proof?I wrong alleys, into any dark alleys and
said, I don't believe in any
really can be a very much a different
fundamentalism, alright. I do believe person. But with this you are in the
centre, you have complete balance
in yourself. And at that moment his
within yourself and all the hankering,
Kundalini rose, just like this, you see.
He said, what's happening? How this everything drops out. You don't
cool breeze is flowing into my
hanker after this, you don't hanker
after people, you don't hanker after
great publicity or anything. You just
automatically become so balanced
fingertips? How is it? I said, also feel
it out of your fontanelle bone area and
he was completely changed. He said,
whatever I have asked you the and you are not bothered as to what's
quetions I am not going to put it up. frightened. For example, if you are
happening and that you are not
it's all nonsense (I was stupid). Now
standing in the water you are afraid
of the waves, alright, but supposing
I have become a sensible man.
Actually this Kundalini changes, you get into the boat then you can
really transforms you. Now they say even enjoy the waves. But suppose
that we have six enemies-kaam, you learn how to swim, you can jump
krodh, mad, matsar, loabh, moha, down and you can save people. This
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 September-October 2000
12
The Divine Cool Breeze
is how Sahaja Yoga works, in a simple problems and cured out of your
thinking, just relaxed. There's no
thinking, which is thoughtless
manner.
As I have said that I have tremendous
awareness has been already told to us
concern for you people, always had%3;
but because of my husband's strict by A. Yung. You know A. Yung who
rules I could not touch his office was a disciple of Frieud, whom he
people, I could not talk to them, I revolted against and he talked about
the mother instinct.
could not meet anyone even a peon,
leave alone the IAS officer. He was
We Indians you see are Shakti pujaris.
very strict about it. I said, alright, I Now, these days the Navaratras are
will try some other areas. But now he
on but we have never
going
has retired, luckily. Now I am free, understood the message of Mother's
even to talk to you, surprisingly, Love. It is the Mother's Love that
otherwise he could never allow me works, I think, and you also become
to talk to you people because he
thought it's not proper. You must compassionate. How can a human
maintain a certain distance. So even
very motherly, very kind, very
being, be cruel to anyone who is
in the parties and all these places I suffering, who is in trouble, who is
was quite amused the way people in poverty! The love that you have
used to discuss and talk about things within yourself starts flowing just like
and I used to keep quiet. So, they
an ocean and you become extremely
thought I don't even know English or
be I am so quite because perhaps
generous. All the generous people, I
have seen, are always very much
looked after. I will give you an
example of my father who was a very
generous man, very-very generous
may
may be I am good for nothing. But
now all the same persons, those same
ladies and gentlemen are now doing
meditation.
person. Once what happened... he
Now, for meditation you don't have always used to say don't close the
to hang yourself with anything, you houses, we should not close our
don't have to have too much time. house, always open the windows,
Even ten minutes before sleeping you open the doors. If you tell him that
do meditation, you will feel so thieves might come in, he said, let
relaxed and so very absolutely them come. After all they need
completely cured out of your something that's why they come. So,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 September-October 2000
13
The Divine Cool Breeze
he used to keep all the doors open.
wrong. It should come, we should
He was fond of music so he had a big
prosper, our country should prosper,
we should create more things. I agree
there, but this hankering should go
gramophone, - a big horn like thing
and one day one thief came, the door
was open, and he took away that
gramophone. So, next day he was
sitting very seriously. So my mother
said, are you sorry for that? He said,
away. Now, the hankering becomes
the other way round, like what should
I give to this lady? What should I do
for this gentleman? I mean the worry
no-no, that I can buy, but I am only
goes to the other side... that what to
sorry, this man, he seems to be a
connoisseur of music, has taken away
the gramophone! now what will he
play, he has not taken any records. So,
my mother said, alright, you advertise
in the newspaper- the one who has
taken the gramophone should please
come and take the records so that he
do... what should I give that they
won't feel bribed, because sometimes
you know Sarkari Naukar, as they are,
they are very strict. So if you give
them, they think you have given them
a bribe. I said, this is not a bribe. I am
just giving because I want to give you.
So will you take it? With very great
enjoy the gramophone.
difficulty they take. But you see, it is
I have seen very generous people and a way of expression of your love.
at the time when Gandhiji declared With this love you will be so very
the war of independence they not only Popular, so very popular in your
went to jail but they gave away office, in your work. In the whole of
everything that they had. We used to the country people will remember you
live in huge big houses, then we that this was the man who really
shifted to some sort of huts like looked after us, who has done so
things. We enjoyed because you see much for others.
the enjoyment was
rashtrabhakti and this has helped that be just worried about yourself and
time. Mahatma Gandhi was helped this thing. And the ladies also of the
because that time people were like IAS, thank you very much for inviting
of
our
If you don't have a concern you will
that.
me but I would like to tell you that
Today it is coming from the west too ladies have to help the husbands.
much of this, too much of that. It's They should try to understand that
alright there's nothing wrong-nothing their energy is the Shakti and they
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 September-October 2000
14
The Divine Cool Breeze
very-very important. You somehow
or other manage to talk to him, he will
get your husband a very good job
and will get a very good house. (and
should give to men this energy so that
they can work better. But sometimes
I have funny experiences which I will
relate to you.
It was very interesting. First of all I who comes there was my husband)
She said, you know him? I said, Yes.
How? He is my husband; After that
never knew about your seniorities-
juniorities, anything I don't know
much about this, I don't understand.
she didn't talk to me. She never said
it to me. To know that to live in Meena
I came to Delhi, I mean my husband Bagh is bad in itself is quite a big
came here, to Delhi, to work for
knowledge about things, isn't it? That
Shastriji. So, we met in a party a
only people of this much pay live in
Meena Bagh. It's really impossible, I
friend of mine who was from my
college. She asked me, arey! how are
you here, Nirmal! I said, my husband
mean I don't know the state officer
knows this much but the lady knew
has come here. She said, what does
that Meena Bagh was not meant for
he do? I said, he is a government
an IAS Officer. Can you imagine? So,
servant... Everybody is a government
these indulgences of the women is of
servant here but what he is doing? I
no use.
said, I don't know that but he is
I am very happy to hear about this
organisation that it is doing such a
good constructive work. I was really
something here. Where do you live?
first thing she asked. I said, I live
in Meena Bagh. Aah! Meena Bagh!
very happy. He says I am a socialist
because I always think of the social
problems... Somehow or other I am a
socialist, alright because this is a
what is your husband doing? You
could have got a much better husband.
Why did you marry a man who takes
you to Meena Bagh? Baba! I didn't
know Meena Bagh was that bad. You
collective sense and when I heard that
these people are doing this kind of a
work, I said, amazing. I can't imagine!
Those days women used to talk of
something else, they would never talk
of something social. It was so
see, Shastriji asked us to come here
and there was no house so, they gave
us Meena Bagh. I thought it was very
bad to live in Meena Bagh the way
she was talking. Then she said,
alright, this gentleman who is coming,
this tall gentleman... you know, he is
difficult to make them understand
social work, funny type of
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 September-October 2000
15
The Divine Cool Breeze
country. I would say these days our
atmosphere was there. The Britishers
had left their legacy on our heads and
country is in a very big turmoil-very
we were quite enamoured by that. For big turmoil and all these things are
example, I would say that it was not
for them to concieve of something
going to help us to solve these
problems, so many problems we can
solve. Once some of these problems
higher or better.
are solved I am sure we will be one
of the greatest countries. We have no
dearth of talent, no doubt. We have
no dearth of hard work, only there's
So, I was the president of the blind...
this was the friends of the blind
society and for that they were going
to have a programme and these blind
no one, it's difficult to get a person
were going to act and the governor.
Mr. Charion was to come. When he
who can put them to the yojna and if
such a person gets his self-realisation
came they wanted to know who will he is so self-confident, so peaceful
be sitting next to him. Being a
within himself, he is not bothered as
chairman of course, they would ask
me to sit down, the rest started to what others are doing and all this
quarelling and fighting and discussing
so much. I got such a fright. I thought
now take to humour, that's the best
way to solve the problem. So, I said
alright we will get a big plank on top
can change, transform you into a
beautiful personality. You give up all
your destructive habits, absolutely. I
don't have to say, give up. I never say.
If I say that half of people might leave
but I have seen people over night give
of the governor's head and all sit like
up bad habits. In London there were
sparrows on that. Immediately all
their anger vanished and they became were taking drugs, they were drug
twelve people who had come, who
alright.
addicts... they left their drugs
So, what I am saying is that the quality overnight, overnight, can you
of women has changed. You can see imagine! I was amazed, how could
that very clearly, the quality has they leave it, overnight! Our problems
changed and though you might think of drugs, of all other things, we can
that they are rather self centred or solve them without any difficulty and
whatever you may think, but one you are placed for that, for that kind
thing I have noticed that they are of a job. Your situation is very
social minded. They read, they difficult because you have a
understand what's going on in this responsibility,
great
very
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 16
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
responsibility and that responsibility humble so nice. I don't know why in
has to be understood. If we do not Bombay they have developed this
understand our responsibility we will kind of a superiority complex or
not achieve but once you get your something. We had very bad reports
realisation you will. You will become about them but suddenly they have
extremely responsible and also you
changed so much and in the same way
will not feel that responsibility on you all should change and you
your head, you will feel extremely, become so collective. It's not joint,
absolutely relaxed and such a person it's collective and you just think of
to meet, you are sometimes surprised. helping each other and living that kind
The face changes, the body changes of a life and all over the world we
everything-the transformation takes have brothers and sisters, wherever
place and you are surprised. All this you go. You may go anywhere you
is within you, all this you have got it, will find them waiting for you. They
all this is working out within you. also come here. When they come here
Only thing we have to get our self they touch this motherland of ours.
realisation. This is a knowledge of our They touch this Bharatbhumi with
inner being, very subtle knowledge. I their lips and kiss it. I say, why do
pray and thank you very much, all the you do it? Because it's a yoga bhumi,
ladies also, for calling me here. This it's a special country, it's a yoga
is a very unique experience I have bhumi. Here we have got our
because I have never known that IAS realisation and you will be amazed
people could be so receptive to this
kind of a subtle thing. But they are. I
that this country is a yoga bhumi.
Once I was travelling with my
was surprised when I had this
programme in Bombay. Now they are husband in the plane and I told him
regularly going for meditation in a we have reached India. He said, how
hall that they have, surprising! How do you know... I feel the vibrations
can they do it. I don't know but they all over, you can see. So, he went to
are doing it, the way they have
the pilot to verify as usual, verify what
I was saying was correct or not. The
received me actually I used to say that
the Bombay IAS people are very
pilot said, Sir, we have, reached India.
I said, see this is our land, this has
proud, very proud. They won't look
at you, they won't see you but I am
surprised they have become so
spirituality. Everything that is written
we have to verify. Why some places
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 September-Ootober 2000
17
The Divine Cool Breeze
You all are capable of getting self-
realisation, you all are. Whatever
are swayambhus? How can you make
it out? Anywhere you go there is a
temple-how do you know? You can
must be your past, doesn't matter,
we have to be in the present. Past is
finished, future doesn't exist, you will
be in the present and that's the reality.
You all can feel the vibrations. So
feel it on your fingertips. Now, you
will be surprised to know that Mecca
has got a big stone. black stone.
Mohmmed Saheb said, don't
workship any stone because people
used to make money out of making
some statues and all. But this stone
he said, you should go round. That is
the biggest thing for muslims to go
round the stone. Now ask them, why
many saints in this country have said
that it is within yourself, find out
within yourself, the peace is within
yourself. This is the way, by
Kundalini awakening and when they
have written about it also nobody
understands. Kabira has said about it,
do you go and worship the stone?
They don't know. But I know.
Because in our Shastras it's written
about this-'ida, Pingla, Sukhman nadi
re', 'shoonya shikhar pur anahad
baajey re'. So many things they have
that it's a Meccashwar Shiva. I say it
said, but who understand Kabira?
and vibrations start flowing... it's a
Now, Guru Nanaka has said also very
clearly that, Kaahey re ban khojan
Meccashwar Shiva. It's a Shiva in the
stone. It's the vibrations of the Shiva
jayee, sada nivasi, sada alepa, tohe
and it's a fact.
sang samayee'. But that's only saying,
The other day I read a very nice article
that's only reading. Then Kabira has
also said... Padhi, Padhi Pandit
in Marathi that the Shiva was
worshipped before the Islamic
religion came. But the way they were
doing it, because they were going to
all kinds of temples and rituals, too
moorakh
Adishankaracharya has prayed to
Even
bhaye.
Mother... Mother! please remove my
shabdajalam. So, we are lost in the
many rituals and because of that
ritualism.... Mohammed Saheb said,
shabdjalam.
don't worship the stone. But we have Even in Maharashtra, you will be
swayambhus, we have really the surprised, they will get one big bag
swayambhus. But when you will gö full of all the kinds of statues and
and verify with your vibrations, you early in the morning 4o' clock they
will know they are Swayambhus.
will get up, start worshipping,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
18
worshipping, worshipping till about
9 o' clock. Then they will have their
saying, it's very simple, it will hardly
take any time, just a matter of
bath, have something to eat and go to
office. It's a common practice and this
happening. First of all you should
forgive everyone. Now so many
is that one has to understand that these
people say, Mother! we cannot
are ritualisms. You should really forgive specially in the west. They
know what is the reality and who cannot forgive, they just cannot
should be worshipped, not to waste forgive. But just think what do you
your energy on all such things. It's
very easy to become that knowledge. don't do anything but you don't
That knowledge is also the truth, also forgive then you play into wrong
do when you do not forgive. You
the absolute, I should say, the Divine hands and torture yourself. So, better
love and you don't know how you forgive everyone of them, everyone.
become so nice, you don't know how I know there have been so many
you become so loving and so horrible people also who must have
respectful to everyone? It's such a troubled you, tortured you, must have
remarkable thing within you which done all kinds of things. But forgive
you should just have for nothing at them. Now, forgive yourself also, you
all. You can't pay for it. It's a living should not feel guilty for anything.
process of your evolution. How much Whatever has happened, has
did we pay for our evolution? happened, that's forgotten, finished.
Nothing. We don't have to pay What's the use of remembring it now
anything. It just works, just sprouts that I feel guilty. I mean, sometimes
like a small little seed; sprouts but it this guilty business goes too far. Like
has to grow, for that you should one day I asked a gentleman, what are
meditate for sometime. It's not a you guilty for? I spilled some coffee
process or anything but which can on the president. So what! you didn't
clarify these chakras. Sometimes you mean it.. no! So, why are you feeling
have problems on chakras which guilty? But, I did. I said, you didn't
should be clarified and that can be do it, it happened. Then somehow or
done with meditation. It's absolutely other he forgave himself that he
energy giving, absolutely joy giving. spilled some coffee on the president's
clothes. Can you imagine such a thing
bothering him all his life?
I hope it will work out if you want to
have self realisation. As they are
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 19
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
cannot forgive others, you see, I don't
So, one should not have any such
ideas that I have done this wrong, how know why there is this kind of a
can I get realisation? This is different attitude but we should
unnecessary, you should not, you forgive oursleves also. God has
should never-never think that you are created you as human beings not to
guilty. If you were you would have be ruined like this, not to be shattered
been in the jail, you would not have like this but to achieve your glory.
been here. So, don't think you are
guilty, don't judge yourself. You don't towards me like this. I think if you
know yourself. It is to know yourself have shoes you will have to take it
you have to do this and don't judge. out. Why? Because this Mother Earth
You must have great respect and love also helps us a lot. You are sitting in
for yourself and I am sure it will work Delhi, you are here in this Bharat
You have to just put your hands
out tonight as desired by these people
Bhumi, in this yoga bhumi. In this
country it works very fast and also
with you people because you love this
country very much. You work so hard
for this country. So it works very fast.
So, don't have any apprehensions,
but those who don't want to have self
realisation, I would say, they can go
becuase I don't want them to disturb
others. Supposing if you don't want,
cannot be forced, it has to be asked
for. You cannot force it on anyone,
just put your both the hands like this.
you cannot pay for it, you cannot doO
Again I would request you must
anything about it, but if the Kindalini
doesn't rise, it's alright. We have a
centre where you can go and get it
corrected, may be, something wrong
in the chakras which you do not know
forgive yourself and others. That's
very important because if you don't
do that then your centre here, we call
the Vishudhi chakra, will be blocked.
I mean the guilty part will be blocked
and they will find out.
and if you don't forgive others then
So, it will take hardly anytime, have this Agnya Chakra will be blocked.
faith in yourself. First of all have faith Please put your hands like this, little
in yourself and this will work out. lower. Now first you will start feeling
First, I think to forgive others is some cool or hot breeze on your
difficult. You see the Western people
finger tips and also on your thumb.
they cannot forgive themselves and
for Indians the other way round, they
Then in the palm you will start feeling
a cool or a hot breeze. Some people
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
start thinking that-this
conditioning... it has nothing to do
with this air-conditioning. So please
have faith in yourself. Now, please
nirvikalpa, when there is no doubt in
air-
you, you become into doubtless
awareness where you are sure you got
it, you are sure you can do everything
put your right hand towards me and that is the state one has to rise. Now,
put down your head a little and feel all those who have felt on their
with your left hand on top of your fingertips a cool or a hot breeze or
fontanelle bone area which was called
out of the fontanelle bone area, cool
as Taalu. If there's a cool or hot breeze
or hot breeze, please raise both your
hands. Most of you have got it, most
coming out now. Please put down
your head a little and see for yourself,
of your have got it.
move your hand. It might be coming
very far may be, very close but don't Congratulations! And those who
put your hand on top but above. Just haven't got, will also get it. You have
move, please move it on the sides and to just little bit join one of the centres
see for yourself if there's a cool or that we have or if you want anyone
hot breeze coming. It is hot means you of them to come and give realisation.
have not forgiven, it means only that I don't think there is any hindrance in
really you have to say, I forgive. You
that but sometimes it happnes that the
don't have to do anything except you Kundalini doesn't rise. She is your
have to say in your heart, forgive mother, your individual Mother. She
doesn't have any other child, this
Kundalini knows everything about
everyone. That's a very great quality.
Now, please put your left hand
you. She knows your aspirations, she
towards me and see with your right
hand. Again bend your head please knows your past, she knows
and see for yourself if there's a cool everything. Also, she knows what
or a hot breeze coming out of your physical problems you have. She is
head. Just see for yourself. Now, very kind as your mother when she
gave you birth she took up all the
please put your right hand again and
see for yourself. Now, again put both
the hands towards me and don't think,
just-just don't think. You can stop
thinking even for a second, it's very
important. This is called as nirvichara,
labour pains upon herself. This is the
Kundalini that out of her love, that
motherly love she does everything
and then it just works. It works
because that's what you are in for. The
time has come for all of us to be
then comes the state to become
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 21
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
the permutations
and
transformed, to get into a new
аге
generation of beautiful people. It's a combinations of problems in the
wonderful time. If I have done human beings and why should not
they all get it? This collective
happening has been a great blessing
all over the world. Again I would like
anything so far is this that I found a
way of collective awareness, that's the
only work I have done. Otherwise it
to thank you very much. Very kind
of you that you have invited me here.
was already there, Nathpanthis used
to do it, it was quite a well known
thing among people but what I have
done is, I have tried to find out what
May God Bless You
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
22
ON -
RECEPTION
DELHI 5.12.99
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
I bow to all the seekers of truth. I am
it is working out and it will work out.
overwhelmed to see so many of you
sitting here. I couldn't even imagine
that so many people will experience
The joy that you are receiving, you
should give to others also.
India of course is my country and the
the truth in my own life time. Life
joy of coming here is undescribable.
without truth has absolutely no
When I see you all on the Airport then
I know how many hearts are full of
meaning since man keeps groping in
the dark. Without experiencing the
this joy and how many are being
nurtured by it! This joy will protect
our children and also our youth. It is
not the end of this. It will bring
truth, one goes astray. But I do not
regard it as his fault; the darkness that
surrounds him is to be blamed. As I
have said, you have to spread Sahaja
wisdom and self-rule (Svarajya) in the
Yoga.
real sense of the word. 'Sva' means
This is my keen desire that you
should spread Sahaja Yoga and you
work it out. Everyone should think
that we have experienced the truth,
spirit' and Rajya' means kingdom.
Kingdom of the Spirit is Swarajya
and Swatantra is the "Reign' of the
Spirit'. Both of these should come
now we should give it to others and
make it grow. It will not only help
Sahaja Yoga grow but also make this
world heavenly, peaceful and
prosperous. Now it is up to you. Do
it sincerely. This is being worked out
and they are there. You people have
accepted and adopted it in your lives.
Now others have to adopt them. Now
is the time of their salvation. It should
be adopted now. I notice with surprise
that how the millennium is affecting!
Many of our foreign Sahaja Yogis
came to India. They went to Orissa,
gave realisation to many people and
started nine Sahaja Yoga centres there.
Cyclone was the result of the sins
which were being committed there.
with full force in India, because it is
Yoga Bhumi, Punya Bhumi and it
was destined to be worked out in this
Punya Bhumi. Still I never expected
it to work out with such speed and
make the Sahaja family mature. But
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
23
September-October 2000
None of the Sahaja Yogis was harmed
think in those terms then a lot could
in the cyclone nor were their houses
be done in India. I think it is not at all
difficult because there is absolutely
no problem in it - no quarrel, no
damaged. Absolutely no harm was
done to them. The people in Turkey
are Muslims but after Sahaja Yoga
difficult, no medicine, no rituals,
nothing at all. Only you have to raise
they have become real Muslims.
the Kundalini of the seekers. This
There more than two thousand people
who are doing Sahaja Yoga. There
also, terrible earthquake came twice
power has been bestowed upon you;
you have to use this power. If you do
not use the power that is given to you
then what is the purpose of it. All of
but none of the Sahaja Yogis was
harmed. Even their relatives were
you should use this power and decide
saved. Such calamities were there in
that each one of you will awaken at
Italy also. But I have seen that all the
Sahaja Yogis are fully protected and least one hundred persons. Talk to
everyone about it. There is no cause
you are growing in this protection. It
means the last judgement has begun
to feet shy or to be embarrassed
because we are standing on truth. The
with full force.
only remedy to check the false Gurus
(Guru Ghantals) of today is that we
should talk openly to the people about
Sahaja Yoga and tell them to be at
their guards against these people.
Otherwise they will be finished. To
All of you meditate regularly and you
have grown in Sahaja Yoga. But now
you should have the desire to give it
to others. May be that you have this
desire, but some how it is not being
fulfilled. You have to do it with full
enthusiasm. The worldly and
save the sinking ship of this world is
our duty. Only you could do it. You
should try to give self realisation to
domestic activities go on always but
amongst all these activities you have
to take time to give realisation to
more and more people. This joy could
not be confined to one's own heart.
others and uplift them. This is your
If it were possible to confine then why
pious duty. It all depends on you. should I leave my house and move in
Only you could do it and many of the whole world to give self
you are already doing. But if you
think over it seriously, this comfort,
this joy which we have received
realisation to people? This is a state
in which you wish to use your power
collectively. If you are in this state
should also be given to others. If you
then use it fully and go ahead in that
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
24
direction.
could see at the Airport itself that how
people were mad in love for me. So
this is the glory of the love and to
I hope next year when I come to India
many more people will have become
share this love with others is a great
Sahaja Yogis. You have honoured me
thing. If it is achieved in this life time
then it will be the reward of all the
and arranged this reception. What do
I say about it? There was no need of
it. Yet it was your desire and I had to
bow before it. But the day I arrived I
punyas.
Abundant Blessings to all of you
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
25
Talk by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Hague, Holland, 17-09-1986
To influence other people we must absolutely late. Also if you tell
know how much control we have somebody that I have to meet at such
upon ourselves also. That is very and such a time, and this should be
important. For example some people arranged at such and such a time, then
do not have proper image and they you should be absolutely punctual. Its
try to influence others. So its a very important that the punctuality
mockery. Nobody gets influenced by
is to be maintained by you.
such a person who himself has no
Now, I've seen in the West specially
that people get up very late, are very
image of his own. So before working
out the exterior the interior must be
lazy; they walk in a limpy manner;
and the whole thing shows that they
are not interested in the world, they
are just pushed into it and somehow
or other they are doing. Such a person
can never influence anyone, because
people also see your image, that you
yourself are dragging your life
somehow, so why to do the same
thing? - Whatever he is doing. He
cannot tell us anything. So that is
another reason why you cannot
influence people at all, if you are
yourself a lazy person. So, the person
worked out.
For example a person who always
comes late to the office and is always
delayed, who has no time-sense, is
never respected. So when you tell
people that they should be in time,
you should be the first to arrive at the
right time. You must always keep the
time, absolutely. You should be
known for keeping time. So if you
have to go to the office at ten o'clock,
you reach the office in such a way that
you are there five minutes early, wait
outside and enter the office at the time
who has to influence others must be
when you have to go there. That an early riser, must have proper
punctuality is very important. That habits of sleeping, must get up in the
helps people and people get an awe morning and be properly brushed,
for you. They think, this gentleman washed and everything, and should
is so regular and I'm the one who is
be what we call a smart man.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 26
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
Now, many people believe that if you
try to be a fashionable type, that you
wear dresses of a fashionable style
comes with a person when he realises
that he is completely secure. And in
Sahaja Yoga you know that if your
center heart is secure, tell yourself,
and all that, that will influence others.
"Mother is with me. Mother is
It's not true. Because they think that
you have no conviction of any kind,
helping me, and I'm with Mother. I
have nothing to worry." Then your
center heart will be alright. Of course,
this you cannot tell to others, but still
if you have personality you can instill
you see, you must build up an image
of yourself that you are such and
such a kind of a character, as we
have in a drama, a character. A
person speaks with the same that into others very simply. But if you
character, talks with the same
are diffident about yourself then you
character. And the style should be
absolutely known to people that this
is your style, that is how you are. That
you don't compromise on things.
cannot do it. So confidence is to be
established first of all within
yourself. For Sahaja Yogis it's very
easy to say, "I am the spirit, and I am
the child, I am the one who has been
chosen by the Adi Shakti herself." So
It is very important that when you are
talking to people you should have a
proper style of talking, walking; a
proper style. This should all be
trimmed down properly, that you
there should be a tremendous amount
of confidence in you.
For example when you are with the
people, how do you eat your food?
don't walk in a languid manner, in a
manner of throwing your legs here Some people open their mouth all the
and there but straight, and sit down time, eat their food with a sort of
sound. All these things are watched
by others. How you eat. How you
straight. And let people see that you
have faith in yourself first of all. If
you don't have faith in yourself; I talk. Normally things are watched by
mean any behaviour that shows that others. How you eat. How you talk.
you have no faith in yourself; you Normally you should not keep your
cannot influence. So your self- mouth open. You can never influence
confidence must be shown through people. Keep your moth - not pursed
all your behaviour like talking, either but in a normal way closed,
walking sitting and communicating. so that people don't think that you are
There should be a feeling of just gaping at them if you keep your
moth open all the time. Or they should
confidence. But the confidence
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 27
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
not think that you are aggressive with feel that this gentleman is very
them or angry. Have a normal face, a
face that is neither aggressive, nor
pleasant.
Another way to impress people is to
allow others to talk, - listen to them
subservient. Suppose if you keep a
gaping mouth, they'll think, "Oh, he's
an idiot.", and if you purse your lips
they'll think you are a person of a
properly, - do not talk yourself. Listen
to them, and once they've said
aggressive nature. So one has to something, say, "That is true no
understand how you are sitting before
others, talking to others. And to
doubt. I agree with you but.." Then
you can start. So you don't just stun
them by your, "No! Not at all!" like
that. But on the contrary, you see what
influence others, first of all, as I said,
you must respect your own
personality, and then respect the they say, You can watch me, I do that
personality of other people in your many times. When somebody says
something, "Oh, that is true, but, you
see, this is it..." So they don't mind.
Like when somebody comes in, you They think that you have seen the
should talk to them in a very gentle other side of the thing also, that you
manner - knowing that there is another have a balance, you don't just impress
God who is coming in. If there is your idea upon others. In a way you
Spirit in me, there is Spirit in him also. are, but you do it in such a way that
So you must see that he sits properly, nobody feels the impact that you are
that he is comfortable, and ask him if doing something of that kind.
behaviour.
he wants any tea. Make him
comfortable. Make him feel that you Now, as far as possible don't tell
are not in any way disturbed, nor that anybody to do anything. That hurts
you are irritated, but you are very people. For example, when I tell
happy to meet him and you should people, "Do this. Put the lights off."
settle down with kindness. Sometimes After all you are my children, it's
also in diffidence one might feel alright, it is a different relationship.
nervous about a person. That But when you are dealing with others,
nervousness is a sign of insecurity. like somebody is there sitting - if you
One should not be nervous if one is want to put on the light, slowly, while
talking to someone. One should be talking, you get up and put on the
you
in a way that another person should
light. Ask him, "Do you mind if I put
on the light?" Any behavioural
feel absolutely confident and should
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 28
The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
But if you try to do the fashions of
the world, then it changes everyday.
Today the hair will be this side,
tomorrow that side. So make the hair
style as an official would do. That is
to properly comb it. In the olden days,
if you see, even the heroes of the film
used to have oil in their hair. They
never had this kind of hair that is dry.
I mean, it need not be oil, but should
be properly groomed as they say.
in you. They should trust you that There are lots of things available in
whatever you are saying is the truth. the market which can just groom your
That you are not telling them hair without oiling it. It should be
something that is false or you have properly groomed hair so that it
no faith in. The way you tell them shows that you have paid attention to
influences them very much that this your appearance and hairstyle. So you
man is telling the truth. So the whole make an image out of yourself that is
thing should start from your absolutely suitable for a particular
aggression is the first impression.
It is the other way round in Sahaja
Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga first is the
Kundalini, then, do this, do that. It is
the other way round. You have to
build them up from the foundation if
you have to impress them from
outside. To build them up from the
foundation, the first thing is that you
must infuse in them a kind of a trust
behavioural style.
type of a job.
Now the dress also is very important
in influencing others. Now supposing
you are connected with somebody in
an official way, or in any way that you
Now, for example, if a cook appears
in a swimming suit - what would you
think of that? It's horrid! A cook has
to dress up like a cook. In the same
way a businessman also has to dress
up like a businessman. You cannot go
about in jeans to your office, because
if you do it, everybody will do it. And
all these things create laxity. Laxity
is alright outside the office, outside
your business; alright, but not when
you have the business. Like we have
want to influence him in the business
and all that. The best thing is to wear
a business dress, not a dress that is
relaxed or casual. You must wear a
dress that is a business dress, like a
deep blue suit with a lot of strips, a
proper three-piece smart thing, and
smart, clean shoes, and the hair nicely
done, may be a little bit oiled, it's a drawing room. Now a drawing
alright. Looks like a smart business room is a drawing room, it is not a
bedroom. You should not mix them
person.
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
29
up. Once you start mixing them up know, I never wrote about a serpent.
there's no end to it. It can go to any If somebody else has written why
limit. I've seen people going to the should I explain it? I never call it a
office in dresses that really look like serpent's energy because that
a swimming suit. So this has to be confuses people. But if somebody has
revived, and can be revived very called it a serpent's energy it doesn't
easily if you tell people that they matter. What can you do about it"
won't be able to influence people And when you say such a thing, bring
unless and until they keep that kind it to a ridiculous conclusion of the
of a form and an upright behaviour. whole thing, so the person himself
keeps quiet.
In dealing with others there is another
point, that you have to be truthful.
Don't tell lies. Whatever you have to
tell you should say; this much, that is
all. But you shouldn't tell one thing
But you should not suddenly change
the topic, that means that you are
evading the issues, that you don't
know how to handle it. This is what
today, tomorrow another thing, the people do sometimes. They say,
day-after-tomorrow another thing. "Alright, let's talk about this." You
That creates a very big gap in the cannot do that. A diversion like that
mind of a human being.
Unconsciously he thinks, "Oh, he's a
cheat, and he is trying to evade the
can create a big problem. And another
thing; while talking to others, don't
talk about yourself, "I am this and I
am that." No one likes that. Its
issue."
stupid, to talk about yourself. "I have
this thing. I am this thing." Nothing.
Supposing now I'm talking to you,
and then I start looking at the watch.
Now, you just ask, "What are you
That is insulting. Supposing you are
talking about something particular are you." This. That. All sorts of
doing? What is your profession? How
and suddenly I change the topic, then
questions to him.
it is again insulting, because
everybody is intelligent to see that
you are trying to avoid the issues. But
up to a point you should take it, and
then, if the whole thing is ridiculous,
you should bring it to a point to show
that. Like yesterday, I said that, "You
Then you have to talk, say, about your
organization, you shouldn't say I',
you should always say 'we'. We don't
do. We'; always refers to the
organisation and never to yourself. "I
would not do such a thing. I hate it. I
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
30
believe in it." That is absolutely
women. When they serve people, they
take good care and the food is lavish,
absolutely lavish, - eat as much as you
like, a lot of food. They give you five,
six times food, whatever you like.
And you feel quite happy to have all
that. You press the button and
immediately they are available to you.
absurd. "What we have to do. That
we believe. We think this way; - and
what is your opinion. We have this
kind of a thing." Or anything that you
want to tell them about your own
organisation or your own product or
anything. You have to tell them;
"Now, see this is what is available.
So what I am saying is, when you are
Now it is here, and we have seen that
it has done a lot of good, and it works marketing people you are at the other
this way. And we have got very good end. You are not to be serviced, but
reports about it. You can see what it you have to service. Once you realise
is. And, if you please, you can try it, that you have to service others your
and see for yourself."
attitude changes. You have to service
others. Only through your services
they are going to work out. I'll tell
The amount of service you give to the
person is very much appreciated by
another person. It is not only ego, but
you how.
Specially with the English its a big
it makes a person very comfortable.
Like, people like to travel by Air India
very much. Many people say that they
problem. That's why they are losing
so much. They are extremely
arrogant. If you get to an Englishman
and ask him, "Can I see what product
would like to travel by Air India. Try
to understand why. Because these
you have?"- "What do you want?
"I would like to see the product that
days its difficult, because they
examine you too much, and also
because of bombing and this and that. you have!" - "Alright. We just now
So I thought I would be very difficult. don't have any arrangements here to
And they have raised the prices for give you anything, but if you leave
the travel because they have to do your note we'll send it!! Finished.
extra spending on getting people
checked. The reason why people take You should be properly equipped all
to Air India is this, the ladies who
work there are extremely modest. organisation, suppose you are having
They look after the people very well.
They are not cheap, they are not cheap all about it. The brochures should be
That person is not bothered.
the time to attend to it. In an
some product, then you should know
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
31
from whom I bought it, and the
experiences I've had. I think I'd
always go to a person who was kind
to me, who is not shouting at me, who
there, it is all the time available
whenever you want it. It should be
properly priced, systematically kept.
If somebody comes, if you know the
person, if it has validity, the one who
can do some business with you, "Here
it is. Please have it. You can see
yourself." Explain to him what it is.
"This is what it is, and we can give
is well behaved. His behaviour is nice,
he just doesn't try to make fun of me,
and also, on the contrary, he gives me
all the information and everything. It
is absolutely acceptable.
you so much concession in that.
Like, I went to see Lloyds. It is a
company where I wanted to put some
money. I mean, it is a very big thing
Could be so much." All those things
are going to capture the mind. The
market doesn't capture so much
because of the product, but because
to put some money into some bank.
They should understand, It's a
of the way it is put forward.
customer. Now, they had put a little
The way it is put forward is very
important. You have a proper
brochure done, by proper people, or
you yourself see to it that it is done
beautifully. Spending a little money
on that doesn't matter. Whatever is
spent is a prop of the capital that you
have to put in for the product. It is a
part of it. If you think that just to put
a product somewhere is enough it
won't sell. These are part and parcel,
in these modern times, of any product
being made or sold. It's part of the
product.
girl there. After all, the people who
are to be contacting others should be
people of personality. So some little
girl was there. As soon as I came in
she asked me, "Who are you?" I told
her, "I am this and this." "Oh, no we
cant help you. You've got to have this
and, please . we can't do it." So I
said alright, and I gave the name of
the high commissioner of India and
all those things. I mean, she should
understand, then she would not say
like that.
So, the only thing is that she did not
realise that I was with a driver. I had
a chauffeur-driven car. I have a
To influence people you don't have
to advertise so much as you have to
deal with them. I tell you this much,
that when I had to buy something
anywhere I remember the people
Mercedes with me. I was wearing an
expensive saree. I looked quite
respectable, and she should have
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 September-October 2000
32
The Divine Cool Breeze
understood that she should behave to
inquiring. You should not in any way
me in a different way than to an
show that you know about him.
ordinary labourer. Here is a real
So, that kind of secrecy helps a lot,
customer. So she said, "I'd like to
have identification, and then I have
because you do not become arrogant.
You do not become blunt, or you say
to do this, and - no, no no, no, no!"
it bluntly if you tell somebody.
I got so fed up with them that I went
to another bank, that is North West. I
Nobody likes you that way, of if you
try to put down another person, or you
have got a bank account somewhere try to doubt another person. There are
else, but I wanted one near my house. the three things that you look after -
Though it is far away, though it is not that you put the person in a
in such a good locality, when I entered comfortable position and tell him
in, immediately she could see that I everything; listen to him, what he has
was an intelligent woman, she could to say, trusting him. Then the person
see this is a good customer. She could looks up on you.
see that I was wearing diamonds, this, So, in an organisation, if you have to
that. You should see from my
run any administration, your
personality has to be absolutely
sensible. Secondly, what you talk, you
must follow. Supposing I tell you that
you shouldn't take money, and I start
grabbing money
supposing, - then what will you do?
You'll have no faith in me, will you?
personality that there is a good
customer coming in. Immediately she
said, "Please, let us go into the V.I.P.
room." I didn't say anything. She took
me inside, she talked very gently to
from
you,
me and she asked me and she said,
"Can I take one minute?" She went
in and she told somebody to
Actually, when you give me money
for pujas I keep them in a packet and
telephone and find out about my
things and all that ..
use that money for buying the silver
and all that for you. I need not. I mean
it is out of the question. You have
given it in puja, it is supposed to be
mine, and I have said, alright, to keep
You see, it is not to be done in the
presence of a person, but you can
verify the person's personality
secretly, in a way that he doesn't feel
bad or; something may be wrong with
this man, is he correct or not? But he
should not know that you are
the protocol alright you use that
silverware, which is my own, but you
can use it. I mean, it's just a joke, but
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
33
be something absurd.
everybody knows that Mother is so
clear cut, so clear cut. You have to be
clear cut with people. They should When you have to deal with three
persons, or five or ten persons, then
you have to understand that you
should always try to create a good
understand that you do not play tricks
with them, or you are not doing some
sort of a backhand outwitting.
feeling among them. Like now for
Some people do it, you see, at the example, I would like you to marry -
back of a person they try some sort
of a trick. Such a person is never liked.
then I will tell you about her, what
she is, in a way that will not hurt you
Nobody respects such a person. But
straight forward dealing with a person
as he is. If somebody is not alright, in
or hurt her, but prepare you. Because
later on you may hear about her, that
somebody was saying so, and Mother
never told. So, in a very gentle way
you should say, "You see, she has a
little of these things, but it's alright,
she can be very, very gentle. She can
manage it." And it depends on you.
How you manage it. So that you feel
a mild way you should say what the
problem is. "We are facing this
problem. Now, tell me what is the
solution." Then the person does not
feel bad. If you tell a person directly
they won't like it. No, they won't. You
won't like it, if I tell you so directly,
informed, knowledgeable about a
person, and also responsible about it,
that how it is my responsibility.
but I tell you everything, - and I tell
you in a way that is mild, that is
congenial, that is easily understood
and assimilated. That is very
So, to make people responsible is also
a very important part
administration. If you start doing
of
important, that you have a style that
people understand, and a proper kind
every work yourself then people may
never share your work. They will
of behaviour.
Actually by not influencing others,
never do anything. To make them
you influence others. Art lies in hiding responsible the best way is by
art. There should be no deliberation rewarding them. You must reward
exposed about it. When talking to them if somebody has done good
someone also, even if you don't work. "Oh you have done such a good
understand what they are talking, you work." But not directly like that, but
should not show that you are
in a very indirect manner you must
understanding and listening. It may reward that person. Not only in
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 September-October 2000
34
The Divine Cool Breeze
works, but in kind words you can
do it with kind small things.
saris for myself. I was buying some
saris and I thought, I've bought quite
a lot now. I liked one saree very, very
much, but I didn't buy it. I thought it
I'll give you an example of Rajesh.
Rajesh is very sweet, and does not
need anything. I mean, he is such a
rich man, what can we give him?
was too much money, - I shouldn't
waste all this money, that will not be
Once he was taking me somewhere good. Whatever it is. I gave it up.
and he had this swiss knife, and he
Next day Gregoire bought the sari as
a present to me. Really, I treasured
that sari. I remember.
gave it to the driver to cut the fruit or
something. And then it vanished. And
You see, every incident can be made
into some sort of a very valid thing,
we can say: like a puja. But like an
official makes a difference in an
he was very angry, you see. He
couldn't bear this fellow cheating
him. He took him to the police station
and all that, but he couldn't get it. The
organisation where you work. Little,
little things like that. Also they should
feel that you are responsible for them
in an organisation, very important.
driver had managed it somehow you
see. It was a taxi. He was very angry
with the driver. I saw that and said,
"Alright, it doesn't matter."
The next time I went to India, I took Once in my husband's office one
a very nice knife for him. When he fellow joined another organisation
saw it, he just melted away. He said, and he was told not to join another
organisation, but he joined it because
there was more money. And when he
"Mother, how did you remember?"
I said, "You were so upset at that
went there he found it was all a very
time."
horrible thing. There was nothing
good happening except for the
money. He was very unhappy there,
He said, 'Not because of a knife, but
because of the way this fellow cheated
so he wanted to come back. And he
came back my husband was very
annoyed, "I told you not to go there.
Why did you go? What was the need
me."
But the whole thing neutralised you
see. So, little, little things if you watch
of a person, its very sweet.
to do such a thing? Now I can not take
you back."
Like I'll tell you about Gregoire.
So the fellow came to me. I don't
Once we went to a shop to find some
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
35
September-October 2000
like a family. What's wrong with her?
know why he thought of it, but he
came to me. He told me what had
Is she all right? Do you need any help?
This thing, that thing. Send
happened and that he wanted to come
back to the shipping corporation and,
I made some mistakes. I think I made
sometimes the flowers when the
husband is sick, or the wife is sick, -
or make enquiries about the children.
All these things mean a lot.
a big mistake, and Mr. Shrivastava is
somehow angry with me. He doesn't
want to take me back. So when Mr.
Shrivastava came home I said that he Normally, what people do, on a
had come to see me."Oh! So he Christmas day. At the most they may
came to see you. As if you are my send a card or something. But you can
I have in the organization a proper card
said, "He wants to join your system. You should sign them
yourself, and one line somewhere in
boss."- and he got very angry. So I
corporation. I think you should give
the thing - I hope your wife is alright.
I hope the children are alright. 'If you
know the wife, 'Please give my
regards to her.' There is no need to
consideration to him."
He said, "Why did he come to you?"
I said, "I think he thought I am more
make them drink like fish, but it is
forgiving than you are perhaps!"
more to make them feel that they are
That put him right. He said, "What loved and they are liked in the
do you mean? I can be forgiving too." organisation. They are very
important. This kind of a thing.
"So then forgive him!"
Even the suggestion like you are
These are the tricks, you see, which I changing the position of a person.
have naturally. But you can imbibe Now, for example if I want Christine
them also, not difficult to impress to be the leader in America and
others. Such little, little things make Gregoire to be there and not to
a difference, you see. When they are interfere with Christine, I said,
sick you must look after them. Find
"Gregoire, see now, she is there and
out if their children are sick, if their
she is handling people better. She
wives are sick. You should be
knows them, people have love and
concerned and you should be
respect. Suddenly you are a new
identified. You must treat an
person going there and you will be
her husband. So, as it is, you are one
organisation like a family. Absolutely
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-37.txt 
 September-October 2000
36
The Divine Cool Breeze
know what is wrong with them, but
of the world leaders, and you should
have nothing to do with the local please take care and all that. And
stuff." And he understood it. But if I things work out. People take you
had said, "Now you don't talk seriously and they understand that
anything there! Now you keep quiet!" you are responsible for yourself, and
I mean, it would not have worked out. that you are putting that responsibility
And that he is, he knows that very on them. That is how it should be
worked out.
well. He is the one who have come
up like that. Anywhere in the world
you can go and do anything you like. There is a shop in Lucknow that
I would say Rajesh is another one who
is coming up.
makes very good sweets, very famous
for it's sweets. Now his father is gone
but the son is sitting there. Big
stomach he has got. And everybody
goes there to his shop. You can't take
a car, you have to walk quite a long
distance. Now his trick is such, which
Unless and until you make proper
arrangements you should not shift a
person suddenly. You should try to
see that this person who is suddenly
shifted is alright. But you should find
out if you really want to shift a person
or not. If you are uncertain better keep
it hanging. Time is the best way to
allow things to happen like this.
Allow a little time to pass-away. Give
a little hint to a person., "People are
complaining. What to do? I'd like you
to help me." So that he also thinks
that you give him sufficient time to
improve. But if you don't give any
time and you just tell a person,
I have noticed, he'll first take your
order, then you are sitting there and
he says (to his boys), "What are you
doing? Why don't you give her
things? She has been sitting here for
such a long time. Look at these
people. They just go on taking so
much time of people. Now I hope you
don't have to go by the aeroplane just
now." I said, "No, I am alright!" So,
on an apology all the time, you see.
So then he said, "Why not taste these
"Now, you get out!" - he'll become
things I've made specially, just try."
your enemy.
So you eat something and you say,
"Alright, give me some of these too."
But, on the contrary, you should say,
"I'm sorry, but these people are such,
they are trying to trouble us and Like that, he goes on, you see, giving
trouble me all the time, and I don't time. And then after some time he
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-38.txt 
 37
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
"Look now at these people, how
horried they are. They don't know
how to finish the work. Hey! What
which is sensible, which receives
says,
people sensibly, respects them and
delivers the things in time, and a thing
are you doing there? Why don't you
give some sweets to the lady. She has
to go now. Why are you taking so
much time? I'm Sorry, will you taste
that is not useless.
of course, you must find out what is
the good with the other organisation.
What they are having. What they are
them? They'll bring it."
selling. You should find out, and why
people like that? But most of all, what
I've seen, that works out is nothing
but your relationship with the
So, you eat something else. So you
say, "Alright." You eat this and by the
time you have left the shop all your
money is finished and you bought all
customer.
the sweets of the shop. And that is
the trick he plays. Then after some But also your relationship in the office
time you discover it and you say, "I should be good. First of all your
know all these tricks. Now will you
please give me what ever I want!" who wear fashionable dresses in the
Then he'll give it.
personality should be good. People
office cannot be good administrators
because you see, they become a little
loose, and people start taking
advantage of a loose personality. But
you should be tight - in a sense. Wear
an official dress. Always. People have
So what I am saying is that a
relationship of sweetness devélops
when you see him sweetly selling his
things, his products to us. On the
contrary, - "This is my product. If you
an awe of them.
want, you have it. Otherwise, get out.
In the same way, this new data, like
in the office people will call
- "Alright, you get out first!"
The whole attitude of selling is now
everybody the driver will call the
boss, - "Tom, how are you?"
turning back to a proper relationship
between the seller and the purchaser.
It is just a relationship that works, not No respect. It starts like that. Or if
the product. Let the product go to hell! the boss takes a drug or something,
Nobody is bothered about the like in India they take what you call
product. Of course, if you have five tobacco. Tobacco they eat. What
products, and they are equally good, happens, even a peon goes to the boss
then people will go to the organisation and the boss says, "Have you got
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-39.txt 
 38
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
little bit of zarda?" - "Yes, yes.", dresses. Because that really makes
a difference, you see. Always a
finished. The whole relationship is dress makes a difference for proper
takes out his own and gives it, -
articulation. Absolutely.
finished.
So at that time, if you are taking Now, yesterday, I didn't have a white
drugs, if you take drinks, anything, Sari. They never forget white saris for
whatever habits you have that are my programme. O, I always wear a
really detrimental, try to cut them. white sari for my programme. But I
Even if you cannot, you do not had worn this one, white with a red
expect your subordinates to support border. It makes a difference. If I had
that. No one likes cheap type of
jokes and things, but these happened. But suppose I am coming
subordinates pass cheap types of to see you, what sari I wear has an
jokes and they think they are effect on you. "Oh, Mother wore this
popular. They are not. Popularity is
to be gained by aloofness and is like your light. Your dress, your
singleness. Not by just becoming like behaviour is like your light. Whatever
worn another sari it could not have
sari while coming just to meet us." It
them.
you are inside shows out with that.
And all these compromises that
Another incident I'll give you. In
C.P.'s office there was a lady who people have nowadays are spoiling
came in jeans, and C.P. called her and
the administration. You must keep
yourself, you must keep your
position.
said, - "Madame, I will not have this.
You can wear trousers, or you can
Now in the offices I've seen, people
answer back. Your own people
answer back. But if you see a
Japanese firm, one person will speak,
nobody else. They'll all sit tight.
wear some sensible dress but not these
jeans." You can wear it in the street,
you can wear it in the house, you can
wear it anywhere but not in the
office."
When this one person asks them a
She said, "No sir, it cannot be so!"
question, they'll say, otherwise they
don't speak. A kind of an allegiance
He said, "Alright, then will you please
resign. I won't have you.
exists between them. The trick is like
this; before going to any programme
or all that he'll call his five people.-
And she started wearing proper
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-40.txt 
 September-October 2000
39
The Divine Cool Breeze
feeling, no sense of jealousy or
anything. Jealousy is something that
plays among your own people. You
have to tell, "Everybody has his own
job. Everything has to be done, and
We do the same with our children. has to be done well - and we are all
When Indians have to go to together and we are one. No question
somebody's house, they tell the of this hand having a jealousy with
children, "When you go there you are this one, but you are on the right hand
not to ask for anything. You should and you are on the left hand, so do
not touch anything there. You are not your right hand work and do your left
to eat much, or say no to that. Even if hand work. And the whole thing will
you have to eat, take very little. Then work out. The whole organisation has
before going you say, "Thank you", to come up. If the organisation comes
When you go there you must say, up, we'll all get advantages." So
“Namaskar", "All these things are always build them up in the form of
taught in the house first of all. an allegiance as far the organisation
"Otherwise next time we'll not take is concerned. If we have more profits,
This is what we are going to do. Now
you have to say this, and you have to
this. It's already decided. Nobody
is free to talk in the presence of others.
say
you."
we have better bonuses.
So in this way, what happens is that May be, I understand your
they are already warned. Actually Kundalini's very well-innately. I
they are knowledgeable about what
to do. Suppose you take five people,
know how to deal with things,
innately. Now, sometimes you have
to say about someone, say, I may
Then they start arguing among say about you to him, "Look after
themselves in the same organisation. him and do this.' May be he is rather
Now Sahaja Yogis in the beginning careless. He won't understand what
used to do the same. They would I've told and he might just say,
come along for a meeting, sit down.
argue with me in the presence of "Mother was saying so!" So I have
others and it created a problem. So I to warm him, "You just say yourself."
had to tell them. - in the presence of
Otherwise it won't work out. Why
others don't argue. If you want to tell
am I telling you? But all these things
me, you tell me.
must be made clear before he
And between them to create a good
cont'd on page No. 52
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-41.txt 
 40
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
SAHASRARA PUJA
Cabella (7-05-2000)
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
accept that they are not yet complete
Thirty years back when Sahasrara was
opened I found darkness all over.
People were so ignorant. There was
and they have to have their realization.
Also there style of life was such that
no awareness, what they have to find. they had no time for themselves. I
Of course I found they wanted to find
found it very difficult to convince
people that you must take your self
something that was unknown but they
didn't know, what was unknown,
what they have to find? And they
realization because they thought it is
something imaginary. Which is very
were extremely ignorant about farfetched and they only believe in
themselves and about their gurus who would say alright "Do this
surroundings and about the aim of
their life. I did know how to start that
much of rituals, Karamkands." That's
all and they were doing all kinds of
rituals with the kind guidance of their
topic.
Gurus without knowing that you have
to first know yourself, which is said
thought of trying self-realization only by all the great incarnations, all the
on one lady. She was an old lady and saints, clearly. It is not that it was only
there was another lady who also my idea that people should get their
When Sahasrara was opened I
started to come.
self-realization but it was the idea of
all those people. They said one after
another, for centuries that seek
This old lady got the realization and
then the another lady who was much
younger told me that she gets fits and
she gets possessed. Oh my God! I said
"how will I give her realization?" But
somehow she got cured very fast and
yourself". Even Christ said know
thyself". Mohammed Saheb said the
same. Nanak Saheb said the same.
But nobody tried to know that these
she also got realization. Its a very rituals are not the end of life, they will
unknown knowledge. Also human
not serve the purpose and they have
beings in their ego do not want to to have realization. So those two
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-42.txt 
 41
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
those days people were such that if
you tell them anything like that, they
would turn their faces. Only the kind
of false Guru who would say 'alright,
ladies only got self realization and
with that I thought let's go to the sea-
shore and about thirty people came
with me and they were talking in a
very funny manner as to how they can you give me five rupees'. They will
get self realization? They don't be very happy that they have
deserve it. They have not been very purchased the Guru and now they
good people. All kinds of things, don't have to bother about anything.
condemning themselves and in that You don't have to do anything. So
lot I got about twelve people with that gradually it started working
altogether, inclusive of those two out and I remember that these people
ladies who got realization.
who got their realization asked me
"Mother you allow us to do Durga
This is a sign that the movement of Puja." Durga Puja was regarded as
knowing yourself is very very slow something very difficult and
and people don't understand why they Brahmins were not normally ready to
should know themselves. I was quite do it, because they were not realized
disappointed because nobody souls. So they used to get into fits and
understood me. But one day it so into all kinds of problems. So they
happened that in one of the
programmes one lady came. She was
possessed and she started talking in
called the Brahmins, seven of them,
and told them "you just don't worry."
Nothing will happen to you because
Sanskrit language. She was just a now you are facing the reality, not
maid-servant! Everybody was
surprised and she said "you don't anything. Its a human being. They
know who she is?" and then she were quite frightened and they
some sort of the Murti Puja or
started describing me from the camedown. But something happened
Saundarya Lahiri. I was wondering to them that with great confidence
what is the matter with this lady! Like they started Mantras and everything.
flowing
a man she spoke. Her voice was like
Vibrations
started
a man. People may believe it or not
but she was very posssessed and then
they came and asked mother "What
she is saying, is it true?" I said you
should find out yourself. Because
everywhere. We were very close to
the sea and I found that the sea was
roaring but people didn't understand.
Except for these seven people, they
said that nothing has happened to us!
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-43.txt 
 September-October 2000
42
The Divine Cool Breeze
We did everything so well: I think should have somebody to take
that was the first miracle also.
money, otherwise they don't have
it. I said but you cannot sell it. It is
See the trouble with human minds at false hood. You cannot sell self-
this level or at this time is that they realization to people. He said then
have too much of self importance and
they think no end of themselves. So you see you won't be successful,
with other gurus this is main thing
already they think that we are great. that they just accept money and
What is there to know ourselves? We
even they tell people, bring so much
money, do this, that is the fees and
know ourselves. So the basic seeking
power is humility. If you think that
that's how only in Ego you satisfy
you know everything, you cannot
humble down and you can not seek.
Even if you seek, they don't want to
follow anybody's path. They will say
that we will follow our own path. We
and people take to falsehood. This
falsehood, they may realize later on
because they suffer a lot with all
kinds of physical, mental problems
but by that time they are gone cases.
do whatever we want to do. I faced
many people in different countries
who just came to listen to my lecture
and that's all. They would not take
Now the Sahastrara has not been
described in any of the books. Though
they have talked about in our ancient
books in India also. They have talked
about Sahastrara but nobody has
described it except that it has got a
thousand petals. At least if they had
mentioned something about it, it
would have been easier for me to
realization, and some of them did take
their realization. They got it but they
got it lost. Somehow this was such a
funny story for me that I am giving
them realization. I am taking no
money for it, nothing. I used to travel
on my own. But despite that why is
it, that the people don't realize the
show that see it is written in the book.
Because people are like that! It has to
be written in some book and that only
they accept. Its a very difficult
situation, because nobody had given
a collective realization. So nobody
had written to that extent except for
value of self-realization. Then a gentle
man who got realization in the first
lot, told me that today it is a consumer
society, as they call it, what ever it is
unless and until you take money from
one or two people who wrote clearly
about Kundalini. But I would not say
them, they will never value it. Let
them feel that we have paid for it, for
our realization. So at the gate only you
it was so clear because it was all in
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
43
poetry. So people would sing the
songs but they won't understand. But
I was thinking how these people who
and that's how people became so
clean, so beautiful and started
enjoying their lives. But nobody
would believe them. When they went
round and talked to people, they
would say they have gone mad! They
could not believe, how they have
stopped drinking? How they are not
smoking. So the identification I found
of these people were mostly with the
were lost here and there under some
sort of seeking, what will happen to
them and how will I be able to give
them self-realization? Experiences
were so horried but doesn't matter. I
went on and on and on and I worked
it out. Of course you met some people
who were also very cruel and nasty,
who troubled me and troubled Sahaja
Yogis. All these things should have
very loose type of enjoyment. They
enjoyed very loose type of
enjoyment, which has nothing to do
really tampering my enthusiasm but
on the contrary I started thinking why,
with the spirit.
Gradually of course it started working
why people are like this?
out. But still I must say that we cannot
Then I realized onething that we expect, in this Kaliyuga, to have
cannot have the whole world to get billions and billions of people in
Sahaja Yoga, though it is my desire,
it is your desire and you want them
to get their self-realization, by which
so many good things can happen.
understand what they are doing. Its Firstly your physical self improves.
not just having the big number that Many people have been cured. Christ
will help us but really solid Sahaja cured only twentyone people. I don't
Yogis. Then I found there were people know how many thousands have been
who got cured of many diseases but cured in Sahaja Yoga? Also there is
most of them got lost. Some of them another very big problem with human
who were drug addicts, drinking, they beings that they read all kinds of
gave up, smoking they gave up. I have books and they have no clear cut idea
never said a word, that you give up as to what they should find? What is
this or give up that. I know, when the their seeking? It's a very big problem
and whatever is in one boook, they try
self-realization. This is the last
judgement. At this time people have
to decide what is the most important.
They have to know themselves and
Kundalini rises they will
automatically give up and it happened
to follow that. I mean they are like
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-45.txt 
 September-October 2000
44
The Divine Cool Breeze
shifting type of people. They shift tips. Without the experience you
from one to another and their progress should not believe it. That means a
new dimension has come now in your
nerves. That you can feel the system
which has not been known to you.
The sympathetic nervous system was
there but you never knew how it is
in Sahaja Yoga is much more difficult.
Because if you are going on one path
and you start shifting from one to
another then you may go back. But
in that they find it is their freedom.
Actually without realization you working. The knowledge about
don't have your freedom, of yourself was so poor but after
anything. Freedom is that in which realization suddenly the whole thing
you know what you are. You know got enlightened, Suddenly you start
what you are capable of. In the feeling the newness among yourself.
freedom you are the one who should Still sometimes you have to fight your
receive all the blessings. If these ego. You have to get over your
blessings are not there then you are ignorance of things. Because
not free. There is something wrong realization gives you absolute
somewhere in your own life. Because knowledge, absolute knowledge. It
can not be challenged. Its signal, as
they call, is Ekmeva Satya, (the only
truth) and when you get that
knowledge then you can tally it also.
once you get your realization you
become absolutely free people. Free
means your own spirit guides you,
Spirit as you know is the reflection
of the Divine, the God Almighty. If
You can find out whether if it is
correct or not. This is something that
has happened to all of you and you
everybody has the same reflection and
he is awakened, then in the awareness
have already got those vibrations with
it works as if they know what is right
and what is wrong. What is which you can feel.
constructive and what is destructive.
For example there may be some
It is not some sort of a false
satisfaction that you have but in dissatisfied souls with Sahaja Yoga
reality it is. You feel the reality and who are these people? What are they
but you can find out on vibrations
that is what it has to happen.
doing? On vibrations you can make
out if those people have reached such
The first thing in Sahaja Yoga is that
stage of reality or not. You can make
out if these people who are trying to
you get the experience, of feeling, the
spanda, the cool breeze on your finger
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-46.txt 
 45
September-Oclober 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
oppose you or trying to tell you reached it. You can see in the life of
something else, how far are they? On all the great people that they think this
your finger tips you know. This is is the truth, not by just reading, not
what is 'Kyama' about which by just believing but as an experience.
If on their central nervous system they
can feel the truth, then it is impossible
The other day I must tell you an to change them. Like you can see a
Mohammed Saheb has said.
experience with me. There was one
fellow who came from the television change the tree into a seed. Seed is a
and known as staff and he started seed. When the seed changes into the
asking me very funny questions tree then you cannot bring it back into
which had no relevance. His name seed which may create more seeds,
was Abbas. So I said, Abbas Miyan, its different. In the same way once
seed becomes a tree, then you cannot
you are wasting your time and my you have got your realization and
time. Will you come to the right once you have become one with the
questions? So he said I am against all Divine, then there is no question of
fundamentalism. But I am not
you going down and listen to
yourself. Its very very remarkable,
fundamentalist. How do you know I
am that or not? So he said, I am trying how you get this property, how you
to find out. "Alright," I said, you put get this ability and this capability and
your hands toward me. Mohammed after that you don't use it! Of course
Saheb has said that at the time of first you must grow and for that you
"Kyama" your hands will speak and, have to meditate. But this meditation,
you will be amazed, immediately he once you do it, the whole being itself
started feeling cool breeze on his gets so enlightened and so beautiful
hands. He said what is happening to that you don't want to change it. You
me. I said that's what it is." No use want to be there and enjoy it forever.
arguing, no use talking about it, no But of course you want to give it to
use enquiring. Just see yourself. others because you are enjoying so
Experience it. He just got so stunned much. Like on the street you find
and after that whatever he talked to somebody starving and you are
me he never published. So what I am
having food then you would feel like
saying is that if the people reach the
truth and they know this is the truth,
nothing can change it, if they have
giving food to that person. In the same
way you see in this world people are
madly seeking running up and down,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-47.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
46
doing all kinds of things. You want enjoy the turmoil, the torture.
to tell them. They may or may not Everything you can enjoy if you see
believe. They may try to, sort of, the point that nothing can happen to
absolutely deny you, defy you. They your spirit which is the real light.
Whatever you may suffer, wherever
you may think is troubling you is
actually this silent light of the spirit
makes you absolutely, perfectly
joyous and you give joy to others. You
don't design it, you don't plan it, how
to give joy, but it just automatically
gives joy, and this giving joy is also
can do anything. But you know for
definite that you are on the right path,
you are on the right state of mind
which is a Sahaja state. In Sanskrit it
is called 'Sahajavastha'.
In Sahajavastha you do not react. You
just see and appreciate. Now see, I
came, I saw this beautiful, such an effortless, Sahaja, because you are in
idea of Sahastrara, all the chakras,
the Sahaja state. In the Sahaja state
they are crossed over, gone up there
and from there then, very good feel, its different styles, different
you just see things. Its a drama you
expression. But any other person
Oh,
combination is not good, Why? Why
did they use this? Why don't they use
types, you just see and watch and get
the joy out of it. It is not important to
this
colour
would
say,
see, I like this, I like that, no. That I,
which likes, is nothing but ego. This
something else? Like that, finding
keeps you out of the enjoyment which
faults with others! This finding faults
actually comes from your brain which
is not yet enlightened. You cann't
is reality, which is real. Everything in
this world, that you find is
troublesome, if you see from another
enjoy anything because you react, all
the time you go on reacting. If angle, from Sahaja sthiti (feefa) you
somebody says something nice, still
won't feel the troubles. But that
higher standard should be built-in
within you.
you are reacting. If someone says
something bad, of course you are
reacting. No question! So for us it is The other day I had a meeting with
the bureaucrats and I told them I know
to understand that we are not free to
that the pay is less. You may think
that the others get much more pay
they have much more facilities. But
react. We are not that cheap to react.
We are on a very high pedestal. What
is our job, is to enjoy. Enjoy
everything and that enjoyment is the
blessing of the Divine. Even you can
there is one way you can really enjoy
your work. If you have patriotism,
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-48.txt 
 September-October 2000
47
The Divine Cool Breeze
Deshbhakti. If you have patriotism for in the ocean of purity. Where there is
your country, no amount of sacrifice no idea at all of hurting anyone or
will satisfy you. You wan to give troubling anyone. Such a protection
everything and you can go through is there for them. They cannot be
all kinds of depressive states without harmed because after all you have
even feeling anything. And at the entered into the kingdom of God, so
same time your feelings become very who can harm you or trouble you?
Such a prosperity I have seen among
Sahaja Yogis and such a generosity
deep. For example you are travelling
and suddenly you find somebody
who is sick. You can feel it on your
vibrations that this person is sick and
such
that they have, and
understanding about things. I don't
have to give lectures; now don't do
this and don't do that. No, no need.
immediately your sympathy and your
love flows to that person. You try to
help that person. If possible you try
to even cure that person. Just like that,
your whole being becomes like an
ocean which absorbs all the rivers and
And these who are not yet already
matured in Sahaja Yoga should try to
mature and those who are not matured
and troubling, don't worry about
them. You should have pity, have pity
for such people that they are
all kinds of watery things, whatever
it is within its abdomen, I should say.
it just takes all that is there. It doesn't
immature.
hurt. It doesn't trouble someone. It is
like over powering a person with his Today it is something great, I feel,
love. He doesn't show his power. He because for thirty years I have been
does not bother about its self- running up and down every where and
importance. If somebody tries to I have been able to gather so many
insult you, alright, what is there the of you. There are so many Sahaja
insult part of it, and such people who Yogis all over the world. This is just
have reached that Sahajavastha are the a wee-bit of them. So this is.
greatest creators of art, of music, of something was to happen, has been
great thoughts and that's why these already described has been predicted
survive. So many people create but by people that such and such thing
nobody bothers. But those who are
will be happen that so many people
will get their self-realization.
Unbelievable, It was, of course. But
realized souls, whatever they create
is of eternal nature. Because they
are
as now, you see, how sweet is the
now in the ocean of eternity. They are
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-49.txt 
 48
September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
people who are around you, with your
feeling that we are all one, there is
no quarrel, no fight, no bad ideas own country and other countries,
and nobody likes cheap things. They everywhere, the whole atmosphere.
want to have something that is The Brahmand (universe) becomes
pleasing and has a quality of part and parcel of you and you are
understanding. I have seen people not separated from that. Then, that
echoes. You can call the 'naad'. The
becoming poets, writing beautiful
echoes of your being, of your life can
be easily seen, not in material
advancement or in any other kind of
a thing but in the spiritual area which
poetry. I have seen people becoming
oraters. Also I have seen people
becoming very good organisers. But
one thing that is very important is
is the highest. Everywhere, in every
country, there have been people of
that quality and till today they are
the humility. I said in the beginning
and again I would say that what will
appeal to the people is your humility.
You should be a humble person.
all remembered. In the same way
you all will be representing a very
Do not think that you are something great knowledge about reality in
special, or that you are some sort of
your life, in your creation or in your
working. In every way you can do
it. The only thing that now we have
to do is to decide how many people
a, I should say, self important person.
Once you think that you are
important then you are not part and
parcel of the whole. If my one hand
starts thinking I am important, its What we can do for realization?
stupid. How can one hand be What we should do? This is the only
important? All hands are needed, thing, if you go on with your
everything is needed, legs are needed. complete emancipation, you will be
How can one part be so important? If surprised that its like climbing up a
you start thinking like that anywhere big mountain. But when you reach
in your journey of Sahaja Yoga, then the peak, you can see everything
I must say, that you are not in the very well, and you feel so satisfied
Sahajavastha. So my own effort was that you are at the peak. That
to take you into that beautiful arena climbing part even some of you have
of Sahaja, where you will be
we are going to give realization?
to do it. It is all right, there is no
absolutely one with your-self, one problem. You can do it. You must
with the nature, one with all the have respect for yourself, love
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-50.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
yourself and understand that you very loving because you are capable
have to reach the peak of the of love and it is not forced on you.
mountain, and once you have agree that from the ocean the clouds
reached the peak of the mountain rise and they give rain and all that
you will know that you are there but it is in the cycle of life, they are
and then you start showering all your doing it. They are not conscious of
love, affection and everything that it. They don't think that they are
flows down the mountain. If that is doing something great because they
the life for you, its the greatest type are in the cycle. You are out of the
of life. Forget all other people, cycle and still you are doing the
politicians and all other people who work without any feeling of self
are supposed to be great. Forget importance. You are doing because
them. You are much higher than you have to do.
them because you are already
Another cycle, not the natural cycle,
butanother cycle of awareness, where
you are aware as to what you are
chiselled like a diamond with Sahaja
style of life, which is very satisfying
and also which is very much
absolutely peace giving. It gives you
joy, it gives you peace, it gives you
capabilities, it gives you so many
things that you cannot count, like the
doing. At the same time you are very
humble, you are very loving, you are
very kind. You don't shout, you don't
beat anyone. You don't say anything
harsh to anyone and you can manage
the most difficult persons. If
thousand petals of your Sahasrara,
which are enlightened. God knows
someone tries to be funny, you can
what all you can have with this. This
is such a tremendous area you are always raise the Kundalini and be
in, the thousand petals. And from satisfied. If you secretly raise the
there the people have gained all the Kundalini, the other person is
knowledge about
knowledge about all the great forget it. Forget it, he is a difficult
discoveries are from there. So this person, he may be a stone. What can
is what one has to realize one's own you do? You can not make love flow
esteem. Self esteem is different form and the dignity and these qualities. It
self importance. You should have is not possible for the stone-hearted
self-esteem. With that you would person. Forget it, it is not your job.
become humble. You will become
finished, if you can't raise it, then
seience,
Its not your job at all. I would request
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-51.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
50
September-October 2000
that first of all you should see how
a lot. Climbing for about three hours.
much humble you are? You have to
Naturally we all got tired and there
be very humble and that is your was a little resting place, made of
decoration, that is your beauty. So marble. So we said let us spread out
you have your love, which is pure, ourselves here. So when we spread
without any lust or greed. You love out, they said. "Why we have come
others only because you are in love here, of all the things, this or that,
and then secondly you are blessed grudging. "Then suddenly, there was
with peace. You are absolutely at a joy point. Suddenly I saw the
peace with yourself and you will be carvings of elephants. So I said "Can
amazed that with peace, wisdom will you see these elephants, everyone's
come to you. You will be regarded tail is differently made." They said,
as the wisest man, wisest woman, "Mummy, how do you see the
because you are at peace with elephants' tails, we are so tired. I said,
**You also see." Because it is the joy
yourself. Only in peace you can
that shifts, your mind from nonsense.
discover the truth, you can
discover every solution that you
It is saying just nonsense. You just
shift your mind. This is the way you
want to. You become a very wise
and sensible person, outstandingly can shift and go to the thing that is
greater than others. You are not like joyous. Supposing there is a person
common people. Then you have joy. who is quite boring. Then what
Joy in something cannot be expressed happens, you just see the humour
in words but still joy as I have told behind it, how a person bores you?
you many a times, it is similar. It is And what you learn out of it is never
not happiness or unhappiness. It is just bore anyone. So this joy has a
joy. Just you enjoy. You enjoy speciality that it teaches you the
everything, enjoy every company,
every incident, every scene, every bad person, alright, still you enjoy
happening in your life. You know because you say how bad it is.
how to enjoy. See just joy has a great Suppose, of course if it is a good
capacity.
essence of joy of everything. If it is a
friend, you can always see. But you
do not go with a mind how to criticize
it. This criticism business goes out of
your mind. So what happens, your
I remember once I had gone with my
son-in-law and daughter to see some
historical place and we had to climb
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-52.txt 
 September-October 2000
The Divine Cool Breeze
51
mind shifts immediately from
been very critical of others. I don't
know the reason, why it is so? But
something that is ridiculous to
something interesting in the may be that they think no end of
samething. So you don't criticize themselves! But this is what is very
and you don't feel bad about it.
Sometimes it so happens that people knowledge, then you become really
are amazed that how I tolerate such humble. Absolutely humble and
people. I don't tolerate. I am not sweet, gentle and kind.
common, f you know the absolute
paying any attention, whatever the
So today is a great day, for me also. I
didn't know that I will survive so
person may be doing. If you are of
that nature, that you can call a
condition, where you are absolutely many years to see this beautiful
at Turya" state about which Kabira world. Because after all, it was a very
has said "Jab Mast hue phir kya
hard life, according to other
Bolen,-when I have gone into that standards. But what is most joy giving
state of joy why should I say
anything? It is like that, à
to me is creating Sahaja Yogis, and
listening to them and talking to them.
The way they are so sweet, so kind
temperament which you have to
understand and respect it. That is and so respectful! All this has helped
within you, respect it. Do not me so much and I must thank you for
compare it with others. Others are not that. With your support, with your
at your level. So you are at a different help, with your understanding I could
level and you just try to enjoy, never achieve it. If I could have achieved it
feel that you are something higher or on my own, I would have never asked
greater. No, never feel. What you for this help of yours. But you are just
should feel is that thankfulness that like my hands, you are just like my
you are not mixed up with all those eyes and I need you very much
funny ideas and funny styles of life because without you I cannot do. Its
where you go on criticising this is not like channelising. Unless and until
good. I don't like it. Who are you? you have channels, what's the use of
You don't know yourself. When you being Adishakti or anything? How
will you channalise it? If there is
say, I don't like it, you are not
movement, it needs
channels. Otherwise its a static thing.
knowing yourself. How do you say, I electrical
don't like it. 1 have seen people with
In the same way I felt always that I
very poor knowledge. Who have just
 2000_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-53.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October 2000
52
needed more and more channels.
so you have a responsibility also to
give realization to others. Don't keep
very very great spirit. So I thank you it to yourself. This has to be given
very much again for this day that to others and you can explain, you
has come and I bless you from my can talk to them, you can very well
heart that now you take over understand, try to understand them
When it worked out, I was really in a
responsibility. You are a Sahaja Yogi,
and talk to them. And you must give
realization to others, otherwise you
won't feel complete. To feel
complete, you have to do that.
May God Bless You.
Cont'd from page No. 39
speaks. Because once he has done place. And your relations remain
it, what is the use?
alright. So relationships are to be
maintained by your own dignity, by
Then, if he comes for your
your own sense of respect of yourself
explanation to you, you should be
and the respect of others. As you treat
yourself, you treat others. But if you
have no respect for yourself, how can
you respect others?
prepared to tell him, "Why did you
have to tell him, and I didn't tell him,
directly?" So that the other person who
has tried to be stupid is put in his own
