NIRMALA Nov.-Dec., 2001 Volume: XIII Issue: 11 & 12 VERSAL PURE The Divine Cool Breeze 00 AELC "If you are still busy with the money problem or the power problem and this problem and that, then you are a 'problem' not a Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi is above everything else and is very powerful. Power will be achieved by them-power of love and compassion, which is not only words of love. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Adi Shakti Puja, 2001) OHARMA RELIGION

 Guru Puja, Cabella, 8.7.2001

 The Divine Cool Bree ze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 November Decembat. 2001 ssue 11 & 12 November - December 2001 Adi Shakti Puja - 3.6.2001 Guru Puja - 8.7.2001 81 Public Programme, Albert Hall (London) - 14.7.2001 26 New Year Puja, Kalwe - 31.12.2000 34 Shakti Devi Puja, Mascow - 17.9.1995 43 1 Shri Mataji Talks To Brides - 30.7.2001 46 1 Letter from Shri Mataji, March, 1989

 T H E D IVINE C oOL BREE ZE Тн Co o L B RE EZE Published by V.J. Nalgirkar 162 - A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067 Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph. : 5447291, 5170197 For subscription please write to Mr. O. P. Chandna N-463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi - 110034 Ph. : (011) 7013464 Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to: THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple C-17, Qutub Institutional Area New Delhi - 110016

 SHRI ADISHAKTI PUJA CABELLA, 3.6. 2001 (Pravanchana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) subtleties of life-little higher animals maybe -that once they ate the fruit they started feeling that there is Today we are worshipping Adi Shakti. I think this is the most important Puja, because it is the power of Adi Shakti that has given you something wrong-the way they are Self-Realisation, that has given you the Truth, that has given you the power of Compassion and Love. That's the power that separated from without any clothes. So they brought some leaves of the tree and covered themselves. So the first knowledge came, was of chastity, because Shri Ganesha was established and His influence brought forth this consciousness that we have Sadashiva and this Power wanted Herself to create this complete universe, universes after universes. She is creating and loving. With Her love, She did this great creation- creation of this world also. to cover our bodies. We are no more animals. Only, the animals- of course, they're not standing, so it is alright- are not aware of it. This is a specially selected planet, which was very beautifully brought in the centre between the Sun and the With the knowledge of chastity. Moon for the creation of-ultimately- gradually human beings started the human beings. This is Her great growing... into beautiful nations, but work-with such love and affection, and with very great hope that Her children will know the Truth and will there are so many things which were still to be known, to be aware of it. You may be aware of many things, but unless and until you get your Spiritual Awakening, unless and until you get your Self-Knowledge, all other knowledge is absolutely nothing. get the ultimate Knowledge about themselves, and about everything else. As you have read in the Bible, With this Self-Knowledge only, you become powerful. The real power - the real power is of Love and Compassion. Today, when you see, the whole world is busy fighting and they are trying to protect people from wars and creating great, huge, protecting instruments. about how Adi Shakti came in the form of a Snake and told human beings that: "You have to know the Knowledge". Adam and Eve... and to Eve specially. and they accepted to eat the fruit of Knowledge. Because they would have remained just like animals, without knowing any The whole world seems to be in a mad

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 race... of killing each other, of souls came on this Earth. They all destroying each other, of competition, suffered. They were tortured. Nobody ambition... leading to fighting and then to greater wars. They're fighting for a piece of land! understood them. But now the time has come for you to know the Truth. But Truth which is not dry, Truth which compassion, encompasses everyone, that brings the complete view of our existence: Why are we here on this Earth? What is our purpose? What should we do? that Truth has So ignorant they are! Can you carry even a pinch of this land with you when you die? When you are born, you come with closed fists. When you die you go with open hands. What do you take with you? All right, you may not Adi Shakti's powers are such, of like to take anything, but do you 'enjoy' Love and Compassion, that makes you whatever you think is so great, for understand your Self first. The love, for which you are fighting? Why this you, is very, very limited. There's no awareness of your own being. Just nonsensical people? It's surprising imagine what a great task is for you, how people give up their peace, give how much you have to be seriously up their understanding, when it comes becoming aware of your Self first. That is extremely important. First you have to be aware of your Self. And now you have the light of your Spirit. In the light of that Spirit, you can see what you are. And you can see how far you are going, how wrong things you are doing, what harm you are doing to yourself. fighting is going on among all to a piece of land! And the whole thing has moved into a very wrong direction and going towards complete destruction. The thing that has made human beings so much suffering because of all their ignorance, by which they have all those habits, all those attractions, all And you have the power to cure it, to improve it and to come to your senses. These are the most important times. You will never get these times again. Never had it in the history and you can never get it in the future. those identifications, which is so ruinous, which will ruin all of them, each one by one. They have to take to 'sense' and they have to take to their Self-Knowledge. This is the time you have got, not Self-Knowledge is the 'key' for a only the Awareness, not only the Self- Saviour to give to people. We have knowlédge, but you 'know how to do it'. had so many Saints. We have had so many Sufis. We had Tao people. We had Zen people. All kinds of realised they have just described what a Otherwise-about the saints, about those people, Tao and Zen people-

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 person with Self-knowledge is, how he understanding. But the worst time I have when I see those people whom I different from others. But none of them have given Realisation-those who are have said how you 'become' that. No self-realised people-'they' are the one has been able to say that. Nobody ones who have no responsibility for has been able to 'do' that also. others-and if they have, it is very little. Because, perhaps, most of them didn't They don't have that Compassion and don't have that Love, that we 'have' to knew, also, could not talk about it to have today to save the world, save the humanity. That's our... not only our 'principal' work, but the 'only' work that we have to do. All other things are Shakti is to put the Kundalini in your going to achieve nothing, except for your own efforts, individual efforts to give Self-Realisation to others and behaves, how his style is, how he's so know about Kundalini, and those who people. So the greatest work of the Adi sacrum bone. This Kundalini is not the Adi Shakti. The Adi Shakti is a much greater thing, much bigger thing, much wider thing, much deeper, much more powerful. give them this Knowledge This knowledge is so... so easy to Kundalini is the 'reflection' of Adi understand. It is very subtle, no doubt. And, as l've told you, that the know what happens to you and how 'Quantum Theory' they're talking about now, the scientists, is that they have seen those miraculous waves of lights and they are trying to find out Are you really a compassionate something about it. It cannot be that some Sahaja Yogis will rise above the first thing that will happen to any others. Every one of you have to know that this is a very special thing that has to help others, to emancipate others. happened to you. Even if you had gone to Himalayas, even if you have starved yourself, even if you have been singing the praise of God for stronger, much Shakti Power and when She rises, you you get your Realisation. But you have to be very watchful. person? If you are compassionate, the compassionate person, I think, will be They cannot be satisfied with their own achievements and with their own state of Self-Realisation. It cannot happen. years, even if you had done all kinds of rituals and penances, you could not have got your Realisation. That would not have been possible. What was the need for the Adi Shakti to do all these efforts, to work so hard? You know that I had to work very, very hard. But, from My very childhood, I've worked very hard and I've gone through very difficult times, very, very difficult times according to human I knew this. That's why I have to work very hard, facing all kinds of

 Nov. - Dec. The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 2001 4 problems, all kinds of turmoils, all Sahaja Yogis to do that. What they kinds of pressures. What was the thing? Just to see that you all are people. Find out ways and methods created and you're all My hands. You have to work. Every finger has to work. And that is what I have been telling your mind to it and you will know how have to do is to transform other how you can transform, how you can spread the message of Adi Shakti. Put you, that now it is our responsibility to see that we become, not only Sahaja Yogis ourselves, but it is blossom time and many, many Sahaja Yogis we should have. you can manage it. There should be all the time compelling desire that we have to find out method by which we can spread Sahaja Yoga. Otherwise, it's like what Christ has described, that some seeds It's a work of Adi Shakti. Try to understand this. It's not work of any fell on the marshy land and sprouted, Saint. It's not work of any Incarnation. It's not work of any politician, and not the real sense of the word, and work of any big leader. It is the work of become something very, very special Adi Shakti, which is so transparently and real, by knowing what you can do. showing its results in you. Now it is for I have a vision, no doubt, and I've been you to see. To please Me is your talking about it quite a lot, but it ends ardent desire, I know. I see how you love Me and how you want to do for know some countries are very difficult. Me. The greatest thing you can do for Try to find out what is the problem, Me... is to spread Sahaja Yoga. It is a why it is so very difficult. Attention has very special, extremely difficult blessings you have got. You didn't human beings are doing to destroy have to do any efforts. You didn't have to pay any money. You don't have to parcel of the same game which we call get sick with rituals. You got it spontaneously. But that doesn't mean through our compassion and love, that it's... sort of... your birthright to get it. It is the work of Adi Shakti. And the work of Adi Shakti has to be shown but never grew. You can only grow, in up with the Puja. It's not a good thing. I to be paid to this, that what other themselves, as if it is the part and as the Last Judgement. But let us, save as many as possible. This is the work of Adi Shakti, not the work of any Saint or any Incarnation. They're all there, no in your life. It is a compassion, without any reward. People have tried to spread their religion by showing doubt. They're all with us, all the time compassion to poor people, looking to help us. But you people have the after the poor people, handicapped power of Adi Shakti, which is very people. There's no need, actually, for great, which is very penetrating, which

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 is something very, very superficial. The best thing is to give Realisation is miraculous. It is so effective. But unless and until you become aware of your own powers, how will you work it out? It would be like a dead machine that has everything, but nobody is there to work it out. All the time I had to coming up, they'll be great Sahaja go through very, very hazardous Yogis also. I can see that. But, before times. And sometimes I felt that I may them, you have to show your own have to take another birth, the way things are so difficult for Me. But now- for you it has been very easy. As if... movement, which has to be really the one who makes the road has to explosive. And unless and until to every person you see. We have seen children: they are merits of what you have done. It's not a static work. It is a big such a great step is taken, I don't work very hard, but those who walk on that, they don't realise how easily they know who will be blamed for the have got it. And if they (do) realise this, Doomsday. You are the ones who then they will realise also: "Let many have to build up the destiny of human walk on this road, which was created beings. Don't consider as yourself, with such patience, understanding and something nothing! You could never have got your Realisation. You'd never have come to Me. Among so many, love." I have to really see you-all Sahaja you are the ones who came to Me and Yogis-doing your level best to change who asked for Realisation and got it. this world. 'Has' to be changed. As it is, humanity has to be saved through Realisation cannot be forced. This 'you' and nobody else. No president, awareness cannot be forced. And the no prime minister, no minister, none of growth of this awareness also cannot these people can change the world and save it. It is 'you' who are entitled. "You' have got this Power. Do you You know it cannot be forced. This be forced. You have to develop that attention deep down within yourself, and see for yourself what you have done, what you have done. If you are realise your own status, your own being, which has risen so high? It is still busy with the money problem or not there! If that realisation 'is' there, the power problem and this problem you would go 'all out' to express your and that, you are a 'problem'. You are love and compassion to other people, not a Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi is to make them realise what they are. Only with Sahaja Yoga you can save powerful. Power will be achieved by this world. There's no other way them power of love and compassion, out. Whatever you may try, say, to which is not only words of love. It is not help the poor, to help this and that only act of loving others, but it is a above everything else and is very

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 work it out and, if it fails, to write to Me that "Mother, such and such What's powerful personality that you will have, which will just emit that great Divine Light and can capture people. All of you should develop a very brave important? Already we have so personality. sick." so person is many healthy people going around. Why not use them first? Our job is I must say people have improved. not to cure people. Affection is all Otherwise everybody used to write to right. Compassion is all right. It is a Me: "This is wrong with me and that is natural thing that our attention goes wrong with my father. That is wrong to sick people or to the poor people with my great grand-mother" and all kinds of things. That is over now. Much less, I must say, much less. But have one sick person, hundred instead of telling Me about people who Sahaja Yogis will get after that. are sick, people who have failed, What is the people who are still in a state that compassion? It's not! They want to cannot be improved, attention should be changed. or to the people who are suffering. But what about Sahaja Yoga? If you Is it reason? prove that they can cure that person. It is not compassion. Compassion today is If there's one person who has got to cancer, anywhere, immediately at transform human beings into least ten photographs will come to Me. Sahajis, into good people. That is the love of Adi Shakti. Because... Leader will write to Me. The leader's wife will write to Me. Everybody will those who are born have to die in any case. We should not be unkind, of and such thing!" Why? Is that My job? course, but our attention should be: "How many people we are giving cured by Realisation to". It is a very common photograph. But attention always thing that people indulge more into so- goes-now the compassion part of it-to called curing and improving and this. those people who are, so-called, It's alright. Also there are problems mentally, like in the marriages, you see. Some married couples don't want to be marriages. That's not your job, there. It's alright. Finish them! If they neither Mine. If they're sick, they don't want to live together, let them go. We have many people who are sensible in this world, many people that... it doesn't deserve. There is who are healthy in this world. Now how can you go on struggling with people write to Me that: "Mother, he has such That person can be cured - we have hospitals be cured can suffering-physically, emotionally, financially-also in the should take a photograph and work it out. If it doesn't work, that means no need for you to treat them and to

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 who don't want to live together and have problems? That's not your job. thousands He can destroy. Anywhere there is a calamity, we First of all, you are a 'spiritual' can say, like an earthquake or some sort of a hurricane, all these things come through the working of Shri Mahadeva. I can't help you there. But if you really give Realisation to people, all these can be averted. Of course, worker. You are not a 'social' worker. Of course, by the way, you can do social work. It doesn't matter, by the way. But 'the main thing for you is to transform human beings'. With that, the greatest diseases of meanness, of cruelty, of torturing others, anger, all these diseases can be cured, which are internal, not external. That is today wanted. Every country is fighting and is tortured and is in peril all the time of getting destroyed. The only way you can do it is to give them Realisation. is the whim, I should say, of Adi Shakti that She started this work of creating this world, of creating you and making you Sahaja Yogis, but your responsibility is also very important... You cannot be irresponsible. Maybe it was I felt 'My' responsibility? But there's a difference: I never felt it was "My responsibility", never felt this was "My job", never felt: "I have to do it". 'l did it.' That is the work. That's the kind Now what happens is to be seen very clearly, that when you give of personality you should have. You Realisation to someone, and he values it, and he grows into it, then have to do it in a very humble manner, in a very beautiful manner and you'll be amazed to see how you are are protected. You you completely protected. Who protects protected, how you are supported and you? You may say: "The Adi Shakti!" how everything works out. Alright. But also destructive power working in this world. Not of negativity, but you will find you can give Realisation positive destructive power of Shiva. to people. You can change their lives. If Adi Shakti's work is going on well, Never you would feel such joy, even if He's happy. But He is sitting there you get, say, a big lottery maybe, and watching each and every maybe a job or a big name or a very person, each and every work of big award, no. The joy of creating Sahaja Yogis and if He finds Sahaja Yogis knows no bounds, is something really very wrong-I such a joy-giving thing. You develop cannot control it-He destroys. I such fraternity, such solidarity, as they are there is a The greatest joy you will get when call it, such oneness, such enjoyment of love, enjoyment of compassion. It's cannot go up to that point. He destroys. Not only destroys, but

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 8 involved in money, in cheating... I a different level of enjoyment that's not like ordinary enjoyments. mean, all kinds of criminal activities they do... I can't understand. I can't You're not to be afraid of 'Me', believe it. After getting the highest, but be afraid of yourself. Have a why do you want to go so low as watch on yourself and see for that? Because you have not yet felt what you have got. You have not realised what you have got. And you yourself: "What have you been doing so far? What have you done so far?" Because you have been enlightened, if the enlightened people cannot give light, what's the don't respect yourself. Still, if you are on the same line and the same level, I must say you have done no justice to use of having them? Look at these Me or to yourself. We have to work it little, little candles. Whatever little light out. Single-handed, I've done it, they have, they're giving that light. worked very hard, I must say, in the They're burning themselves to give sense that I had to deal with horrible people- very unkind, very selfish, very cruel. But doesn't matter. And such beautiful birds I have discovered. But of enlightenment? you must keep your lustre and work "Enlightened" doesn't mean the light it out. I'll be very happy to know that for yourself only the light of Love, Sahaja Yoga is spreading with leaps Compassion, which is Divine, which is and bounds, with great speed and not normal, which is not ordinary as that people are really getting into that realm of peace, joy and happiness. That's My dream and I that light. If we cannot give that light, what is the use you see in the films. It is a Divine Love which works. hope you all will work it out. And that is what makes Me sometimes little weak when I hear that Sahaja Yogis now are getting Thank you very much

 GURU PUJA 8 July 2001, Cabella Ligure (Pravanchana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) You don't know how your Mother are doing a very great service to feels to see so many people who have humanity! become really gurus themselves! They have been seeking the Truth in very difficult times. They have been wanting to know what is the Truth. And this difficult time, itself, has served to The thinking today of human beings is not at all deep, it is very superficial and that's how you find this world full of turmoil; everyday, every minute you can find ... they are killing so many human beings. They are torturing, in a are seeing around us. In the whole very large scale. Formarly, of course, world also, there is something the saints were all tortured - tortured definitely very wrong and we have to by all kinds of different stupid ideas, should say, of something being higher and something being lower; something In the seeking, one thing is very being good, something being bad. act upon your minds that what is happening in this world, whatever we go beyond. important, that the person should have a great devotion about it. And also Under such ideas they combined untold miseries you have to go together and worked out all kinds of through. Seeking is when within aggression all over the world. All over. yourself also you are struggling Not only that, but also in the families, and outside also you find nothing in the institutions, in the organisations, satisfactory. This is how the thinking that they were very right, they were very good, and they tried to seeking has a double edge. aggress other personalities. In that seeking, when you are trying to get to the Truth, it seems it's a very So, many people thought 'It's better difficult thing. But you can't help it, to fight it back' and they started because you are not satisfied with fighting it out collectively it doesn't work out. This fighting doesn't work out, because fighting begets nothing strifes are there. People are fighting but murders, killing. Thus many for nothing at all - for land; killing people were killed. Buddha talked to human beings. Land, can it create people of non-resistance, and there is history about it that in one of the what exists around you. See the world today, it's full of strife. All kinds of human beings? They are fighting in a very Collective manner thinking they great universities in Bihar, when the

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Nov. Dec. 2001 10 If they are seeking the Truth, they will be surprised that this world is one, all human beings are one, and that is the destiny of human beings. But for aggressive people came in, they killed all the saints in the name of aggression. And they all died. Maybe that might have achieved on that, so many are to be killed, so a very subtler level, some sort of many are to be destroyed, because punyas; but in this Kali Yuga, it is not they don't learn a lesson in an easy going to work out. What is the way. Now your job is to give them resistance you can put in (up) against Self Realisation, and change the such people? How can you fight them? people. That's the real thing you have It's an impossible situation to convince anybody that they are aggressive and doing? We come to Sahaja Yoga with they are nowhere near the Truth. what idea? You are working only on Because nobody wants to accept such the periphery. a thing. And so whatever they are trying, all over the world, to convince others of their follies, are completely ourselves: how we can prosper, how failing. And thus this struggle, this war- mongering cannot be cured. to do as gurus. But what are we Firstly we are worried about can we become better off; also there is greed. We do not see ourselves - if we are aggressive, if we are trying to We have to accept that human trouble others, if we have wrong ideas about ourselves, how we torture beings are not at that level to understand what's wrong with them. others. They do not want to accept. To them, aggression is the only way they can So first of all you have to cleanse propound their own goodness. So yourself and accept your own problems, your own misgivings. These are to be faced. And challenge yourself; What are you doing? You are a Sahaja Yogi, how can you hate someone? How can you trouble someone? How can you torture what is the solution? The solution is that we should give all of them Self Realisation. They should get their Self Realisation. Then only things will improve. Now, you might say that, "Mother in these days of strife and struggle and fighting, it will work out. Circumstances will tell them. someone? This is the beginning of introspection, it's very important. I can make out a person who meditates, in the real sense of the word, and the one who just 'meditates'. You should not deceive yourself. If you are deceiving yourself, then how Life will be so difficult with all the time weapons hanging on their heads, that they will have to also seek the Truth". It has to be done very genuinely.

 Nov. - Dec. The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 2001 11 can you become a guru? For yourself. But the identification should becoming a good guru, you have to first of all be very honest within yourself, and find out what are you doing, what are you up to, what have be with the Truth. For example, you see in the mirror your face and you find something wrong you are not identified with that wrong, but you are identified with your own face, and so you clear it out, cleanse it out. In the same way, if you you done. We have six enemies, as I have told you. And we justify all these enemies. We think, "It is all right! After all I did this because of this, I had to do it" are identified with yourself you cannot get rid of it. Somebody would say, "I was poor, so I When you are climbing ahead into the new path of righteousness, of goodness, of compassion and love, This is the biggest thing human beings you should see yourself, watch have is justification! Animals don't yourself. What are you doing? Where are you going? How far you are they have their fixed 'nature'. But stupid? You should not cheat yourself. Let others cheat you, let others do whatever they like. Let others try to kill had to be dishonest". Another would say that, "I had to tell lies". Another would say that, "I had to be immoral". have it. They have their fixed ideas; human beings can do all kinds of wrong things and can justify it. This justification doesn't help you in your you, but don't you kill yourself! You don't cheat yourself! So you have your self-respect, and you have your self- honour, which you value more than anybody else. And you don't yield to anything that will spoil your image in So when you start supporting the mirror. This is the first step, is of ascent. "I did this because of that ...". It never helps you! One should try to introspect and see for oneself what is the justification. yourself in doing all kinds of opposite introspection. things, how can you rise? How can you ascend? All the time you are what helps for this Now trying to descend! So purification introspection is your sense of love. Can you love a person who is within is only possible if you can see yourself clearly, if you can't see how One distressful? is who will you purify? If I can't see in the aggressive? One who is hot- mirror, how will I see what's wrong with tempered? One who cheats you? my face? So when you start seeing Can you love such a person? You cannot. Then how can you love the Truth, and comparing yourself with that, then only you can clear out yourself when you have these

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 12 qualities, when you do this to blemish on your Self. Face yourself in the most honest manner, and you will yourself? be amazed to see how nice it is. Just So the first thing is the pure love for to see the pure Self shining within you. yourself. Pure love. It's such a great When that Self starts shining, you start thing to have pure love. Like, you may seeing many other things which you like to have a very nice bed to sleep; have not seen, so far. And one of them you may like to have a very beautiful house; you may like to have all the yourself, but for everyone. It's a pure wealth of the world. But, all this, will it you see is that love is not only for love for everyone else. It's not only for make you love yourself? If you love your self. It's very surprising: when yourself, you don't want anything! you really love your self, then your love Because you enjoy your Self! To enjoy your Self is the greatest that love in such a manner that you enjoyment. is for your self, and you start spreading beautifully love others. So now you have got Realisation. Means you know what you are, you know what a beautiful thing you are. When that is so, you should try to love for love, because pure love is so joy- your Self. And when you start loving giving. It is so joy-giving that if there your Self, you are not bothered about all non-sensical things. Now this pure love is one of the most beautiful things person', 'because I am something you have which you can do to yourself. great', and 'if I love somebody then When you are selfish, you are not loving your Self. When you are unkind, obliged'... all these ideas you are not loving your Self. When you absolutely of no avail. are aggressive, you are not loving your self. Because you are loving all these bad things; but your Self is pure. It's absolutely pure and beautiful. And it loves all that is beautiful and good. So this is the beginning of your 'Self' Realisation: when you realize how do with him. But if you are pure love, important is your Self. You don't have wrong ideas about yourself, you don't justify all the wrong things you do, because you understand that it is a You don't love for money, yoù don't love for some advantage, for some power or for some gain, but you love is any such thing that 'I love somebody because I want to possess that that person should feel absolutely are Really if you love, then you just love. You love everyone. You may say, "Mother, how can you love a crook?" Need not go his way. Need not be with him. Need not have anything to then he can change, she can-change. If they do not, then you don't bother. Those who come into the ocean

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 13 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 of love, those who are really pure, Purity is very powerful. It may not act on one or two persons, doesn't matter. There could be some very, loving people, they are your friends. They are the ones who are needed on this earth. Not the people who very nasty, horrible fellows, doesn't are crooks, who cheat you, who try matter. But it will have an effect on tơ dominate you - they are not the very many sensitive persons who want ones needed. What we need are the to become Sahaja Yogis. You have to people who drenched into the purity of love. are completely just test it; how people like you and how they are impressed by you. The Paramachaitanya, this all- So, from love we go to another point, which is purity. And the purity is a pervading power of Divine Love, flows subject, which has been talked about by through you because you are pure. If many people. That you should be pure, you are impure, then it will stop at you should be absolutely open and different chakras, it won't work. So people should know everything about purity of temperament, purity of you. I don't think that is purity. Purity is love what does that mean? That you love somebody because that person has got spirituality! You love that person because there is purity, and you go to places just to spread the purity among them. A pure person will never create a problem. It's the impure that which purifies others! If you are a pure person, then others will be purified. They have to be purified. Now supposing you have certain ideas about yourself, you think that you Are very highly placed as a Sahaja Yogi and that person who every day can start with this problem or that problem. you are full of love. Maybe it's all imaginary. Does it purify others? Does your purity purify others? Can it give them worship the purity of your own and the awakening? Can they be Realised purity of others. It's true that we have Souls? And then, how much do you to face ourselves everyday. It's true value the purity, the power of purity? And how many people you every day. It's true that we have to give Realisation to? Or you have kept separate ourselves from ourselves it to yourself? How many places you to see how far we have done, how have been to spread this purity? Purity far we have gone, what are we has to be spread. And without any doing, what have we done. doubt, in your own purity, you should do it because it's a very, very powerful thing. So the character of a Yogi is to that we have to correct ourselves So the difference between the ancient times' guru and modern times'

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 14 guru Is that the ancient times' gurus didn't care if they gave Realisations to people; it was not their style most of them. They only cared for themselves, become like that; if they have some nicely sitting down somewhere in the Himalayas, away from all the madding have some eminence they become crowds, and enjoying themselves! But you must share this enjoyment. I think by that - by that achievement they that is the sign of a good guru. The one who cannot share, only looks after his own pleasures, or looks after his own ashram, we can call it, or looks after his own family, looks after maybe will bring down your purity. some disciples he has attention has to be for the whole world! are anything, they become very proud and think no end of themselves. If they have, say, one power, they will talent, they become like this; if they like this they do not become humble become extremely, extremely proud, arrogant absolutely in a very wrong shape! But you, you are a Sahaja Yogi and you should not mind any thing that So, you can call yourself as gurus if you want. I need not say that you are a guru. But you have to first of all make your self your disciple! Must In Sahaja Yoga, now, it has reached such a stage that you have to worry about the complete humanity. look after your Self first of all. You It's not only you, or a few Sahaja have to see for yourself, 'Have I got Yogis, or many more Sahaja Yogis, the qualities? Am I the one who can but all over the world, whatever is the really do all this?" problem, you people have to solve it. But first get out of your own little, little problems. I get letters from people, should be with a very clean heart and especially women, saying their understanding. Because you are not husband is like that, and husband incarnations, does that and... children are suffering, absolutely pure, but you are human and all kinds (She laughs)... Now, you beings and you are rising to the level are a guru! All this introspection within you which born are of those incarnations. So you have to cleanse, you have to watch yourself, Means you are such a highly see for yourself and then understand if electrified person with spirituality. you are a Sahaja Yogi - have you got Why should you worry about all these nonsensical things? And the consciousness that you are purified and that you are a pure person should conditional, is not limited, but it is make you very humble. Just the absolutely like an ocean. And you like opposite of it- normally people, if they to swim in that ocean, like to be the beauty of purity and love? Now this love is not relative, is not

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-Xill Issue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 15 could have told him 'Because of your drenched in that ocean of love. ego'. I didn't. I told him in a very sweet ego'. manner, "You see, you are a sanyasi and you have got a sari for me. If I had Formerly guru meant a person who is standing with a big stick. He used to hit everyone. Anybody did anything. not got drenched, I could not have wrong - they used to hit and beat them. taken sari from a sanyasi". He completely melted! He had tears in his We had gurus in music also, and eyes and fell at My Feet. different, different types of gurus we had in our country. And their speciality was that they used to absolutely is like this. It's not anger. It's not oppress the disciple, control, and then repulsion. It's not hatred. But the teach the knowledge of music, maybe; technique is such by which you maybe wrestling, maybe anything. But suggest your love. This is how one has in Sahaja Yoga it's very different. So the technique of Sahaja Yoga to understand the difference between a Sahaja Yogi guru and other gurus. No question of beating your disciple, no question of scolding, no question of shouting at them. Love is the most powerful thing! Of course it doesn't work on some people, I agree. Forget Even the spiritual gurus who were real were like that. Very harsh. They used to throw stones at such people. All kinds of things they used to do - but then they didn't mean anything bad (by it), but the method I didn't like. them. But it works in most of the people There was a story about a person who was supposed to be a great guru, and I went to see him. I had to climb because God has made us out of His love, and we have a capacity to yield to that love and to enjoy that love. So, quite a lot because he lived in a small, little cave. And when I reached there, for a Sahaja Yogi, what he has to do is to understand the powers of love. Powers of love, if you can understand, it will grow within you. you see, he was very angry within and going on like this, like this (She shakes her head from side to sid Some people have, some people don't have it. Try to understand, this Paramchaitanya is nothing but it is (the) power of God's love or you said "Mother, it was raining. Normally I can say 'Mother's love'! This power works so beautifully, in such a allow me to stop the rain. Why?" I secret manner, that you call it a And it was raining so I was completely drenched! And I went and sat in His little cave. Then he came back and he asked me a question. He can stop the rain, but you wouldn't

 16 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 'miracle'. Because you can't see knowledge about your being, your chakras, everything, which you know now, is with you. That is the truth. You So first and foremost thing is, try have the complete subtle knowledge to develop the sense of love within which nobody had before. Because you. Understand. There is one maybe these gurus did not want to problem, which is always mis- give (it), or maybe these gurus did not understood. Pure love can be very know themselves. All the knowledge easily understood, that it gives you joy, of Sahaja Yoga is simple, very subtle how it has worked. and is real. that it helps others to improve, it works in a very subtle manner. Now, after having this within you, should not be just mental - it should it Now try to remember when you be spiritual. And to make how you got your Realisation, try to spiritual, what have you to do is to remember how you started growing. love! When you love others, you will These are like the seeds within us of start working on them. Then you will find out, with your knowledge, that gradually we started the showers of there is something wrong with this fellow: what is wrong? He has this chakra, he has that chakra this is the came to Sahaja Yoga, try to remember love, which sprouted. Slowly and blessings of love. Then we started enjoying it and understanding it. combination, that is it. Now at this stage when we are about to become gurus and we are But a Sahaja Yogi doesn't get angry on that point. He tries to cure that person. He tries to improve that person. He doesn't say "You are very bad, you are horrible". No, no. He takes up a challenge that 'With my already gurus, should be nothing but embodiment of love. It's a very different theory I am telling you. No guru will accept this those who are already accepted as gurus all over. And the knowledge, knowledge they pure love I can cure'. It is so simple for give you, is the knowledge of very him; not like any doctor or anybody subtle things. All the knowledge that you have got in Sahaja Yoga has been already told by those gurus long time back. who has certain great qualifications that he would come and ask for the fees and that he will charge you this money nothing! He knows what's wrong with you and he knows how to cure it. And he does it that way. Somebody has told this, somebody has told that, somebody has told that .. But all the knowledge, the total So, you are not afraid. Apart from

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Isue 11 & 12 17 (the fact that) you are not afraid, That you have done is to give him the truth person who is with you also is not itself, Absolute Truth. afraid because of your temperament, because of your nature: the way you are handling the patient, the way you are talking to a person who has come to know about the truth. And thus you give him also the truth. Also you teach I know it's a ... these days people find it very difficult to find any time for Sahaja Yoga, for spreading Sahaja Yoga. They are looking out for holidays! Whatever it is, whatever is happening, I am very sure with your great powers that you have, you can really show great, great success, very great success. And this success can bring forth the vision I have of saving the humanity all over the world. him what the truth is. And the truth is very simple - that you are the Spirit! This is the truth, is revealed out to another person. Thus realise yourself, by giving you May God Bless You Realisation to another person, what

 Public Programme Royal Albert Hall, London-14.7.20001 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) I bow to all the seekers of Truth. they are still in the complete control of ignorance. I would call it ignorance, and in that ignorance, in that Some of you have found the Truth, some of you have not found it fully, darkness, they are doing this horrible and some of you have not found it at thing. Nobody wants to understand all. But if you look around in today's that what we are doing is nothing but situation, you will have to admit there complete destruction. Is that our is a big turmoil going on. Countries destiny? That we are going to get after countries are taking to all kinds of destroyed completely? What good are wrong things. A lot of cold war is on, people are killing each other, of nationality or maybe some religion, destroying beautiful places, cutting all kinds of things, which are good. But each other's throat for nothing at all. We are all human beings created by Fighting! Fighting is not nobility. We God, God Almighty has created them and has brought them to this level of hatred. It is very much, we doing under the name of some sort things. we are doing all wrong hate anybody who can excite our I don't know.... Very much liked, and under this guidance, we form groups. human awareness. At this juncture one can see where are we going in a collective way. This is, where have we to reach or is it our All this is coming because, this is the Last Judgement. I have told you, this is the Last Judgement. And this Last Judgement will really decide destiny? Is this the destiny of human beings, to be destroyed by each other for land or for anything else? Think of who are to be saved and who are to be doomed completely. It is a very, is happening all over. Every day you very serious thing. All of them who are aware should think about it. Little the whole world as one and think what read newspaper, every day there is some sort of a horrible news about patchwork here, and a little patchwork horrible things people are doing to there, is not going to do. Whatever you each other for no rhyme or reason. We may try, unless and until you transform have to think: what is the destiny, human being, it cannot be saved. where are we going? Are we going to This transformation is not an Hell or to Heaven? What is our impossible thing, it is not difficult. This is the time for transformation, this is a situation around? Can you help it? chance for transformation. And within What is wrong with human beings is

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 19 us it is placed, the power, as power it is described, is the mystical feminine power within us. All of them have written, I am not the first person to say that; but nobody has been able, perhaps so far, to understand it or to accept it that it should happen to you. Have you been able to save yourself from calamities? Maybe these calamities may come to destroy people who are, who are doing harm, then, that may be the mission of God. But what is your mission? Why don't you think that "I have to be a person who is not a stone, who is a source of joy and love"? You are born, not only to be human beings, but you superhuman. You have to enjoy all to get your Self-Realization. What is yourself, your life should be enjoyable, Self-Realization? It is to know your it should be blissful. It should not be a Self. You do not know your Self, you curse, morning till evening worried do not know. You are living in this about that. That is why you are I am not only talking, but I want you to be have world without knowing your Self, can created, because God had. no you imagine? You do not know what intention of creating people who will be you are, you do not know that you are all the time worried how to quarrel, the Spirit, and that you are the source how to fight, how to save, but people of knowledge, of Pure Knowledge. who will live in complete harmony, find people sitting in a meeting peace and joy. That is why we are listening to some babaji who is telling created, that is our destiny. That is not just I am telling you, but it is a fact. them some story, very happy. This is not going to give you the reality, and the truth. If you want to have reality and truth, then please try to understand that something has to So we will have to be, we have to be transformed. This transformation is not difficult, but what I find is that you happen, to you some transformation could get satisfied with anything. has to take place. You are not yet Hindus will go to the tempie thinking, subtle enough, you have not got the "oh we have done great". Christians go to the church and think they have done very good, Muslims will go and family, you do not have to leave your pray and think that they are great. children, you do not have to leave your What have they achieved? Face yourselves, please, face your limitations, face your, face your subtleties till you reach that point for which you do not have to leave your household and go to the jungles. There is no need to do all that. It is nice to say that "all right, you all take sanyasa and give all that belongs to you been able to solve your problems? you to me". It is such a stupid idea. problems and see for yourself: Have

 The Divine Cool Breeze Voiume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 20 of Jehad we talk that you have to These are emergencies, you are living in very emergent conditions, fight your enemies within yourself. try to understand. And I want to warn you that if you do not go deep into yourself and find out what you are and take to your transformation, there is greed. With that greed people anything is possible: all kinds of can do anything they want, all kinds of diseases happening to you, all things are happening out of greed. kinds of new problems of children They will have money, they will have coming up, all kinds of national all kinds of facilities, but still this greed problems are there, all kinds of is such a satanic thing that you do not international problems are there, that people cannot help it. So we have to get out of this and become a people, deceive your relations, solid personality of truth. What are our enemies? These days the worst is greed, even see what you have. And you want to have more and more, deceive deceive everyone and grab their money. We do not know what the truth is. Then another worst thing we have We are worse than animals whose eyes are open, while our eyes are is anger. Anger does not allow us to closed. It is not to condemn you or anything, but to make you alert and aware that human beings have to change. Otherwise you just, you people who are angry because of come to my lecture, tomorrow you see things as they are. We develop anger for small things. Like we have come to this country, I have seen different colour. I cannot understand! God has made different colours will come to another lecture. That is all, it is an everyday, sort of a nice entertainment. But when I see the the same, like army and life would destiny, I don't know how many will have been miserable. So the colour be going, how many will be finished, what will happen to them, what diseases they will get, what difference? I just do not understand, problems they will get, what will happen to their children, what will this myth we are fighting. The whites happen to their country, and what will happen with the whole world. blacks are fighting with the whites. And Just widening your vision. My vision is then they go also for burning their skin that all the people of the world should in the sun, getting skin-cancers. I just get transformation. We have enemies do not understand, there is no logic, within ourselves, and when we talk otherwise we all would have looked has been created by nature. So there are whites or blacks, what is the because such a myth is going on, with are fighting with the blacks and the there is no balance in us to see that

 Nov. - Dec. The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 11 & 12 2001 21 what we are doing. Why are we Everybody has to get old. What have wasting this precious time when we have to get transformation? This anger by running after other sex? You have can be with anything, with anything no sense of dignity, no sense of one can develop anger. It is like a human failure, which is very common. For the smallest thing people can get person. This is not the way. We have angry, and they like it because with to introspect and see for ourselves. that they can oppress others, they Why are we doing this, wasting our could be aggressive. So they want to energy into nonsensical things? So have this anger within them, and with that anger they try to dominate others. This is the biggest problem. Why do what they tell me that they wanted to we want to dominate others? Why do marry a particular woman and a we want to oppress others? And why particular man or anything. How they do we want to take control of others? put it, I mean, how fragile! That is not We cannot control ourselves. Why being very great. you achieved by running after women, honour. If you are arrogant, you wear very good clothes, you are a wonderful many people I met are really half mad and some of them are full mad. And are we wanting to control others? You have to be very, very strong within yourself, feel your Self. Your Then there are attachments, Self is the Spirit, is the reflection of attachments to their houses, to their God Almighty within you. You can be land, to their children, to everything. very strong, you can be very, happy, and you can be absolutely balanced if will go with open hands, you cannot you become the Spirit. You have heard so much about Spirit and attachments have to change, they are Spiritual life. But, have you reached very particular about their car, about that point? Even when you read Zen- their house, maintaining. But what system, Tao-system, Bible, Koran, about yourself? Are you all right? anything. Do you know how to reach Inside, are you absolutely calm, that point of the Spirit? Not yet, not yet. peaceful and joyful? Why are you You have to know that, because you wasting your energy in getting angry? are very great, you are very precious and you are so beautiful within. But destroyed. If you look at another you are not aware of it! You have to person, here you see weaknesses, become that. That becoming is very apart from money, from women, is important. And for that God Almighty very common, or women having for has already organised within you, men. To get attractive. For what? which is called as Kundalini, which can What is the need? But tomorrow you will not be here, you So such carry anything new. That is a sign of life that will also be

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 22 be awakened and its Awakening can belong to this religion, you belong to give you Self Realisation, can give you that. You belong to nothing. You Self Knowledge, as you call 'Atm- belong to the kingdom of God. That is what we have to achieve, and you should be one there. But if you like Saakshatkar'. That is what is very, very important, in your life to have it, and then it is free, you cannot pay for storytelling there is no end to it. it. How much can you pay? When it is absolutely free, why don't you take your self realisation? And why don't you grow? Is it in the name of religion? now here for the last, I don't know, Every religion has said about it. Mohammed Saheb has said clearly: but what I find, that people do not "At the time of resurrection your hands will speak." Are they speaking? Hindus They like people who will just know about it, that we have to get our self realisation. No use just listening to these babajis and giving them money. All this kind of rituals that we are doing, that destiny of destruction is to that our forefathers have been doing. be about today, complete destruction What have we achieved? Nothing! But you are wasting your time! The time is running short. I have been 20 years or so. I worked very hard, realise what they are supposed to do. say something very simple, or who are to serve visual entertainment. So the whole humanity has to understand is to be about. And very simple is that you enter into the kingdom of God, which is very easy, no time to say So now it is important for us to know that we have to have our evolution anything, you do not have to work out reaching to the point of Self anything. You take your Sefl Realisation. If we were perfect, there. Realisation, and then at home you would have been no problem. If spend about 10 minutes meditating. we were Self Realised people, there Only your mind is all the time justifying would have been no problem. All kinds your misbehavior. I call it misbehavior of selfishness, all kinds of limits we have put around us, all kinds against God's wish, it is against of conditioning and ego, which have humanity, and it will destroy all the been working our life and have been good things. because it is against the truth, it is ruling us. We have to get over it. And once you get over it you get united. Nobody has to tell you that you get dropped and you have to know that we united. You lose all misidentificațions. All this misidentifications have to be are all one, we are all global, we are not separated by colour, race or Your misidentifications are that, religion. We should know we are all that you belong to this country, you one, and that oneness should not be

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 23 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 established by slogans or by shouting. get your Self Realisation, and you are What should be that oneness is to be going to understand the value of your life. felt within. It is not artifical, it has to be real, very real oneness. And that The problem is, you will get your realisation in the sense, the power comes to you once you realise that you are Part and Parcel of the Whole. Religions have brought you up within you will rise. It is very well to this point of awareness, not your organised. Actually, God is a great fighting, not your killing. Why, why creator, how he has balanced and how human beings themselves? Because of complete he has done. With that happening, is ignorance of righetousness, because of complete greed of oneself, just place and then you go round and see yourself, all your family, at the most all your relations. Why do you want to keep it yourself? You are the Spirit. then grow into it. Once you are grown Spirit is the ocean, Ocean of knowledge, is the ocean of love, is the thing you are, the greatest gem, the ocean of all blessings. it works out is remarkeble, every detail diverted have not sufficient. You enter into, say, a for yourself how beautiful you are, what beautiful things God has made, into it then you will realise what a great greatest person, so loving, that having some writing under statues. Nobody So we have to decide. Today I tries to understand what were they have to request that there is not doing, how they worked. so much time left. We have to decide that we have to become the Spirit. That is what all the religions have experience, the experience of the taught, but how to do it was not so very Spirit. It is a very unusual, rare thing, much explained, and it did not work out. Some of them did get it, but they is now, so why not take advantage of were not trusted, nobody listened to them. Even people killed them and tortured them and crucified them. But point. What you become is the point, now please, all of you, try to understand the value of that........... So, tonight we can have the never used to have one like that. But it it. Please, be ready for that, accept it, take it and become. Becoming is the and what you make out of this whole human civilisation is your problem, not Why are you humans? Why are you mine, I can help, I can work it out. created? What is the purpose behind this? Are you going to be driven by nonsensical ideas? Are you going to be finished by all sorts of dividing factors? No, no. You are all going to So I would request you all to now get ready for Self Realisation. It is much better, but those who do not want to have cannot be forced. So it is

 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 24 better such people leave, leave the anything, just put your hands towards Me, just like this. Now please close your eyes, it is important, please close May God bless you. your eyes. This power-Kundalini, is placed in the triangular bone, known as sacrum, is sacred and anything. Meaning, also do not think it rises through six centers of what I have said, try to keep your the parasympathetic nervous system and ultimately pierces through the fontannel bone area which was a soft hall, and get on to their work. Firstly, you do not have to do thoughts very peaceful, and I am sure all of you can get your self realisation. But how many will grow? Because you bone in your head, on top of your have to come to the follow-up, then head. When you were a child it was a you have to practice it in the centers. soft bone. It pierces through that and And it works out, little bit time you have enters into the subtle energy of all- to give to yourself and to this global pervading power of Divine love. They problem. You have to dedicate call it by different names, they call it Paramachaitanya, they call it to dedicate yourself. That does not Chaitanya, and some call it as Ruh. mean that you have to become You may call it by any name, it is the Love of God. Once you get connected this or that ritual. Nothing. But this with it, when you start feeling on your dedication will make you so much one fingers some sort of a breeze, first some people will get hot, does not that I do not have to tell you that you matter, but then it cools down and you get the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost - yourself, it is very important you have sanyasi or you have to get busy with with yourself, with the whole universe will dedicate by yourself. Everyone. And it starts flowing. So please do not stay here if you do not want to have Self Realisation, nothing will happen to you. Please leave the hall in case you do not want You can now raise your left hand on top of your fontannel bone area, keep your eyes shut and see for yourself if there is a cool or a hot breeze coming out of your head. You can move your hand. Now see with your right hand if there is a cool or a hot breeze coming out of your fontannel bone area, which was a soft bone in your childhood. See for yourself. Bend your head, better is to bend, please bend your head. Again put your right hand towards me, and Self-Realisation, What you have to do is not to do anything, just put your hands towards Me. Of course if you are wearing shoes, better take them out, because Mother Earth is very strong. Please put hands towards Me. You do not have to pray, you do not have to say

 Nov. - Dec. The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 2001 25 countries, which are following Sahaja if there is a cool breeze coming out of Yoga. And surprisingly, in black your head. If it is hot it is all right, it countries like Benin, they have 20,000 does not matter, and it is coming Sahaja Yogis. Only three years back I started there. And in England, it is more than sixteen years, I have been Now all those who have felt cool or working here, and after that also all the hot in their hands or on their fingers or time every year. But somehow, their out of the fontannel bone area, this is growth is very much there, but not the real baptism, please raise both subtle, not within ourselves. The growth is within and you will enjoy, very much enjoy the reality. The reality see for yourself with the left hand, see because of the heat within you. your hands. Just imagine, you are the is beautiful, absolutely. soldiers who are going to save the world from its destruction. Try to understand your importance. May God bless you. They want to sing one song, which was written in 12th century by a saint Everyone practically has felt. That in India. And it is sung in all the means you are already mature to get religions, but nobody knows the your Spiritual Life. It is the last jump to meaning of that. The meaning is that Reality. Now you should know what is "O, Mother, give me the union, Jogwa, this, what are you, what is your Spirit, I will give up my bad habits, I will give up my temper, I will..." You do not have to do it, now you will give up You can put down your hands. and what you can do, what are your powers, what are spiritual powers. automatically. The light that we have For this I would request you to first itself automatically will give up, come to the follow-up program me and automatically. You do not have to do after that you can join anyone of the anything, but you have to meditate, centers which are closer to you, and about 10 minutes, that is not much. work it out. They are so much full of joy that You have to work for the whole they all want to go on singing all the world. You should know there are 85 while.

 New Year Puja 31.12.2001, Kalwe (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) who will be saved from the curses of Now we are starting a new year andI wish you all a very happy and prosperous New Year. In this Desh of mine, I also Kaliyuga. This is going to be your vow on the new year day that now we are going to start Sahaja Yoga in a new way, in a bigger way, in a more dynamic way. wish you a very deep growth in Sahaja Yoga. Now you all are Sahaja Yogis and you all have to become masters in Sahaja Yoga. For that first thing needed is your "Sangh Shakti', that is your collectivity. This collectivity has to be extremely well For becoming masters in Sahaja built well knit, well understood and Yoga I am sure, you are doing absolutely lovable. This in not difficult in meditation, introspection, and all kinds Sahaja Yoga because practically all your of Sahaja Yoga rituals, I should say. In jealousies, all your baser ideas have this new year I think there is greater been completely washed out by your chance for you to do much better Kundalini, She has transformed you. You because all those years of ordeals are over. We are now entering into the new era or say now the 'Satyayuga' has are different people. You are very very different. Not only that, but you have now understood your Self. You have known established. yourself and all those who know themselves, can't fight with each other. Because this Self is the reflection of one In the beginning you may not feel the atmosphere of Kaliyuga has been cleared out completely. Of course gradually you will find that all is clearing heart, how can you fight with each other? out and all the people who are dangerous Otherwise you will be fighting with your for your spiritual life or your national life, self. It would be very-very stupid to do for your family life will have to take back their wheel. They cannot be successful. things that you have been thinking about Now the Sahaja Yogis have to decide, will of-course disappear, no doubt. But how they can spread Sahaja Yoga all you will become very dynamic. You will over, how many people they can get into be amazed at your dynamism. Just you Sahaja Yoga? There should be many more waiting for you this year, and may yourself to manifest. You can become be this year if you all decide to work it very-very collective, progressive and you out, I am sure, you can get lots of people can create many Sahaja Yogis. person, of one deity, of one God. So how can you fight, when he is with in your that. So all the fights and all the funny have to rise, Just you have to express

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII İssue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 27 You have been given the realization. You have been given the knowledge of realization, what ever was possible has been done for your health and prosperity. But now it's your duty to repay to the Divine by your creative methods. You have to be very creative. You find so many people in this world are full of lots of problems, which you have got out of. But you can help them. You don't need any help because you are yourself full of Power. Power of Divinity is within you. This Divine Power should be used. Its not given just to be wasted. This power has to be used, otherwise what's the use of becoming powerful? Supposing we have electrical power here and it doesn't give light, so what's the use of having electrical power? are some, some people who take Sahaja Yoga for granted. You don't understand your responsibility. You have to meditate collectively, wherever there is collective meditation, you must join them. You can also start something in your area, a collective meditation and it will work out. Many people who are in Sahaja Yoga are now meditating. I can make them out, I know, who are the ones who are meditating and who are not. It's not difficult to make it out. Besides you come out with other problems like my mother's, father's, uncle's, this thing. There is no need to wory about that. If you are a realized soul and if you are connected with the Divine even your own wish will be fulfilled. But it does not. Why? Because you still do not understand what you have become. You first try giving realization to others. See what joy, tremendous joy you get! This joy you can't get in anything else. Whatever you may buy, whatever you may have, you can't get this joy of giving realization. And you will be so very happy with that, not because you expect anything, you want anything, nothing of the kind. But only thing is the pure joy, pure joy of creating great Sahaja Yogis. This is what you are here for. This is what the Divine wants So the power that you have is for the emancipation of human beings. It is for you to raise the Kundalini of people. You can do it. One person can do it for thousands. I hope now you take up this responsibility upon yourself. It should be the greatest blessings for you, for Sahaja Yoga and for the whole world, because in my vision we have to change the whole world. I don't know in my life time if I will achieve it or not, but if you people really join hands with me, with full effort, it will work out. you to do, not just to take advantage of Divine Powers. Cure my father, cure my mother, cure my sister. Or else I haven't got property. Somebody says "my husband illtreats me" or some wife says that or husband says that. Goes on and on and on. Forget it. You are now above everything, above all these things. And Firstly I hear many people don't go to meditation, into collective meditation. They do not join together. Its surprising. After so many years of work I have done, 30 years I have been working and there

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 11 & 12 Nov. - Dec. 2001 28 you have become absolutely powerful within you. If you have not used your powers then how will you know what powers you have got. It is as simple as that. Those who have used it go on telling me what miracles they had, what things have happened to them, how they were protected. What-ever they wanted how they got it. you go to the collective meditation regularly. I promise you that, but the problem is you won't go. You write letters to me. You want to meet me. This is not going to help you. They come and trouble me like that and do something like that but does not help. What helps that you help your self. year is going to be a great year for you. In the West, l am surprised, how things are spreading fast! In Russia, the people are so deep, so deep. Once they get realization they understand the value of realization. They are so humble and so deep. They do not want anything. They have never desire for it. Though they have gone through horrible problems of communism and now there is a reaction to that. Despite that all these 5 countries which I call as real Divine Countries, because the way they have accepted, they are poor according to the Next But in Sahaja Yoga you cannot be hypocritical. If you have hypocracy, Sahaja Yoga knows, the Divine knows, you are a hypocrite. It is for your good, for your growth, you have to be in Sahaja Yoga. Its not for somebody else that you are doing it, but for your self. When people are that powerful, I am amazed, how easily they can get cured! But they must meditate and they must join collective meditation. Most of the people do not join collective meditation. I am surprised. I know some times, say in Delhi, there is no sufficient space, so people have to come on either Saturday or Sunday. Some of them have to wait outside. Does not matter. But going for the collective meditation, you will be amazed that Divinity is flowing there, vibrations are flowing there, I am there. It is not that you are just going there just as a ritual. Problem is you people don't realize that you have to be responsible for Sahaja Yoga, responsible for giving modern standards but from their heart they are very very rich, from their understanding of Sahaja Yoga they are very very rich, and their Scientists are so well qualified. In every type of thing now. There is one scientist who has come to India and who has discovered a method by which you can see all the chakras and the kundalini and the obstructions and everything. Something we can show you. While our scientists are busy opposing mel Little knowledge is very dangerous thing. They do not want to see what I am doing and how I am doing! They just want to criticise me. Also the so called intellectuals, specially realizations to others and attend all the programmes you have of meditation. With collective meditation you get alright. All your problems are solved if

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 29 people react because of their conditioning and some people react because of their ego. So why should you react to anything? Why don't you enjoy by not reacting? You just watch, how beautifully, they have made beautiful flowers! Just enjoy it. What is the nead? Some will find some faults, somebody will say this should not have been there. How did they manage this? All kinds of non-sensical things. The joy of its creation is there and you should be able to see it, feel it, enjoy it. Then you are a Sahaja Yogi, otherwise you are not. If you are reacting type, you cannot be a Sahaja Yogi. This is a degree, Sahaja Yoga is. in Maharashtra, the Intellectuals, I think have something wrong in their heads. They can not understand Sahaja Yoga. Just beyond them, what has happened to them I do not know, but they just cannot understand Sahaja Yoga. And these Maharashtrians are so busy with their rituals! Four o' clock in the morning they will get up, take their bath, do this, then start doing their pujas, this that. Now somebody got sick, so his wife writes to me, that we did not go to any temple, we did not do any rituals, still my husband has got sick. Imagine! As if by doing such things, you have become a Sahaja Yogi! If you are a real Sahaja Yogi then nothing can happen to you, but you have been just under a wrong impression. Whether you go to temple, whether you go to wrong places and do all kinds of rituals, it has never helped you. I think there are so many various types of Sahaja Yogis. Somebody is just minus, somebody is little plus, somebody is like that but the depth of the Sahaja Yogi is to be measured by the way he keeps joyous and happy. Goes on criticising others, goes on getting angry with others, all these things are going on and he thinks he is a Sahaja Yogi! In our Divine University we have no full of water or anything you cannot fill it. degrees, we don't give you certificates. So you have to empty it first. Empty You are a Sahaja Yogi if you have got yourself. Empty your mind. It's possible your Realization. If the Kundalini has first through Sahaja Yoga, if you can take opened your Sahasrara, it means you your kundalini beyond Agya chakra by are a Sahaja Yogi. But that Sahaja Yogi So first you have to empty yourself. If you are already filled with these ideas, the age old ideas and you are still carrying on with them, how can the Divine be filled. If there is a pot already may not be a real Sahaja Yogi. not reacting. It only depends when you are joyous and you are anxious to give realisation to others. You want to share your realisation. You just don't want to keep Reaction is the worst thing because reaction comes through Agya, as I told you the other day, and it is due to your conditioning or due to your ego. So some

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 30 it to yourself. If that is not your condition, to talk about Sahaja Yoga, that we have then you are still not a full Sahaja Yogi. got this through Sahaja Yoga. So how You should find out how many people will Sahaja Yoga spread? One has to you have given realisation to. Its very understand. You all should find out how important because next year as I said is much responsible you have been for very important, very-very important year. getting people into Sahaja Yoga. Of course you are all protected, you are all blessed. Everyone has got whatever have seen all these other false Gurus they wanted. Most of them. But how many of them are returning this debt, how many are working to give realization to others? This is a debt on you. But if your attention is haphazard, if your attention is not clear, is not nirmal then you are involved into all kinds of things vibrations were so hot that I asked her, like tentacles of octopus. You become "What Guru you follow?" So she told me like an octopus, you go on getting attached to this, attached to that. You have to be a free bird. All these attachments that you have are going to amazed how this lady was proudly take you no where. You should be only attached to Sahaja Yoga and should be bad man and without knowing me, I was conscious that you have known yourself. stranger to her! But Sahaja Yogis don't You can just understand your value, your talk. You should talk to your neighbours, level. I tell you "we can change the whole world". You have such a good heritage. You have such good culture in your meet people. Like in India we do Haldi, country. In this country. I have seen the kumkum in Maharashtra. They will never problems of America and other In that year, I would like to see all of you going round and giving realisation. While who are getting exposed one by one. If you see their attitude anywhere you meet them. Once I was travelling by a plane and there was a lady sitting next to me. Her the name. She said he is very good. This Guru is the best, this and that. Such heat was coming from her body but I was talking about her Guru, who is such a should talk in your circle. Like, we have in India, so many customs where we countries. We don't have these talk to those people, who come for haldi- kumkum, about Sahaja Yoga. They won't problems. At least they are not so even have my photograph. If they want, prevalent, but only the thing that we have to do is to know that you are a Sahaja Yogi. Like a tree, where it grows, it knows it's a tree. It knows, it has to produce It is very good chance. You have any fruits, it has not come up like that. It has dinner, you have any public meeting, not been brought up just like a stick. No, anything, they won't talk about Sahaja it has to do something. In this world Yoga. Its very surprising. They don't want everything has to do something. But then they can do it, but I don't know what are they frightened about!

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Nov. Dec. 2001 31 what about Sahaja Yogis? Its such a rare thing that has happened that you have got your Self- Realization. So why should we waste our attention, why should we neglect our meditation? Why? We have to grow. We are different people. We have different ways altogeter. In this Now as I said, it's a drop that has become the ocean. Identify yourself with the ocean. Ocean is the lowest if you have seen. Lowest so much that the zero point starts from the ocean. Ocean is so humble. It is at the lowest point it lives. But all the rivers go into it. And the ocean does the work of throwing the clouds in the sky and there they burst and become rain, fall into the same ocean. They come back to the same ocean. So those who world we are realized souls. There were hardly any number during the time of Christ, practically and even before that. I was surprised that in China and other places in one age there used to be one Guru, one Master. While you are so many masters. But you don't want to use are humble, will attract more Sahaja Yogis. Those who are kind will attract much more Sahaja Yogis. your power as a master. So it is important to see that you Why not the women use it also? I change your temperament. If you try to find women are more lethargic than men are in Sahaja Yoga. They should impressed by you. If you think you are know I am a woman myself. Single something very great, nobody is going handedly I have done all this work and why cannot you do it? Because it's a tremendous task to transform people imagine a Sahaja Yogi going in a group all over the world, but its very easy for you. If I can do it why can't you do it? But put your complete attention to it that we are going to work out Sahaja happening, but I am doing Sahaja Yoga. Yoga not for ourselves but for the betterment of humanity. We need it, Yog"? You go and cry and weep and sit well. Your compassion, your love is all down there. If he is really doing Sahaja being wasted if you just think about Yoga, no sickness can come, no trouble yourself, your family. What's the use? People do that even before realization, With you only, these people who are so what is the use of completely supposed to be there, they will rise but getting attached to your families, no use having identification with people attached to all other things. You who are not Sahaja Yogis. They may be should get attached to the whole your relations, they may be anything. No world. We belong to the whole world now. We are no more individualistic, and they are at a different level. Either show off, nobody is going to be to look at you. Be very humble, kind, generous, also very joyous person. Now and telling them see, my mother is sick, my father is dying, this thing is So people will say "why do you do Sahaja can come. It is a fact. Try to understand. use. Because you are at a different level try to raise their level or have nothing to no more.

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 32 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 do with them. Because they will pull you down. They will not see your height. They have no eyes to see. They have no ears to hear and they have no feeling of it. If they have seen how you have changed they would have gone absolutely head long into Sahaja Yoga. But if they are not, that's not your job. You shouldn't bother about them. If they come to Sahaja Yoga, well and good, otherwise they are no more your relations. In no way they are related to you. How will you relate Sahaja Yoga to them? How will you explain anything to them? It is going to be impossible to talk to these people. is the Kundalini. I want you to have that Shuddh Ichha that is the Pure Desire not only to become Sahaja Yogis but to make more Sahaja Yogis. That's absolutely your Pure Desire. You may not have recognised it, but unless and until you fulfil that desire, you can never be a good Sahaja Yogis. It is to spread Sahaja Yoga in every way, every where and with every one that you can do. And it will spread very well and so many people can be saved, so many who are just lost in the maya of Stupidity will be back on to right path. How much could you go to do for them, just think? If me alone has brought so many Sahaja So what I have to tell you today is that Yogis, why can't you also try and get our family which is Sahaja Yoga is large. It's spread in 86 countries and is doing very well. But what we have to see is that you do belong to that ocean, to that more Sahaja Yogis. This world needs Sahaja Yoga. The whole problem when see in great family of Sahaja Yoga, but it is for newspapers, I think 'Oh God, if these you to increase the size of this family. people would have been Sahaja Yogis there would have been no problem. But I find that still people are moving about, responsibility. You are not given Sahaja going round and round. I don't know! Yoga just for nothing. You have to As if they have no brains or have no produce greater Sahaja Yogis, better understanding that where is this world Sahaja Yogis and you yourself should going and who is going to save this world? I am not here to tell you what you You have to talk about it and you have to change people. This is your meditate. Not only meditate but also should do in your private lives but you your-self should know to keep yourself cleansed and beautiful. What you have attend all the collective programmes as far as possible. I am happy the way you have stayed to do to yourself? Some people are so on and have come here. It has rained, superficial that you cannot go with them. still you are here and you still are Sahaja Yoga does not go into them. So enjoying the Divine Bliss. I again and very superficial? So forget them. I don't again bless you from my heart and I want think they can be saved. So forget them. you to have that 'Shuddh Ichha, which They can't enjoy. They are worried about

 Nov. Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 33 some non-sensical things always. So now take up Sahaja Yoga upon yourself with such people you need not move, but there are still so many people, atleast who comes. I mean, I don't want cheap I think there are 80% people people who popularity. But I do want Sahaja Yogis and go on telling about this to everyone are seeking and you should give them should be every where. Sahaja Yoga. This is one thing, the desire of Your Mother that you should May God Bless You.

 Shakti Devi Puja Moscow 17.9.1995 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) harmful to themselves or to the nation. But Sahaja Yogis don't know this kind of enjoyment. Every moment is filled with such joy for them when they are in collective. I could see that yesterday when you had gathered at the airport and were waiting for me, when I came I saw your faces were shining with joy. I am sorry I was little late today but I am sure you must have enjoyed each other and the enjoyment of collectivity is very great. Once it happened I was going to some place and the plane was very late and I was little worried that I will be reaching late there. But actually the plane was so late that I reached after seven hours more and all the people were waiting for that time at the airport. That was in Delhi and when I puja of the Devi, of the Gddess in the reached there they looked so fresh form, which are many. Many a times and nice I was surprised! I said, did you go home? No, no we were waiting beings from the evil forces and to give here only for you at the airport; all singing, dancing nicely the whole night. Today we have decided to have a she has taken birth to protect human them a sense of security. But I don't think in any one of Her lives she did self-realisation job. This is the most interesting most lovable job. She had It's something about Sahaja Yoga to fight all kinds of evil people and that every moment we can enjoy, we can enjoy for our benefit. Modern ideas are as in the West is specially in suffering for their innocence and America that we must enjoy every simplicity. All this was long time back moment of our life. But actually all but these are special blossom times these enjoyments that they have are where all of you have to become fruits. self destructive, The kind of things So many flowers were there on this they do like drinking or they go to earth and you have to now become the places where they start fighting or else fruits. they do all other hopeless things that protect the devas, the people who were good people, also who were It is very heartening to see that in collectivity becomes very dangerous. Russia and Ukraine people are so So much so that they are smuggling or spiritually sensitive. It is very-very blissful for all of you to be realised souls. All this collective happening is should not be done and thus their they are killing. They all become collective to do something very

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 35 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Now, first thing I have noticed in this definitely going to bring very great emancipation for the whole world. country that people think that the There are problems in our country but whole Western world is like paved with now I am telling all the Sahaja yogis gold, it is not paved with gold. They are that whatever you have got, you must not at all full of joy as you are, they project the power of the Goddess don't have the kind of faces you have delibrately. It is very enjoyable to be a Sahaja yogi. Also you are spreading you see it minutely, they are having Sahaja yoga very fast, just like fire, little problems even with the finance. because this land, surprisingly, these both countries are so much sensitive because all kinds of foreign goods to spirituality. But this power of the Goddess that you have got within countries, there is yourself has now to be delibrately recession in those countries, nothing projected. For example, when once I came here when you were having a coup, very difficult time, and perhaps I country, to Ukraine and to all the managed, it but now you all can manage, you all can project. For Rubles you have, you have spent, you example, now I find the problem here is more of financial. Now if you all project your mind to this problem you struggle of independence then will realize what's the cause of it. The Mahatma Gandhi said we will not buy devotion you have for me is very gratifying. I am your mother and I am also Mother of the Ukraine people; but from foreign then our industries, our I am also the Mother of Russia and the handicrafts will come up. And he whole of Ukraine. I will be only changed the lifestyle of our country. satisfied when all the problems of this Everybody had to wear hand woven, country and of Ukraine will be solved hand spun clothes or which are made by you. You don't have to depend only in India. Even today in India you upon your government for that. I have cannot get anything imported in the been telling you that I have noticed market and if any body tried to sell why this country is going down! So, anything the young volunteers like this power of the Goddess that you students and young people used to go have within yourself will give you so much of understanding through the enlightened intelligence that you can really solve the problem. full of beauty, full of satisfaction, But if Now the problem in this country is have come from these western sells. And this is all junk, useless things they are sending to your Eastern Block people. Whatever are wasting on these junky things. When in my country there was a a single thing from abroad. And then he said that if we don't buy anything and stand before the shops and used to say don't buy foreign things. And that time there were Britishers ruling us so they would arrest, doesn't

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 36 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-Xill Issue 11 & 12 matter. So, all the import was stopped. you are Sahaja Yogis what will please Now, even today we cannot buy the Goddess? Unless and until you anything imported in the market. Of- can please the Goddess you can course, there are some stupid people never be joyous, you can never be who smuggle and some stupid people good Sahaja yogis. For that you must want to take to that kind of culture but have wisdom to understand what will they are very few and they are all please the Goddess. I don't think getting exposed due to the power of Western people have even half of wisdom that you have except for Goddess in that country. So, you are duty bound to your own country. This Sahaja yogis, of course. Because they is the Mother Earth which has given think of these temporary pleasures all the time and they get into immoral life and as such you have to look after the styles which is against the power of prestige and the well being of this Goddess. They are suffering from country. I am amazed to see so many horrible incurable diseases. They kill their parents, they kill their children. you a place, has given you the birth junky shops brought in here by these Americans and all the people wasting their precious money on this junk! But once you stop, completely, boycott all There's no question of love. The power of Goddess is of love. these things coming from the foreign Whatever she does to the whole world countries then, you will be amazed, is through Her compassion and love. what will they do here? They are all The whole body, the whole being of the against the Divine Power of love Goddess is made of compassion and love and nothing else. This power because they want to exploit. If you love somebody you cannot exploit gives full understanding of the reality others. This is not a very nourishing and also this enlightens inside and thing for your country. All their styles if outside. For example, if you love you want to see what they are doing in somebody you know everything about the West you will be shocked. They that person. It has nothing to do with money. It's the highest, most valuable, very important powers that you have. Even when you think about something noble, something benevolent, this power is filled into that thought and then this thought fills into the universe, into your country, into individuals. The aim of this compassion and love is only one-to see everyone joyous, that's all. Joyous in the real sense of the world. have destroyed everything that was beautiful given to them by the Goddess. They have no sense of a pious life. They have no sense of spirituality. They just know money money money. They have no sense of morality. Without morality how can you please the Goddess? So, you have to understand that if

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 37 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 This power cares for the collective as well as for the individual. It cares for must say when I went to China I was the whole world as well as the amazed though they are communists particular nation. All the time this they are very patriotic people. They power works, specially in modern times to better the lives of people of way they have grown in their finances, the whole world but unfortunately it is because all the people who have there are not many countries like you gone out of China are sending money who have heart to feel the love of their to China to develop. For this Mother Goddess. So, it's like an ocean So first you have to be patriotic. I are very moral also. I found that the conference when I went there I was of love and compassion that wants to amazed how the volunteers who were touch every shore, it wants to touch just students offered their services every heart but some are just like free. They were at the airport, they stones. Russia has a very great heart were in the hotels, they were in the as well as Ukraine. Also I find in the markets, every where they were Eastern Block, I don't how they have standing to see that this conference developed this great noble heart. We becomes successful. Otherwise Chinese are very fond of food but they are not to think them to be low would not even take their food the because they are not so rich. What's the use of riches where you cannot whole day. For example, they were very kind to me and when we went out, the whole day we were out, the driver even trust your own children and children cannot trust their own parents! They kill each other for money; of-course this effect also is nothing. They are not realized souls there that there are people who want never complained that he had no food, but when I came out to go in the car they all would come and put a hand on the entrance of the car so that I should money at any cost. I promise that all such mafias will be finished in no time if you all decide that you are not going not hit. They looked after all the people to be afraid of them, and if you all in your meditation ask that they should who could not walk. They carried their be finished, it will be done. You should, chair upto the great wall of China. I as yesterday asked for my good mean so much so that I saw on the health, you ask for the betterment of television that people who had come who were not so healthy, old or those there, even Americans, were crying, to your country. These delibrations of your thoughts. Your go back; and the Americans, such intelligence will sharpen so much, this is I call as a supreme intelligence by saying that we will miss this love in our which you will see the point and you country. It was touching and so will be able to solve the problems. the are stone hearted people also, were obvious in these modern times when

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 38 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 people are so dry and so money Pygmies. I was surprised because oriented! These people worked they did not criticise any one but for without any money, they wouldn't take everybody they knew what to praise. any tips or anything. We went for Very surprising that also for American shopping and we gave realisation to people who were there they said, they so many there in the shop, went to the bazaar, to the shop, they were all getting realized very fast. I told them so insulting there, trying to show off, one thing when they asked, I said, the everything, see they are childish. I Russians do not like because Chinese don't bother about the kind of are still childish, they have to still grow! It's surprisingI thought that these were go there and marry, you see, Russian government they have or you have but women and then they give up and bring their own wives. They told me people we are! I was surprised at what is most important is what sort of them, they were very much concerned the reason is that Russian women are very good for divorce, they take to about their children. How they behave, divorce very fast and very dominating, how they talk, how they are related to not Sahaja yogis, not Sahaja yogis but others? They teach their children that the Chinese women are not like that, you must share your things, it doesn't they are very wise. They know their belong to you, it belongs to all the role is very important and that their children. It's just like Sahaja that we children are to be created who should want all the people to enjoy everything be very good Chinese. Normally, they together. Also, the way they respect don't want to go out of the family and neglect the children, not at all. But if they know all about their artists in their they have a grand mother or country, such a big country. They also somebody then they leave the children with them who are also very-very affectionate and kind. And then they really amazed, specially the men. In go out to work; but I was amazed they India, our men are hopeless they are were doing all kinds of work as Russians do. They may not drive know anything. They don't know how trains, may not run big industries to even clean the house or clean the because you know the Chinese utensils, nothing, of course they don't women are so short and so dainty, know even how to cook. They are while by God's grace God has given another children, I must say, who have you people with better health and better heights and they really appreciate saying that see they are like giants, what are we? We are the art of their country, I was amazed, know what sort of art is produced in this part or that part or any part, I was not bothered about art at all they don't to learn a lot. I think in this women play a part because women do everything and keep the men absolutely ignorant so the man is completely under the

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 39 hand of the woman. They don't know example, yesterday when I came they the roads, they don't know cities, had locked up all the doors with nothing, the women knows nothing. computers. I don't know why you have Now, if you ask them what is this taken to computer which doesn't carpet? From what country? They will understand love? So many planes say, I don't know from where it is. were coming, it was all piled up thousands and thousands, they can't It is very important for you to know get out because the doors are locked your country, to love your country. If with the computer. What is the need to you don't know your country, how will you love! If you don't know your mother, how will you love! It's a very them to do the job as they did in China. great power working there and I am sure one day these Chinese also will anybody, thousands you see ten join your group completely. With love thousand, twenty thousand people comes another thing which is the respect. As you people are here of channel because of love and respect different places of different qualities No where in the world I have seen and capabilities but you love each gates being locked by computers. Why other. You don't disrespect anyone should Russia try to become so because somebody is dark coloured or modern and mechanised, I cannot a fair coloured person, because your understand! love has given these special subtle inner eyes which sees the inner beauty of a being. You enjoy each to this mechanisation too much, you other because you know the value of lose the power of love. This have computers for doors? You have so many human beings, why not ask no chaos, no piling up There's were there, all went through proper So, one has to know that if you take industrialisation in the west has ruined love. these people, they have no hearts. As I said love is the most important, Power of the Goddess can not work the most valuable thing but this love through robots, can it! As far as has to be absolutely pure love, without possible, you don't need any mechanisation. It happened once in somebody because you want to take Ganapatipule that mikes failed advantage of that person or because completely and the music we could not start. So, somebody came from Delhi attraction. This love doesn't identify organisation and told me Mother, we have people from Noida who don't require mikes. I had never heard about that group, I had never known there is lust and greed. You should not love that person has money or some sort of with any one what so ever. It just feels, it's love for love's sake. Thus, you realise what powers you have. For

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 40 harm anyone, it will not trouble anyone. I always give the example of the intelligent cell which is at the end of a root. This root starts growing and this little cell, very little, it knows how to go in Mother Earth. Now supposing, it meets a stone alright, it goes round the stone nicely, binds it. The manifesta- tion is that when the big tree will come, it will be supported by these stones. So, this simple love that it puts round the stone ultimately manifests. Thus, So, for love you don't require this love is power of the Goddess, is very subtle, silent but it manifests. All these manifestations, you call them as miracles. You may call them by any such group. They were never given a chance to sing even, because they might be called as rustic people, may be the villagers. So, immediately I said alright let them come on the stage and even today you will know that all of us know about Noida music. They sang with love, with such a big voice that all over the world now you can hear the music of Noida, the rustic poetry of Noida. sophistication. If you have real love you become so gentle, so sweet. It is the greatest blessing of the Goddess. But love doesn't make you mad. Some people think that if you are in love with somebody you can kill anybody you like if you cannot get that love. They are doing it every where. Love is something so pure that it's very powerful and it acts. Just as I was telling yesterday they were all locked up there and so many of them, all of them were worried you see trying to tell them that I should be allowed to name. It is this Goddess which is ruling this universe, which is in your center heart, which looks after you and looks after the whole universe. It is nothing but pure desire of love. It knows how to express, it knows how to act, you don't have to do anything, it's spontaneous. What goes against is your mental activity because the mental activity will say oh my! How can you love somebody like this, it's no use. It's the mental activity which gives you funny ideas. The mental activity is limited and linear. Every body has different fixed ideas, that's why they are fighting, that's why they are having wars. But this power that is of love gives you the Absolute Truth. Then how can come out. They were not willing to listen to anyone. Just I said you all forget, let me handle. I just went and that gentleman, before stood immediately he took my passport and stamped it without argument, without any problem because it is silent but it acts in such a beautiful way. you fight? Love is also very intelligent, it gives you solutions, it is down to earth because it wants to manifest. It will not So, what we need is this power because our power is very limited. I

 Nov. - Dec. 41 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 know you all love me very much but system is very low. But she had you must love each other, you must gathered some rustic things called respect each other. Then only I will "Ber' which is what you call here I don't feel that there has been manifestation know little little berrys and she went of this love. We were in one Sahaja and told Shri Rama that this I have seen because you don't like sour things. I have tasted all of them with take dinner in his house, it was my teeth and that's howI have decided before. I didn't know he had selected these for you. In India, no cooked for all the people who had body will eat if somebody has touched that with mouth, nobody will eat it you know. It's very unhygienic according to because I thought this man can not Indian standards of hygiene. Only the cook for so many people. So as they Goddess, if she eats some food and she touches some food, that's yogi's house and he had called other Sahaja yogis also to meet Me. I had to come. So I told them, now alright the session is over, you can go home were going down he came Mother, what have you done? I have cooked regarded as very holy. This was the other way round. She was offering to an incarnation something tasted by her spoilt teeth. So Shri Rama had the same power of the Goddess, he for all of them. Really! Now, where have they gone? They are on the street. So, he want down the staircase running upto them and said come back, come back, come back have immediately took those from her, all your dinner, and they really laughed the fruits. Started eating and He said I and this gentleman who had cooked for them Sahaja yogis.They were so overjoyed and we all enjoyed the food very much that night. have never seen such fruits full of ambrosia, (Amrut Fal). His wife said, can I have some also? But the brother was very furious. He thought this woman has not been at all protocolish and he wanted to hit her. But when the There is a very sweet story in the Ramayana, I must tell you about this wife of Shri Rama asked for the fruit, love. When Shri Rama went to jungle he kept quiet. Then the wife Sita, she went into jungle, in his exile, that time ate it and she said, really, what fruits there was a very old lady who had few these are! I have never eaten such teeth left, who was a great devotee of fruits of ambrosia. Then the brother Shri Rama. Her whole life was started thinking that these two persons are having all the ambrosia what about me? So, he asked his sister-in-law. can I have some of these fruits? She dreaming about seeing Shri Rama sometime and when she saw Shri Rama she was absolutely full of joy. She was rustic, from aboriginal tribe said, no-no because you were angry which in India according to caste now why do you want to have the

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 42 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 fruits? He said, please, please let me him', and you will be surprised how have some. So he was given some fruits and when he ate them he said, people will come into the complete my goodness! It has the essence of control of this pure love. At the same best fruits. At above all sophistication, time this pure love ruins, destroys above all these mechanical things, is completely any negative force that is this dynamic power of love which is trying to harm you. It teaches you how given to you as it was given to Shri Ganesha. And you should be reality because it is the light which assuming that, assume. Once you enlightens all darkness within and have the assumption then you can project individually or collectively. are peaceful within and your peace Even if you want to win over somebody manifests. in your heart, you should say alright, 'the Goddess Mother please act on this fellow. Let my pure love act on you will win over. Ninety nine percent to understand a complete picture of without. When you have that love you May God bless you all

 Shri Mataji Talks To Brides Nirmal Nagari Canajoharie, USA, 30 July 2001 You don't have to open your mouth It's a great thing to see so many of you looking very happy and looking forward for a very happy married life. I'm to tell you that (it) is the woman who makes the marriage happy or unhappy. She should know how to handle the and ask, "Give me this, I want this." No, there's no need at all. It's love that you have shown or given which will be valued the most and will be granting whatever is your need and whatever is necessary. But you should never open your mouth. That's the secret. Never ask for anything and it may be that he may also complain that "You are not saying anything to me." It's all right. Whatever is proper is all right. situation and to understand, because it's a question of love. If you have love in your heart, you can win over anybody. So first you must think of showing, expressing in a very gentle manner, your love for your husband and for his family and try to control yourself in a way that they do not get upset with you, he does not get upset with you. Sometimes you may not like some things. At that moment you should keep quiet and later on you can correct it, but the best thing is how you love your husband, how you look after him, how you suggest that you love him very much. You see, you have to build up this self- respect of your husband. You have to respect his self-reliance. It's all you have to do, just I would do- you would do for a child because you are the supporting personality, but actually you are his energy. You are the one who is going to completely fulfil his life with your love and with your attention. If you have decided on that, you won't see small, small things. You won't bother about small things, what sort of a dress he's wearing, what sort of a thing he does because he comes from a different family, different background and he has his own style of doing things, so you should not try (to) criticise him on that point. Try to understand, he's brought up in a different way. You are from a different family and This is not understood sometimes. Sometimes the brides think that once you are married, We can demand this, we can demand that. There should be no demand at all, no demand of any kinas, but only thing if you develop, the love, it will look after you and give all that is necessary that you want to have.

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 44 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 brought up in a different manner, so naturally his styles would be different is allowed is Yoga. from yours. So there's nothing to be expected that it should be in a very perfect way that you think. life, then also we allow divorce. Divorce But first is the duty of a wife, I personally think to see that you make a beautiful home, a beautiful house, family and beautiful children. Because your So he should be left to himself in the way that he wants to express, If you find anything very wrong, then when he's quiet, then tell him very quietly, make him understand. This in no way makes you subservient to your husband. On the contrary, he will become subservient to children, also I've seen all of them are children of realised souls are very great Sahaja Yogis. They are born realised. They are tremendous. They have great possibilities. They can rise very high and they have shown such results that I am myself amazed how they could do it. So that is now your own choice, everything, how you work it out, how you build it, how you do it... Woman thinks she works very hard in the house and that she should have more rest, she should be you. He'll try to always keep you happy and keep you pleased because this is a Sahaja match. This is not an ordinary marriage. Sahaja marriage means two realised souls are married to each other. Those who have achieved their spirit are married, so whatever may be the case more sort of going outside and all that. with others, with you it should be the Husband also thinks he works very hard. maximum amount of enjoyment, love, So the point is never think about yourself. peace and blessings. So you should Think about the other, how much he make it that way. It is only for you to works, how much he's putting his effort, how much time he gets. If you think like that, from your heart, then you will Maybe something is different from understand his difficulties and there won't yours like some people don't like yellow be any problem. But if he also starts colour. Some people don't like green thinking about himself, it's wrong. I've told colour. Some people don't like this kind them already. So it has to be very of hair, that kind of hair. Doesn't matter. mutually understood and you have to prove that Sahaja marriages are excellent. They give the greatest joy and to keep them pleased, better do it the greatest happiness and the greatest because in return they'll always look after morality. On this point, please be careful your pleasures, your happiness, your joy. If you try to be immoral after marriage, it's going to be impossible for Me to get you married because you get a bad reputation and it's very difficult. So one realise it and to achieve it. It doesn't matter. It's not important. It's superficial. But if anything has to be done In case they fail and they cannot adjust themselves to a proper married

 Nov. - Dec. 2001 45 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 things away from your family life and just give joy which you are capable of. thing that you must know, now this marriage if you do not like, you can give up in a sensible way, but try to make it a beautiful marriage, so that others also enjoy. If they're happily married couples, then everybody enjoys their company. Otherwise So I am looking forward to your married life and to a very, very happy life that you're going to have. there's somebody complaining, this, that. Then no one likes to talk to such people. So keep all these May God bless you

 Letter from Shri Mataji March, 1982 "Dear Mr. Raul, received a very detailed letter from Damle. It was a very wise step on your God and that it creates us and that the Lord of our autonomous nervous part to have met Shri Gagan Gadh system is our spirit which is the Maharaj. What he says about the reflection of God? You can quote the names of people like Mr. Bose and Mr. true. The reason why this great Daftary and Mr. Sharma who are sanctuary never manifested in reality miraculously cured of his colour blindness through Sahaja Yoga. In any case I am going to America next year. One of my dear Sons Dr. Lanjewar has now become the president of the Medical Practitioners' Association of miracle of Sahaja Yoga is absolutely that whenever Adishakti was descended as incarnation (She) did not have all the chakras integrated through Sahasrara. The complete harmony and unison merged into an integrated personality is bringing forth these fantastic results. So much so that I am surprised at myself. of instrument her New York and is very anxious to have a conference next year in New York. Due to our slavery for so many years, doctors in india have lost the capacity to know that we are the people born on I think he (Gagan Gadh Maharaj) also the Yoga Bhumi. Their thinking is so cannot imagine the dynamics of this slavish that they think all our ideas about medicine are stupid while discovery and hence he feels that "Avdhuts" have to be away in the forests and that Cancer can give you western knowledge is very sensible. I bless you with all my heart. Dr. reaction. You have cured the Cancer Ramlingam has good vibrations. Shri of Phadke's father. Did it give you any Rama in him would have wisdom to reaction? When you are at a giving understand the ways of God Almighty. I send you my love and protection so that you can break the barriers of You are reborn as Lotus which does ignorance of our medical men. Let end how can you receive anything? not take anything bad from muddy them know that the time has come for surroundings but transforms its them to accept that science is not surroundings with its beauty and fills it everything. It only discovers whatever with fragrance. This is the magic of a exists and appears before the gross realised soul. Do you think doctors will being. Once we become subtle, rising accept that there exists the Kingdom of in the forth dimension, we see the

 Nov. - Dec. 47 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 Vishnu and Dattatreya responsible for the religion (Dharma) of human beings are to be worshipped. They help you to cure and also the local Deity of the chakra that is attacked. Put the patient before the photograph with the candle and his feet in the water, bring down your hands across the sympathetic nervous system towards the water. The patient will cool down gradually. If he gets realization, then he is cured. subtle being, the spirit and contentment and Divine working of this love cannot be done by argument. One has to be realised. One has to evolve through Sahaja Yoga spontaneously as this is a living process. For cancer best treatment is of water, i.e. putting feet in the river, sea or in at home with the the water photograph. Water has the religion (Dharma) of cleansing and hence Shri More in the next.

 Union Home Minister Shri L. K. Advani visits Sahaja Yoga stall at Delhi Book Fair, 2001

 Royal Albert Hall, London-Public Programme, 14.7.2001



----------------------

2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 NIRMALA
Nov.-Dec., 2001
Volume: XIII Issue: 11 & 12
VERSAL PURE
The Divine Cool Breeze
00
AELC
"If you are still busy with the money problem or the power problem and
this problem and that, then you are a 'problem' not a Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi
is above everything else and is very powerful. Power will be achieved by
them-power of love and compassion, which is not only words of love.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(Adi Shakti Puja, 2001)
OHARMA
RELIGION
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Guru Puja, Cabella, 8.7.2001
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The Divine Cool Bree ze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12 November Decembat. 2001
ssue 11 & 12 November - December 2001
Adi Shakti Puja - 3.6.2001
Guru Puja - 8.7.2001
81 Public Programme, Albert Hall (London) - 14.7.2001
26
New Year Puja, Kalwe - 31.12.2000
34
Shakti Devi Puja, Mascow - 17.9.1995
43
1 Shri Mataji Talks To Brides - 30.7.2001
46
1
Letter from Shri Mataji, March, 1989
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 T H E D IVINE C oOL BREE ZE
Тн
Co o L
B RE
EZE
Published by
V.J. Nalgirkar
162 - A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph. : 5447291, 5170197
For subscription please write to
Mr. O. P. Chandna
N-463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi - 110034
Ph. : (011) 7013464
Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to:
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple
C-17, Qutub Institutional Area
New Delhi - 110016
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 SHRI ADISHAKTI PUJA
CABELLA, 3.6. 2001
(Pravanchana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
subtleties of life-little higher animals
maybe -that once they ate the fruit
they started feeling that there is
Today we are worshipping Adi
Shakti. I think this is the most
important Puja, because it is the
power of Adi Shakti that has given you something wrong-the way they are
Self-Realisation, that has given you
the Truth, that has given you the
power of Compassion and Love.
That's the power that separated from
without any clothes. So they brought
some leaves of the tree and covered
themselves.
So the first knowledge came, was of
chastity, because Shri Ganesha was
established and His influence brought
forth this consciousness that we have
Sadashiva and this Power wanted
Herself to create this complete
universe, universes after universes.
She is creating and loving. With Her
love, She did this great creation-
creation of this world also.
to cover our bodies. We are no more
animals. Only, the animals- of course,
they're not standing, so it is alright- are
not aware of it.
This is a specially selected planet,
which was very beautifully brought in
the centre between the Sun and the
With the knowledge of chastity.
Moon for the creation of-ultimately- gradually human beings started
the human beings. This is Her great growing... into beautiful nations, but
work-with such love and affection,
and with very great hope that Her
children will know the Truth and will
there are so many things which were
still to be known, to be aware of it. You
may be aware of many things, but
unless and until you get your Spiritual
Awakening, unless and until you get
your Self-Knowledge, all other
knowledge is absolutely nothing.
get the ultimate Knowledge about
themselves, and about everything
else.
As you have read in the Bible,
With this Self-Knowledge only, you
become powerful. The real power - the
real power is of Love and Compassion.
Today, when you see, the whole world
is busy fighting and they are trying to
protect people from wars and creating
great, huge, protecting instruments.
about how Adi Shakti came in the
form of a Snake and told human
beings that: "You have to know the
Knowledge". Adam and Eve... and to
Eve specially. and they accepted to
eat the fruit of Knowledge. Because
they would have remained just like
animals, without knowing any
The whole world seems to be in a mad
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
race... of killing each other, of souls came on this Earth. They all
destroying each other, of competition, suffered. They were tortured. Nobody
ambition... leading to fighting and then
to greater wars. They're fighting for a
piece of land!
understood them. But now the time
has come for you to know the Truth.
But Truth which is not dry, Truth which
compassion,
encompasses everyone, that brings
the complete view of our existence:
Why are we here on this Earth? What
is our purpose? What should we do?
that
Truth
has
So ignorant they are! Can you carry
even a pinch of this land with you when
you die? When you are born, you
come with closed fists. When you die
you go with open hands. What do you
take with you? All right, you may not
Adi Shakti's powers are such, of
like to take anything, but do you 'enjoy' Love and Compassion, that makes you
whatever you think is so great, for understand your Self first. The love, for
which you are fighting? Why this you, is very, very limited. There's no
awareness of your own being. Just
nonsensical people? It's surprising imagine what a great task is for you,
how people give up their peace, give how much you have to be seriously
up their understanding, when it comes becoming aware of your Self first. That
is extremely important. First you have
to be aware of your Self. And now you
have the light of your Spirit. In the light
of that Spirit, you can see what you are.
And you can see how far you are
going, how wrong things you are doing,
what harm you are doing to yourself.
fighting is going on among all
to a piece of land!
And the whole thing has moved into
a very wrong direction and going
towards complete destruction. The
thing that has made human beings so
much suffering because of all their
ignorance, by which they have all
those habits, all those attractions, all
And you have the power to cure it, to
improve it and to come to your senses.
These are the most important times.
You will never get these times again.
Never had it in the history and you can
never get it in the future.
those identifications, which is so
ruinous, which will ruin all of them,
each one by one. They have to take to
'sense' and they have to take to their
Self-Knowledge.
This is the time you have got, not
Self-Knowledge is the 'key' for a only the Awareness, not only the Self-
Saviour to give to people. We have knowlédge, but you 'know how to do it'.
had so many Saints. We have had so
many Sufis. We had Tao people. We
had Zen people. All kinds of realised they have just described what a
Otherwise-about the saints, about
those people, Tao and Zen people-
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec.
2001
person with Self-knowledge is, how he understanding. But the worst time I
have when I see those people whom I
different from others. But none of them have given Realisation-those who are
have said how you 'become' that. No self-realised people-'they' are the
one has been able to say that. Nobody ones who have no responsibility for
has been able to 'do' that also. others-and if they have, it is very little.
Because, perhaps, most of them didn't They don't have that Compassion and
don't have that Love, that we 'have' to
knew, also, could not talk about it to have today to save the world, save the
humanity. That's our... not only our
'principal' work, but the 'only' work that
we have to do. All other things are
Shakti is to put the Kundalini in your going to achieve nothing, except for
your own efforts, individual efforts to
give Self-Realisation to others and
behaves, how his style is, how he's so
know about Kundalini, and those who
people.
So the greatest work of the Adi
sacrum bone. This Kundalini is not the
Adi Shakti. The Adi Shakti is a much
greater thing, much bigger thing, much
wider thing, much deeper, much
more powerful.
give them this Knowledge
This knowledge is so... so easy to
Kundalini is the 'reflection' of Adi understand. It is very subtle, no doubt.
And, as l've told you, that the
know what happens to you and how 'Quantum Theory' they're talking about
now, the scientists, is that they have
seen those miraculous waves of lights
and they are trying to find out
Are you really a compassionate something about it. It cannot be that
some Sahaja Yogis will rise above the
first thing that will happen to any others. Every one of you have to know
that this is a very special thing that has
to help others, to emancipate others. happened to you. Even if you had
gone to Himalayas, even if you have
starved yourself, even if you have
been singing the praise of God for
stronger, much
Shakti Power and when She rises, you
you get your Realisation.
But you have to be very watchful.
person? If you are compassionate, the
compassionate person, I think, will be
They cannot be satisfied with their own
achievements and with their own state
of Self-Realisation. It cannot happen.
years, even if you had done all kinds of
rituals and penances, you could not
have got your Realisation. That would
not have been possible.
What was the need for the Adi Shakti
to do all these efforts, to work so hard?
You know that I had to work very, very
hard. But, from My very childhood, I've
worked very hard and I've gone
through very difficult times, very, very
difficult times according to human
I knew this. That's why I have to
work very hard, facing all kinds of
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Nov. - Dec.
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
2001
4
problems, all kinds of turmoils, all Sahaja Yogis to do that. What they
kinds of pressures. What was the
thing? Just to see that you all are people. Find out ways and methods
created and you're all My hands. You
have to work. Every finger has to work.
And that is what I have been telling your mind to it and you will know how
have to do is to transform other
how you can transform, how you can
spread the message of Adi Shakti. Put
you, that now it is our responsibility to
see that we become, not only Sahaja
Yogis ourselves, but it is blossom time
and many, many Sahaja Yogis we
should have.
you can manage it.
There should be all the time
compelling desire that we have to find
out method by which we can spread
Sahaja Yoga. Otherwise, it's like what
Christ has described, that some seeds
It's a work of Adi Shakti. Try to
understand this. It's not work of any fell on the marshy land and sprouted,
Saint. It's not work of any Incarnation.
It's not work of any politician, and not the real sense of the word, and
work of any big leader. It is the work of become something very, very special
Adi Shakti, which is so transparently and real, by knowing what you can do.
showing its results in you. Now it is for I have a vision, no doubt, and I've been
you to see. To please Me is your talking about it quite a lot, but it ends
ardent desire, I know. I see how you
love Me and how you want to do for know some countries are very difficult.
Me. The greatest thing you can do for Try to find out what is the problem,
Me... is to spread Sahaja Yoga. It is a why it is so very difficult. Attention has
very special, extremely difficult
blessings you have got. You didn't human beings are doing to destroy
have to do any efforts. You didn't have
to pay any money. You don't have to parcel of the same game which we call
get sick with rituals. You got it
spontaneously. But that doesn't mean through our compassion and love,
that it's... sort of... your birthright to
get it. It is the work of Adi Shakti. And
the work of Adi Shakti has to be shown
but never grew. You can only grow, in
up with the Puja. It's not a good thing. I
to be paid to this, that what other
themselves, as if it is the part and
as the Last Judgement. But let us,
save as many as possible.
This is the work of Adi Shakti, not
the work of any Saint or any
Incarnation. They're all there, no
in your life. It is a compassion, without
any reward. People have tried to
spread their religion by showing doubt. They're all with us, all the time
compassion to poor people, looking to help us. But you people have the
after the poor people, handicapped power of Adi Shakti, which is very
people. There's no need, actually, for great, which is very penetrating, which
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec. 2001
is something very, very superficial.
The best thing is to give Realisation
is miraculous. It is so effective. But
unless and until you become aware of
your own powers, how will you work it
out? It would be like a dead machine
that has everything, but nobody is
there to work it out. All the time I had to coming up, they'll be great Sahaja
go through very, very hazardous Yogis also. I can see that. But, before
times. And sometimes I felt that I may them, you have to show your own
have to take another birth, the way
things are so difficult for Me. But now-
for you it has been very easy. As if... movement, which has to be really
the one who makes the road has to explosive. And unless and until
to every person you see.
We have seen children: they are
merits of what you have done. It's
not a static work. It is a big
such a great step is taken, I don't
work very hard, but those who walk on
that, they don't realise how easily they know who will be blamed for the
have got it. And if they (do) realise this, Doomsday. You are the ones who
then they will realise also: "Let many have to build up the destiny of human
walk on this road, which was created beings. Don't consider as yourself,
with such patience, understanding and something nothing! You could never
have got your Realisation. You'd never
have come to Me. Among so many,
love."
I have to really see you-all Sahaja you are the ones who came to Me and
Yogis-doing your level best to change who asked for Realisation and got it.
this world. 'Has' to be changed. As it is,
humanity has to be saved through Realisation cannot be forced. This
'you' and nobody else. No president, awareness cannot be forced. And the
no prime minister, no minister, none of growth of this awareness also cannot
these people can change the world
and save it. It is 'you' who are entitled.
"You' have got this Power. Do you
You know it cannot be forced. This
be forced. You have to develop that
attention deep down within yourself,
and see for yourself what you have
done, what you have done. If you are
realise your own status, your own
being, which has risen so high? It is still busy with the money problem or
not there! If that realisation 'is' there, the power problem and this problem
you would go 'all out' to express your and that, you are a 'problem'. You are
love and compassion to other people, not a Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi is
to make them realise what they are.
Only with Sahaja Yoga you can save powerful. Power will be achieved by
this world. There's no other way them power of love and compassion,
out. Whatever you may try, say, to which is not only words of love. It is not
help the poor, to help this and that only act of loving others, but it is a
above everything else and is very
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Nov. - Dec.
2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
work it out and, if it fails, to write to
Me that "Mother, such and such
What's
powerful personality that you will have,
which will just emit that great Divine
Light and can capture people. All of
you should develop a very brave important? Already we have so
personality.
sick."
so
person is
many healthy people going around.
Why not use them first? Our job is
I must say people have improved. not to cure people. Affection is all
Otherwise everybody used to write to right. Compassion is all right. It is a
Me: "This is wrong with me and that is natural thing that our attention goes
wrong with my father. That is wrong to sick people or to the poor people
with my great grand-mother" and all
kinds of things. That is over now. Much
less, I must say, much less. But have one sick person, hundred
instead of telling Me about people who Sahaja Yogis will get after that.
are sick, people who have failed, What is the
people who are still in a state that compassion? It's not! They want to
cannot be improved, attention should
be changed.
or to the people who are suffering.
But what about Sahaja Yoga? If you
Is it
reason?
prove that they can cure that
person. It is not compassion.
Compassion today
is
If there's one person who has got
to
cancer, anywhere, immediately at transform human beings into
least ten photographs will come to Me. Sahajis, into good people. That is
the love of Adi Shakti. Because...
Leader will write to Me. The leader's
wife will write to Me. Everybody will those who are born have to die in any
case. We should not be unkind, of
and such thing!" Why? Is that My job? course, but our attention should be:
"How many people we are giving
cured by Realisation to". It is a very common
photograph. But attention always thing that people indulge more into so-
goes-now the compassion part of it-to called curing and improving and this.
those people who are, so-called, It's alright. Also there are problems
mentally, like in the marriages, you see. Some
married couples don't want to be
marriages. That's not your job, there. It's alright. Finish them! If they
neither Mine. If they're sick, they don't want to live together, let them go.
We have many people who are
sensible in this world, many people
that... it doesn't deserve. There is who are healthy in this world. Now how
can you go on struggling with people
write to Me that: "Mother, he has such
That person can be cured - we have
hospitals
be cured
can
suffering-physically,
emotionally, financially-also in the
should take a photograph and work
it out. If it doesn't work, that means
no need for you to treat them and to
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
who don't want to live together and
have problems? That's not your job.
thousands He can destroy.
Anywhere there is a calamity, we
First of all, you are a 'spiritual' can say, like an earthquake or some
sort of a hurricane, all these things
come through the working of Shri
Mahadeva. I can't help you there. But
if you really give Realisation to people,
all these can be averted. Of course,
worker. You are not a 'social'
worker. Of course, by the way, you
can do social work. It doesn't
matter, by the way. But 'the main
thing for you is to transform human
beings'. With that, the greatest
diseases of meanness, of cruelty, of
torturing others, anger, all these
diseases can be cured, which are
internal, not external. That is today
wanted. Every country is fighting and
is tortured and is in peril all the time of
getting destroyed. The only way you
can do it is to give them Realisation.
is the whim, I should say, of Adi Shakti
that She started this work of creating
this world, of creating you and making
you Sahaja Yogis, but your
responsibility is also very important...
You cannot be irresponsible. Maybe it
was I felt 'My' responsibility? But
there's a difference: I never felt it was
"My responsibility", never felt this was
"My job", never felt: "I have to do it". 'l
did it.' That is the work. That's the kind
Now what happens is to be seen
very clearly, that when you give of personality you should have. You
Realisation to someone, and he
values it, and he grows into it, then
have to do it in a very humble manner,
in a very beautiful manner and you'll
be amazed to see how you are
are protected. You
you
completely protected. Who protects protected, how you are supported and
you? You may say: "The Adi Shakti!" how everything works out.
Alright. But also
destructive power working in this
world. Not of negativity, but you will find you can give Realisation
positive destructive power of Shiva. to people. You can change their lives.
If Adi Shakti's work is going on well, Never you would feel such joy, even if
He's happy. But He is sitting there you get, say, a big lottery maybe,
and watching each and every maybe a job or a big name or a very
person, each and every work of big award, no. The joy of creating
Sahaja Yogis and if He finds Sahaja Yogis knows no bounds, is
something really very wrong-I such a joy-giving thing. You develop
cannot control it-He destroys. I such fraternity, such solidarity, as they
are
there is a
The greatest joy you will get when
call it, such oneness, such enjoyment
of love, enjoyment of compassion. It's
cannot go up to that point. He
destroys. Not only destroys, but
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
8
involved in money, in cheating... I
a different level of enjoyment that's not
like ordinary enjoyments.
mean, all kinds of criminal activities
they do... I can't understand. I can't
You're not to be afraid of 'Me', believe it. After getting the highest,
but be afraid of yourself. Have a why do you want to go so low as
watch on yourself and see for that? Because you have not yet felt
what you have got. You have not
realised what you have got. And you
yourself: "What have you been
doing so far? What have you done
so far?" Because you have been
enlightened, if the enlightened
people cannot give light, what's the
don't respect yourself. Still, if you are
on the same line and the same level, I
must say you have done no justice to
use of having them? Look at these Me or to yourself. We have to work it
little, little candles. Whatever little light out. Single-handed, I've done it,
they have, they're giving that light. worked very hard, I must say, in the
They're burning themselves to give sense that I had to deal with horrible
people- very unkind, very selfish, very
cruel. But doesn't matter. And such
beautiful birds I have discovered. But
of enlightenment? you must keep your lustre and work
"Enlightened" doesn't mean the light it out. I'll be very happy to know that
for yourself only the light of Love, Sahaja Yoga is spreading with leaps
Compassion, which is Divine, which is and bounds, with great speed and
not normal, which is not ordinary as that people are really getting into
that realm of peace, joy and
happiness. That's My dream and I
that light.
If we cannot give that light, what
is the
use
you see in the films. It is a Divine Love
which works.
hope you all will work it out.
And that is what makes Me
sometimes little weak when I hear
that Sahaja Yogis now are getting
Thank you very much
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 GURU PUJA
8 July 2001, Cabella Ligure
(Pravanchana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
You don't know how your Mother are doing a very great service to
feels to see so many people who have humanity!
become really gurus themselves!
They have been seeking the Truth in
very difficult times. They have been
wanting to know what is the Truth. And
this difficult time, itself, has served to
The thinking today of human beings
is not at all deep, it is very superficial
and that's how you find this world full
of turmoil; everyday, every minute you
can find ... they are killing so many
human beings. They are torturing, in a
are seeing around us. In the whole very large scale. Formarly, of course,
world also, there is something the saints were all tortured - tortured
definitely very wrong and we have to by all kinds of different stupid ideas,
should say, of something being higher
and something being lower; something
In the seeking, one thing is very being good, something being bad.
act upon your minds that what is
happening in this world, whatever we
go beyond.
important, that the person should have
a great devotion about it. And also
Under such ideas they combined
untold miseries you have to go together and worked out all kinds of
through. Seeking is when within aggression all over the world. All over.
yourself also you are struggling Not only that, but also in the families,
and outside also you find nothing in the institutions, in the organisations,
satisfactory. This is how the thinking that they were very right, they
were very good, and they tried to
seeking has a double edge.
aggress other personalities.
In that seeking, when you are trying
to get to the Truth, it seems it's a very
So, many people thought 'It's better
difficult thing. But you can't help it, to fight it back' and they started
because you are not satisfied with fighting it out collectively it doesn't
work out. This fighting doesn't work
out, because fighting begets nothing
strifes are there. People are fighting but murders, killing. Thus many
for nothing at all - for land; killing people were killed. Buddha talked to
human beings. Land, can it create people of non-resistance, and there is
history about it that in one of the
what exists around you. See the world
today, it's full of strife. All kinds of
human beings? They are fighting in a
very Collective manner thinking they great universities in Bihar, when the
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Nov. Dec. 2001
10
If they are seeking the Truth, they
will be surprised that this world is one,
all human beings are one, and that is
the destiny of human beings. But for
aggressive people came in, they killed
all the saints in the name of
aggression. And they all died.
Maybe that might have achieved on that, so many are to be killed, so
a very subtler level, some sort of many are to be destroyed, because
punyas; but in this Kali Yuga, it is not they don't learn a lesson in an easy
going to work out. What is the way. Now your job is to give them
resistance you can put in (up) against Self Realisation, and change the
such people? How can you fight them? people. That's the real thing you have
It's an impossible situation to convince
anybody that they are aggressive and doing? We come to Sahaja Yoga with
they are nowhere near the Truth. what idea? You are working only on
Because nobody wants to accept such the periphery.
a thing. And so whatever they are
trying, all over the world, to convince
others of their follies, are completely ourselves: how we can prosper, how
failing. And thus this struggle, this war-
mongering cannot be cured.
to do as gurus. But what are we
Firstly we are worried about
can we become better off; also there is
greed. We do not see ourselves - if we
are aggressive, if we are trying to
We have to accept that human trouble others, if we have wrong ideas
about ourselves, how we torture
beings are not at that level to
understand what's wrong with them.
others.
They do not want to accept. To them,
aggression is the only way they can
So first of all you have to cleanse
propound their own goodness. So yourself and accept your own
problems, your own misgivings.
These are to be faced. And challenge
yourself; What are you doing? You
are a Sahaja Yogi, how can you hate
someone? How can you trouble
someone? How can you torture
what is the solution?
The solution is that we should give
all of them Self Realisation. They
should get their Self Realisation. Then
only things will improve. Now, you
might say that, "Mother in these days
of strife and struggle and fighting, it will
work out. Circumstances will tell them.
someone? This is the beginning of
introspection, it's very important. I can
make out a person who meditates,
in the real sense of the word, and
the one who just 'meditates'. You
should not deceive yourself. If you
are deceiving yourself, then how
Life will be so difficult with all the time
weapons hanging on their heads, that
they will have to also seek the Truth".
It has to be done very genuinely.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Nov. - Dec.
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
2001
11
can you become a guru? For yourself. But the identification should
becoming a good guru, you have to
first of all be very honest within
yourself, and find out what are you
doing, what are you up to, what have
be with the Truth.
For example, you see in the mirror
your face and you find something
wrong you are not identified with that
wrong, but you are identified with your
own face, and so you clear it out,
cleanse it out. In the same way, if you
you done.
We have six enemies, as I have told
you. And we justify all these enemies.
We think, "It is all right! After all I did
this because of this, I had to do it"
are identified with yourself you cannot
get rid of it.
Somebody would say, "I was poor, so I
When you are climbing ahead into
the new path of righteousness, of
goodness, of compassion and love,
This is the biggest thing human beings you should see yourself, watch
have is justification! Animals don't yourself. What are you doing? Where
are you going? How far you are
they have their fixed 'nature'. But stupid? You should not cheat yourself.
Let others cheat you, let others do
whatever they like. Let others try to kill
had to be dishonest". Another would
say that, "I had to tell lies". Another
would say that, "I had to be immoral".
have it. They have their fixed ideas;
human beings can do all kinds of
wrong things and can justify it. This
justification doesn't help you in your you, but don't you kill yourself! You
don't cheat yourself! So you have your
self-respect, and you have your self-
honour, which you value more than
anybody else. And you don't yield to
anything that will spoil your image in
So when you start supporting the mirror. This is the first step, is of
ascent. "I did this because of that ...".
It never helps you! One should try to
introspect and see for oneself what is
the justification.
yourself in doing all kinds of opposite introspection.
things, how can you rise? How can
you ascend? All the time you are
what helps
for
this
Now
trying to descend! So purification introspection is your sense of love.
Can you love a person who is
within is only possible if you can see
yourself clearly, if you can't see how
One
distressful?
is
who
will you purify? If I can't see in the aggressive? One who is hot-
mirror, how will I see what's wrong with tempered? One who cheats you?
my face? So when you start seeing Can you love such a person? You
cannot. Then how can you love
the Truth, and comparing yourself with
that, then only you can clear out
yourself when you have these
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec. 2001
12
qualities, when you do this to blemish on your Self. Face yourself in
the most honest manner, and you will
yourself?
be amazed to see how nice it is. Just
So the first thing is the pure love for to see the pure Self shining within you.
yourself. Pure love. It's such a great When that Self starts shining, you start
thing to have pure love. Like, you may seeing many other things which you
like to have a very nice bed to sleep; have not seen, so far. And one of them
you may like to have a very beautiful
house; you may like to have all the yourself, but for everyone. It's a pure
wealth of the world. But, all this, will it
you see is that love is not only for
love for everyone else. It's not only for
make you love yourself? If you love your self. It's very surprising: when
yourself, you don't want anything! you really love your self, then your love
Because you enjoy your Self! To
enjoy your Self is the greatest that love in such a manner that you
enjoyment.
is for your self, and you start spreading
beautifully love others.
So now you have got Realisation.
Means you know what you are, you
know what a beautiful thing you are.
When that is so, you should try to love for love, because pure love is so joy-
your Self. And when you start loving giving. It is so joy-giving that if there
your Self, you are not bothered about
all non-sensical things. Now this pure
love is one of the most beautiful things person', 'because I am something
you have which you can do to yourself. great', and 'if I love somebody then
When you are selfish, you are not
loving your Self. When you are unkind, obliged'... all these ideas
you are not loving your Self. When you absolutely of no avail.
are aggressive, you are not loving your
self. Because you are loving all these
bad things; but your Self is pure. It's
absolutely pure and beautiful. And it
loves all that is beautiful and good. So
this is the beginning of your 'Self'
Realisation: when you realize how do with him. But if you are pure love,
important is your Self. You don't have
wrong ideas about yourself, you don't
justify all the wrong things you do,
because you understand that it is a
You don't love for money, yoù don't
love for some advantage, for some
power or for some gain, but you love
is any such thing that 'I love somebody
because I want to possess that
that person should feel absolutely
are
Really if you love, then you just
love. You love everyone. You may
say, "Mother, how can you love a
crook?" Need not go his way. Need not
be with him. Need not have anything to
then he can change, she can-change.
If they do not, then you don't bother.
Those who come into the ocean
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
13
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
of love, those who are really pure,
Purity is very powerful. It may not
act on one or two persons, doesn't
matter. There could be some very,
loving people, they are your friends.
They are the ones who are needed
on this earth. Not the people who very nasty, horrible fellows, doesn't
are crooks, who cheat you, who try matter. But it will have an effect on
tơ dominate you - they are not the very many sensitive persons who want
ones needed. What we need are the to become Sahaja Yogis. You have to
people who
drenched into the purity of love.
are completely just test it; how people like you and
how they are impressed by you.
The Paramachaitanya, this all-
So, from love we go to another point,
which is purity. And the purity is a pervading power of Divine Love, flows
subject, which has been talked about by through you because you are pure. If
many people. That you should be pure, you are impure, then it will stop at
you should be absolutely open and different chakras, it won't work. So
people should know everything about purity of temperament, purity of
you. I don't think that is purity. Purity is love what does that mean? That
you love somebody because that
person has got spirituality! You love
that person because there is purity,
and you go to places just to spread the
purity among them. A pure person will
never create a problem. It's the impure
that which purifies others! If you are
a pure person, then others will be
purified. They have to be purified. Now
supposing you have certain ideas about
yourself, you think that you Are very
highly placed as a Sahaja Yogi and that
person who every day can start with
this problem or that problem.
you are full of love.
Maybe it's all imaginary. Does it
purify others? Does your purity
purify others? Can it give them worship the purity of your own and the
awakening? Can they be Realised purity of others. It's true that we have
Souls? And then, how much do you to face ourselves everyday. It's true
value the purity, the power of
purity? And how many people you every day. It's true that we have to
give Realisation to? Or you have kept separate ourselves from ourselves
it to yourself? How many places you to see how far we have done, how
have been to spread this purity? Purity far we have gone, what are we
has to be spread. And without any doing, what have we done.
doubt, in your own purity, you should
do it because it's a very, very powerful
thing.
So the character of a Yogi is to
that we have to correct ourselves
So the difference between the
ancient times' guru and modern times'
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec. 2001
14
guru Is that the ancient times' gurus
didn't care if they gave Realisations to
people; it was not their style most of
them. They only cared for themselves, become like that; if they have some
nicely sitting down somewhere in the
Himalayas, away from all the madding have some eminence they become
crowds, and enjoying themselves! But
you must share this enjoyment. I think by that - by that achievement they
that is the sign of a good guru. The one
who cannot share, only looks after his
own pleasures, or looks after his own
ashram, we can call it, or looks after
his own family, looks after maybe will bring down your purity.
some disciples he has attention has
to be for the whole world!
are anything, they become very proud
and think no end of themselves. If they
have, say, one power, they will
talent, they become like this; if they
like this they do not become humble
become extremely, extremely proud,
arrogant absolutely in a very wrong
shape! But you, you are a Sahaja Yogi
and you should not mind any thing that
So, you can call yourself as gurus if
you want. I need not say that you are
a guru. But you have to first of all
make your self your disciple! Must
In Sahaja Yoga, now, it has
reached such a stage that you have to
worry about the complete humanity. look after your Self first of all. You
It's not only you, or a few Sahaja have to see for yourself, 'Have I got
Yogis, or many more Sahaja Yogis, the qualities? Am I the one who can
but all over the world, whatever is the really do all this?"
problem, you people have to solve it.
But first get out of your own little, little
problems. I get letters from people, should be with a very clean heart and
especially women, saying their understanding. Because you are not
husband is like that, and husband incarnations,
does that and... children are suffering, absolutely pure, but you are human
and all kinds (She laughs)... Now, you beings and you are rising to the level
are a guru!
All this introspection within you
which
born
are
of those incarnations. So you have to
cleanse, you have to watch yourself,
Means you are such a highly see for yourself and then understand if
electrified person with spirituality. you are a Sahaja Yogi - have you got
Why should you worry about all
these nonsensical things? And the
consciousness that you are purified
and that you are a pure person should conditional, is not limited, but it is
make you very humble. Just the absolutely like an ocean. And you like
opposite of it- normally people, if they to swim in that ocean, like to be
the beauty of purity and love?
Now this love is not relative, is not
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-Xill Issue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec. 2001
15
could have told him 'Because of your
drenched in that ocean of love.
ego'. I didn't. I told him in a very sweet
ego'.
manner, "You see, you are a sanyasi
and you have got a sari for me. If I had
Formerly guru meant a person who
is standing with a big stick. He used to
hit everyone. Anybody did anything. not got drenched, I could not have
wrong - they used to hit and beat them.
taken sari from a sanyasi". He
completely melted! He had tears in his
We had gurus in music also, and eyes and fell at My Feet.
different, different types of gurus we
had in our country. And their speciality
was that they used to absolutely is like this. It's not anger. It's not
oppress the disciple, control, and then repulsion. It's not hatred. But the
teach the knowledge of music, maybe; technique is such by which you
maybe wrestling, maybe anything. But suggest your love. This is how one has
in Sahaja Yoga it's very different.
So the technique of Sahaja Yoga
to understand the difference between
a Sahaja Yogi guru and other gurus.
No question of beating your disciple,
no question of scolding, no question of
shouting at them. Love is the most
powerful thing! Of course it doesn't
work on some people, I agree. Forget
Even the spiritual gurus who were
real were like that. Very harsh. They
used to throw stones at such people.
All kinds of things they used to do - but
then they didn't mean anything bad (by
it), but the method I didn't like.
them.
But it works in most of the people
There was a story about a person
who was supposed to be a great guru,
and I went to see him. I had to climb
because God has made us out of His
love, and we have a capacity to yield
to that love and to enjoy that love. So,
quite a lot because he lived in a small,
little cave. And when I reached there,
for a Sahaja Yogi, what he has to do is
to understand the powers of love.
Powers of love, if you can understand,
it will grow within you.
you see, he was very angry within and
going on like this, like this (She shakes
her head from side to sid
Some people have, some people
don't have it. Try to understand, this
Paramchaitanya is nothing but it is
(the) power of God's love or you
said "Mother, it was raining. Normally I can say 'Mother's love'! This power
works so beautifully, in such a
allow me to stop the rain. Why?" I secret manner, that you call it a
And it was raining so I was
completely drenched! And I went and
sat in His little cave. Then he came
back and he asked me a question. He
can stop the rain, but you wouldn't
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 16
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec. 2001
'miracle'. Because you can't see knowledge about your being, your
chakras, everything, which you know
now, is with you. That is the truth. You
So first and foremost thing is, try have the complete subtle knowledge
to develop the sense of love within which nobody had before. Because
you. Understand. There is one maybe these gurus did not want to
problem, which is always mis- give (it), or maybe these gurus did not
understood. Pure love can be very know themselves. All the knowledge
easily understood, that it gives you joy, of Sahaja Yoga is simple, very subtle
how it has worked.
and is real.
that it helps others to improve, it works
in a very subtle manner.
Now, after having this within you,
should not be just mental - it should
it
Now try to remember when you
be spiritual. And to make
how you got your Realisation, try to spiritual, what have you to do is to
remember how you started growing. love! When you love others, you will
These are like the seeds within us of start working on them. Then you will
find out, with your knowledge, that
gradually we started the showers of there is something wrong with this
fellow: what is wrong? He has this
chakra, he has that chakra this is the
came to Sahaja Yoga, try to remember
love, which sprouted. Slowly and
blessings of love. Then we started
enjoying it and understanding it.
combination, that is it.
Now at this stage when we are
about to become gurus and we are
But a Sahaja Yogi doesn't get angry
on that point. He tries to cure that
person. He tries to improve that
person. He doesn't say "You are very
bad, you are horrible". No, no. He
takes up a challenge that 'With my
already gurus, should be nothing but
embodiment of love. It's a very
different theory I am telling you. No
guru will accept this those who are
already accepted as gurus all over.
And the knowledge, knowledge they pure love I can cure'. It is so simple for
give you, is the knowledge of very him; not like any doctor or anybody
subtle things. All the knowledge that
you have got in Sahaja Yoga has been
already told by those gurus long time
back.
who has certain great qualifications
that he would come and ask for the
fees and that he will charge you this
money nothing! He knows what's
wrong with you and he knows how to
cure it. And he does it that way.
Somebody has told this, somebody
has told that, somebody has told
that .. But all the knowledge, the total
So, you are not afraid. Apart from
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Isue 11 & 12
17
(the fact that) you are not afraid, That you have done is to give him the truth
person who is with you also is not itself, Absolute Truth.
afraid because of your temperament,
because of your nature: the way you
are handling the patient, the way you
are talking to a person who has come
to know about the truth. And thus you
give him also the truth. Also you teach
I know it's a ... these days people
find it very difficult to find any time for
Sahaja Yoga, for spreading Sahaja
Yoga. They are looking out for
holidays! Whatever it is, whatever is
happening, I am very sure with your
great powers that you have, you can
really show great, great success, very
great success. And this success can
bring forth the vision I have of saving
the humanity all over the world.
him what the truth is.
And the truth is very simple - that
you are the Spirit! This is the truth, is
revealed out to another person. Thus
realise yourself, by giving
you
May God Bless You
Realisation to another person, what
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Public Programme
Royal Albert Hall, London-14.7.20001
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
I bow to all the seekers of Truth.
they are still in the complete control of
ignorance. I would call it ignorance,
and in that ignorance, in that
Some of you have found the Truth,
some of you have not found it fully, darkness, they are doing this horrible
and some of you have not found it at thing. Nobody wants to understand
all. But if you look around in today's that what we are doing is nothing but
situation, you will have to admit there complete destruction. Is that our
is a big turmoil going on. Countries destiny? That we are going to get
after countries are taking to all kinds of destroyed completely? What good are
wrong things. A lot of cold war is on,
people are killing each other, of nationality or maybe some religion,
destroying beautiful places, cutting all kinds of things, which are good. But
each other's throat for nothing at all.
We are all human beings created by Fighting! Fighting is not nobility. We
God, God Almighty has created them
and has brought them to this level of hatred. It is very much,
we doing under the name of some sort
things.
we are doing all wrong
hate anybody who can excite our
I don't know....
Very much liked, and under this
guidance, we form groups.
human awareness.
At this juncture one can see where
are we going in a collective way. This
is, where have we to reach or is it our
All this is coming because, this is
the Last Judgement. I have told you,
this is the Last Judgement. And this
Last Judgement will really decide
destiny? Is this the destiny of human
beings, to be destroyed by each other
for land or for anything else? Think of
who are to be saved and who are to
be doomed completely. It is a very,
is happening all over. Every day you very serious thing. All of them who are
aware should think about it. Little
the whole world as one and think what
read newspaper, every day there is
some sort of a horrible news about patchwork here, and a little patchwork
horrible things people are doing to there, is not going to do. Whatever you
each other for no rhyme or reason. We may try, unless and until you transform
have to think: what is the destiny, human being, it cannot be saved.
where are we going? Are we going to
This transformation is not an
Hell or to Heaven? What is our
impossible thing, it is not difficult. This
is the time for transformation, this is a
situation around? Can you help it?
chance for transformation. And within
What is wrong with human beings is
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
19
us it is placed, the power, as power it
is described, is the mystical
feminine power within us. All of
them have written, I am not the first
person to say that; but nobody has
been able, perhaps so far, to
understand it or to accept it that it
should happen to you.
Have you been able to save yourself
from calamities? Maybe these
calamities may come to destroy
people who are, who are doing harm,
then, that may be the mission of God.
But what is your mission? Why don't
you think that "I have to be a person
who is not a stone, who is a source of
joy and love"?
You are born, not only to be human
beings, but you
superhuman. You have to enjoy all to get your Self-Realization. What is
yourself, your life should be enjoyable, Self-Realization? It is to know your
it should be blissful. It should not be a Self. You do not know your Self, you
curse, morning till evening worried do not know. You are living in this
about that. That is why you are
I am not only talking, but I want you
to be
have
world without knowing your Self, can
created, because God had. no you imagine? You do not know what
intention of creating people who will be you are, you do not know that you are
all the time worried how to quarrel, the Spirit, and that you are the source
how to fight, how to save, but people of knowledge, of Pure Knowledge.
who will live in complete harmony, find people sitting in a meeting
peace and joy. That is why we are listening to some babaji who is telling
created, that is our destiny. That is not
just I am telling you, but it is a fact.
them some story, very happy. This is
not going to give you the reality, and
the truth. If you want to have reality
and truth, then please try to
understand that something has to
So we will have to be, we have to be
transformed. This transformation is
not difficult, but what I find is that you happen, to you some transformation
could get satisfied with anything. has to take place. You are not yet
Hindus will go to the tempie thinking, subtle enough, you have not got the
"oh we have done great". Christians
go to the church and think they have
done very good, Muslims will go and family, you do not have to leave your
pray and think that they are great. children, you do not have to leave your
What have they achieved? Face
yourselves, please, face your
limitations, face your, face your
subtleties till you reach that point for
which you do not have to leave your
household and go to the jungles.
There is no need to do all that. It is nice
to say that "all right, you all take
sanyasa and give all that belongs to
you been able to solve your problems? you to me". It is such a stupid idea.
problems and see for yourself: Have
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Voiume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec. 2001
20
of Jehad we talk that you have to
These are emergencies, you are
living in very emergent conditions, fight your enemies within yourself.
try to understand. And I want to
warn you that if you do not go deep
into yourself and find out what you
are and take to your transformation, there is greed. With that greed people
anything is possible: all kinds of can do anything they want, all kinds of
diseases happening to you, all things are happening out of greed.
kinds of new problems of children They will have money, they will have
coming up, all kinds of national all kinds of facilities, but still this greed
problems are there, all kinds of is such a satanic thing that you do not
international problems are there,
that people cannot help it. So we
have to get out of this and become a people, deceive your relations,
solid personality of truth.
What are our enemies?
These days the worst is greed,
even see what you have. And you
want to have more and more, deceive
deceive everyone and grab their
money.
We do not know what the truth is.
Then another worst thing we have
We are worse than animals whose
eyes are open, while our eyes are is anger. Anger does not allow us to
closed. It is not to condemn you or
anything, but to make you alert and
aware that human beings have to
change. Otherwise you just, you people who are angry because of
come to my lecture, tomorrow you
see things as they are. We develop
anger for small things. Like we have
come to this country, I have seen
different colour. I cannot understand!
God has made different colours
will come to another lecture. That is
all, it is an everyday, sort of a nice
entertainment. But when I see the the same, like army and life would
destiny, I don't know how many will have been miserable. So the colour
be going, how many will be
finished, what will happen to them,
what diseases they will get, what difference? I just do not understand,
problems they will get, what will
happen to their children, what will this myth we are fighting. The whites
happen to their country, and what
will happen with the whole world. blacks are fighting with the whites. And
Just widening your vision. My vision is then they go also for burning their skin
that all the people of the world should in the sun, getting skin-cancers. I just
get transformation. We have enemies do not understand, there is no logic,
within ourselves, and when we talk
otherwise we all would have looked
has been created by nature. So there
are whites or blacks, what is the
because such a myth is going on, with
are fighting with the blacks and the
there is no balance in us to see that
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Nov. - Dec.
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 11 & 12
2001
21
what we are doing. Why are we Everybody has to get old. What have
wasting this precious time when we
have to get transformation? This anger by running after other sex? You have
can be with anything, with anything no sense of dignity, no sense of
one can develop anger. It is like a
human failure, which is very common.
For the smallest thing people can get person. This is not the way. We have
angry, and they like it because with to introspect and see for ourselves.
that they can oppress others, they Why are we doing this, wasting our
could be aggressive. So they want to energy into nonsensical things? So
have this anger within them, and with
that anger they try to dominate others.
This is the biggest problem. Why do what they tell me that they wanted to
we want to dominate others? Why do marry a particular woman and a
we want to oppress others? And why particular man or anything. How they
do we want to take control of others? put it, I mean, how fragile! That is not
We cannot control ourselves. Why being very great.
you achieved by running after women,
honour. If you are arrogant, you wear
very good clothes, you are a wonderful
many people I met are really half mad
and some of them are full mad. And
are we wanting to control others?
You have to be very, very strong
within yourself, feel your Self. Your
Then there are attachments, Self is the Spirit, is the reflection of
attachments to their houses, to their God Almighty within you. You can be
land, to their children, to everything. very strong, you can be very, happy,
and you can be absolutely balanced if
will go with open hands, you cannot you become the Spirit. You have
heard so much about Spirit and
attachments have to change, they are Spiritual life. But, have you reached
very particular about their car, about that point? Even when you read Zen-
their house, maintaining. But what system, Tao-system, Bible, Koran,
about yourself? Are you all right? anything. Do you know how to reach
Inside, are you absolutely calm, that point of the Spirit? Not yet, not yet.
peaceful and joyful? Why are you You have to know that, because you
wasting your energy in getting angry? are very great, you are very precious
and you are so beautiful within. But
destroyed. If you look at another you are not aware of it! You have to
person, here you see weaknesses, become that. That becoming is very
apart from money, from women, is important. And for that God Almighty
very common, or women having for has already organised within you,
men. To get attractive. For what? which is called as Kundalini, which can
What is the need?
But tomorrow you will not be here, you
So such
carry anything new.
That is a sign of life that will also be
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec. 2001
22
be awakened and its Awakening can belong to this religion, you belong to
give you Self Realisation, can give you that. You belong to nothing. You
Self Knowledge, as you call 'Atm- belong to the kingdom of God. That is
what we have to achieve, and you
should be one there. But if you like
Saakshatkar'. That is what is very,
very important, in your life to have it,
and then it is free, you cannot pay for storytelling there is no end to it.
it. How much can you pay? When it is
absolutely free, why don't you take
your self realisation? And why don't
you grow? Is it in the name of religion? now here for the last, I don't know,
Every religion has said about it.
Mohammed Saheb has said clearly: but what I find, that people do not
"At the time of resurrection your hands
will speak." Are they speaking? Hindus They like people who will just
know about it, that we have to get our
self realisation. No use just listening to
these babajis and giving them money.
All this kind of rituals that we are doing, that destiny of destruction is to
that our forefathers have been doing. be about today, complete destruction
What have we achieved? Nothing!
But you are wasting your time!
The time is running short. I have been
20 years or so. I worked very hard,
realise what they are supposed to do.
say something very simple, or who are
to serve visual entertainment. So
the whole humanity has to understand
is to be about. And very simple is that
you enter into the kingdom of God,
which is very easy, no time to say
So now it is important for us to know
that we have to have our evolution anything, you do not have to work out
reaching to the point of Self anything. You take your Sefl
Realisation. If we were perfect, there. Realisation, and then at home you
would have been no problem. If spend about 10 minutes meditating.
we were Self Realised people, there Only your mind is all the time justifying
would have been no problem. All kinds your misbehavior. I call it misbehavior
of selfishness, all kinds of limits
we have put around us, all kinds against God's wish, it is against
of conditioning and ego, which have humanity, and it will destroy all the
been working our life and have been good things.
because it is against the truth, it is
ruling us. We have to get over it. And
once you get over it you get united.
Nobody has to tell you that you get dropped and you have to know that we
united. You lose all misidentificațions.
All this misidentifications have to be
are all one, we are all global, we are
not separated by colour, race or
Your misidentifications are that, religion. We should know we are all
that you belong to this country, you
one, and that oneness should not be
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
23
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
established by slogans or by shouting. get your Self Realisation, and you are
What should be that oneness is to be going to understand the value of your
life.
felt within. It is not artifical, it has to be
real, very real oneness. And that
The problem is, you will get your
realisation in the sense, the power
comes to you once you realise that
you are Part and Parcel of the
Whole. Religions have brought you up within you will rise. It is very well
to this point of awareness, not your organised. Actually, God is a great
fighting, not your killing. Why, why creator, how he has balanced and how
human beings
themselves? Because of complete he has done. With that happening, is
ignorance of righetousness, because
of complete greed of oneself, just place and then you go round and see
yourself, all your family, at the most all
your relations. Why do you want to
keep it yourself? You are the Spirit. then grow into it. Once you are grown
Spirit is the ocean, Ocean of
knowledge, is the ocean of love, is the thing you are, the greatest gem, the
ocean of all blessings.
it works out is remarkeble, every detail
diverted
have
not sufficient. You enter into, say, a
for yourself how beautiful you are,
what beautiful things God has made,
into it then you will realise what a great
greatest person, so loving, that having
some writing under statues. Nobody
So we have to decide. Today I tries to understand what were they
have to request that there is not doing, how they worked.
so much time left. We have to decide
that we have to become the Spirit.
That is what all the religions have experience, the experience of the
taught, but how to do it was not so very Spirit. It is a very unusual, rare thing,
much explained, and it did not work
out. Some of them did get it, but they is now, so why not take advantage of
were not trusted, nobody listened to
them. Even people killed them and
tortured them and crucified them. But point. What you become is the point,
now please, all of you, try to
understand the value of that...........
So, tonight we can have the
never used to have one like that. But it
it. Please, be ready for that, accept it,
take it and become. Becoming is the
and what you make out of this whole
human civilisation is your problem, not
Why are you humans? Why are you mine, I can help, I can work it out.
created? What is the purpose behind
this? Are you going to be driven by
nonsensical ideas? Are you going to
be finished by all sorts of dividing
factors? No, no. You are all going to
So I would request you all to now
get ready for Self Realisation. It is
much better, but those who do not
want to have cannot be forced. So it is
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec. 2001
24
better such people leave, leave the anything, just put your hands towards
Me, just like this. Now please close
your eyes, it is important, please close
May God bless you. your eyes. This power-Kundalini,
is placed in the triangular bone,
known as sacrum, is sacred and
anything. Meaning, also do not think it rises through six centers of
what I have said, try to keep your the parasympathetic nervous system
and ultimately pierces through the
fontannel bone area which was a soft
hall, and get on to their work.
Firstly, you do not have to do
thoughts very peaceful, and I am sure
all of you can get your self realisation.
But how many will grow? Because you
bone in your head, on top of your
have to come to the follow-up, then head. When you were a child it was a
you have to practice it in the centers. soft bone. It pierces through that and
And it works out, little bit time you have enters into the subtle energy of all-
to give to yourself and to this global pervading power of Divine love. They
problem. You have to dedicate call it by different names, they call it
Paramachaitanya, they call it
to dedicate yourself. That does not Chaitanya, and some call it as Ruh.
mean that you have to become You may call it by any name, it is the
Love of God. Once you get connected
this or that ritual. Nothing. But this with it, when you start feeling on your
dedication will make you so much one fingers some sort of a breeze, first
some people will get hot, does not
that I do not have to tell you that you matter, but then it cools down and you
get the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost -
yourself, it is very important you have
sanyasi or you have to get busy with
with yourself, with the whole universe
will dedicate by yourself.
Everyone. And it starts flowing.
So please do not stay here if you do
not want to have Self Realisation,
nothing will happen to you. Please
leave the hall in case you do not want
You can now raise your left hand on
top of your fontannel bone area, keep
your eyes shut and see for yourself if
there is a cool or a hot breeze coming
out of your head. You can move your
hand. Now see with your right hand if
there is a cool or a hot breeze coming
out of your fontannel bone area, which
was a soft bone in your childhood. See
for yourself. Bend your head, better is
to bend, please bend your head. Again
put your right hand towards me, and
Self-Realisation,
What you have to do is not to do
anything, just put your hands towards
Me. Of course if you are wearing
shoes, better take them out, because
Mother Earth is very strong. Please
put hands towards Me. You do not
have to pray, you do not have to say
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Nov. - Dec.
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
2001
25
countries, which are following Sahaja
if there is a cool breeze coming out of Yoga. And surprisingly, in black
your head. If it is hot it is all right, it countries like Benin, they have 20,000
does not matter, and it is coming Sahaja Yogis. Only three years back I
started there. And in England, it is
more than sixteen years, I have been
Now all those who have felt cool or working here, and after that also all the
hot in their hands or on their fingers or time every year. But somehow, their
out of the fontannel bone area, this is growth is very much there, but not
the real baptism, please raise both subtle, not within ourselves. The
growth is within and you will enjoy,
very much enjoy the reality. The reality
see for yourself with the left hand, see
because of the heat within you.
your hands.
Just imagine, you are the is beautiful, absolutely.
soldiers who are going to save the
world from its destruction. Try to
understand your importance.
May God bless you.
They want to sing one song, which
was written in 12th century by a saint
Everyone practically has felt. That in India. And it is sung in all the
means you are already mature to get religions, but nobody knows the
your Spiritual Life. It is the last jump to meaning of that. The meaning is that
Reality. Now you should know what is "O, Mother, give me the union, Jogwa,
this, what are you, what is your Spirit, I will give up my bad habits, I will give
up my temper, I will..." You do not
have to do it, now you will give up
You can put down your hands.
and what you can do, what are your
powers, what are spiritual powers.
automatically. The light that we have
For this I would request you to first itself automatically will give up,
come to the follow-up program me and automatically. You do not have to do
after that you can join anyone of the anything, but you have to meditate,
centers which are closer to you, and about 10 minutes, that is not much.
work it out.
They are so much full of joy that
You have to work for the whole they all want to go on singing all the
world. You should know there are 85 while.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 New Year Puja
31.12.2001, Kalwe
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
who will be saved from the curses of
Now we are starting a new year andI
wish you all a very happy and prosperous
New Year. In this Desh of mine, I also
Kaliyuga. This is going to be your vow
on the new year day that now we are
going to start Sahaja Yoga in a new way,
in a bigger way, in a more dynamic way.
wish you a very deep growth in Sahaja
Yoga. Now you all are Sahaja Yogis and
you all have to become masters in
Sahaja Yoga.
For that first thing needed is your
"Sangh Shakti', that is your collectivity.
This collectivity has to be extremely well
For becoming masters in Sahaja built well knit, well understood and
Yoga I am sure, you are doing absolutely lovable. This in not difficult in
meditation, introspection, and all kinds Sahaja Yoga because practically all your
of Sahaja Yoga rituals, I should say. In jealousies, all your baser ideas have
this new year I think there is greater been completely washed out by your
chance for you to do much better Kundalini, She has transformed you. You
because all those years of ordeals are
over. We are now entering into the new
era or say now the 'Satyayuga' has
are different people. You are very very
different. Not only that, but you have now
understood your Self. You have known
established.
yourself and all those who know
themselves, can't fight with each other.
Because this Self is the reflection of one
In the beginning you may not feel the
atmosphere of Kaliyuga has been
cleared out completely. Of course
gradually you will find that all is clearing heart, how can you fight with each other?
out and all the people who are dangerous Otherwise you will be fighting with your
for your spiritual life or your national life, self. It would be very-very stupid to do
for your family life will have to take back
their wheel. They cannot be successful. things that you have been thinking about
Now the Sahaja Yogis have to decide, will of-course disappear, no doubt. But
how they can spread Sahaja Yoga all you will become very dynamic. You will
over, how many people they can get into be amazed at your dynamism. Just you
Sahaja Yoga? There should be many
more waiting for you this year, and may yourself to manifest. You can become
be this year if you all decide to work it very-very collective, progressive and you
out, I am sure, you can get lots of people can create many Sahaja Yogis.
person, of one deity, of one God. So how
can you fight, when he is with in your
that. So all the fights and all the funny
have to rise, Just you have to express
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII İssue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec. 2001
27
You have been given the realization.
You have been given the knowledge of
realization, what ever was possible has
been done for your health and prosperity.
But now it's your duty to repay to the
Divine by your creative methods. You
have to be very creative. You find so
many people in this world are full of lots
of problems, which you have got out of.
But you can help them. You don't need
any help because you are yourself full
of Power. Power of Divinity is within you.
This Divine Power should be used. Its
not given just to be wasted. This power
has to be used, otherwise what's the use
of becoming powerful? Supposing we
have electrical power here and it doesn't
give light, so what's the use of having
electrical power?
are some, some people who take Sahaja
Yoga for granted. You don't understand
your responsibility. You have to meditate
collectively, wherever there is collective
meditation, you must join them. You can
also start something in your area, a
collective meditation and it will work out.
Many people who are in Sahaja Yoga
are now meditating. I can make them out,
I know, who are the ones who are
meditating and who are not. It's not
difficult to make it out. Besides you come
out with other problems like my mother's,
father's, uncle's, this thing. There is no
need to wory about that. If you are a
realized soul and if you are connected
with the Divine even your own wish will
be fulfilled. But it does not. Why?
Because you still do not understand what
you have become. You first try giving
realization to others. See what joy,
tremendous joy you get! This joy you
can't get in anything else. Whatever you
may buy, whatever you may have, you
can't get this joy of giving realization. And
you will be so very happy with that, not
because you expect anything, you want
anything, nothing of the kind. But only
thing is the pure joy, pure joy of creating
great Sahaja Yogis. This is what you are
here for. This is what the Divine wants
So the power that you have is for the
emancipation of human beings. It is for
you to raise the Kundalini of people. You
can do it. One person can do it for
thousands. I hope now you take up this
responsibility upon yourself. It should be
the greatest blessings for you, for Sahaja
Yoga and for the whole world, because
in my vision we have to change the whole
world. I don't know in my life time if I will
achieve it or not, but if you people really
join hands with me, with full effort, it will
work out.
you to do, not just to take advantage of
Divine Powers. Cure my father, cure my
mother, cure my sister. Or else I haven't
got property. Somebody says "my
husband illtreats me" or some wife says
that or husband says that. Goes on and
on and on. Forget it. You are now above
everything, above all these things. And
Firstly I hear many people don't go to
meditation, into collective meditation.
They do not join together. Its surprising.
After so many years of work I have done,
30 years I have been working and there
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 11 & 12
Nov. - Dec. 2001
28
you have become absolutely powerful
within you. If you have not used your
powers then how will you know what
powers you have got. It is as simple as
that. Those who have used it go on telling
me what miracles they had, what things
have happened to them, how they were
protected. What-ever they wanted how
they got it.
you go to the collective meditation
regularly. I promise you that, but the
problem is you won't go. You write letters
to me. You want to meet me. This is not
going to help you. They come and trouble
me like that and do something like that
but does not help. What helps that you
help your self.
year is going to be a great year
for you. In the West, l am surprised, how
things are spreading fast! In Russia, the
people are so deep, so deep. Once they
get realization they understand the value
of realization. They are so humble and
so deep. They do not want anything.
They have never desire for it. Though
they have gone through horrible
problems of communism and now there
is a reaction to that. Despite that all these
5 countries which I call as real Divine
Countries, because the way they have
accepted, they are poor according to the
Next
But in Sahaja Yoga you cannot be
hypocritical. If you have hypocracy,
Sahaja Yoga knows, the Divine knows,
you are a hypocrite. It is for your good,
for your growth, you have to be in Sahaja
Yoga. Its not for somebody else that you
are doing it, but for your self. When
people are that powerful, I am amazed,
how easily they can get cured! But they
must meditate and they must join
collective meditation. Most of the people
do not join collective meditation. I am
surprised. I know some times, say in
Delhi, there is no sufficient space, so
people have to come on either Saturday
or Sunday. Some of them have to wait
outside. Does not matter. But going for
the collective meditation, you will be
amazed that Divinity is flowing there,
vibrations are flowing there, I am there.
It is not that you are just going there just
as a ritual. Problem is you people don't
realize that you have to be responsible
for Sahaja Yoga, responsible for giving
modern standards but from their heart
they are very very rich, from their
understanding of Sahaja Yoga they are
very very rich, and their Scientists are
so well qualified. In every type of thing
now. There is one scientist who has
come to India and who has discovered
a method by which you can see all the
chakras and the kundalini and the
obstructions and everything. Something
we can show you. While our scientists
are busy opposing mel Little knowledge
is very dangerous thing. They do not
want to see what I am doing and how I
am doing! They just want to criticise me.
Also the so called intellectuals, specially
realizations to others and attend all the
programmes you have of meditation.
With collective meditation you get
alright. All your problems are solved if
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
29
people react because of their
conditioning and some people react
because of their ego. So why should you
react to anything? Why don't you enjoy
by not reacting? You just watch, how
beautifully, they have made beautiful
flowers! Just enjoy it. What is the nead?
Some will find some faults, somebody
will say this should not have been there.
How did they manage this? All kinds of
non-sensical things. The joy of its
creation is there and you should be able
to see it, feel it, enjoy it. Then you are a
Sahaja Yogi, otherwise you are not. If
you are reacting type, you cannot be a
Sahaja Yogi. This is a degree, Sahaja
Yoga is.
in Maharashtra, the Intellectuals, I think
have something wrong in their heads.
They can not understand Sahaja Yoga.
Just beyond them, what has happened
to them I do not know, but they just
cannot understand Sahaja Yoga. And
these Maharashtrians are so busy with
their rituals! Four o' clock in the morning
they will get up, take their bath, do this,
then start doing their pujas, this that. Now
somebody got sick, so his wife writes to
me, that we did not go to any temple, we
did not do any rituals, still my husband
has got sick. Imagine! As if by doing such
things, you have become a Sahaja Yogi!
If you are a real Sahaja Yogi then
nothing can happen to you, but you have
been just under a wrong impression.
Whether you go to temple, whether you
go to wrong places and do all kinds of
rituals, it has never helped you.
I think there are so many various
types of Sahaja Yogis. Somebody is just
minus, somebody is little plus, somebody
is like that but the depth of the Sahaja
Yogi is to be measured by the way he
keeps joyous and happy. Goes on
criticising others, goes on getting angry
with others, all these things are going
on and he thinks he is a Sahaja Yogi! In
our Divine University we have no
full of water or anything you cannot fill it. degrees, we don't give you certificates.
So you have to empty it first. Empty You are a Sahaja Yogi if you have got
yourself. Empty your mind. It's possible your Realization. If the Kundalini has first
through Sahaja Yoga, if you can take opened your Sahasrara, it means you
your kundalini beyond Agya chakra by are a Sahaja Yogi. But that Sahaja Yogi
So first you have to empty yourself. If
you are already filled with these ideas,
the age old ideas and you are still
carrying on with them, how can the
Divine be filled. If there is a pot already
may not be a real Sahaja Yogi.
not reacting.
It only depends when you are joyous
and you are anxious to give realisation
to others. You want to share your
realisation. You just don't want to keep
Reaction is the worst thing because
reaction comes through Agya, as I told
you the other day, and it is due to your
conditioning or due to your ego. So some
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
30
it to yourself. If that is not your condition, to talk about Sahaja Yoga, that we have
then you are still not a full Sahaja Yogi. got this through Sahaja Yoga. So how
You should find out how many people will Sahaja Yoga spread? One has to
you have given realisation to. Its very understand. You all should find out how
important because next year as I said is much responsible you have been for
very important, very-very important year. getting people into Sahaja Yoga. Of
course you are all protected, you are all
blessed. Everyone has got whatever
have seen all these other false Gurus they wanted. Most of them. But how
many of them are returning this debt,
how many are working to give realization
to others? This is a debt on you. But if
your attention is haphazard, if your
attention is not clear, is not nirmal then
you are involved into all kinds of things
vibrations were so hot that I asked her, like tentacles of octopus. You become
"What Guru you follow?" So she told me like an octopus, you go on getting
attached to this, attached to that. You
have to be a free bird. All these
attachments that you have are going to
amazed how this lady was proudly take you no where. You should be only
attached to Sahaja Yoga and should be
bad man and without knowing me, I was conscious that you have known yourself.
stranger to her! But Sahaja Yogis don't You can just understand your value, your
talk. You should talk to your neighbours, level. I tell you "we can change the whole
world". You have such a good heritage.
You have such good culture in your
meet people. Like in India we do Haldi, country. In this country. I have seen the
kumkum in Maharashtra. They will never problems of America and other
In that year, I would like to see all of you
going round and giving realisation. While
who are getting exposed one by one. If
you see their attitude anywhere you meet
them.
Once I was travelling by a plane and
there was a lady sitting next to me. Her
the name. She said he is very good. This
Guru is the best, this and that. Such heat
was coming from her body but I was
talking about her Guru, who is such a
should talk in your circle. Like, we have
in India, so many customs where we
countries. We don't have these
talk to those people, who come for haldi-
kumkum, about Sahaja Yoga. They won't problems. At least they are not so
even have my photograph. If they want, prevalent, but only the thing that we have
to do is to know that you are a Sahaja
Yogi. Like a tree, where it grows, it knows
it's a tree. It knows, it has to produce
It is very good chance. You have any fruits, it has not come up like that. It has
dinner, you have any public meeting, not been brought up just like a stick. No,
anything, they won't talk about Sahaja it has to do something. In this world
Yoga. Its very surprising. They don't want everything has to do something. But then
they can do it, but I don't know what are
they frightened about!
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Nov. Dec. 2001
31
what about Sahaja Yogis? Its such a rare
thing that has happened that you have
got your Self- Realization. So why should
we waste our attention, why should we
neglect our meditation? Why? We have
to grow. We are different people. We
have different ways altogeter. In this
Now as I said, it's a drop that has
become the ocean. Identify yourself with
the ocean. Ocean is the lowest if you
have seen. Lowest so much that the zero
point starts from the ocean. Ocean is so
humble. It is at the lowest point it lives.
But all the rivers go into it. And the ocean
does the work of throwing the clouds in
the sky and there they burst and become
rain, fall into the same ocean. They come
back to the same ocean. So those who
world we are realized souls. There were
hardly any number during the time of
Christ, practically and even before that.
I was surprised that in China and other
places in one age there used to be one
Guru, one Master. While you are so
many masters. But you don't want to use
are humble, will attract more Sahaja
Yogis. Those who are kind will attract
much more Sahaja Yogis.
your power as a master.
So it is important to see that you
Why not the women use it also? I change your temperament. If you try to
find women are more lethargic than
men are in Sahaja Yoga. They should impressed by you. If you think you are
know I am a woman myself. Single something very great, nobody is going
handedly I have done all this work and
why cannot you do it? Because it's a
tremendous task to transform people imagine a Sahaja Yogi going in a group
all over the world, but its very easy for
you. If I can do it why can't you do it?
But put your complete attention to it
that we are going to work out Sahaja happening, but I am doing Sahaja Yoga.
Yoga not for ourselves but for the
betterment of humanity. We need it, Yog"? You go and cry and weep and sit
well. Your compassion, your love is all down there. If he is really doing Sahaja
being wasted if you just think about Yoga, no sickness can come, no trouble
yourself, your family. What's the use?
People do that even before realization, With you only, these people who are
so what is the use of completely supposed to be there, they will rise but
getting attached to your families, no use having identification with people
attached to all other things. You who are not Sahaja Yogis. They may be
should get attached to the whole your relations, they may be anything. No
world. We belong to the whole world
now. We are no more individualistic, and they are at a different level. Either
show off, nobody is going to be
to look at you. Be very humble, kind,
generous, also very joyous person. Now
and telling them see, my mother is sick,
my father is dying, this thing is
So people will say "why do you do Sahaja
can come. It is a fact. Try to understand.
use. Because you are at a different level
try to raise their level or have nothing to
no more.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
32
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
do with them. Because they will pull you
down. They will not see your height. They
have no eyes to see. They have no ears
to hear and they have no feeling of it. If
they have seen how you have changed
they would have gone absolutely head
long into Sahaja Yoga. But if they are
not, that's not your job. You shouldn't
bother about them. If they come to
Sahaja Yoga, well and good, otherwise
they are no more your relations. In no
way they are related to you. How will you
relate Sahaja Yoga to them? How will
you explain anything to them? It is going
to be impossible to talk to these people.
is the Kundalini. I want you to have that
Shuddh Ichha that is the Pure Desire not
only to become Sahaja Yogis but to
make more Sahaja Yogis. That's
absolutely your Pure Desire. You may
not have recognised it, but unless and
until you fulfil that desire, you can never
be a good Sahaja Yogis. It is to spread
Sahaja Yoga in every way, every where
and with every one that you can do. And
it will spread very well and so many
people can be saved, so many who are
just lost in the maya of Stupidity will be
back on to right path. How much could
you go to do for them, just think? If me
alone has brought so many Sahaja
So what I have to tell you today is that Yogis, why can't you also try and get
our family which is Sahaja Yoga is large.
It's spread in 86 countries and is doing
very well. But what we have to see is
that you do belong to that ocean, to that
more Sahaja Yogis.
This world needs Sahaja Yoga. The
whole problem when see in
great family of Sahaja Yoga, but it is for newspapers, I think 'Oh God, if these
you to increase the size of this family. people would have been Sahaja Yogis
there would have been no problem. But
I find that still people are moving about,
responsibility. You are not given Sahaja going round and round. I don't know!
Yoga just for nothing. You have to As if they have no brains or have no
produce greater Sahaja Yogis, better understanding that where is this world
Sahaja Yogis and you yourself should going and who is going to save this
world? I am not here to tell you what you
You have to talk about it and you have
to change people. This is your
meditate. Not only meditate but also
should do in your private lives but you
your-self should know to keep yourself
cleansed and beautiful. What you have
attend all the collective programmes as
far as possible.
I am happy the way you have stayed to do to yourself? Some people are so
on and have come here. It has rained, superficial that you cannot go with them.
still you are here and you still are Sahaja Yoga does not go into them. So
enjoying the Divine Bliss. I again and very superficial? So forget them. I don't
again bless you from my heart and I want think they can be saved. So forget them.
you to have that 'Shuddh Ichha, which They can't enjoy. They are worried about
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Nov. Dec. 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
33
some non-sensical things always. So now take up Sahaja Yoga upon yourself
with such people you need not move,
but there are still so many people, atleast who comes. I mean, I don't want cheap
I think there are 80% people people who popularity. But I do want Sahaja Yogis
and go on telling about this to everyone
are seeking and you should give them should be every where.
Sahaja Yoga. This is one thing, the
desire of Your Mother that you should
May God Bless You.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Shakti Devi Puja
Moscow 17.9.1995
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
harmful to themselves or to the nation.
But Sahaja Yogis don't know this kind
of enjoyment. Every moment is filled
with such joy for them when they are in
collective. I could see that yesterday
when you had gathered at the airport
and were waiting for me, when I came
I saw your faces were shining with joy.
I am sorry I was little late today but I
am sure you must have enjoyed each
other and the enjoyment of collectivity
is very great. Once it happened I was
going to some place and the plane was
very late and I was little worried that I
will be reaching late there. But actually
the plane was so late that I reached
after seven hours more and all the
people were waiting for that time at the
airport. That was in Delhi and when I puja of the Devi, of the Gddess in the
reached there they looked so fresh form, which are many. Many a times
and nice I was surprised! I said, did
you go home? No, no we were waiting beings from the evil forces and to give
here only for you at the airport; all
singing, dancing nicely the whole
night.
Today we have decided to have a
she has taken birth to protect human
them a sense of security. But I don't
think in any one of Her lives she did
self-realisation job. This is the most
interesting most lovable job. She had
It's something about Sahaja Yoga to fight all kinds of evil people and
that every moment we can enjoy, we
can enjoy for our benefit. Modern
ideas are as in the West is specially in suffering for their innocence and
America that we must enjoy every simplicity. All this was long time back
moment of our life. But actually all but these are special blossom times
these enjoyments that they have are where all of you have to become fruits.
self destructive, The kind of things So many flowers were there on this
they do like drinking or they go to earth and you have to now become the
places where they start fighting or else fruits.
they do all other hopeless things that
protect the devas, the people who
were good people, also who were
It is very heartening to see that in
collectivity becomes very dangerous. Russia and Ukraine people are so
So much so that they are smuggling or spiritually sensitive. It is very-very
blissful for all of you to be realised
souls. All this collective happening is
should not be done and thus their
they are killing. They all become
collective to do something very
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
35
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Now, first thing I have noticed in this
definitely going to bring very great
emancipation for the whole world. country that people think that the
There are problems in our country but whole Western world is like paved with
now I am telling all the Sahaja yogis gold, it is not paved with gold. They are
that whatever you have got, you must not at all full of joy as you are, they
project the power of the Goddess don't have the kind of faces you have
delibrately. It is very enjoyable to be a
Sahaja yogi. Also you are spreading you see it minutely, they are having
Sahaja yoga very fast, just like fire, little problems even with the finance.
because this land, surprisingly, these
both countries are so much sensitive because all kinds of foreign goods
to spirituality. But this power of the
Goddess that you have got within countries, there is
yourself has now to be delibrately recession in those countries, nothing
projected. For example, when once I
came here when you were having a
coup, very difficult time, and perhaps I country, to Ukraine and to all the
managed, it but now you all can
manage, you all can project. For Rubles you have, you have spent, you
example, now I find the problem here
is more of financial. Now if you all
project your mind to this problem you struggle of independence then
will realize what's the cause of it. The Mahatma Gandhi said we will not buy
devotion you have for me is very
gratifying. I am your mother and I am
also Mother of the Ukraine people; but from foreign then our industries, our
I am also the Mother of Russia and the handicrafts will come up. And he
whole of Ukraine. I will be only changed the lifestyle of our country.
satisfied when all the problems of this Everybody had to wear hand woven,
country and of Ukraine will be solved hand spun clothes or which are made
by you. You don't have to depend only in India. Even today in India you
upon your government for that. I have cannot get anything imported in the
been telling you that I have noticed market and if any body tried to sell
why this country is going down! So, anything the young volunteers like
this power of the Goddess that you students and young people used to go
have within yourself will give you so
much of understanding through the
enlightened intelligence that you can
really solve the problem.
full of beauty, full of satisfaction, But if
Now the problem in this country is
have come from these western
sells. And this is all junk, useless
things they are sending to your
Eastern Block people. Whatever
are wasting on these junky things.
When in my country there was a
a single thing from abroad. And then
he said that if we don't buy anything
and stand before the shops and used
to say don't buy foreign things. And
that time there were Britishers ruling
us so they would arrest, doesn't
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
36
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-Xill Issue 11 & 12
matter. So, all the import was stopped. you are Sahaja Yogis what will please
Now, even today we cannot buy the Goddess? Unless and until you
anything imported in the market. Of- can please the Goddess you can
course, there are some stupid people never be joyous, you can never be
who smuggle and some stupid people good Sahaja yogis. For that you must
want to take to that kind of culture but
have wisdom to understand what will
they are very few and they are all please the Goddess. I don't think
getting exposed due to the power of Western people have even half of
wisdom that you have except for
Goddess in that country. So, you are
duty bound to your own country. This Sahaja yogis, of course. Because they
is the Mother Earth which has given think of these temporary pleasures all
the time and they get into immoral life
and as such you have to look after the styles which is against the power of
prestige and the well being of this Goddess. They are suffering from
country. I am amazed to see so many horrible incurable diseases. They kill
their parents, they kill their children.
you a place, has given you the birth
junky shops brought in here by these
Americans and all the people wasting
their precious money on this junk! But
once you stop, completely, boycott all
There's no question of love.
The power of Goddess is of love.
these things coming from the foreign Whatever she does to the whole world
countries then, you will be amazed, is through Her compassion and love.
what will they do here? They are all The whole body, the whole being of the
against the Divine Power of love Goddess is made of compassion and
love and nothing else. This power
because they want to exploit. If you
love somebody you cannot exploit gives full understanding of the reality
others. This is not a very nourishing and also this enlightens inside and
thing for your country. All their styles if outside. For example, if you love
you want to see what they are doing in somebody you know everything about
the West you will be shocked. They that person. It has nothing to do with
money. It's the highest, most valuable,
very important powers that you have.
Even when you think about something
noble, something benevolent, this
power is filled into that thought and
then this thought fills into the universe,
into your country, into individuals. The
aim of this compassion and love is only
one-to see everyone joyous, that's all.
Joyous in the real sense of the world.
have destroyed everything that was
beautiful given to them by the
Goddess. They have no sense of a
pious life. They have no sense of
spirituality. They just know money
money money. They have no sense of
morality. Without morality how can you
please the Goddess?
So, you have to understand that if
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
37
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
This power cares for the collective
as well as for the individual. It cares for must say when I went to China I was
the whole world as well as the amazed though they are communists
particular nation. All the time this they are very patriotic people. They
power works, specially in modern
times to better the lives of people of way they have grown in their finances,
the whole world but unfortunately it is because all the people who have
there are not many countries like you gone out of China are sending money
who have heart to feel the love of their to China to develop. For this
Mother Goddess. So, it's like an ocean
So first you have to be patriotic. I
are very moral also. I found that the
conference when I went there I was
of love and compassion that wants to amazed how the volunteers who were
touch every shore, it wants to touch just students offered their services
every heart but some are just like free. They were at the airport, they
stones. Russia has a very great heart were in the hotels, they were in the
as well as Ukraine. Also I find in the markets, every where they were
Eastern Block, I don't how they have standing to see that this conference
developed this great noble heart. We becomes successful. Otherwise
Chinese are very fond of food but they
are not to think them to be low
would not even take their food the
because they are not so rich. What's
the use of riches where you cannot whole day. For example, they were
very kind to me and when we went out,
the whole day we were out, the driver
even trust your own children and
children cannot trust their own
parents! They kill each other for
money; of-course this effect also is nothing. They are not realized souls
there that there are people who want
never complained that he had no food,
but when I came out to go in the car
they all would come and put a hand on
the entrance of the car so that I should
money at any cost. I promise that all
such mafias will be finished in no time
if you all decide that you are not going not hit. They looked after all the people
to be afraid of them, and if you all in
your meditation ask that they should who could not walk. They carried their
be finished, it will be done. You should, chair upto the great wall of China. I
as yesterday asked for my good mean so much so that I saw on the
health, you ask for the betterment of television that people who had come
who were not so healthy, old or those
there, even Americans, were crying, to
your country. These
delibrations of your thoughts. Your go back; and the Americans, such
intelligence will sharpen so much, this
is I call as a supreme intelligence by saying that we will miss this love in our
which you will see the point and you country. It was touching and so
will be able to solve the problems.
the
are
stone hearted people also, were
obvious in these modern times when
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
38
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
people are so dry and so money Pygmies. I was surprised because
oriented! These people worked they did not criticise any one but for
without any money, they wouldn't take everybody they knew what to praise.
any tips or anything. We went for Very surprising that also for American
shopping and we gave realisation to people who were there they said, they
so many there in the shop, went to the
bazaar, to the shop, they were all
getting realized very fast. I told them so insulting there, trying to show off,
one thing when they asked, I said, the everything, see they are childish. I
Russians do not like because Chinese don't bother about the kind of
are still childish, they have to still grow!
It's surprisingI thought that these were
go there and marry, you see, Russian government they have or you have but
women and then they give up and
bring their own wives. They told me people we are! I was surprised at
what is most important is what sort of
them, they were very much concerned
the reason is that Russian women are
very good for divorce, they take to about their children. How they behave,
divorce very fast and very dominating, how they talk, how they are related to
not Sahaja yogis, not Sahaja yogis but others? They teach their children that
the Chinese women are not like that, you must share your things, it doesn't
they are very wise. They know their belong to you, it belongs to all the
role is very important and that their children. It's just like Sahaja that we
children are to be created who should want all the people to enjoy everything
be very good Chinese. Normally, they together. Also, the way they respect
don't want to go out of the family and
neglect the children, not at all. But if they know all about their artists in their
they have a grand mother or country, such a big country. They also
somebody then they leave the children
with them who are also very-very
affectionate and kind. And then they really amazed, specially the men. In
go out to work; but I was amazed they India, our men are hopeless they are
were doing all kinds of work as
Russians do. They may not drive know anything. They don't know how
trains, may not run big industries to even clean the house or clean the
because you know the Chinese utensils, nothing, of course they don't
women are so short and so dainty, know even how to cook. They are
while by God's grace God has given another children, I must say, who have
you people with better health and
better heights and they really
appreciate saying that see they are
like giants, what are we? We are
the art of their country, I was amazed,
know what sort of art is produced in
this part or that part or any part, I was
not bothered about art at all they don't
to learn a lot. I think in this women play
a part because women do everything
and keep the men absolutely ignorant
so the man is completely under the
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
39
hand of the woman. They don't know example, yesterday when I came they
the roads, they don't know cities, had locked up all the doors with
nothing, the women knows nothing. computers. I don't know why you have
Now, if you ask them what is this taken to computer which doesn't
carpet? From what country? They will understand love? So many planes
say, I don't know from where it is.
were coming, it was all piled up
thousands and thousands, they can't
It is very important for you to know get out because the doors are locked
your country, to love your country. If with the computer. What is the need to
you don't know your country, how will
you love! If you don't know your
mother, how will you love! It's a very them to do the job as they did in China.
great power working there and I am
sure one day these Chinese also will anybody, thousands you see ten
join your group completely. With love thousand, twenty thousand people
comes another thing which is the
respect. As you people are here of channel because of love and respect
different places of different qualities No where in the world I have seen
and capabilities but you love each gates being locked by computers. Why
other. You don't disrespect anyone should Russia try to become so
because somebody is dark coloured or modern and mechanised, I cannot
a fair coloured person, because your understand!
love has given these special subtle
inner eyes which sees the inner
beauty of a being. You enjoy each to this mechanisation too much, you
other because you know the value of lose the power of love. This
have computers for doors? You have
so many human beings, why not ask
no chaos, no piling up
There's
were there, all went through proper
So, one has to know that if you take
industrialisation in the west has ruined
love.
these people, they have no hearts.
As I said love is the most important, Power of the Goddess can not work
the most valuable thing but this love through robots, can it! As far as
has to be absolutely pure love, without possible, you don't need any
mechanisation. It happened once in
somebody because you want to take Ganapatipule that mikes failed
advantage of that person or because completely and the music we could not
start. So, somebody came from Delhi
attraction. This love doesn't identify organisation and told me Mother, we
have people from Noida who don't
require mikes. I had never heard about
that group, I had never known there is
lust and greed. You should not love
that person has money or some sort of
with any one what so ever. It just feels,
it's love for love's sake. Thus, you
realise what powers you have. For
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
40
harm anyone, it will not trouble
anyone. I always give the example of
the intelligent cell which is at the end of
a root. This root starts growing and
this little cell, very little, it knows how to
go in Mother Earth. Now supposing, it
meets a stone alright, it goes round the
stone nicely, binds it. The manifesta-
tion is that when the big tree will come,
it will be supported by these stones.
So, this simple love that it puts round
the stone ultimately manifests. Thus,
So, for love you don't require this love is power of the Goddess, is
very subtle, silent but it manifests. All
these manifestations, you call them as
miracles. You may call them by any
such group. They were never given a
chance to sing even, because they
might be called as rustic people, may
be the villagers. So, immediately I said
alright let them come on the stage and
even today you will know that all of us
know about Noida music. They sang
with love, with such a big voice that all
over the world now you can hear the
music of Noida, the rustic poetry of
Noida.
sophistication. If you have real love
you become so gentle, so sweet. It is
the greatest blessing of the Goddess.
But love doesn't make you mad. Some
people think that if you are in love with
somebody you can kill anybody you
like if you cannot get that love. They
are doing it every where. Love is
something so pure that it's very
powerful and it acts. Just as I was
telling yesterday they were all locked
up there and so many of them, all of
them were worried you see trying to
tell them that I should be allowed to
name.
It is this Goddess which is ruling this
universe, which is in your center heart,
which looks after you and looks after the
whole universe. It is nothing but pure
desire of love. It knows how to express,
it knows how to act, you don't have to do
anything, it's spontaneous. What goes
against is your mental activity because
the mental activity will say oh my! How
can you love somebody like this, it's no
use. It's the mental activity which gives
you funny ideas. The mental activity is
limited and linear. Every body has
different fixed ideas, that's why they are
fighting, that's why they are having
wars. But this power that is of love gives
you the Absolute Truth. Then how can
come out. They were not willing to
listen to anyone. Just I said you all
forget, let me handle. I just went and
that gentleman,
before
stood
immediately he took my passport and
stamped it without argument, without
any problem because it is silent but it
acts in such a beautiful way.
you fight?
Love is also very intelligent, it gives
you solutions, it is down to earth
because it wants to manifest. It will not
So, what we need is this power
because our power is very limited. I
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-44.txt 
 Nov. - Dec.
41
2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
know you all love me very much but system is very low. But she had
you must love each other, you must gathered some rustic things called
respect each other. Then only I will "Ber' which is what you call here I don't
feel that there has been manifestation know little little berrys and she went
of this love. We were in one Sahaja and told Shri Rama that this I have
seen because you don't like sour
things. I have tasted all of them with
take dinner in his house, it was my teeth and that's howI have
decided before. I didn't know he had selected these for you. In India, no
cooked for all the people who had body will eat if somebody has touched
that with mouth, nobody will eat it you
know. It's very unhygienic according to
because I thought this man can not Indian standards of hygiene. Only the
cook for so many people. So as they Goddess, if she eats some food and
she touches some food, that's
yogi's house and he had called other
Sahaja yogis also to meet Me. I had to
come. So I told them, now alright the
session is over, you can go home
were going down he came Mother,
what have you done? I have cooked regarded as very holy. This was the
other way round. She was offering to
an incarnation something tasted by
her spoilt teeth. So Shri Rama had the
same power of the Goddess, he
for all of them. Really! Now, where
have they gone? They are on the
street. So, he want down the staircase
running upto them and said come
back, come back, come back have immediately took those from her, all
your dinner, and they really laughed the fruits. Started eating and He said I
and this gentleman who had cooked
for them Sahaja yogis.They were so
overjoyed and we all enjoyed the food
very much that night.
have never seen such fruits full of
ambrosia, (Amrut Fal). His wife said,
can I have some also? But the brother
was very furious. He thought this
woman has not been at all protocolish
and he wanted to hit her. But when the
There is a very sweet story in the
Ramayana, I must tell you about this wife of Shri Rama asked for the fruit,
love. When Shri Rama went to jungle he kept quiet. Then the wife Sita, she
went into jungle, in his exile, that time ate it and she said, really, what fruits
there was a very old lady who had few these are! I have never eaten such
teeth left, who was a great devotee of fruits of ambrosia. Then the brother
Shri Rama. Her whole life was started thinking that these two persons
are having all the ambrosia what about
me? So, he asked his sister-in-law.
can I have some of these fruits? She
dreaming about seeing Shri Rama
sometime and when she saw Shri
Rama she was absolutely full of joy.
She was rustic, from aboriginal tribe said, no-no because you were angry
which in India according to caste
now why do you want to have the
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
42
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
fruits? He said, please, please let me him', and you will be surprised how
have some. So he was given some
fruits and when he ate them he said, people will come into the complete
my goodness! It has the essence of control of this pure love. At the same
best fruits. At above all sophistication, time this pure love ruins, destroys
above all these mechanical things, is completely any negative force that is
this dynamic power of love which is trying to harm you. It teaches you how
given to you as it was given to Shri
Ganesha. And you should be reality because it is the light which
assuming that, assume. Once you enlightens all darkness within and
have the assumption then you can
project individually or collectively. are peaceful within and your peace
Even if you want to win over somebody manifests.
in your heart, you should say alright,
'the Goddess Mother please act on
this fellow. Let my pure love act on
you will win over. Ninety nine percent
to understand a complete picture of
without. When you have that love you
May God bless you all
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Shri Mataji Talks To Brides
Nirmal Nagari
Canajoharie, USA, 30 July 2001
You don't have to open your mouth
It's a great thing to see so many of
you looking very happy and looking
forward for a very happy married life. I'm
to tell you that (it) is the woman who
makes the marriage happy or unhappy.
She should know how to handle the
and ask, "Give me this, I want this." No,
there's no need at all. It's love that you
have shown or given which will be valued
the most and will be granting whatever
is your need and whatever is necessary.
But you should never open your mouth.
That's the secret. Never ask for anything
and it may be that he may also complain
that "You are not saying anything to me."
It's all right. Whatever is proper is all right.
situation and to understand, because it's
a question of love. If you have love in
your heart, you can win over anybody.
So first you must think of showing,
expressing in a very gentle manner, your
love for your husband and for his family
and try to control yourself in a way that
they do not get upset with you, he does
not get upset with you. Sometimes you
may not like some things. At that moment
you should keep quiet and later on you
can correct it, but the best thing is how
you love your husband, how you look
after him, how you suggest that you love
him very much.
You see, you have to build up this self-
respect of your husband. You have to
respect his self-reliance. It's all you have
to do, just I would do- you would do for a
child because you are the supporting
personality, but actually you are his
energy. You are the one who is going to
completely fulfil his life with your love and
with your attention. If you have decided
on that, you won't see small, small things.
You won't bother about small things,
what sort of a dress he's wearing, what
sort of a thing he does because he
comes from a different family, different
background and he has his own style of
doing things, so you should not try (to)
criticise him on that point. Try to
understand, he's brought up in a different
way. You are from a different family and
This is not understood sometimes.
Sometimes the brides think that once
you are married, We can demand this,
we can demand that. There should be
no demand at all, no demand of any
kinas, but only thing if you develop, the
love, it will look after you and give all that
is necessary that you want to have.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
44
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
brought up in a different manner, so
naturally his styles would be different is allowed is Yoga.
from yours. So there's nothing to be
expected that it should be in a very
perfect way that you think.
life, then also we allow divorce. Divorce
But first is the duty of a wife, I
personally think to see that you make a
beautiful home, a beautiful house, family
and beautiful children. Because your
So he should be left to himself in the
way that he wants to express, If you find
anything very wrong, then when he's
quiet, then tell him very quietly, make him
understand. This in no way makes you
subservient to your husband. On the
contrary, he will become subservient to
children, also I've seen all of them are
children of realised souls are very great
Sahaja Yogis. They are born realised.
They are tremendous. They have great
possibilities. They can rise very high and
they have shown such results that I am
myself amazed how they could do it. So
that is now your own choice, everything,
how you work it out, how you build it,
how you do it... Woman thinks she works
very hard in the house and that she
should have more rest, she should be
you. He'll try to always keep you happy
and keep you pleased because this is a
Sahaja match. This is not an ordinary
marriage. Sahaja marriage means two
realised souls are married to each other.
Those who have achieved their spirit are
married, so whatever may be the case
more sort of going outside and all that.
with others, with you it should be the Husband also thinks he works very hard.
maximum amount of enjoyment, love, So the point is never think about yourself.
peace and blessings. So you should Think about the other, how much he
make it that way. It is only for you to works, how much he's putting his effort,
how much time he gets. If you think like
that, from your heart, then you will
Maybe something is different from understand his difficulties and there won't
yours like some people don't like yellow be any problem. But if he also starts
colour. Some people don't like green thinking about himself, it's wrong. I've told
colour. Some people don't like this kind them already. So it has to be very
of hair, that kind of hair. Doesn't matter. mutually understood and you have to
prove that Sahaja marriages are
excellent. They give the greatest joy and
to keep them pleased, better do it the greatest happiness and the greatest
because in return they'll always look after morality. On this point, please be careful
your pleasures, your happiness, your joy. If you try to be immoral after marriage,
it's going to be impossible for Me to get
you married because you get a bad
reputation and it's very difficult. So one
realise it and to achieve it.
It doesn't matter. It's not important. It's
superficial. But if anything has to be done
In case they fail and they cannot
adjust themselves to a proper married
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-48.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2001
45
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
things away from your family life and just
give joy which you are capable of.
thing that you must know, now this
marriage if you do not like, you can give
up in a sensible way, but try to make it a
beautiful marriage, so that others also
enjoy. If they're happily married couples,
then everybody enjoys their company.
Otherwise
So I am looking forward to your
married life and to a very, very happy
life that you're going to have.
there's
somebody
complaining, this, that. Then no one likes
to talk to such people. So keep all these
May God bless you
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-49.txt 
 Letter from Shri Mataji
March, 1982
"Dear Mr. Raul,
received a very detailed letter from
Damle. It was a very wise step on your
God and that it creates us and that the
Lord of our autonomous nervous
part to have met Shri Gagan Gadh system is our spirit which is the
Maharaj. What he says about the reflection of God? You can quote the
names of people like Mr. Bose and Mr.
true. The reason why this great Daftary and Mr. Sharma who are
sanctuary never manifested in reality miraculously cured of his colour
blindness through Sahaja Yoga. In any
case I am going to America next year.
One of my dear Sons Dr. Lanjewar has
now become the president of the
Medical Practitioners' Association of
miracle of Sahaja Yoga is absolutely
that
whenever
Adishakti
was
descended as incarnation (She) did
not have all the chakras integrated
through Sahasrara. The complete
harmony and unison merged into an
integrated
personality is bringing forth these
fantastic results. So much so that I am
surprised at myself.
of
instrument
her New York and is very anxious to have
a conference next year in New York.
Due to our slavery for so many years,
doctors in india have lost the capacity
to know that we are the people born on
I think he (Gagan Gadh Maharaj) also the Yoga Bhumi. Their thinking is so
cannot imagine the dynamics of this slavish that they think all our ideas
about medicine are stupid while
discovery and hence he feels that
"Avdhuts" have to be away in the
forests and that Cancer can give you
western knowledge is very sensible. I
bless you with all my heart. Dr.
reaction. You have cured the Cancer Ramlingam has good vibrations. Shri
of Phadke's father. Did it give you any
Rama in him would have wisdom to
reaction? When you are at a giving understand the ways of God Almighty.
I send you my love and protection so
that you can break the barriers of
You are reborn as Lotus which does ignorance of our medical men. Let
end how can you receive anything?
not take anything bad from muddy
them know that the time has come for
surroundings but transforms its them to accept that science is not
surroundings with its beauty and fills it everything. It only discovers whatever
with fragrance. This is the magic of a exists and appears before the gross
realised soul. Do you think doctors will being. Once we become subtle, rising
accept that there exists the Kingdom of in the forth dimension, we see the
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-50.txt 
 Nov. - Dec.
47
2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 11 & 12
Vishnu and Dattatreya responsible for
the religion (Dharma) of human beings
are to be worshipped. They help you to
cure and also the local Deity of the
chakra that is attacked. Put the patient
before the photograph with the candle
and his feet in the water, bring down
your hands across the sympathetic
nervous system towards the water.
The patient will cool down gradually. If
he gets realization, then he is cured.
subtle being, the spirit and
contentment and Divine working of this
love cannot be done by argument. One
has to be realised. One has to evolve
through Sahaja Yoga spontaneously
as this is a living process.
For cancer best treatment is of water,
i.e. putting feet in the river, sea or in
at home
with the
the water
photograph. Water has the religion
(Dharma) of cleansing and hence Shri
More in the next.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-51.txt 
 Union Home Minister Shri L. K. Advani visits Sahaja Yoga stall at
Delhi Book Fair, 2001
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-52.txt 
 Royal Albert Hall, London-Public Programme, 14.7.2001
