YUVADRISHTI An offering by the Yuva Shakti at the lotus feet of our Divine Mother Volume 2 Issue 4 December 2001 भारत सोग भुर्मी यो० HRO प.पू.श्रीमाताजी निर्मला देवी

 1| Jai Shri Mataji|| A NTAIAN Contents Fuja Talk Navratri Puja ******- 2 Theme : Bharat वन्दे मातरम् ...... ***.. 5. Why do we come to India . .. 7. Gandhiji 9. भारत - एक योग भुमी 10 Jihad, the holy war Binks from the aes/ Greece... ** 11 Heal the Warld 13 Sahaja - The Answer to Epilepsy 15 Knowledge and fun yuvadrishti@yahoo.com The essence of life is fragrance of Love This New Year, lets spread the message of Love Merry Christmas & Happy Nea Year to all our Brothers and Sisters ealestin

 NAVARATRI PUJA LOUTRAKI, GREECE, 21.10.2001 loday we have gathered here to do the I have been knowing them since long because Devi Puja. This Puja was performed in our household, in my father's household, we many a times and the Devi was requested had lots of Muslim people working as cooks, as by the Devas to save them from the tyranny of drivers, as other servants. And these Wahabees devilish people. Today I feel the same way, that are very interesting people because they don't we are now in the grip ofa funny situation; that believe even in Mohammed Saab. So if you tell there are people who are themselves devils. I them that Mohammed Saab has said such-and- and also (people who are) mesmerised such a thing, they say "No, we don't believe in by them - who are trying to do something which Mohammed Saab". "So, in whom do you they should never have done. But they don't believe?" We believe in Allahl" "Have you met know that there is a climax of everything. And Allah? Have you seen him, that you are that point has arrived where all the good people, belieying in Him?" But in their whole behaviour especially the Sahaja Yogis should put al their it was cruelty whief was innately built, very mind to the destruction of these horrible Cruel and whenever my father saw that, he asked them to get out. Because (they) always had sinister practices by which they used to treat think, personalities like Mahishasura. In those days, it was very simple because devils came as devils and you could see them, that they are devils, and all their behaviour proved that l never knew that they were devils. Why they did it? Why wereAnd mostly they were from Afghanistan, can you they cruel? Because so called human beings as imagine, mostly. Of course they tortured other they are devilish and they want to do something byhad a speciality that they could be very cruel. which they can destroy human beings, and good Not all Afghanis, no, not at all, but some of thern. human beings. óthers. It will come up to that stage. they are not - they are by nature Afghanis also; and where-ever they went they And they came to India from Afghanistan and We have different types of Afghanis. Some were very loving, kind, helpful, very nice people. And some of them were very cruel. First we It is evident that the time has come for them to be destroyed. In no way I could be against Islam or ever to didn't understand what is this. But because my criticise Mohammed Saab. He was divine, no father was a scholar and scholar of Islam, he told doubt, and tried to do divine work. But out of us "These are not Islamic. They call themselves that divine work these stupid people have come Wahabees and they are not Islamic". I can see who accept those devilish people. You will that today, so clearly. up be amazed to know that in İşlam there are seventy-four groups! They sayWe follow one religion" - but they do hot. Out of these, some of them are really evil people, and they call They are not many. And that's what my father themselves by the name as Devbandhis because this is a place in India, and also they are called häad told me that "One day they will become very as Wahabees. in other religions or in other groups Not that there are not bad people. But these Wahabees were secretly working out different groups. explosive and they might try to completely ruin 2

 At first I 'Madharsa' means a 'school'. And in the world". couldn't understand, that school they used to admit small children. because, after all, they And it was so well planned that God doesn't looked like human know I mean I can't say, that there were 120 beings only. But he Madharsas only in Delhil Now nobody knew says, he told me, "They what they are teaching there, what they are absolutely mesmerising, how they are doing this. It so and happened once I went to this place, Nizamudhin, once they start their and there I found people singing songs and all cruelty you will not that. And I found in them a real feeling for love. They felt My love, very much, all of them, and We had one invader in they started coming to Sahaja Yoga. But I didn't our country called as know there was a Madharsa in that place. Iasked Mohammed Shah Dali. He was a very, very cruel them "Why is it, here the vibrations. man, very cruel, and he used to even kill the Nizamudhin was an aulia, and how is that the muslims because his concept was that you place doesn't have good vibrations?" In between should not worship Mohammed Saab because I used to get very bad vibrations. So they told are camouflaged, know what to do." me "Mother, there is a Madharsa". Mohammed Saab said that "I am not Divine. I also used to say the same, to save from the stupid Now look at the evil, how it works. Normally, . evil used to work like this, that it would go and but when they felt My vibrations and all that. form some groups, some wars, and kill people. they believed. But those who believed in They were few people, but they had cruelty as Mohammed Saab were never understood by their religion. Which ever way they lived, they these people. Very, very cruel, and because they wanted to be cruel. In those Madharsas only, don't even believe in Mohammed Saab you they had people who used to tell them how to cannot argue with them on any point: you be cruel, how to hate, So 'education in hatred' cannot argue with them what is written in the started. And that education of hatred was very Koran because you (they) don't believe in Koran, well woven through these Madharsas, all over people. For years I used to say "I am notDivine". you don't believe in Mohammed Saab, you the world. believe in Allah. God knows from where do they have connections! Now, as you know, Pakistan and India were always fighting. But this time Pakistanis realised that If we fight with India in that as we have horrible gurus who we will be called as terrorists'. So they said "No, come as gurus and they mesmerise. You have we will have no terrorism in our country". But seen them, people being mesmerised. So many they are the ones stupidly - this new fellow are being exposed and so many are going to be (President Musharraf) had sent about 65 exposed. But mostly they were people who were scholars, ambassadors, to Afghanistan to study interested in money, in getting lots of money, in those Madharsas, how to become cruel can somehow, in the name of religion But at that you imagine! To teach hatred! Of course there time, people didn't see their cruel methods and are many Muslims who are not; but if you do not respect Mohammed Saab and you are mesmerise their cruelties. This cruelty started growing and you know we supposed to be a Muslim, what will come out have been to Nizamudhin aulia. In that place of you? So, all these wrong ideas grew up and only I discovered there's a Madharsa Islam got divided into many groups.

 কি ० ् बन्द मातर जत वन्दे मातरम् - ये वे शब्द है जो एक समय देश के चन्द्रिका से प्रकाशित यहाँ की रात है। भाँति-भाँति के बच्चे-बच्चे के जबान पर हुआ करते थे, ये वे शब्द है सुगन्धित दिव्य पुष्पों से सुशोभित वृक्ष पंक्तियाँ स्वतः ही जो देश के कोने कोने में गूँजते थे, ये वे शब्द है जो पूरे सबको आकर्षित करती है। सुसंस्कृत शब्दों से सजी हुई भारत वर्ष को ताकत, हिम्मत व हौसला बन्देमातरम् ने पूरे भारत उपमहाद्वीप को एक सूत्र में बाँधा होते हुये भी सबको एकता हुआ था। वन्दे मातरम् पुकारते हुये हजारों कान्तिकारी वीर से अंगीकार करने वाली हमारी भारत माता का हम सब फाँसी के तख्ते पर हँसते हुये गये और न जाने कितने हृदय से अभिनन्दन करते हैं । लाखों इसी वन्देमातरम् का नारा लगाते हुये गोलियाँ सप्त कोटी कुंठ कलकल निनाद कराले, खाकर शहीद हो गये न जाने कितने घर बेरवाद हो गये, न जाने कितनी मौओं ने अपने बच्चे खोये और न जाने कैनो माँ एतो बोले। कितनी बहनों ने अपने भाई, न जाने कितनी औरतों े अपने सुहाग। पर किसी की आँख से आँसू का एक कतरा तक न निकला। निकली तो सिर्फ एक गूँज, एक गड़गड़ाहट, एकजुट आवाज़ जो थी हम सब इस महान गीत का अर्थ करें। देते थे। कर्णप्रिय मधुर भाषा है। विभिन्न भाषा-भाषी लोगों के के सूत्र में पिरोकर आत्मीयता सप्त कीटी भुजैः घृत खर कर वाले, अबल द्व बहुबलधारिणीम् नामामि तारिणी, रिपुदल वारिणं मातरम् मातरम् जहाँ सात कराड़ कंठ (उस समय की जनसंख्या) एक वन्देमातरम् समझने की काषशिश। स्वर पें आपकी महिमा का गान करते हैं, जिससे महान । आइये उद्घोष होता है। चौदह-करोड़ हाथ, हाथों में खड्ग-तलवार लिये आपक प्रहरी है। ऐसी शक्तशाली भारत माता को वन्दे मातरम् सुजालाम् सुफलाम्, मलयज शीतलाम् शष्य श्यामलाम् मातरम् वन्द जाने क्यों लोग अबला कहते है। वे अतीव बल पराकम मातरम् । । से सम्पन्न है। शत्रुओं के दल का संहार करने वाली दुर्गा है भारत माता हम सब आपकी वन्द्ना करते हैं। भारत स्वरूपणों भारत साता को हम बार-बार प्रणाम करते हैं। माता को शत शत नमन।हमारी माँ महिमामयी है, वे आज के पूरिपेक्ष्य में यदि हम देखें, चारों ओर अराजकता शीतल जल की पवित्र नदियों एवं जलस्रोती से पोषित हैं रस भरे मीठे फलों से लदे हुये वृक्षों से छायादार है। राजनेता है, जैन्ता को गुमराह करने वाले कुगुरू है, मलय पर्वत से प्रवाहित चन्दन गन्ध से सुगन्धित वायु युहाँ िष्टाचार और अराजकता से जनता त्रस्त है ऐसे में हमारी शीतलता प्रदान करती है। हमारा देश कृषि प्रधान देश है, श्रीमाताजी साक्षात दुर्गास्वरूपिणी है, जो सभी शत्रुओं का, यहाँ की धरती उपजाऊ है। अपनी हरी-भरी फसलों की बुराइयों का संहार करने पृथ्वी पर आई हैं। हमें यह प्रयत्न आभा से सांवली भारत माता का हम नमन करतें हैं । शुभ्रज्योत्सना पुलकितयामिनिम्, शोभिनिम्म सुहासिनिम् सुमधुर भाषिनिम्। सुखदाम् वरदाम् मातरम् वन्दे मातरम् मधुर फैलाने वाले उग्रवादी आतंकवादियों का साम्राज्य है, भ्रष्ट की. करना चाहिये कि हम सभी सहज योगी उनकी सशक्त सहस्त्र भुजाए बनें। आइये हम सब सहज योगी मिलकर यह प्रण लें कि बुराइयों को समाप्त करेंगे, पूरे विश्व भर में शान्ति अमन व प्रम का सहज द्वारा प्रचार करेंगे। वह दिन दूर नहीं जब माँ का स्वपन साकार होगा और एक नये सहज विश्व का निर्माण होगा। वन्दे मातरम् , कुसुमित फुल्य दुमदल सन्यमेव चन्द्रमा एवं अनेकानेक देदीप्यमान नक्षत्रों की शीतल त्र रे 4

 Why do we come to India lo begin with Maharashtra is the country Mooladhara. This is the easiest thing to do here, where I would say the Ganesha principle and you must have noticed the people have very is very strong. Because there are eight good Mooladhara in Maharashtra, they have no Ganeshas which are come out of mother earth, problem of their Mooladhara. The way they and all the three powers are represented by become innocent, see their eyes are so innocent, mother earth also are here Mahakali, there is no lust, there is no greed, its vanished. Mahalaxmi, Mahasaraswati. So the whole place is very vibrated. The mother earth is very much Moreover this place is very vibrated otherwise vibrated. Now if you have any problem of also, because lots of saints have lived here, they Mooladhara for example, on this land if you sit have left thefr vibrations. Shri Rama and Sita down on the ground and put My photograph in have walked on this soil bare feet. It is a very front of you and put your left hand towards the vibrated place. photograph and the right hand on the mother earth and say the mantra of Shri Ganesha or full Now the second point is that we are an Atharvashirsha left side will be cured. Left international religion. We don't belong to any side is cured means, left Swadhishthana first of contry, none of us belong to any country that all, so many of you have been to so many gurus, we are not Italians, we are not Indians we are this that, and have done wrong things. that's gets not Australians, what we are? We are in the corrected. Also you have seen that, in the west kingdom of God. So, we are men of God as abortion is the very common thing that happens described by William Blake. So we are men of to women, may be because of bad Mooladhara God and that we have no bondage to any of these or may be by the left Swvadhishthana we don't ideas that we belong to this country or to that have to bother about it, past, or about the reason why it is so, so if you take your vibrations on your collectivity then you will expand, not only the left hand side then you clear out your will expand, but that expansion will give you a Mooladhara in such a manner that the problems kiịnd of a confidence in yourself that we have to are solved. That is very important for all of us. but this you can't do anywhere else mean, you can of course, mother earth is Sahaja yoga is to be learned. If you do not have everywhere, but here it is a special place for that culture within us, that people are not going Mooladhara chakra. Where it clears you very to listen to us. In your personality there should much and feels you up with holiness and be that magnetism which expresses your auspiciousness. These are the two qualities of responsibility which is the gravity part. And the Shri Ganesha which you can imbibe very easily mother earth has gravity she has in this place. So try to meditate with your left of gravity, so that gravity should be there within hand towards the sun and right hand on the us. mother earth. So, instead of cleansing it through On the whole, if you see the Indians as they are, your Agnya, you can cleanse it through your they have many funny funny type of politicians your country. Once you understand your point in take the responsibility of Sahaja Yoga. We have to spread Sahaja yoga all over. So the culture of I think, I this got power

 and also we have lots of kinds cunning people center of the wheel is the quite, Center, if you for ruling us, because they are very simple. are on your center then you will see the wheel people are extremely simple and very innocent moving you don't mind, but you immediately so only cunning can rule such people, and such jump en to that center is difficult. cunning are exploiting these simple people here. But that doesn't mean the people are bad. They If you go to the quite place where the pressures are too good and that's why anybody can come are not much of time or of any such bindings on this country and can rule us. then gradually the attention moves to the center, that's why people used to go to Himalayas In the same way now these all the rakshasas have where there is peace. In that peace you can reach now become politicians and they are trying to your own peace better, think of the comfort of rule this country and the poverty remains at the the heart. Comfort of the mind. And that will same level as the poverty. There is no concern really help you a lot. for the poor people, really, because they just want to exploit even that poverty for their own The beautiful climate has given this country the purpose. That whatever may be the situation, possibility of they were inner being more than there is one thing for sure that these are very simple hearted very open hearted. loving nature. The nature is so kind, that you can live affectionate people. Very generous, they have on a tree here. We don't have to fight to get to very little to give but whatever they have they the stores for food. We can get around here want to give it. Even the poorest of poor will something, they are quite available. So the life try to contribute something just to make you becomes much easier here. And then people comfortable. outer being because we don't have to fight the don't think of outside things. They have to think about inner thing. Just automatically, you seen Indians are not exposed to these ideas of when the life is simple, enter inside and see for advancement where you can overpower other yourself, because the inquiry starts, why it is life, people economically, politically, or try to sort why am I here, what I am supposed to do. You of dominate the whole world. Even economics jump in the sea, the ocean of joy and you will can dominate. So they have no sense of that so forget every purpose. Now the most important the humanity is still in the same innocent child thing is that Sahaja Yoga is the greatest event like character here. All sorts of parasites, but of spiritual world where all the cosmos, all the still they exist happily, always laughing. In the gods, goddesses, and all the angels, and all the same way we have to understand that in Sahaja incarnations and prophets all are busy working culture we are innocent people. We don't want it out within you. If you could easily reflect my to harm anyone, trouble anyone.. We are brain back on some screen you might be able to peaceful people and we are joyous people. see them all. of them sitting down there and working there and working on you. So the whole and We have to enjoy our own personality and enjoy of Virata is working, behind the stage our collectivity, But the gain is quite a lot if we develop that witness state within yourself and and alert that if we do not divert our attention in that is very very easily developed in this to something, we have to become very subtler country because there is no more any pressures and subtler here. you see. Like a wheel moves very fast and the you are on the stage. So one has to be very careful -Shri Mataji, Vaitarna, 1979

 JANDHIJI "Nepali, you are the same to look at and you are In may ways the mode of action of Gandhiji was z mother . When are you going to start your spiritual work ? Now we are free, you should Sahaj. He firmly derived his political activity start whatever you wanted to do." from dharmic principles and refused to compromise with what was wrong. These Gandhiji had demonstrations that a powerful principles, his very firmness, stemmed from his human following can be assembled not through conviction that it is god who leads history. the cunning game of usual political maneuyers and trickeries but through the cogent example Once Mahatma Gandhi stood by stream and saw of morally superior conduct of life. In our time of utter moral decadence he was the only statesman to stand for higher human relationship in the political sphere", thus wrote Prof. Albert Einstein on Mahatma Gandhi's death. a woman in torn clothes which could not cover her modesty. Mahatma Gandhi 'spontaneously fook off his mantle and let it flow into the streamB it floated to the needy woman and she received if. His actions were spontaneous. In South Africa, Gandhiji's Christian friends Gandhiji forcefully and convincinglylaught him the essence of Christianity, they said believed in Jesus he would find if he believed in Jesus he would find demonstrated the power of spirit over material things. His greatest leverage was his command redemption. Gandhiji replied, "I do not seek over the Indian masses. He gained such a redemption from the consequences of sin, I seek command because the simple folk could to be redempted from sin itself". Gandhiji could understand what he was inspíred from above. They called him "Mahatma", merely by his not have ahother. Why could he go to heaven hunger strike the Mahatma could control and attain salvation only as Christian? Did behaviour of millions of people. not understand why if god had one son he could Christianity have monopoly of heaven? Was With Best Compliments from Wilh Best Gompliments from स्यमेव जयने Y.D. Mane Sarveshwara Softtech and Printers Pvt. Ltd. Pune New Delhi Tele fax 91-116462943, 6484268 7

 god a Christian? Did he have prejudices against non-chirstians? On the other hand he doubted whether the sacred Hindu Vedas were the only inspired word of god. "Why not also the Bible and the Koran? He recoiled from the competitiveness of religions. He was not a Hindu, a Muslim a Christian or a Jew. He believed in one religion humanity, i.e. "Nirmala" dhrarma. In İndia got freedom from the British rule on 15th August 1947, but alas. Independence brought sadness to the Architect of Independence. 'Father of the Nation' was disappointed with his Shri Mataji's perents with Mahatma Gandhi nation Gandhiji was sad because he had worked and prayed for 'swatantrata', that is 'Swa' ka tantra, rule of the spirit. What India had got was just a replacement of union Jack with the वैष्णवजन तो तेने कहींए, जे पीड पराइ जाणे रे, Indian Tricolor. It was a hollow husk of freedom. पर दखे उपकार करे तोये, मन अभिमान नाआणे रे। Indians sat where Englishmen had sat before them. It was a victory with tragedy. वैष्णवजन तो then सकल लोकम सहने वंदे, निंदा न करे केनी रे; वाच काछ मन निश्चल राखे धन धन जननी तेनी रे । Little did the Great man realised that "Swatantrata" that he was searching for can be सम द्रष्टिने तृष्णात्यागी, परस्त्री जेने मात रे; brought about only by inner transformation of जिहवा थकी असत्य न बोले, परधन नव झाले हाथ रे । the masses, i.e. raising of the Kundalini. But his work did not go waste. In enabling Bharat mata मोह-माया व्यापे नही जेने दूठ वैराग्य जेने, दुठ वैराग्य जेना to regain its political freedom Gandhiji brought back to the land of Yoga its best dignity without which it could not unveil the precious secret of वणलोभी ने वकपटहिन छे, कामक्रोध निवार्या रे; its spiritual tradition, Sahaja Kundalini Yoga. मनमारे । मणे नरसैयो तेनुं दरशन करता, कुल लेकोतेज तार्या रे । Gandhiji's dream are coming true in this blossom time when millions are taking 'Self" realisation through Sahaja Yoga by the grace of H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, and thus moving towards true freedom, "swatantrata जयते Winh Best Compliments from Nitin C. Jawalkar Adapted from Nirmal Yoga

 एक योग भुमी देशभक्ति और देशप्रेम के सबसे बड़े उदाहरण शायद महात्मा गांधी भारतवर्ष - परमात्मा की रचना का एक अभुतपुर्व और परिपुर्ण जिस प्रकार एक मानव अपनी छोटी छोटी त्रुटियो और अभावों थे कार्य। यह वह भुमी है जहाँ श्री रामचन्द्र और श्री कृष्ण ने जन्म विशाल सम्मुहन के सम्मिलित कर लेता से उभरकर अपने को एक लिया। इसी भुमी पर नानक जी, साईनाथ और महात्मा बुद्ध का भी जन्म हुआ । और स्वयं आदिशक्ति ने भी इसी धरती पर जन्म ले है, इसके वह एक परिपुर्ण उदाहरण थे । इसे आर्शिवादित किया है । ु एक अन्य देश प्रेम की मु्ती श्री लाल बहादुर शास्त्री थे । किस प्रकार ऐसी दिव्य पौराणिक और अत्यंत पवित्र भुमी को हमारा शत-शत दरिद्रता मे भी अपने सिध्दान्त और सच्चाई के मुलों को स्थापित रखा जाए, शायद उनसे बेहतर ईसका कोई उदहरण नही है । शिवाजी प्रणाम । एक अन्य देशप्रेमी थे जिन्होने मर्यादा, साहस और प्रभुभक्ती के शायद इस भुमी की महिमा का सबसे उत्तम मुल्याकन एक सहजयोगीआदर्श स्थापित किये । ही कर सकता है । इससे प्रवाहित चैतन्य स्वयं श्री गणेश का मे श्री गणेश जी के स्वयंभु स्वरुप पुरे महाराष्ट्र में प्रकट। इन सब महापुरूषोंके बीच एक सहजयोगी अपने को कहा पाते है? अनुरुप है । हुए है । श्री सदाशिव के प्रतिस्वरुप बारह ज्योतिर्लिंग भी यही पर वह समय और था जब देश को अंग्रेजी राज से छुट्कारा दिलाना था | तत् की मांग और थी । आज फिर हमारे सामने एक चुनौती है । उत्पन्न हुए । संत ज्ञानेश्वर, संत एकनाथ, कबीर, तुकाराम जैसे पहुँचे हुए संतो ने इसी धरा पर कार्य क़िया । चुनौती, विश्व को परिवर्तित करने की चुनौती, हमारे आंतरिक उत्थान की एक ऐसी चुनौती जिसका सपना स्वयं आदिशक्ती ने देखा है । और अब अंततः हम सभी सहजयोगियों का भी इसी धरती पर जन्म हो लेने का अवसर प्रदान हुआ है । इसके लिए हम श्री माताजी के ऋ एक ऐसे विश्व का सपना जो भय, मत्स, लालसा, क्रोध से मुक्त णी है । | एक ऐसा विश्व जहाँ परमेश्वर का साम्राज्य हो। जिस साम्राज्य की नीव प्रेम, करुणा, पावित्र्य और धर्म पर स्थापित हो । एक सहजयोगी और एक भारतवासी होकर हमारे कुछ उत्तरदायित्व है । स्वयं श्री माताजी ने देश प्रेम पर कहा है की जो मानव अपने देश आईए हम सभी सहजयोगी मिलकर इस महान कार्य में सहायक हों वही कार्य है जिसका नायकत्व स्वयं आदिशक्ती कर रही है। और के प्रती निष्ठ नही होता, वह एक सच्चा सहजयोगी नही हो सकता है । | यह देश प्रेम का ही बीज है जो परमात्मा की इच्छा से हमारे अंदर अंततः शायद यही वह अवसर हो हमे उस महान साम्राज्य में पहुँचने का जिसका हम सभि सपना देखते है। पनपकर एक फलदायक, छायप्रदायक और हरेभरे पेड़ के रुप में एक उत्तम सहजयोगी का रुप लेत है । 9.

 Jihad or the Holy War Jihad or the Holy war as described by Prophet IN HIS CAUSE; - THE WAIT Mohammed has an entirely different meaning. UNTIL GOD BRINGS ABOUT The word Jihad comes from the root word in HIS DECISION: AND GOD Arabic the meaning of which is to strive. GUIDES NOT THE REBELLIOUS. Therefore Jihad actually means to strive. Man's heart clings to his own kith and kin THOSE WHO BELIEVE, AND SUFFER EXILE parents, children, brothers, and sisters, husbands AND STRIVE WITH MIGHT AND MAIN, IN GOD'S CAUSE, WITH THEIR GOODS AND THEIR PERSONS, gain, or beautiful and grand houses, for dignity HAVE THE HIGHEST RANK IN THE SIGHT OF GOD: THEY ARE THE PEOPLE WHO WILL ACHIEVE SALVATION or wives or other relatives. Wealth and prosperity. Commerce or means of profit and and comfort. If these are a hindrance in God's cause, we have to choose which we love the most. We must love God even if it involves the sacrifice of all else. Here is a good description of Jihad. It may Prophet Mohammed when speaking about Jihad require fighting in God's cause, as a form of self- has said, "The biggest Jihad one fights is with sacrifice. But its essence consists in a true and himself/herself" This clearly means that a true sincere faith, which also fixes its gaze on God. believer, who is realized soul, has to introspect that all selfish or worldly motives seem paltry and strive hard to remove all his/her faults. All and fade away. Earnest and ceaseless activity, af us have our faults; no one except God is involving the sacrifice (if need be) of life, person perfect. We do not have to see the faults of other or property, in the service of God. Brutal people, but rather we have to strive hard (wage fighting is opposed to the spirit of Jihad, while a holy war {Jihad)} within ourselves) to make the sincere scholar's pen or peacher's yoice or a ourselves better instruments of God. It is wealthy man's contributions may be the most mentioned in the Quran that Muslims (realised valuable forms of Jihad. souls) should be the helpers of Allah. SAY: IF IT BE THAT YOUR FATHERS YOUR SONS. YOUR BROTHERS, YOUR MATES, OR YOUR KINDRED; THE WEALTH THAT YOU HAVE GAINED: THE COMMERCE IN WHICH YOU FEAR A DECLINE; OR THE DWELLINGS IN WHICH YOU DELIGHT ARE DEARER TO YOU THAN GOD, OR HIS APOSTLE, OR THE STRIVING BY THE TOKEN OF TIME THROUGH THE AGES VERILY MAN IS IN LOSS EXCEPT SUCH AS HAVE FAITH AND DO RIGHTEOUS DEEDS AND JOIN TOGETHER IN THE MUTUAL TEACHING OF TRUTH, AND OF PATIENCE AND CONSTANCY. Adapted from 'Islam Enlightened' by Javed Khan 10

 GREECE T hen I went to Greece, I knew that I had navel, it was vibrating. And not only that, but to go to Greece and they told me that they showed the most remarkable thing was that they believed in the beginning in one this is the mound which is actually the Mother, in one primordial Mother. But after expression of the navel, it is the mound which some time there were some Indo Aryan people has come out of the Mother Earth. And this is who came down to me and said, 'yes, there is actually Athena. According to them this is that one Mother but she has many aspeetS and these has come out of the Mother Earth. I saw the aspects are expressed as different Gods. And vibrations were tremendous. And next to that then they told about all the Gods, which you there were lots of vibrations coming. So I turn know but they later on made them absolutely around. And what I find is the Ganesha, absolute human types of gods and they spoilt. But still Gaesha there sitting down with a beautiful there are certain things so amazing like- Athena trunk, face and the ears, and eyes and the is the name of the Goddess, the primordial/stomach, can you believe it, sitting next to us, mother, but Athena, Atha in Sanskrit means the and absolutely the vibrations coming. Another Primordial and they got the word Athena and thing is they showed the egg, just imagine, and to the water they call Niroo, and in Sanskrit it is the eternal egg from where the other eggs come Nira, my name at home is Nira, means from out and the eggs are shown divided into the Water. Its very surprising how mány words there same way into spindles as they do, which doctors are, like I told them about the centers they said know and haye seen under the microscope, but Kendro, in Sanskrit its Kendra. But the best was how did they see those Greeks God alone in Delphi when I went we were surprised at knows. But there is another side, first they used something they said, that it is the 'navel of the to get Amroota, this is the one that was meant Universe.' I said Europe is the lever, and Greece for the Gods, by which they were given eternal is the navel. They showed a point that is the life, in the sense they were appointed as सत्यमेव जयते Witk Best Gompliments from With Best Gompliments from Adishakti Sound system Mr. Chandrakant Shripati Jawalkar Pune Pune 11

 permanent creatures. But then the same thing they wanted everybody to have so they started using Ambrosia, they converted it into something else, some sort of a LSD business. So also they went into trance. So the rest of it is also discover the value of concepts and entities that drama and that supra consciousness also side were significant earlier. Many of us tend to take by side exists. Now discretion has to be used, our country for granted; its virtues, its history, how around reality, supra consciousness or its culture. The fact that India and her people collective subconscious always work out. But I were created with the purpose of enabling and was amazed at the temple of Athena (in Delphi) fostering spiritual growth becomes evident when we went there its so much so near to the when one leaves India and goes abroad. For the thing that the Mooladhara is shown there where many students who fly to countries like the the Kundalini exists. Now she is the one who United States of America for graduate studies has snakes around her and she has little little or work, the grandeur of India, her culture and snakes as her children, can you imagine it, and her people begin to show through very clearly she's one and she has a daughter which is the indeed. The realized soul is always open to Kundalini in you and a God who is a child god. positive influences and does note the attributes And when she stands she has a Kundalini in her that go towards the progress that countries like hand, the snake coming out of her hand, with all USA have achieved; the dignity of labor, the the chakras she is paitend. Its so beauitifully freedom of opinion, the great value attached to shown. The best was her Sanctum Sanctorum human life and dignity. Shri Mataji also shows where nobody is allowed to go inside it, where Her children how erosion of principles have she resides in the Adi Kundalini, but they say taken place. The relentless assault on innocence, that she came out of the head of Zeus, the the lack of discretion and respect are painfully Primordial Kundalini. And in her place nobody evident and the Sahaja Yogi feels intense can go inside. Nobody can reach except for her motivation to share Shri Mataji's lessons with the son, the child son. But her steps are very large, misguided people of the foreign land. The also are roundish, are curved. Can you imagine greatest joy for the Sahaja Yogi away from home they are curved as if it is part of the Kundalas lies in the warm cocoon of protection that Shri and they are three and a half in height. You can Mataji blesses him with; he (or she) is always see that. In height and width also. Like every aware that She is always watching and guiding place are made of big stones and the last is made and aiding. Her Presence is a source of infinite of a small stone. Three and a half and they are in joy particularly when the Sahaja Yogi ventures a curve. And that is Sanctum Sanctorum. Nobody out to propagate Her message and begins to can go inside.And Athens is after the name notice how the Param Chaitanya removes seen Athena. If you see the face also you will find and unseen hurdles in wondrous fashion. It is your Mother very much there. Si elf realization is rebirth in the life of an individual. For many, it is more so than others. The realized soul begins to hoped that Her children are able instruments for Her Grand Design in these lands and can bring joy to those seeking truth. ***H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmaia Devi आन -Indian American student Yuvashakti. 12

 SAHAJA - THE ANSWER TO EPILEPSY АНАЈА Epilepsy is a very old disease which was already Every cell in our body has a certain threshold of electric discharge beyond which it starts behaving in an abnormal way. Some stimulus The word "Epilepsy" is of Greek origin 'epi' can cause some changes in the polarization of meaning above and 'ledo', injury. We can say the neurons and make them behave abnormally. that it is an injury to the upper parts that is the The electrical activity of the brain cells can be recorded on an EEG. Some instults to the brain or some infections can interfere in the well being Some well-known commanders like Alexander of the neurons. But in most of the cases, the cause existing before Jesus-Christ's birth. head. the Great, Julies Caesar and Napolean got of the disease remain unknown. afflicted by epilepsy. Dostoyvsky, Van Gogh and Alfred Nobel have also been victims of this In medicine, it has been observed that alcohol ailment. This disease affects both sex and plus drug abuse are some of the risk factors. commonly occurs during childhood andold age Epilepsy can be controlled up to 70-80% by medicines which unfortunately have some acute In India, the prevalence rate is 5 per 1000 which and chronic adverse effects. For the time being means that approximately 50 lakhs Indians in the medical fleld, epilepsy is still considered regardless of Socio-Economic status suffer from as an incurable disease. But by the grace of H. this disease. It is the highest number after the H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, we came to known the root cause of this disease and the way to treat it. Epilepsy is due to a movement of the attention to the extreme left for getting rid of this ailment. The subtle system should be balanced by saying There are many types of epilepsy. In the the 'Gayatri Mantra' (It will bring the attention one of the African countries. What is an attack of Epilepsy? commonest from, the consciousness is altered, to the center). the patient falls down the body becomes stiff and alter on the muscles enter into a phase of Once we are in equilibrim, the Brahma Deva- intermittent contractions. The attack can be Saraswati mantra should be said. anticipated as some symptoms called as 'Aura' are commonly present before the seizure: It may Another good way is to put the left hand start with a pain in the abdomen, a strange taste towards Shri Mataji's photo and the right one on in the mouth, a musical sound, a curious odour the ground. Shri Mahakali mantra can be said or some changements in the body temperature. while working with a candle on left side. Back Agya which also gets affected in this disease can What is happening in the brain at the time of be treated by the early morning sun rays. In epilepsy attack? 13

 some researches it has been shown that seizure frequency decreases after practicing Sahaja Yoga. Refereces: Epilepsy, Combination therapy by alternative medicine Dr. B.M. Soni and Dr. Gupta. NEWS AND EVENTS ACCOLADES A Group Song Competition was organized by Saraswati Brahman Marathi Samaj - Indore on the eve of Shri Guru Puja, 2001, in which Indore Yuva Shakti Music Group had actively participated by the grace of H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, the group had won first prize and was awarded with "Shield'. hlnle गणपतीपुळे ये गणपतीपुळे का अदभुत समा हर क्रिसमस पर यहाँ होते सहजी जमा M.P. and Chhatisgarh State level seminarwas organized on 30th September to 2 nd October 2001, at Indore, करती मा हर सहजी का उत्थान On first day the inaugural program was conducted by 'मिटते यहाँ आकर सब विचार और थकान Mumbai Yuva Shakti Leader Mr. Arvind Thakur. जितने भी है चौंद-सितारे On second day Shri Siddharth Gupta, Nagpur leader had given a brief speech on-"How to get into the deep meditation". Later on he advised the yuva shakti to contribute their experiences with one to other. /This मिलता है यहाँ पर एक प्रसाद program had benefited a lot. आते है माके दर्शनको सारे निर्मल माँ का अशीर्वाद On third and final day havan puja was done under the guidance of Shri Yogesh Lodha (M.P. leader), Shri Siddharth Gupta (Nagpur Leader) and Shri S.K.B. Kulkarni (Indore leader). सारे सहजी रहते मिलके संग चढ जाता सबपर यहाँ की मिट्टी का रंग मिलते यहाँपर सारी जाती,सारे प्रांत समुद्र भी होजाता सबको देखकर शांत During seminar, Cultural and Music programs were organized by Indore Yuva Shakti, These included: Malwa Folk Dance, Gujrathi Garbha, A short play on Saint Gyaneshwara, Sahaja Quiz, Sahaja Music. RI जयवे छोड़ छाड कर अपने सारे काम चलो भाईयों निर्मलधाम This section awaits more 'News and Events' relating to Yuva Shakti, from your respective areas. 14

 31. Celestial Body representing Agnya chakra. 6 H AR A A 32 Shri Hanumanji is the son of this element. ACROSS 4. The colletive conciousness: 7. Ajanta- tions) 9"Ascent" as termed in Islam. H. He who is Rudra 12 One of name of Jesus christ, named after Yeshoda Maiya. 21-14. Sidrat-Ul-Huntah. 17. W20 The last Guru of Adi-Guru dattatraya. 24. Angaraj. (25. Shri Mataji's School project near Pune, 26 The Holy Ghost as mentioned in Quran. 28 Jihad: The holy A L10 9. R. (one of the Sahaja Destina- 14. 19 17I 18 M 20 AE is the Sahasrar of the world. 23 22 24 25 for spiritual 26 A1 28 ascente 30 Planet of mooladhara chakra. 33. The ocean of illusions. 34. the right channel ends as the Agnya. 35, He who's kingdom is Amrawati. 30 at 34 DOWN J One of the Jyotirlings. 2 Maryada Purushottam. 3. Moses had given the 4. 3rd chakra after Sahasrara. 5. Bhairavi, Yaman, Todi, Asavari are types of 6. Characteristic of the left side is 8 Adi Shankaracharya's authored "Saundarya 10. He who came to Kashmir and met king of Shalivahana Dynasty J3. Godess presiding over left Heart. 15. Beej mantra of Vishudhhi. 16. Path shown by Gandhiji during freedom struggle. 18. One of Shri Mataji's names in Lalita Sahasraham 19. This colour represents the Swadhishthan Chakru. 21. Number of petals of Agnya chakra. 22. Antibodies are produced with this chakra's help. 23. Planet of the heart chakra. 27. The sound that awakens the 3 qualities of Mahalaxmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali. \29. Shri Ganesh is worshipped with flowers. Sahaurar 17. Hamilaya 20. Sai 24, Karma 25. Serc 26. Rooh IR Meheii 19. commandments Dewm: 1. Bhinahankar 2. Hatna 1 Tm 4. Vilny L Lahari 5, Ragai से ख Gun. शि अ न झे | ओ त्से है ल वा से बा सा सौ अ श्री क मा के श्री ग ना य जी टि प झ | ष्ट स उपर दिये चौकोर मे १० गुरुओंके नाम ढुढे coloured Tehe thank you Shri Mataji 15

 देरी जय हो अंर माँ तेरी जय हो, तेरा ही विजय हो, तेरे गीत सेआज जग ये जीवित हो। माँ तेरी जय हो। ै तेरेगाव के खेत भी गा रहे है, तेरे आज नगरों में जय जय की धुन है सुन तुम्हे देख के ये जगी दीन दुनिया, और वोगा रही है की सा तेरी जय हो। जब औखोमें औँसू, जुबाँ पे थे छाले, ये दिल ग्ररहा था कि माँ तेरी जय हो। चिताएंँ हमारी गगन से भिडी थी, वहाँ लिख रही थी कि माँ तेरी जय हो। तेरा ही विजय हो, तरंगीत से आज जग ये जीवित हो। मी तेरी जय हो प.पू.श्रीमाताजी निर्मला देवी व्दरा रचित



----------------------

2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 YUVADRISHTI
An offering by the Yuva Shakti at the lotus feet of our Divine Mother
Volume 2
Issue 4
December
2001
भारत सोग भुर्मी
यो०
HRO
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी निर्मला देवी
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 1| Jai Shri Mataji||
A
NTAIAN
Contents
Fuja Talk
Navratri Puja
******- 2
Theme : Bharat
वन्दे मातरम्
......
***..
5.
Why do we come to India .
..
7.
Gandhiji
9.
भारत - एक योग भुमी
10
Jihad, the holy war
Binks from the aes/
Greece... **
11
Heal the Warld
13
Sahaja - The Answer to Epilepsy
15
Knowledge and fun
yuvadrishti@yahoo.com
The essence of life is fragrance of Love
This New Year, lets spread the message of Love
Merry Christmas & Happy Nea Year
to all our Brothers and Sisters
ealestin
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 NAVARATRI PUJA
LOUTRAKI, GREECE, 21.10.2001
loday we have gathered here to do the I have been knowing them since long because
Devi Puja. This Puja was performed in our household, in my father's household, we
many a times and the Devi was requested had lots of Muslim people working as cooks, as
by the Devas to save them from the tyranny of drivers, as other servants. And these Wahabees
devilish people. Today I feel the same way, that are very interesting people because they don't
we are now in the grip ofa funny situation; that believe even in Mohammed Saab. So if you tell
there are people who are themselves devils. I them that Mohammed Saab has said such-and-
and also (people who are) mesmerised such a thing, they say "No, we don't believe in
by them - who are trying to do something which Mohammed Saab". "So, in whom do you
they should never have done. But they don't believe?" We believe in Allahl" "Have you met
know that there is a climax of everything. And Allah? Have you seen him, that you are
that point has arrived where all the good people, belieying in Him?" But in their whole behaviour
especially the Sahaja Yogis should put al their it was cruelty whief was innately built, very
mind to the destruction of these horrible Cruel and whenever my father saw that, he asked
them to get out. Because (they) always had
sinister practices by which they used to treat
think,
personalities like Mahishasura.
In those days, it was very simple because devils
came as devils and you could see them, that they
are devils, and all their behaviour proved that l never knew that
they were devils. Why they did it? Why wereAnd mostly they were from Afghanistan, can you
they cruel? Because so called human beings as imagine, mostly. Of course they tortured other
they are
devilish and they want to do something byhad a speciality that they could be very cruel.
which they can destroy human beings, and good Not all Afghanis, no, not at all, but some of thern.
human beings.
óthers.
It will come up to that stage.
they are not - they are by nature Afghanis also; and where-ever they went they
And they came to India from Afghanistan and
We have different types of Afghanis. Some were
very loving, kind, helpful, very nice people.
And some of them were very cruel. First we
It is evident that the time has come for them to
be destroyed.
In no way I could be against Islam or ever to didn't understand what is this. But because my
criticise Mohammed Saab. He was divine, no father was a scholar and scholar of Islam, he told
doubt, and tried to do divine work. But out of us "These are not Islamic. They call themselves
that divine work these stupid people have come Wahabees and they are not Islamic". I can see
who accept those devilish people. You will that today, so clearly.
up
be amazed to know that in İşlam there are
seventy-four groups! They sayWe follow one
religion" - but they do hot. Out of these, some
of them are really evil people, and they call They are not many. And that's what my father
themselves by the name as Devbandhis because
this is a place in India, and also they are called häad told me that "One day they will become very
as Wahabees.
in other religions or in other groups
Not that
there are not bad people. But these Wahabees
were secretly working out different groups.
explosive and they might try to completely ruin
2
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 At first I
'Madharsa' means a 'school'. And in
the world".
couldn't understand, that school they used to admit small children.
because, after all, they And it was so well planned that God doesn't
looked like human know I mean I can't say, that there were 120
beings only. But he Madharsas only in Delhil Now nobody knew
says, he told me, "They what they are teaching there, what they are
absolutely mesmerising, how they are doing this. It so
and happened once I went to this place, Nizamudhin,
once they start their and there I found people singing songs and all
cruelty you will not that. And I found in them a real feeling for love.
They felt My love, very much, all of them, and
We had one invader in they started coming to Sahaja Yoga. But I didn't
our country called as know there was a Madharsa in that place. Iasked
Mohammed Shah Dali. He was a very, very cruel them "Why is it, here the vibrations.
man, very cruel, and he used to even kill the Nizamudhin was an aulia, and how is that the
muslims because his concept was that you place doesn't have good vibrations?" In between
should not worship Mohammed Saab because I used to get very bad vibrations. So they told
are
camouflaged,
know what to do."
me "Mother, there is a Madharsa".
Mohammed Saab said that "I am not Divine. I
also used to say the same, to save from the stupid Now look at the evil, how it works. Normally,
. evil used to work like this, that it would go and
but when they felt My vibrations and all that. form some groups, some wars, and kill people.
they believed. But those who believed in They were few people, but they had cruelty as
Mohammed Saab were never understood by their religion. Which ever way they lived, they
these people. Very, very cruel, and because they wanted to be cruel. In those Madharsas only,
don't even believe in Mohammed Saab you they had people who used to tell them how to
cannot argue with them on any point: you be cruel, how to hate, So 'education in hatred'
cannot argue with them what is written in the started. And that education of hatred was very
Koran because you (they) don't believe in Koran, well woven through these Madharsas, all over
people. For years I used to say "I am notDivine".
you don't believe in Mohammed Saab, you the world.
believe in Allah. God knows from where do they
have connections!
Now, as you know, Pakistan and India were
always fighting. But this time Pakistanis
realised that If we fight with India in that
as we have horrible gurus who we will be called as terrorists'. So they said "No,
come as gurus and they mesmerise. You have we will have no terrorism in our country". But
seen them, people being mesmerised. So many they are the ones stupidly - this new fellow
are being exposed and so many are going to be (President Musharraf) had sent about 65
exposed. But mostly they were people who were scholars, ambassadors, to Afghanistan to study
interested in money, in getting lots of money, in those Madharsas, how to become cruel can
somehow, in the name of religion But at that you imagine! To teach hatred! Of course there
time, people didn't see their cruel methods and are many Muslims who are not; but if you do
not respect Mohammed Saab and you are
mesmerise
their cruelties.
This cruelty started growing and you know we supposed to be a Muslim, what will come out
have been to Nizamudhin aulia. In that place of you? So, all these wrong ideas grew up and
only I discovered there's a Madharsa
Islam got divided into many groups.
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 কি
०
्
बन्द मातर
जत
वन्दे मातरम् - ये वे शब्द है जो एक समय देश के चन्द्रिका से प्रकाशित यहाँ की रात है। भाँति-भाँति के
बच्चे-बच्चे के जबान पर हुआ करते थे, ये वे शब्द है सुगन्धित दिव्य पुष्पों से सुशोभित वृक्ष पंक्तियाँ स्वतः ही
जो देश के कोने कोने में गूँजते थे, ये वे शब्द है जो पूरे सबको आकर्षित करती है। सुसंस्कृत शब्दों से सजी हुई
भारत वर्ष को ताकत, हिम्मत व हौसला
बन्देमातरम् ने पूरे भारत उपमहाद्वीप को एक सूत्र में बाँधा होते हुये भी सबको एकता
हुआ था। वन्दे मातरम् पुकारते हुये हजारों कान्तिकारी वीर से अंगीकार करने वाली हमारी भारत माता का हम सब
फाँसी के तख्ते पर हँसते हुये गये और न जाने कितने हृदय से अभिनन्दन करते हैं ।
लाखों इसी वन्देमातरम् का नारा लगाते हुये गोलियाँ सप्त कोटी कुंठ कलकल निनाद कराले,
खाकर शहीद हो गये न जाने कितने घर बेरवाद हो गये,
न जाने कितनी मौओं ने अपने बच्चे खोये और न जाने कैनो माँ एतो बोले।
कितनी बहनों ने अपने भाई, न जाने कितनी औरतों े
अपने सुहाग। पर किसी की आँख से आँसू का एक
कतरा तक न निकला। निकली तो सिर्फ एक गूँज, एक
गड़गड़ाहट, एकजुट आवाज़ जो थी
हम सब इस महान गीत का अर्थ
करें।
देते थे। कर्णप्रिय मधुर भाषा है। विभिन्न भाषा-भाषी लोगों के
के सूत्र में पिरोकर आत्मीयता
सप्त कीटी भुजैः घृत खर कर वाले, अबल
द्व
बहुबलधारिणीम् नामामि तारिणी, रिपुदल वारिणं
मातरम्
मातरम्
जहाँ सात कराड़ कंठ (उस समय की जनसंख्या) एक
वन्देमातरम्
समझने की काषशिश। स्वर पें आपकी महिमा का गान करते हैं, जिससे महान
। आइये
उद्घोष होता है। चौदह-करोड़ हाथ, हाथों में खड्ग-तलवार
लिये आपक प्रहरी है। ऐसी शक्तशाली भारत माता को
वन्दे मातरम् सुजालाम् सुफलाम्,
मलयज शीतलाम् शष्य श्यामलाम् मातरम् वन्द जाने क्यों लोग अबला कहते है। वे अतीव बल पराकम
मातरम् । ।
से सम्पन्न है। शत्रुओं के दल का संहार करने वाली दुर्गा
है भारत माता हम सब आपकी वन्द्ना करते हैं। भारत स्वरूपणों भारत साता को हम बार-बार प्रणाम करते हैं।
माता को शत शत नमन।हमारी माँ महिमामयी है, वे आज के पूरिपेक्ष्य में यदि हम देखें, चारों ओर अराजकता
शीतल जल की पवित्र नदियों एवं जलस्रोती से पोषित हैं
रस भरे मीठे फलों से लदे हुये वृक्षों से छायादार है। राजनेता है, जैन्ता को गुमराह करने वाले कुगुरू है,
मलय पर्वत से प्रवाहित चन्दन गन्ध से सुगन्धित वायु युहाँ िष्टाचार और अराजकता से जनता त्रस्त है ऐसे में हमारी
शीतलता प्रदान करती है। हमारा देश कृषि प्रधान देश है, श्रीमाताजी साक्षात दुर्गास्वरूपिणी है, जो सभी शत्रुओं का,
यहाँ की धरती उपजाऊ है। अपनी हरी-भरी फसलों की बुराइयों का संहार करने पृथ्वी पर आई हैं। हमें यह प्रयत्न
आभा से सांवली भारत माता का हम नमन करतें हैं ।
शुभ्रज्योत्सना पुलकितयामिनिम्,
शोभिनिम्म
सुहासिनिम् सुमधुर भाषिनिम्। सुखदाम् वरदाम् मातरम्
वन्दे मातरम्
मधुर
फैलाने वाले उग्रवादी आतंकवादियों का साम्राज्य है, भ्रष्ट
की.
करना चाहिये कि हम सभी सहज योगी उनकी सशक्त
सहस्त्र भुजाए बनें। आइये हम सब सहज योगी मिलकर
यह प्रण लें कि बुराइयों को समाप्त करेंगे, पूरे विश्व भर
में शान्ति अमन व प्रम का सहज द्वारा प्रचार करेंगे। वह
दिन दूर नहीं जब माँ का स्वपन साकार होगा और एक
नये सहज विश्व का निर्माण होगा। वन्दे मातरम्
,
कुसुमित
फुल्य
दुमदल
सन्यमेव
चन्द्रमा एवं अनेकानेक देदीप्यमान नक्षत्रों की शीतल
त्र
रे
4
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Why do we come to India
lo begin with Maharashtra is the country Mooladhara. This is the easiest thing to do here,
where I would say the Ganesha principle and you must have noticed the people have very
is very strong. Because there are eight good Mooladhara in Maharashtra, they have no
Ganeshas which are come out of mother earth, problem of their Mooladhara. The way they
and all the three powers are represented by become innocent, see their eyes are so innocent,
mother earth also are here Mahakali, there is no lust, there is no greed, its vanished.
Mahalaxmi, Mahasaraswati. So the whole place
is very vibrated. The mother earth is very much Moreover this place is very vibrated otherwise
vibrated. Now if you have any problem of also, because lots of saints have lived here, they
Mooladhara for example, on this land if you sit have left thefr vibrations. Shri Rama and Sita
down on the ground and put My photograph in have walked on this soil bare feet. It is a very
front of you and put your left hand towards the vibrated place.
photograph and the right hand on the mother
earth and say the mantra of Shri Ganesha or full Now the second point is that we are an
Atharvashirsha left side will be cured. Left international religion. We don't belong to any
side is cured means, left Swadhishthana first of contry, none of us belong to any country that
all, so many of you have been to so many gurus, we are not Italians, we are not Indians we are
this that, and have done wrong things. that's gets not Australians, what we are? We are in the
corrected. Also you have seen that, in the west kingdom of God. So, we are men of God as
abortion is the very common thing that happens described by William Blake. So we are men of
to women, may be because of bad Mooladhara God and that we have no bondage to any of these
or may be by the left Swvadhishthana we don't ideas that we belong to this country or to that
have to bother about it, past, or about the reason
why it is so, so if you take your vibrations on your collectivity then you will expand, not only
the left hand side then you clear out your will expand, but that expansion will give you a
Mooladhara in such a manner that the problems kiịnd of a confidence in yourself that we have to
are solved. That is very important for all of us.
but this you can't do anywhere else
mean, you can of course, mother earth is Sahaja yoga is to be learned. If you do not have
everywhere, but here it is a special place for that culture within us, that people are not going
Mooladhara chakra. Where it clears you very to listen to us. In your personality there should
much and feels you up with holiness and be that magnetism which expresses your
auspiciousness. These are the two qualities of responsibility which is the gravity part. And the
Shri Ganesha which you can imbibe very easily mother earth has gravity she has
in this place. So try to meditate with your left of gravity, so that gravity should be there within
hand towards the sun and right hand on the us.
mother earth. So, instead of cleansing it through On the whole, if you see the Indians as they are,
your Agnya, you can cleanse it through your they have many funny funny type of politicians
your
country. Once you understand your point in
take the responsibility of Sahaja Yoga. We have
to spread Sahaja yoga all over. So the culture of
I think, I
this
got
power
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 and also we have lots of kinds cunning people center of the wheel is the quite, Center, if you
for ruling us, because they are very simple. are on your center then you will see the wheel
people are extremely simple and very innocent moving you don't mind, but you immediately
so only cunning can rule such people, and such jump en to that center is difficult.
cunning are exploiting these simple people here.
But that doesn't mean the people are bad. They If you go to the quite place where the pressures
are too good and that's why anybody can come are not much of time or of any such bindings
on this country and can rule us.
then gradually the attention moves to the center,
that's why people used to go to Himalayas
In the same way now these all the rakshasas have where there is peace. In that peace you can reach
now become politicians and they are trying to your own peace better, think of the comfort of
rule this country and the poverty remains at the the heart. Comfort of the mind. And that will
same level as the poverty. There is no concern really help you a lot.
for the poor people, really, because they just
want to exploit even that poverty for their own The beautiful climate has given this country the
purpose. That whatever may be the situation, possibility of they were inner being more than
there is one thing for sure that these are very
simple hearted very open hearted. loving nature. The nature is so kind, that you can live
affectionate people. Very generous, they have on a tree here. We don't have to fight to get to
very little to give but whatever they have they the stores for food. We can get around here
want to give it. Even the poorest of poor will something, they are quite available. So the life
try to contribute something just to make you becomes much easier here. And then people
comfortable.
outer being because we don't have to fight the
don't think of outside things. They have to think
about inner thing. Just automatically, you seen
Indians are not exposed to these ideas of when the life is simple, enter inside and see for
advancement where you can overpower other yourself, because the inquiry starts, why it is life,
people economically, politically, or try to sort why am I here, what I am supposed to do. You
of dominate the whole world. Even economics jump in the sea, the ocean of joy and you will
can dominate. So they have no sense of that so forget every purpose. Now the most important
the humanity is still in the same innocent child thing is that Sahaja Yoga is the greatest event
like character here.
All sorts of parasites, but of spiritual world where all the cosmos, all the
still they exist happily, always laughing. In the gods, goddesses, and all the angels, and all the
same way we have to understand that in Sahaja incarnations and prophets all are busy working
culture we are innocent people. We don't want it out within you. If you could easily reflect my
to harm anyone, trouble anyone.. We are brain back on some screen you might be able to
peaceful people and we are joyous people.
see them all. of them sitting down there and
working there and working on you. So the whole
and
We have to enjoy our own personality and enjoy of Virata is working, behind the stage
our collectivity, But the gain is quite a lot if we
develop that witness state within yourself and and alert that if we do not divert our attention in
that is very very easily developed in this to something, we have to become very subtler
country because there is no more any pressures and subtler here.
you see. Like a wheel moves very fast and the
you
are on the stage. So one has to be very careful
-Shri Mataji, Vaitarna, 1979
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 JANDHIJI
"Nepali, you are the same to look at and you are
In may ways the mode of action of Gandhiji was
z mother . When are you going to start your
spiritual work ? Now we are free, you should Sahaj. He firmly derived his political activity
start whatever you wanted to do."
from dharmic principles and refused to
compromise with what was wrong. These
Gandhiji had demonstrations that a powerful principles, his very firmness, stemmed from his
human following can be assembled not through conviction that it is god who leads history.
the cunning game of usual political maneuyers
and trickeries but through the cogent example Once Mahatma Gandhi stood by stream and saw
of morally superior conduct of life. In our time
of utter moral decadence he was the only
statesman to stand for higher human
relationship in the political sphere", thus wrote
Prof. Albert Einstein on Mahatma Gandhi's
death.
a woman in torn clothes which could not cover
her modesty. Mahatma Gandhi 'spontaneously
fook off his mantle and let it flow into the streamB
it floated to the needy woman and she received
if. His actions were spontaneous.
In South Africa, Gandhiji's Christian friends
Gandhiji forcefully and convincinglylaught him the essence of Christianity, they said
believed in Jesus he would find
if he believed in Jesus he would find
demonstrated the power of spirit over material
things. His greatest leverage was his command redemption. Gandhiji replied, "I do not seek
over the Indian masses. He gained such a redemption from the consequences of sin, I seek
command because the simple folk could to be redempted from sin itself". Gandhiji could
understand what he was inspíred from above.
They called him "Mahatma", merely by his not have ahother. Why could he go to heaven
hunger strike the Mahatma could control and attain salvation only as Christian? Did
behaviour of millions of people.
not
understand why if god had one son he could
Christianity have monopoly of heaven? Was
With Best Compliments from
Wilh Best Gompliments from
स्यमेव जयने
Y.D. Mane
Sarveshwara Softtech and Printers Pvt. Ltd.
Pune
New Delhi
Tele fax 91-116462943, 6484268
7
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 god a Christian? Did he have prejudices against
non-chirstians? On the other hand he doubted
whether the sacred Hindu Vedas were the only
inspired word of god. "Why not also the Bible
and the Koran? He recoiled from the
competitiveness of religions. He was not a
Hindu, a Muslim a Christian or a Jew. He
believed in one religion humanity, i.e. "Nirmala"
dhrarma.
In
İndia got freedom from the British rule on 15th
August 1947, but alas. Independence brought
sadness to the Architect of Independence.
'Father of the Nation' was disappointed with his Shri Mataji's perents with Mahatma Gandhi
nation Gandhiji was sad because he had worked
and prayed for 'swatantrata', that is 'Swa' ka
tantra, rule of the spirit. What India had got
was just a replacement of union Jack with the वैष्णवजन तो तेने कहींए, जे पीड पराइ जाणे रे,
Indian Tricolor. It was a hollow husk of freedom. पर दखे उपकार करे तोये, मन अभिमान नाआणे रे।
Indians sat where Englishmen had sat before
them. It was a victory with tragedy.
वैष्णवजन तो
then
सकल लोकम सहने वंदे, निंदा न करे केनी रे;
वाच काछ मन निश्चल राखे धन धन जननी तेनी रे ।
Little did the Great man realised that
"Swatantrata" that he was searching for can be सम द्रष्टिने तृष्णात्यागी, परस्त्री जेने मात रे;
brought about only by inner transformation of जिहवा थकी असत्य न बोले, परधन नव झाले हाथ रे ।
the masses, i.e. raising of the Kundalini. But his
work did not go waste. In enabling Bharat mata मोह-माया व्यापे नही जेने दूठ वैराग्य जेने, दुठ वैराग्य जेना
to regain its political freedom Gandhiji brought
back to the land of Yoga its best dignity without
which it could not unveil the precious secret of वणलोभी ने वकपटहिन छे, कामक्रोध निवार्या रे;
its spiritual tradition, Sahaja Kundalini Yoga.
मनमारे ।
मणे नरसैयो तेनुं दरशन करता, कुल लेकोतेज तार्या रे ।
Gandhiji's dream are coming true in this
blossom time when millions are taking 'Self"
realisation through Sahaja Yoga by the grace of
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, and thus moving
towards true freedom, "swatantrata
जयते
Winh Best Compliments from
Nitin C. Jawalkar
Adapted from Nirmal Yoga
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 एक योग भुमी
देशभक्ति और देशप्रेम के सबसे बड़े उदाहरण शायद महात्मा गांधी
भारतवर्ष - परमात्मा की रचना का एक अभुतपुर्व और परिपुर्ण
जिस प्रकार एक मानव अपनी छोटी छोटी त्रुटियो और अभावों
थे
कार्य। यह वह भुमी है जहाँ श्री रामचन्द्र और श्री कृष्ण ने जन्म
विशाल सम्मुहन के सम्मिलित कर लेता
से उभरकर अपने को एक
लिया। इसी भुमी पर नानक जी, साईनाथ और महात्मा बुद्ध का भी
जन्म हुआ । और स्वयं आदिशक्ति ने भी इसी धरती पर जन्म ले
है, इसके वह एक परिपुर्ण उदाहरण थे ।
इसे आर्शिवादित किया है ।
ु
एक अन्य देश प्रेम की मु्ती श्री लाल बहादुर शास्त्री थे । किस प्रकार
ऐसी दिव्य पौराणिक और अत्यंत पवित्र भुमी को हमारा शत-शत दरिद्रता मे भी अपने सिध्दान्त और सच्चाई के मुलों को स्थापित
रखा जाए, शायद उनसे बेहतर ईसका कोई उदहरण नही है । शिवाजी
प्रणाम ।
एक अन्य देशप्रेमी थे जिन्होने मर्यादा, साहस और प्रभुभक्ती के
शायद इस भुमी की महिमा का सबसे उत्तम मुल्याकन एक सहजयोगीआदर्श स्थापित किये ।
ही कर सकता है । इससे प्रवाहित चैतन्य स्वयं श्री गणेश का
मे
श्री गणेश जी के स्वयंभु स्वरुप पुरे महाराष्ट्र में प्रकट। इन सब महापुरूषोंके बीच एक सहजयोगी अपने को कहा पाते है?
अनुरुप है ।
हुए है । श्री सदाशिव के प्रतिस्वरुप बारह ज्योतिर्लिंग भी यही पर
वह समय और था जब देश को अंग्रेजी राज से छुट्कारा दिलाना था
| तत् की मांग और थी । आज फिर हमारे सामने एक चुनौती है ।
उत्पन्न हुए । संत ज्ञानेश्वर, संत एकनाथ, कबीर, तुकाराम जैसे
पहुँचे हुए संतो ने इसी धरा पर कार्य क़िया ।
चुनौती, विश्व को परिवर्तित करने की चुनौती, हमारे आंतरिक उत्थान
की एक ऐसी चुनौती जिसका सपना स्वयं आदिशक्ती ने देखा है ।
और अब अंततः हम सभी सहजयोगियों का भी इसी धरती पर जन्म
हो
लेने का अवसर प्रदान हुआ है । इसके लिए हम श्री माताजी के ऋ एक ऐसे विश्व का सपना जो भय, मत्स, लालसा, क्रोध से मुक्त
णी है ।
| एक ऐसा विश्व जहाँ परमेश्वर का साम्राज्य हो। जिस साम्राज्य की
नीव प्रेम, करुणा, पावित्र्य और धर्म पर स्थापित हो ।
एक सहजयोगी और एक भारतवासी होकर हमारे कुछ उत्तरदायित्व
है । स्वयं श्री माताजी ने देश प्रेम पर कहा है की जो मानव अपने देश
आईए हम सभी सहजयोगी मिलकर इस महान कार्य में सहायक हों
वही कार्य है जिसका नायकत्व स्वयं आदिशक्ती कर रही है। और
के प्रती निष्ठ नही होता, वह एक सच्चा सहजयोगी नही हो सकता है ।
| यह देश प्रेम का ही बीज है जो परमात्मा की इच्छा से हमारे अंदर
अंततः शायद यही वह अवसर हो हमे उस महान साम्राज्य में पहुँचने
का जिसका हम सभि सपना देखते है।
पनपकर एक फलदायक, छायप्रदायक और हरेभरे पेड़ के रुप में
एक उत्तम सहजयोगी का रुप लेत है ।
9.
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Jihad or the Holy War
Jihad or the Holy war as described by Prophet IN HIS CAUSE; - THE WAIT
Mohammed has an entirely different meaning. UNTIL GOD BRINGS ABOUT
The word Jihad comes from the root word in HIS DECISION: AND GOD
Arabic the meaning of which is to strive. GUIDES NOT THE REBELLIOUS.
Therefore Jihad actually means to strive.
Man's heart clings to his own kith and kin
THOSE WHO BELIEVE, AND SUFFER EXILE parents, children, brothers, and sisters, husbands
AND STRIVE WITH MIGHT
AND MAIN, IN GOD'S CAUSE,
WITH THEIR GOODS AND THEIR PERSONS, gain, or beautiful and grand houses, for dignity
HAVE THE HIGHEST RANK
IN THE SIGHT OF GOD:
THEY ARE THE PEOPLE
WHO WILL ACHIEVE SALVATION
or wives or other relatives. Wealth and
prosperity. Commerce or means of profit and
and comfort. If these are a hindrance in God's
cause, we have to choose which we love the
most. We must love God even if it involves the
sacrifice of all else.
Here is a good description of Jihad. It may Prophet Mohammed when speaking about Jihad
require fighting in God's cause, as a form of self- has said, "The biggest Jihad one fights is with
sacrifice. But its essence consists in a true and himself/herself" This clearly means that a true
sincere faith, which also fixes its gaze on God. believer, who is realized soul, has to introspect
that all selfish or worldly motives seem paltry and strive hard to remove all his/her faults. All
and fade away. Earnest and ceaseless activity, af us have our faults; no one except God is
involving the sacrifice (if need be) of life, person perfect. We do not have to see the faults of other
or property, in the service of God. Brutal people, but rather we have to strive hard (wage
fighting is opposed to the spirit of Jihad, while a holy war {Jihad)} within ourselves) to make
the sincere scholar's pen or peacher's yoice or a ourselves better instruments of God. It is
wealthy man's contributions may be the most mentioned in the Quran that Muslims (realised
valuable forms of Jihad.
souls) should be the helpers of Allah.
SAY: IF IT BE THAT YOUR FATHERS
YOUR SONS. YOUR BROTHERS,
YOUR MATES, OR YOUR KINDRED;
THE WEALTH THAT YOU HAVE GAINED:
THE COMMERCE IN WHICH YOU FEAR
A DECLINE; OR THE DWELLINGS
IN WHICH YOU DELIGHT
ARE DEARER TO YOU THAN GOD,
OR HIS APOSTLE, OR THE STRIVING
BY THE TOKEN OF TIME THROUGH THE
AGES
VERILY MAN IS IN LOSS
EXCEPT SUCH AS HAVE FAITH
AND DO RIGHTEOUS DEEDS
AND JOIN TOGETHER IN THE
MUTUAL TEACHING OF TRUTH,
AND OF PATIENCE AND CONSTANCY.
Adapted from 'Islam Enlightened' by Javed Khan
10
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 GREECE
T
hen I went to Greece, I knew that I had navel, it was vibrating. And not only that, but
to go to Greece and they told me that they showed the most remarkable thing was that
they believed in the beginning in one this is the mound which is actually the
Mother, in one primordial Mother. But after expression of the navel, it is the mound which
some time there were some Indo Aryan people has come out of the Mother Earth. And this is
who came down to me and said, 'yes, there is actually Athena. According to them this is that
one Mother but she has many aspeetS and these has come out of the Mother Earth. I saw the
aspects are expressed as different Gods. And vibrations were tremendous. And next to that
then they told about all the Gods, which you there were lots of vibrations coming. So I turn
know but they later on made them absolutely around. And what I find is the Ganesha, absolute
human types of gods and they spoilt. But still Gaesha there sitting down with a beautiful
there are certain things so amazing like- Athena trunk, face and the ears, and eyes and the
is the name of the Goddess, the primordial/stomach, can you believe it, sitting next to us,
mother, but Athena, Atha in Sanskrit means the and absolutely the vibrations coming. Another
Primordial and they got the word Athena and thing is they showed the egg, just imagine, and
to the water they call Niroo, and in Sanskrit it is the eternal egg from where the other eggs come
Nira, my name at home is Nira, means from out and the eggs are shown divided into the
Water. Its very surprising how mány words there same way into spindles as they do, which doctors
are, like I told them about the centers they said know and haye seen under the microscope, but
Kendro, in Sanskrit its Kendra. But the best was how did they see those Greeks God alone
in Delphi when I went we were surprised at knows. But there is another side, first they used
something they said, that it is the 'navel of the to get Amroota, this is the one that was meant
Universe.' I said Europe is the lever, and Greece for the Gods, by which they were given eternal
is the navel. They showed a point that is the life, in the sense they were appointed as
सत्यमेव जयते
Witk Best Gompliments from
With Best Gompliments from
Adishakti Sound system
Mr. Chandrakant Shripati Jawalkar
Pune
Pune
11
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 permanent creatures. But then the same thing
they wanted everybody to have so they started
using Ambrosia, they converted it into
something else, some sort of a LSD business. So
also they went into trance. So the rest of it is also discover the value of concepts and entities that
drama and that supra consciousness also side were significant earlier. Many of us tend to take
by side exists. Now discretion has to be used, our country for granted; its virtues, its history,
how around reality, supra consciousness or its culture. The fact that India and her people
collective subconscious always work out. But I were created with the purpose of enabling and
was amazed at the temple of Athena (in Delphi) fostering spiritual growth becomes evident
when we went there its so much so near to the when one leaves India and goes abroad. For the
thing that the Mooladhara is shown there where many students who fly to countries like the
the Kundalini exists. Now she is the one who United States of America for graduate studies
has snakes around her and she has little little or work, the grandeur of India, her culture and
snakes as her children, can you imagine it, and her people begin to show through very clearly
she's one and she has a daughter which is the indeed. The realized soul is always open to
Kundalini in you and a God who is a child god. positive influences and does note the attributes
And when she stands she has a Kundalini in her that go towards the progress that countries like
hand, the snake coming out of her hand, with all USA have achieved; the dignity of labor, the
the chakras she is paitend. Its so beauitifully freedom of opinion, the great value attached to
shown. The best was her Sanctum Sanctorum human life and dignity. Shri Mataji also shows
where nobody is allowed to go inside it, where Her children how erosion of principles have
she resides in the Adi Kundalini, but they say taken place. The relentless assault on innocence,
that she came out of the head of Zeus, the the lack of discretion and respect are painfully
Primordial Kundalini. And in her place nobody evident and the Sahaja Yogi feels intense
can go inside. Nobody can reach except for her motivation to share Shri Mataji's lessons with the
son, the child son. But her steps are very large, misguided people of the foreign land. The
also are roundish, are curved. Can you imagine greatest joy for the Sahaja Yogi away from home
they are curved as if it is part of the Kundalas lies in the warm cocoon of protection that Shri
and they are three and a half in height. You can Mataji blesses him with; he (or she) is always
see that. In height and width also. Like every aware that She is always watching and guiding
place are made of big stones and the last is made and aiding. Her Presence is a source of infinite
of a small stone. Three and a half and they are in joy particularly when the Sahaja Yogi ventures
a curve. And that is Sanctum Sanctorum. Nobody out to propagate Her message and begins to
can go inside.And Athens is after the name notice how the Param Chaitanya removes seen
Athena. If you see the face also you will find and unseen hurdles in wondrous fashion. It is
your Mother very much there.
Si
elf realization is rebirth in the life of an
individual. For many, it is more so than
others. The realized soul begins to
hoped that Her children are able instruments for
Her Grand Design in these lands and can bring
joy to those seeking truth.
***H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmaia Devi
आन
-Indian American student Yuvashakti.
12
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 SAHAJA - THE ANSWER TO EPILEPSY
АНАЈА
Epilepsy is a very old disease which was already Every cell in our body has a certain threshold of
electric discharge beyond which it starts
behaving in an abnormal way. Some stimulus
The word "Epilepsy" is of Greek origin 'epi' can cause some changes in the polarization of
meaning above and 'ledo', injury. We can say the neurons and make them behave abnormally.
that it is an injury to the upper parts that is the The electrical activity of the brain cells can be
recorded on an EEG. Some instults to the brain
or some infections can interfere in the well being
Some well-known commanders like Alexander of the neurons. But in most of the cases, the cause
existing before Jesus-Christ's birth.
head.
the Great, Julies Caesar and Napolean got of the disease remain unknown.
afflicted by epilepsy. Dostoyvsky, Van Gogh
and Alfred Nobel have also been victims of this In medicine, it has been observed that alcohol
ailment. This disease affects both sex and plus drug abuse are some of the risk factors.
commonly occurs during childhood andold age Epilepsy can be controlled up to 70-80% by
medicines which unfortunately have some acute
In India, the prevalence rate is 5 per 1000 which and chronic adverse effects. For the time being
means that approximately 50 lakhs Indians in the medical fleld, epilepsy is still considered
regardless of Socio-Economic status suffer from as an incurable disease. But by the grace of H.
this disease. It is the highest number after the H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, we came to known
the root cause of this disease and the way to treat
it. Epilepsy is due to a movement of the attention
to the extreme left for getting rid of this ailment.
The subtle system should be balanced by saying
There are many types of epilepsy. In the the 'Gayatri Mantra' (It will bring the attention
one of the African countries.
What is an attack of Epilepsy?
commonest from, the consciousness is altered, to the center).
the patient falls down the body becomes stiff and
alter on the muscles enter into a phase of Once we are in equilibrim, the Brahma Deva-
intermittent contractions. The attack can be Saraswati mantra should be said.
anticipated as some symptoms called as 'Aura'
are commonly present before the seizure: It may Another good way is to put the left hand
start with a pain in the abdomen, a strange taste towards Shri Mataji's photo and the right one on
in the mouth, a musical sound, a curious odour the ground. Shri Mahakali mantra can be said
or some changements in the body temperature. while working with a candle on left side. Back
Agya which also gets affected in this disease can
What is happening in the brain at the time of be treated by the early morning sun rays. In
epilepsy attack?
13
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 some researches it has been shown that seizure
frequency decreases after practicing Sahaja Yoga.
Refereces:
Epilepsy, Combination therapy by alternative medicine
Dr. B.M. Soni and Dr. Gupta.
NEWS AND EVENTS
ACCOLADES
A Group Song Competition was organized by Saraswati
Brahman Marathi Samaj - Indore on the eve of Shri Guru
Puja, 2001, in which Indore Yuva Shakti Music Group
had actively participated by the grace of H. H. Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi, the group had won first prize and
was awarded with "Shield'.
hlnle
गणपतीपुळे
ये गणपतीपुळे का अदभुत समा
हर क्रिसमस पर यहाँ होते सहजी जमा
M.P. and Chhatisgarh State level seminarwas organized
on 30th September to 2 nd October 2001, at Indore, करती मा हर सहजी का उत्थान
On first day the inaugural program was conducted by 'मिटते यहाँ आकर सब विचार और थकान
Mumbai Yuva Shakti Leader Mr. Arvind Thakur.
जितने भी है चौंद-सितारे
On second day Shri Siddharth Gupta, Nagpur leader
had given a brief speech on-"How to get into the deep
meditation". Later on he advised the yuva shakti to
contribute their experiences with one to other. /This मिलता है यहाँ पर एक प्रसाद
program had benefited a lot.
आते है माके दर्शनको सारे
निर्मल माँ का अशीर्वाद
On third and final day havan puja was done under the
guidance of Shri Yogesh Lodha (M.P. leader), Shri
Siddharth Gupta (Nagpur Leader) and Shri S.K.B.
Kulkarni (Indore leader).
सारे सहजी रहते मिलके संग
चढ जाता सबपर यहाँ की मिट्टी का रंग
मिलते यहाँपर सारी जाती,सारे प्रांत
समुद्र भी होजाता सबको देखकर शांत
During seminar, Cultural and Music programs were
organized by Indore Yuva Shakti, These included: Malwa
Folk Dance, Gujrathi Garbha, A short play on Saint
Gyaneshwara, Sahaja Quiz, Sahaja Music.
RI
जयवे
छोड़ छाड कर अपने सारे काम
चलो भाईयों निर्मलधाम
This section awaits more 'News and Events' relating
to Yuva Shakti, from your respective areas.
14
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 31. Celestial Body representing Agnya
chakra.
6
H
AR A
A 32 Shri Hanumanji is the son of this
element.
ACROSS
4. The colletive conciousness:
7. Ajanta-
tions)
9"Ascent" as termed in Islam.
H. He who is Rudra
12 One of name of Jesus christ, named
after Yeshoda Maiya.
21-14. Sidrat-Ul-Huntah.
17.
W20 The last Guru of Adi-Guru dattatraya.
24. Angaraj.
(25. Shri Mataji's School project near Pune,
26 The Holy Ghost as mentioned in Quran.
28 Jihad: The holy
A L10
9.
R.
(one of the Sahaja Destina-
14.
19
17I 18
M 20 AE
is the Sahasrar of the world.
23
22
24
25
for spiritual
26
A1
28
ascente
30 Planet of mooladhara chakra.
33. The ocean of illusions.
34. the right channel ends as the
Agnya.
35, He who's kingdom is Amrawati.
30
at
34
DOWN
J One of the Jyotirlings.
2 Maryada Purushottam.
3. Moses had given the
4. 3rd chakra after Sahasrara.
5. Bhairavi, Yaman, Todi, Asavari are types of
6. Characteristic of the left side is
8 Adi Shankaracharya's authored "Saundarya
10. He who came to Kashmir and met king of Shalivahana
Dynasty
J3. Godess presiding over left Heart.
15. Beej mantra of Vishudhhi.
16. Path shown by Gandhiji during freedom struggle.
18. One of Shri Mataji's names in Lalita Sahasraham
19. This colour represents the Swadhishthan Chakru.
21. Number of petals of Agnya chakra.
22. Antibodies are produced with this chakra's help.
23. Planet of the heart chakra.
27. The sound that awakens the 3 qualities of Mahalaxmi,
Mahasaraswati, Mahakali.
\29. Shri Ganesh is worshipped with
flowers.
Sahaurar 17. Hamilaya 20. Sai 24, Karma 25. Serc 26. Rooh
IR Meheii 19.
commandments
Dewm: 1. Bhinahankar 2. Hatna 1 Tm 4. Vilny L Lahari 5, Ragai
से
ख
Gun.
शि अ
न
झे | ओ
त्से
है
ल
वा
से
बा
सा सौ अ
श्री क मा
के
श्री ग
ना
य
जी टि प
झ | ष्ट
स
उपर दिये चौकोर मे १० गुरुओंके नाम ढुढे
coloured
Tehe thank you Shri Mataji
15
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 देरी जय हो
अंर
माँ तेरी जय हो, तेरा ही विजय हो, तेरे गीत सेआज जग ये जीवित हो।
माँ तेरी जय हो।
ै
तेरेगाव के खेत भी गा रहे है, तेरे आज नगरों में जय जय की धुन है
सुन
तुम्हे देख के ये जगी दीन दुनिया, और वोगा रही है की सा तेरी जय हो।
जब औखोमें औँसू, जुबाँ पे थे छाले, ये दिल ग्ररहा था कि माँ तेरी जय हो।
चिताएंँ हमारी गगन से भिडी थी, वहाँ लिख रही थी कि माँ तेरी जय हो।
तेरा ही विजय हो, तरंगीत से आज जग ये जीवित हो।
मी तेरी जय हो
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी निर्मला देवी व्दरा रचित
