Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages 23rd September 2001 Date : Place Cabella : Type Other Events Speech Language English CONTENTS | Transcript | 02 - 09 English Hindi Marathi || Translation English 10 - 18 Hindi Marathi

 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT ENGLISH TALK Scanned from English Divine Cool Breeze You are going to marry. I am going to just tell you that you have to do it with full understanding. that you will make a very, very happy marriage . Now it is more the responsibility I's very important to understand of the woman somehow, because your role in Sahaja Yoga as married women. We have had very funny types of women who got married because they wanted to marry, and they saw to it that the marriage is not successful. And they have been of such a trouble to Me that I don't understand that before marriage why don't they see that what they have to do.. marriage is herresponsibility and she has fo make a happy marriage. If any of you now don't want to marry a particular person, you can say no. But now if you are marrying, then please think of the way a Sahaja Yogini who is getting married. The responsibility of bringing good name to Sahaja Yoga is on you. We are not marrying you because You have to make a successful mean, some sort of a social event, no, marriage in Sahaja Yoga. It's not an because you are Sahaja Yoginis, ordinary marriage. And for that, it's not sacrifice, but joyful understanding. You you'll bring a lot of glory to Sahaja have to withstand many troubles because you're sensible women and Yoga. niay I must say that so far ninety-nine percent marriages have been successful – ninety-nine percent. Now this is a new group that has come and I have to see now how it works out. also. Financially maybe somebody's not so well off. Maybe, though he's all right, he's not looking after you financially, he's not giving you money or maybe he's very dominating - it's possible. Everything is possible. As you could be If you have some ideas in your the same. head, some sori of a models you have inyour head, then take it out. We have to deal with reality. We have to see So in Sahaja Yoga we have selected you to be married and we think

 Original Transcript : English what reality is, not our imaginary ideas. Se you should not get shocked, nor the man should be shocked. But supposing he is, then the understanding should be in you. Spirit of understanding has to be in you and not expect that from men. ar the misunderstandings to your husband. But for that, you have to have special woman's charm, I should say, special woman's understanding, Pll give you one example of My life, there are many, but one I can give çan you: that from My husband's office, one gentleman came to see Me. And he said that "I'm sorry I did a wrong thing is to give up his organisation and join another one. But I now feel that 1 cannot be Men have a responsibility as far as earning is concerned. They have other responsibilities, but women have responsibility to understand, again I say understand, the husband, the family life and everything that is connected with happy in the other one and I want to come back." So My husband said, "You have no place here. It is not disciplinary. your family life. The spirit of understanding of women only make very good families. It's the woman who does all the things that are needed to smooth the family relations, they understand the husband It is not good. Why did you do it? Why did you join another organisation?" So he said, "Sir, but I want to come back. I want to beg of you," pleading every day. But once the men take something into their heads, they don't change immediately. So he came to Me and he told Me, "I want to be back in the same organisation."I know my husband very Well, so I said, "All right, let's see about it." So when My husband came, I told also and they also help the husband with their understanding. Once it is established in the mind of the husbands that you are sensible, that you care for Sahaja Yoga, that you're dignified, all your problems will be solved. That's very important to have a very deep, deep understanding of your responsibility. And I'm sure you all will be suecessful because you are all Sahaja him, "Why don't you take back this man?" “Oh, so he has coIne to you now, has he? The best man (person), he knows where to go. "No," I said, Yogis. "Maybe he thinks I am more generous Never to dominate-there's no need to dominate. But if you are than you are." That was too much challenging! "That's why he came to me. You should be generous." Then he took intelligent, you can convey the mistakes 3

 Original Transcript : English him back. And I must say, all his life without saying anything harsh, without band very much. - being rude to anyone. Now, that is the helped My hus this man management you have to see. That is something special you have to learn, so all the conflicts will be finished. Alright? So this is what it is. There's a way of doing things. You have to learn that and you lhave to master it, by which you do good things without hunting anyone, May God bless you. 1 bless you all from My beart. 4

 Original Transcript : English have already talked to the brides Annd made them understand what is their love is the most important thing for men. I think. Otherwise, you see, you'll take it for granted that you're married. That's not so, So first come home and talk to her nicely. Ask her what she has been doing. does she need anything duty and what that is supposed to mean. Specially I have told them that men are a little bit-always excited, they get excited with marriage. So you should be more sensible and they will be. Iam sure-they looked very sensible gitls. But still you should also know that you are marrying Now in Sahaja Yoga we have a custom, or we can call it a law, that all the money that you earn should be kept with your wife and you should not spend any money without asking her and she should in Sahaja Yoga, not for 'marriage', but for a Sahaja Yoga marriage, It's very important-very important thai you have to show that you have a very successfül also not spend any money without asking you, Money is a very big problem. So if MAIriage you want money, you have every right. It's a common property. But the wife should know how much money there is. Of course, the responsibility of the household and children, is that of-lagree she cannot also spend without asking you and you also cammot spend without her. that it has to be done by girls and we can bility say the bride. But also your responsi is to pay attention to her, not to neglect her, because the whole thing, you're busy, you justify it. But you have to give some time to your wife. It's not that you should be negligent. That is first thing. For example, when you come back from work, I know you are tired, but just see what she is doing. Enquire. If she's busy, try to help her. It's whal you show in your Now this is because of mutual understanding. You have to have complete understanding as to the love, what love you are expressing. Ifyou doubt her, it's wrong. Or if you think, 'All this is mine Who is she to ask me?"-1 don't like women to work; but if they have to work, they will work. And if they're working, 1 have told them already, that they have to 5

 Original Transcript : English are. If you think from this angle, that the marriage is between two souls who are, say, left and right and there should be a complete understanding. The emotional part ofit-butI find that in the marriages, people don't have much understanding be careful that they are housewives to begin with. We just don't want to have "marriages', we want to have Sahaja Yogis who are maried, who will have nice children, nice families. We want to have beautiful family. sbout emotional side. If she feels sad, if she cries, just a little, few words of love and loving the person is the greatest thing. So a domination of a husband and a domination ofa wife is a wrong idea If you can fall in love with eaeh other, it's heavenly. For small, small things, I feel, There cannot be anything better than loving the person. people fight, for clothes and for food, for this and that. But if you love somebody, You are not married here for just a your life becomes so much beautiful, All these little, little things are of no use. common experience of marriage, but for enjoying love, So do not judge them. Do not dominate them. If they ask for your It's a very, very great blessings and adivine thing to love. If you can do that, then you won't find faults. You will find a way how you can enjoy your married life. guidance, all right. But all the time say, if the husband is all the time saying do this and do that', then he becomes boring, isn't it. And you should see that you don't SoI have called you here to tell you bore your life and her life because there that you have to enjoy your married life and then one thing vou have to remember -alone you cannot. Alone you cannot. are so many ways of enjoying life. Even sitting together you can Talking together you can. But if you don't understand this art, then maybe you might have problems, she might have problems. So she's your companion. She's your friend. She's everything to you. Have beautiful feeling about it. I mean some If she has some serious problem, then, of course, we'll cancel the marriage. We'll find out what sort of a thing. But normally, try to understand that why, if she is working in the house, she's equally important, even more important than youa people are very overly romantic and some neople are not at all romantic. So there's no need to be extremely something'.but, as a Sahaja Yogi, you should uppreciate the qualities of your wife and a Sahaja 6.

 Original Transcript : English were very close. See how touching it is. He came down, I saw this and I was BITmazed-in the Prime Minister of India3B Yoga marriage. The best thing is to trust each other, not to doubt. There's another problem with many marriages, that they start look at him, how he was concerned about her. So he came down and then he had doubting and then they separate. So nothing to doubt Nothing to be frightened about married life It's a beautifu thing vớu are entering into. It's a beautiful, I should say, evolution of yours that you're sharing your fife with somebody. But there are many people who fail. Why? Because they think they are men and these are women. But both of them can be beautifully joined together and live very happily. tea with her. I just hid myself, I said [to [10 myself] I don't want to interfere! All these sweet, sweet things, you see, help you so much and, though Shri Shastriji, was such a busy man, he always used to think about her and also the family But then when I was there, I was surprised. He told his daughters, "You look after your children. My wife is not going to be like a maidservánt. I'm not going to make her an aya. You just look out!" So what T have seen some very good husbands, they are so hardworking they have no time for their wives, so they telephone agairI, They'll find out how are adeference was given to her, compared to the children, That should be the case. You see, that's bow we leam to live with another person. Always if you are thinking about yourself, "What comfort I have got. This food was not good", you are Tot living like Sahaja Yogis. you. I'll give you an example of Lal Bahadur Shastri. He was so fond of this wife. His wife was an ordinary woman, not educated, nothing, from a very ordinary family. But once I was in their house, you see. So in the morning, about say ten o'clock I was there, and he sent a letter to her from the office that, "I woke up early and as is usual my routine, Ihad a bath and everything and you were still sleeping, so I didn't want to disturb you. Because you didn't sleep last night, so l didn'ı want to disturb you. F'm very sorry, but I haven't taken my tea as yet, so can Feome down to take tea with you?" We A Sahaja Yogi lives for others, not for himself, starting with your wife. Of course, if you have problems or anything. that can be sorted out. You can write to Me. We can find out. But first thing is you must see, you have to have emotional balance. That has to be understood. If the wife is unhappy, you should ask her, Why, what's the matter?" Always stand by her-always, whether it is your

 Original Transcript : English mother, father or anyone, stand by her and then tell her what is the right thing. But if you take an opposite position, she won't understand. But if you take her side and tell everybody that "Let's find out". And then establish her self-respect, Let her feel that she will not be insulted by anyone. and compassion. If you cannot love your own wife, who are you going to love? More than your children, more than anybody else! You share your love a little and you'll be amazed For small, small things also I've seen, Sahaja Yogis get angry with their wives. For example now, supposing, I'm Anybody insults your wife, you should stand by her [at] that time. Later on, you supposed to be your Mother and can sort it out. Nobody dare say anything to your wife, do anything to your wife, but take the side of your wife all the time because, after all, she's a Sahaja Yogini everything. But sometimes your wife does some mistake in puja, in something she does not try to understand. I don't mind. Later on you tell her that "It was a mistake and you should not have done it: that's also, And you can talk to her later on and ask her what's the matter. You can take her in the bedroom and ask, our Mother," and they will respect it. But "What is the if you go on shouting, you see, there will be a gap berween them If you talk to them like that, their whole life will change Be kind to them. Be gentle. Very much, it's necessary. Specially I've seen that in the western life, people have no training matter, what has happened?" ** But, in the presence of others, you shouldn't shout at her. And you should not correct her. Moreover, no husband should shout at their wives. That is something I can't understand, why should husbands shout. It shows a very bad uphringing. We're all Sahaja Yogis. You are brought up by Me. I am your Mother. And please never shout at your wives, s how to deal with their wife. There's no arrangement like that but in india we have. When they first meet the husband or the wife, there's a big ceremony and the gentle way ofhandling everything. never show your teniper. I mean, some So, though the refationship is there, you have to establish it. You should move slowly, gently, in a simple manner, not to things are so simple and can be solved by showing love. As you love Me, love you und ifthere's anything wrong with you also, | will never shout at you, never. What L'lbouting at theI. Reully, it's not proper just to jump on the woman and start . We've had three, four cases like that, nof do, l'l take you in a very loving manner. You have such a great power of love many. I should say, for so many years Jof 8.

 Original Transcript : English the Indians, you people have better husbands, no doubt. But sometimes, some arriages}, but still to handle her gently, m talk to her gently, Talk to her in a way that she feels that you're her husband and husbands, like in India, I think, (Shri that she is your wife. It's something, that's Mataji asks to someone nearby "Are an art. And because you are Sahaja there any English people here? Na, 1 Yogis, you have to show to the world that mean to be married?"). "because of Sahaja Yoga, our marriage has been very successful. Don't listen to your mother. Don't listen to anybody, Listen to her first and find out what is the problem. Otherwise, such marriages docile and not only docile but they spoil collapse. When you are already married, their women, because of the law that is So, you see, in England I have seen men are very docile very docile because of the law. Lawis so funny and that's why they are left-sided. They are you should show no interest in any other there. But now we have international woman-no interest whatsoever. First, marriages and here in Italy also, if you are is your wife, because that puts them off unnecessary interest in other women. There's no need. You've got your woman. You've got your wife. Why should you marrying under Italian law, it's not so bad BuH still, you must remember that whatever you are doing is according to Divine Laws. Divine Laws must be obeyed and that how you should make very successful 's have interest in other women? Despite all this, if they are troublesome, let Me know. I am sitting here to know about it. But you don't get desperate. And things can be improved. marriages. I'm very anxious to see that, that you become very happy with these marriages-something very special, exceptio blessings of the Divine and you will enjoy we can make them alright. Ifyou're not sensible, then it will be problematic. nal, that you will have the Imust say that I think, compared to your love. May God bless you.

 HINDI TRANSLATION (English Talk) Scanned from Hindi Chaitanya Lahari आज आप विवाह करने जा रही हैं। मैं सम्मव हैं सभी सम्भव है क्योंकि आप कुछ भी तो ऐसी हो सकती है। सहजयोग में आपको केवल इतना बताना चाहूँगी कि आपने यह कार्य अत्यन्त सूझ-बूझ के साथ विवाह के लिए हमने आपको चुना है और हमें आशा है कि आप इस बिवाह को बहुत करना है। विवाहित महिला के रूप में सहजयोग ही सफल तथा आनन्ददायी बनाएंगी। में अपनी मूमिका को समझ लेना अल्यन्त आवश्यक है कुछ अजीबोगरीब महिलाएं है महिला ने ही विवाह को सफल बनाना हमारे यहाँ आई जिन्होंने विवाह केवल है किसी व्यक्ति विशेष से यदि आप बिवाह इसलिए किया क्योंकि वे चिवाह करना नहीं करना चाहतीं तो आप इसके लिए चाहती थीं और अन्ततः उनके विवाह सफल इन्कार कर सकती है। परन्तु अब जब न हो सके ऐसी महिलां मेरे लिए इतनी आप विवाह कर रही हैं तो कृपा करके कष्टकर हैं कि मेरी समझ में नहीं आता सहजयोगिनी दुल्हन के नजरिए से सोचिए कि विवाह करने से पूर्व वे इस बात को सहजयोग का नाम ऊँचा करना आपकी समझ क्यों नहीं लेती कि उन्हें क्या करना जिम्मेदारी है। सामाजिक घटना के रूप में होगा। सहजयोग में आपको सफल विवाह करने आपका विवाह इसलिए कर रहे हैं कि आप चाहिएं। ये कोई सर्वसाधारण विवाह नहीं सह है। सहज विवाह किसी भी तरह से बलिदान आप सहजयोग को गौरव प्रदान करेंगी । नहीं है यह तो आनन्द से परिपूर्ण सूझ--बूझ है। आपको बहुत से कष्ट भी झेलने पड़ सकते हैं, हो सकता है कि किसी की आपका ये नया समूह विवाह के लिए आया स्थिति पैसे के मामले में अच्छी न हो। ये है और देखना है कि यह किस प्रकार महिलाओं की जिम्मेदारी बहुत अधिक हम आपका विवाह नहीं कर रहे। हम हजयोगिनी हैं. विचेकशील महिला हैं और मैं यहाँ बताना चाहूँगी कि अब तक 99% विवाह सफल हुए हैं-99%। अब भी हो सकता है कि किसी पुरूष के पास कार्यान्वित होता है। ठीक - ठाक पैसा हो फिर भी इस मामले में आपका ध्यान न रख रहा हो, आपको पैसा हैं, कोई विशेष छवि यदि आपने अपने न देता हो या बहुत ही रोबीला हो। ये सब मस्तिष्क में बनाई हुए है तो उसे निकाल आपके मस्तिष्क में यदि कोई धारणाएं 10 १।।

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) दें। हमने वास्तविकता के अनुरूप चलना गलत फहमियों के विषय में अपने पति से है और देखना है कि वास्तविकता काल्पनिक बता सकती हैं परन्तु इसके लिए आप में विचार नहीं होती। इस बात से न तो विशेष आकर्षण और विशेष सूझ-बूझ का आपको झटका लगना चाहिए और न ही होना आवश्यक है। मैं आपको अपने जीवन का एक उदाहरण पुरुष को। परन्तु मान लो कि उसे इझटका लगता भी है तो भी आपमे सूझ-बूझ होनी दूंगी। चाहिए। आप में सूझ-बूड की भावन्ता होनी चाहिए। पुरुषों से आपको इसकी आशा आपके सम्मुख एक उदाहरण दूगी| मेरे नहीं करनी चाहिए। जहाँ तक धना्जन का सम्बन्ध है यह वैसे तो बहुत से उदाहरण हैं परन्तु मैं पति के दफ्तर से एक व्यक्ति मुझे मिलने आया। उसने बताया। कि मैने एक वहुत पुरुषों की जिम्मेदारी है । उनकी अन्य बड़ी गलती की थी कि आपके पति की जिम्मेदारियाँ है परन्तु सूझ-बूझ महिलाओं संस्था को छोड़कर मैने कहीं और नौकरी की जिम्मेदारी है । उन्हें अपने पति को, कर ली थी। परन्तु लगता है कि वहाँ पर पारिवारिक जीवन को तथा उससे जुडीं मैं कभी प्रसन्न नहीं रह सकता, इसलिए में सभी चीजों को समझना होगा। महिलाओं वापिस आना चाहता हूँ। मेरे पति ने उससे क में सूझ बूझ की भावना ही अच्छे परिवारो का सृजन करती है। सुखद पारिवारिक नहीं है, ये अनुशासनहीनता है जो अच्छी सम्बन्धों के लिए महिला ही सभी कुछ नहीं है। आपने ऐसा क्यों किया? आपने करती है। वे पति को समझाती हैं और दूसरी संस्था की नौकरी क्यों स्वीकार की? अपनी सूझ-बूझ से उसकी सहायता करती उसने उत्तर दिया, "श्रीमान, अब मैं वापिस हैं ं कहा था, "तुम्हारे लिए यहाँ कोई स्थान । एक बार जब पतियों के मन में यह आना चाहता हूँ। इसके लिए मैं आपसे बात बैठ जाएगी कि आप विवेकशील हैं, प्रार्थना करता हूँ। प्रतिदिन वह इसके लिए सहजयोग की चिता करती है, आप प्रार्थना करता। परन्तु पुरुषों के मस्तिष्क में गरिमामय हैं तो आपकी सभी समस्याओं यदि एक बार कुछ घुस जाए तो वे इसे का समाधान हो जाएगा अपनी ज़िम्मेदारियों जल्दी से बदलते नहीं। अतः वो मेरे पास की गहन सूझ-बूझ का होना अत्यन्त आवश्यक है। मुझे विश्वास है कि आप सब मैं वापिस आना चाहता हूँ।" अपने पति को इस कार्य. में सफल होंगे क्योंकि आप मैं भली-भांति जानती हैूँ, इसलिए मैंने सहजयोगिनियाँ हैं । कभी रौब न जमाएं। कहा, "ठीक है, देखते हैं क्या हो सकता इसकी कोई आवश्यकता नहीं है। आप है," तो मैंने यदि विवेकशील हैं तो आप गलतियों और उनसे कहा, "क्यों नहीं आप उस व्यक्ति आया और मुझे बताया कि में इसी संस्था मेरे पति जब बापिस आए 11 नमरट

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) को पुनः नौकरी में ले लेते?" "ओह, तो अब वो तुम्हारे पास भी आया था! वो बहुत एक तरीका है, उसे आपने सीखना है, समझदार है और जानता है कि उसे कहाँ उसमें कुशलता प्राप्त करनी है इसके जाना चाहिए। मैंने कहा, "नहीं, हो सकता माध्यम से बिना किसी को चोट पहुँचाए, है वो सोचता हो कि मैं आपसे कहीं अधिक बिना किसी से कटु बोले, बिना किसी से उदार हूँ।" ये बहुत बड़ी चुनौती थी। अभद्र हुए, आप सभी अच्छे कार्य कर "इसलिए वह मेरे पास आया था। आपको सकेंगे। ये सब प्रवन्धन है यह विशेष भी उदार होना चाहिए।" तब उन्होंने उस चीज़ आपको सीखनी होगी तभी सारे झगडें व्यक्ति को वापिस ले लिया। मैं ये कहना समाप्त हो पाएंगे ठीक है? चाहूँगी कि इसके बाद पूरा जीवन उसने मेरे पति की जी-जान से सहायता की। तो ऐसा ही है। हर कार्य को करने का परमात्मा आपको धन्य करें। मैं आप सबको हृदय से आशीष देती हूँ। 12

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) मैं दुल्हनों से बात-चीत करके आई हूँ। वह क्या कर रही है उससे पूछे? यदि वह उन्हें बताया है कि उनके कर्तव्य क्या हैं ज्यादा व्यस्त है तो उसकी सहायता करने तथा उसका अर्थ क्या है? मैने उन्हें चिशेष का प्रयत्न करें। में सोचती हूँ कि अपने रूप से बताया है कि पुरुष प्रायः थोड़े से प्रेम की अभिव्यक्ति करना पुरुषों के लिए उत्तेजित होते हैं। विवाह से भी वे उत्तिजित बहुत आवश्यक है अन्यथा आप तो बस हो जाते हैं । अतः आप लोगों को चाहिए मान लेंगे कि मैं विवाहित हैँ। ये बात नहीं कि और अधिक विवेकशील बनें और मुझे है। अतः घर लौटकर अपनी पत्नी से विश्वास है-वो लड़कियाँ ही विवेकशील अच्छी तरह बातचीत करें, उससे पूछे कि दिखाई दे रहीं थीं। फिर भी आपको ये वह क्या कर रही थी और क्या उसे किसी बहुत बात ध्यान में रखनी है कि आप सहजयोग चीज की आवश्यकता है। सहजयोग में हमारी एक परम्परा या ये में विवाह कर रहे हैं, विवाह नहीं, सहजयोग -विवाह कर रहे हैं। ये बात बहुत महत्वपूर्ण कहें नियम है कि अपनी कमाई का सारा है । अपने विवाह को आपने अत्यन्त सफल पैसा पत्नी के पास रखा जाना चाहिए। उससे पूछे बिना आपको कोई पैसा नहीं बनाकर दिखाना है। घर-गृहस्थी और बच्चों की जिम्मेदारी, खर्चना चाहिए और आपसे पूछे बिना उसे निःसन्देह-मैं इस बात से सहमत हूँ- भी पैसा नहीं खर्चना चाहिए। पैसा बहुत लडकियों की या दुल्हनों की होती है परन्तु आपकी भी ज़िम्मेदारी है कि उसका तो आपको पूरा अधिकार है। यह पति-- पत्नी ध्यान रखें, उसकी उपेक्षा न करें ये कहकर दोनों की सम्पति है परन्तु पत्नी को इस कि मैं बहुत व्यस्त हूँ. इसे तर्कसंगत न ठहराएं। अपनी पत्नी को कुछ समय आपको है। न वो आपसे पूछे बिना खर्च कर सकती देना ही होगा। इस मामले में आपको है न आप उससे पूछे बिना। लापरवाही नहीं करनी चाहिए। ये पहली चीज है। उदाहरण के रूप में जब आप पूरी समझ होनी चाहिए कि किस प्रकार के काम से घर वापिस आते हैं तो-मैं जानती प्रेम की अभिच्यक्ति आप कर रहें हैं। आप हूँ, आप थके हुए होते हैं, परन्तु देखें कि यदि उस पर संदेह करते हैं तो गलत है । बड़ी समस्या है आपको यदि पैसा चाहिए बात का ज्ञान होना चाहिए कि पैसा कितना यह आपसी सूझ-बूझ है। प्रेम की आपको 13

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) या यदि आप ये सोचते हैं कि ये सब तो है एक दूसरे के साथ बैठकर भी आप मेरा है आप यदि समझते हैं कि यह सब जीवन आनन्दमय बना सकते हैं। मरस्पर तो मेरा है वह पूछने वाली कान है तो यह बातचीत करके भी आप जीवन का आनन्द गलत है। महिलाओं का नौकरी आदि करना ले सकते हैं । परन्तु आपको यदि यह कला मुझे पसन्द नहीं फिर भी यदि आवश्यक नहीं आती तो सम्भव है कि आपको भी होगा तो वे कार्य करेंगी। कार्यरत होने की समस्या हो, आपकी पत्नी को भी समस्या स्थिति में मैने उनसे बताया है कि उन्हें हो। पत्नी में यदि कोई गम्भीर समस्या है इस बात के प्रति सावधान रहना कि सर्वप्रथम वे गृहणियाँ हैं। हम केवल विवाह ही नहीं केवल तभी आप विवाह को तोड़ सकते हैं। करना चाहते, हम सहजयोगियों के विवाह हम इस समस्या को देखने का प्रयत्न करना चाहते हैं जिनके सुन्दर बच्चे हों करेंगे परन्तु सामान्य स्थिति में आप ये और सुन्दर परिवार बने। हम खूबसूरत समझने का प्रयत्न करें कि पत्नी यदि घर परिवार चाहते हैं। अंतः पतियों का हावी होना या पत्नियों रूप से महत्वपूर्ण है, आपसे भी अधिक का दोनों ही गलत धारणाएं है एक दूसरे महत्वपूर्ण है। आपका दृष्टिकोण यदि ये हो से यदि आप प्रेम कर सके तो यह बहुत कि दो आत्माओं के बीच-बाएं और दाएं हितकर होगा। मैं देखती हैँ कि छोटी-छोटी के बीच विवाह हुआ है एक दूसरे के प्रति चीजों के लिए लोग परस्पर लड़ते हैं। पूर्ण सूझ-बूझ आ जाएगी। विवाह का कपड़ों के लिए खाने के लिए और भावनात्मक पक्ष भी है परन्तु मैं देखती हैँ छोटी-छोटी चीज़ों के लिए लोग परस्पर प्रायः विवाहित लोगों में भावनात्मक पक्ष की लड़ते हैं। आप यदि किसी से प्रेम करें तो समझ नहीं होती। पत्नी यदि उदास है या का कार्य सम्भाल रही है तो वह समान आपका जीवन अत्यन्त सुन्दर बन जाता रो रही तो आपके प्रेम के दौ शब्द, या है। यह छोटी-छोटी चीजें व्यर्थ हैं अतः उसके प्रति प्रेम प्रदर्शन बहुत बड़ा कार्य अपनी पत्नियों को परखें नहीं, उन पर करेंगे किसी को प्रेम करने से अच्छा और हावी न हों। उन्हें यदि आपके पथ-प्रदर्शन कुछ नहीं हो सकता। की जरूरत है तो ठीक है। परन्तु यदि विवाह के सर्वसाधारण अनुभव के लिए पति हर समय यह कहता रहे ऐसा करो, आपका विवाह नहीं हुआ है। आपका विवाह वैसा करो तो वह बड़ा उबाऊ हो जाता है। प्रेम का आनन्द लेने के लिए हुआ है। प्रेम हमैशा ध्यान रखें कि आप अपने और अपनी करना बहुत बड़ा आशीर्वाद है और दिव्य पत्नी के जीवन को उबाऊ न बना दें। है आप यदि प्रेम करते हैं तो आप दोष जीवन के आनन्द लेने के बहुत से तरीके नहीं खोजेंगे। अपने विवाहित जीवन के 14

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) आनन्द लेने के उपाय आप खोजेंगे। मैंने पता लगाते हैं कि वह ठीक तो है। आपको यहाँ ये बताने के लिए बुलाया है कि आपने अपने विवाहित जीवन का आनन्द मैं आपको लाल बहादुर शास्त्री का उदाहरण देना चाहूँगी। वो अपनी पत्नी से लेना है और अकेले आप आनन्द नहीं ले बहुत प्रेम करते थे। उनकी पत्नी सर्वसाधारण सकते अकेले आप आनन्द नहीं ले सकते अतः आपकी पत्नी आपकी साथी है, आपकी सामान्य परिवार से सम्बन्धित थीं । एक मित्र है, आपकी सभी है। इसके विषय बार मैं उनके घर पर गई। प्रातः दस बजे में सुन्दर विचार बनाएं। कहने से मेरा मैं उनके घर पर थी तो लाल बहादुर अभिप्राय है कि कुछ लोग तो रोमांटिक होते हैं और कुछ बिल्कुल नहीं पत्र भेजा जिसमें लिखा था रोजमर्रा की होते। अतः किसी भी चीज की अति नहीं तरह से मैंने स्नान आदि किया परन्तु तुम होनी चाहिए। सहजयोगी के रूप में आप अपनी पत्नी के गुणों की प्रशसा करें और नहीं करना चाहा। क्योंकि तुम कल रात सहजयोग के विवाह को समझें। निःसन्देह सर्वोत्तम बात तो ये है कि । महिला थीं, पढ़ी-लिखी भी न थीं और एक कुछ बहुत अधिक शास्त्री ने अपने दफ्तर से पत्नी को एक तब तक सो रही थीं। मैंने तुम्हें परेशान | सोई नहीं थी इसलिए मैंने तुम्हे जगाना नहीं चाहा। मुझे खेद है। परन्तु मैंने अभी तक चाय नहीं पी है। क्या मैं तुम्हारे साथ सन्देह करने लगते हैं और फिर अलग हो चाय पीने आ सकता हूँ? वे परस्पर इतने परस्पर विश्वास करें विवाहित लोग परस्पर जाते हैं। अतः सन्देह करने की कोई बात समीप थे! देखिए ये कितना हृदयस्पर्शी है! नहीं। विवाहित जीवन से डरने की कोई वे आए। मैं उन्हें देखकर आश्चर्यचकित बात नहीं। विवाह तो एक अत्यन्त सुन्दर थी वे भारत के प्रधानमंत्री थे फिर भी जीवन में आपका प्रवेश है । मैं कहूँगी कि देखिए किस प्रकार वे अपनी पत्नी का आपका अपने जीवन को किसी अन्य के ध्यान रखते थे! वे घर पर आए और अपनी साथ बाँटना सुन्दर उत्क्रान्ति है। परन्तु पत्नी के साथ चाय पी बहुत से लोग इसमें असफल हो जाते हैं, रही, उनके सामने नहीं आई । मैंने सोचा क्यों? क्योंकि वो सोचते हैं वो पुरुष हैं और कि मुझे बाधा नहीं बनना चाहिए। पत्नियाँ महिलाएं। दोनों परस्पर मिलकर अत्यन्त प्रसन्नता पूर्वक रह सकते हैं। मैंने देखा है कि कुछ पति बहुत अच्छे हैं अत्यन्त व्यस्त व्यक्ति थे फिर भी वे अपनी वे इतना कठोर परिश्रम करते हैं कि उनके पत्नी तथा परिवार का सदैव ध्यान रखते पास पत्नियों के लिए समय ही नहीं होता । थे मैं जब वहाँ थी तो मुझे हैरानी हुई जब परन्तु फोन करके वे उनकी सुध लेते हैं । उन्होंने अपनी बेटियों से कहा कि "तुम | । मैं घर में छिपी ये सभी छोटी-छोटी चीज़ें जीवन में बहुत हितकर होती हैं। यद्यपि शास्त्री जी 15

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) अपने बच्चों की देखभाल स्वयं करो, मेरी दें कि कोई उसे अपमानित नहीं करेगा। पत्नी तुम्हारी नौकरानी नहीं बनी रहेगी। मैं कोई यदि आपकी पत्नी को अपमानित करें उसे आया नहीं बना सकता। तुम स्वयं तो उस समय आपको आपनी पत्नी का इस बात का घ्यान रखो। तो बच्चों के साथ देना चाहिए। बाद में आप उस मामले मुकाबले पत्नी को क्या स्थान दिया गया। को सुलझा सकते हैं। किसी में साहस नही ऐसा ही होना चाहिए। इसी प्रकार से हम होना चाहिए कि आपकी पत्नी को कोई अन्य व्यक्ति के साथ रहना सीखते हैं। हर कुछ कहे। हर समय अपनी पत्नी का साथ समय यदि आप अपने ही बारे में सोचते दें क्योंकि वह एक सहजयोगिनी है। बाद रहें, "मुझे कौन से आराम मिल रहे हैं, ये में आप उससे बात करके पूछ सकते हैं खाना अच्छा न था तो आप सहजयोगियों कि क्या बात है। एकान्त में ले जाकर आप की तरह से जीवन नहीं व्यतीत कर रहे। उससे पूछे, "क्या बात है, क्या हुआ? परन्तु अन्य लोगों के सामने आपको रहता है, केवल अपने लिए नहीं और इस उस पर चिल्लाना नहीं चाहिए और न ही चीज का आरम्भ उसकी पुत्नी से होता है। उसकी गलतियों को सुधारना चाहिए। इतना आपकी यदि कोई समस्या है तो, नि:सन्देह, ही नहीं किसी भी पति को अपनी पत्नी पर उसका समाधान किया जा सकता है। आप चिल्लाना नहीं चाहिए। ये बात मरी समझ मुझे पत्र लिख सकते हैं और हम इन में नही आती कि पति अपनी पत्नियों पर समस्याओं को देखेंगे। परन्तु आवश्यक बात चिल्लाए क्यों! इससे उनकी गलत परवरिश ये है कि आपमें भावनात्मक सन्तुलन होना का पत्ता चलता है। हम सभी सहजयोगीं हैं चाहिए। उसकी समझ आपको होनी चाहिए मैंने आपकी परवरिश की है । मैं आपकी माँ पत्नी यदि खिन्न है तो आप उससे पूछे हूँ। कृपा करके कभी अपनी पत्नियों पर क्यों क्या बात है?" हमेशा उसका साथ चिल्लाएं नहीं। कभी अपना क्रोध उन्हें न दें-हमेशा। चाहे आपकी माँ-पिता या किसी दिखाएं। मेरा कहने का अभिप्राय है इन सब छोटी-छोटी बातों का समाधान प्रेम सहजयोगी अन्य लोगों के लिए जीवित अन्य का मामला ही क्यों न हो अआप उसका साथ दें और फिर उसे बताएं उचित क्या प्रदर्शन के द्वारा ही किया जा सकता है परन्तु यदि आप उसका विरोध करने जैसे आप मुझे प्रेम करते हैं वैसे ही मैं लगेंगे तो उसे समझ नहीं आएगा। उसका आपको प्रेम करती हैँ। आपमें यदि कोई साथ देकर यदि आप सबको कहेंगे कि कमी होगी तो मैं आप पर चिल्लाऊंगी "हम चीजों को देखते हैं" और इस प्रकार नहीं, कभी नहीं। मैं क्या करूगी मैं इसे से यदि आप उसका आत्म सम्मान स्थापित बड़े प्रेम से लूगी।" आप में प्रेम एवं करुणा करेंगे तो अच्छा होगा उसे विश्वस्त होने की अत्यन्त महान शक्ति है अपनी पत्नी 16

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) से यदि आप प्रेम नहीं कर सकते तो मन्द-गति से शान्तिपूर्वक सहजरूप से किससे करेंगे। अपने बच्चों से या किसी जीवन में चलें। महिलाओं पर उछलें नहीं अन्य से कहीं अधिक प्रेम अपनी यत्नी को और न ही उन पर चिल्लाने लगें वास्तव करें। अपना थोड़ा सा प्रेम बाँटकर देंखें में ऐसा करना उचित न होंगा इतने वर्षो आप आश्चर्य चकित रह जाएंगे। में हमारे सम्मुख इस प्रकार के केवल मैने देखा है कि छोटी-छोटी चीजों के तीन-चार मामले आए। इससे अधिक नहीं। लिए भी सहजयोगी अपनी पत्नी से नाराज फिर भी अपनी पत्नी का संचालन बड़े प्रेम हो जाते हैं। उदाहरण के लिए मान लें मैं से करें उससे बड़े प्रेम पूर्वक बात करे। आपकी माँ हूँ सभी कुछ हूँ। परन्तु आपकी पत्नी से इस प्रकार बात करें कि उसे पत्नी कभी पूजा में कोई गलती करती है, महसूस हो कि आप उसके पति हैं वो किसी बात को समझने का प्रयत्न नहीं आपकी पत्नी है। ये एक कला है। आप करती तो मैं बुरा नहीं मानती। बाद में उसे क्योंकि सहजयोगी हैं आपको विश्व के सम्मुख बताएं कि ये गलती थी और तुम्हें नहीं ये दर्शाना होगा कि सहजयोग के कारण करनी चाहिए थी। वे हमारी माँ हैं, तब वे आपके विवाह सफल हुए हैं। अपनी माँं या परन्तु आप यदि किसी अन्य के चलाए न चलें चिल्लाएंगे तो आप दोनों में दूरी पैदा हो पहले अपनी पत्नी को सुने देखें कि उसकी जाएगी परन्तु आप यदि इस प्रकार प्रेम से क्या समस्या है अन्यथा ये विवाह टूट जाएगा। उनसे बात करेंगे तो आपका पूरा जीवन जब आपका विवाह हो चुका है तो किसी परिवर्तित हो जाएगा उन्हें प्रेम करें, उनसे अन्य महिला में आपको बिल्कुल भी भद्रता पूर्वक व्यवहार करें। ऐसा करना दिलचस्पी नहीं लेनी चाहिए। आपकी पत्नी बहुत आवश्यक है। पश्चिम में मैंने विशेष सबसे पहले है। वह अन्य महिलाओं में रूप से ये बात देखी है कि लोगों को आपकी दिलचस्पी को समाप्त करती है। अपनी पत्नियों से व्यवहार करने का प्रशिक्षण इसकी कोई आवश्यकता नहीं, आपकी अपनी ही नहीं है। इस प्रकार का कोई प्रबन्ध ही पत्नी है. अन्य महिलाओं में क्यों आपको 1 बहाँ नहीं है। परन्तु भारत में यह सब कुछ दिलचस्पी लेनी चाहिए? है। भारत में मति-मत्नी, जब पहली बार मिलते हैं तो बहुत बड़ा उत्सव होता है पत्नी कष्टकर है तो मुझे बताएं। ये बात और सभी कुछ अत्यन्त मधुरता पूर्वक होता देखने के लिए मैं यहाँ बैठी हुई हूँ। परन्तु है। अतः यद्यपि सम्बन्ध तो हैं परन्तु आपने ठीक कर सकते हैं। परन्तु आप यदि उन सम्बन्धों को स्थापित करना है अत्यन्त विवेकशील नहीं है तो समस्याएं खड़ी हो ये सब करने के बावजूद भी यदि आपकी आप निराश न हों। चीज़ें सुघरेंगी, हम उन्हें 17 कि

 Hindi Translation (English Talk) जाएंगी। मेरे विचार से भारतीयों के मुकाबले में हमेशा याद रखना है कि जो भी कुछ आप आप लोगों के पति बेहतर है इसमें कोई कर रहे हैं वह दैवी नियम के अनुसार है। शक नहीं (श्रीमाताजी साथ खड़े किसी दैवी नियम का पालन होना चाहिए और व्यक्ति से पूछती हैं क्या यहाँ पर कोई इसी प्रकार से आप अपने विंवाह को सफल इंग्लैण्ड के दुल्हैे भी हैं?) इंग्लैण्ड में मैंने बना सकते हैं। मैं यही सब देखने के लिए देखा है पुरुष अत्यन्त दब्यू हैं। कानून के आतुर हूँ कि इन विवाहों से आप आनन्दित कारण वे अत्यन्त विनम्र है वहाँ का कानून हो जाएं। यह अत्यन्त विशिष्ट चीज है इतना अजीब है और यही कारण है कि जिससे आपको परमात्मा का आशीर्वाद प्राप्त वहाँ के लोग बहुत ही भावुक हैं। वे अत्यन्त होगा और आप अपने प्रेम का आनन्द दब्बू है, इतने दब्बू कि कानून के कारण वे लेंगे। अपनी पत्नियों को बिगाड़ देते हैं परन्तु अब हम अन्तर्राष्ट्रीय विवाह करते हैं और इटली में वहाँ के कानून के अनुसार विवाह करें तो भी कुछ बुरा नहीं है। परन्तु आपको परमात्मा आपको धन्य करें। 18



----------------------

20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page0.txt 
 Shri Ganesha Puja
Marriages
23rd September 2001
Date
:
Place
Cabella
:
Type
Other Events
Speech
Language
English
CONTENTS
| Transcript
|
02 - 09
English
Hindi
Marathi
||
Translation
English
10 - 18
Hindi
Marathi
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page1.txt 
 ORIGINAL TRANSCRIPT
ENGLISH TALK
Scanned from English Divine Cool Breeze
You are going to marry. I am going
to just tell you that you have to do it
with full understanding.
that you will make a very, very happy
marriage
.
Now it is more the responsibility
I's very important to understand of the woman somehow, because
your role in Sahaja Yoga as married
women. We have had very funny types
of women who got married because
they wanted to marry, and they saw to
it that the marriage is not successful.
And they have been of such a trouble
to Me that I don't understand that
before marriage why don't they see that
what they have to do..
marriage is herresponsibility and she has
fo make a happy marriage. If any of you
now don't want to marry a particular
person, you can say no. But now if you
are marrying, then please think of the
way a Sahaja Yogini who is getting
married. The responsibility of bringing
good name to Sahaja Yoga is on you.
We are not marrying you because
You have to make a successful mean, some sort of a social event, no,
marriage in Sahaja Yoga. It's not an because you are Sahaja Yoginis,
ordinary marriage. And for that, it's not
sacrifice, but joyful understanding. You you'll bring a lot of glory to Sahaja
have to withstand many troubles
because you're sensible women and
Yoga.
niay
I must say that so far ninety-nine
percent marriages have been successful
– ninety-nine percent. Now this is a
new group that has come and I have to
see now how it works out.
also. Financially maybe somebody's not
so well off. Maybe, though he's all right,
he's not looking after you financially,
he's not giving you money or maybe he's
very dominating - it's possible.
Everything is possible. As you could be
If you have some ideas in your
the same.
head, some sori of a models you have
inyour head, then take it out. We have
to deal with reality. We have to see
So in Sahaja Yoga we have
selected you to be married and we think
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page2.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
what reality is, not our imaginary ideas.
Se you should not get shocked, nor the
man should be shocked. But supposing
he is, then the understanding should be
in you. Spirit of understanding has to
be in you and not expect that from men.
ar the misunderstandings to your
husband. But for that, you have to have
special woman's charm, I should say,
special woman's understanding,
Pll give you one example of My
life, there are many, but one I can give
çan
you: that from My husband's office, one
gentleman came to see Me. And he said
that "I'm sorry I did a wrong thing is to
give up his organisation and join another
one. But I now feel that 1 cannot be
Men have a responsibility as far
as earning is concerned. They have
other responsibilities, but women have
responsibility to understand, again I say
understand, the husband, the family life
and everything that is connected with
happy in the other one and I want to
come back." So My husband said, "You
have no place here. It is not disciplinary.
your family life.
The spirit of understanding of
women only make very good families.
It's the woman who does all the things
that are needed to smooth the family
relations, they understand the husband
It is not good. Why did you do it? Why
did you join another organisation?" So
he said, "Sir, but I want to come back.
I want to beg of you," pleading every
day. But once the men take something
into their heads, they don't change
immediately. So he came to Me and he
told Me, "I want to be back in the same
organisation."I know my husband very
Well, so I said, "All right, let's see about
it." So when My husband came, I told
also and they also help the husband with
their understanding. Once it is
established in the mind of the husbands
that you are sensible, that you care for
Sahaja Yoga, that you're dignified, all
your problems will be solved. That's
very important to have a very deep,
deep understanding of your
responsibility. And I'm sure you all will
be suecessful because you are all Sahaja
him, "Why don't you take back this
man?" “Oh, so he has coIne to you now,
has he? The best man (person), he
knows where to go. "No," I said,
Yogis.
"Maybe he thinks I am more generous
Never to dominate-there's no
need to dominate. But if you are
than you are." That was too much
challenging! "That's why he came to me.
You should be generous." Then he took
intelligent, you can convey the mistakes
3
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page3.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
him back. And I must say, all his life
without saying anything harsh, without
band very much. - being rude to anyone. Now, that is the
helped My hus
this man
management you have to see. That is
something special you have to learn, so
all the conflicts will be finished. Alright?
So this is what it is. There's a way
of doing things. You have to learn that
and you lhave to master it, by which you
do good things without hunting anyone,
May God bless you.
1 bless you all from My beart.
4
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page4.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
have already talked to the brides
Annd made them understand what is their
love is the most important thing for men. I
think. Otherwise, you see, you'll take it
for granted that you're married. That's not
so, So first come home and talk to her
nicely. Ask her what she has been doing.
does she need anything
duty and what that is supposed to mean.
Specially I have told them that men are a
little bit-always excited, they get excited
with marriage. So you should be more
sensible and they will be. Iam sure-they
looked very sensible gitls. But still you
should also know that you are marrying
Now in Sahaja Yoga we have a
custom, or we can call it a law, that all the
money that you earn should be kept with
your wife and you should not spend any
money without asking her and she should
in Sahaja Yoga, not for 'marriage', but
for a Sahaja Yoga marriage, It's very
important-very important thai you have
to show that you have a very successfül
also not spend any money without asking
you, Money is a very big problem. So if
MAIriage
you want money, you have every right.
It's a common property. But the wife
should know how much money there is.
Of course, the responsibility of the
household and children, is that of-lagree
she cannot also spend without asking you
and you also cammot spend without her.
that it has to be done by girls and we can
bility
say the bride. But also your responsi
is to pay attention to her, not to neglect
her, because the whole thing, you're busy,
you justify it. But you have to give some
time to your wife. It's not that you should
be negligent. That is first thing. For
example, when you come back from
work, I know you are tired, but just see
what she is doing. Enquire. If she's busy,
try to help her. It's whal you show in your
Now this is because of mutual
understanding. You have to have complete
understanding as to the love, what love
you are expressing. Ifyou doubt her, it's
wrong. Or if you think, 'All this is mine
Who is she to ask me?"-1 don't like
women to work; but if they have to work,
they will work. And if they're working, 1
have told them already, that they have to
5
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page5.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
are. If you think from this angle, that the
marriage is between two souls who are,
say, left and right and there should be a
complete understanding. The emotional
part ofit-butI find that in the marriages,
people don't have much understanding
be careful that they are housewives to
begin with. We just don't want to have
"marriages', we want to have Sahaja
Yogis who are maried, who will have nice
children, nice families. We want to have
beautiful family.
sbout emotional side. If she feels sad, if
she cries, just a little, few words of love
and loving the person is the greatest thing.
So a domination of a husband and
a domination ofa wife is a wrong idea If
you can fall in love with eaeh other, it's
heavenly. For small, small things, I feel,
There cannot be anything better than
loving the person.
people fight, for clothes and for food, for
this and that. But if you love somebody,
You are not married here for just a
your life becomes so much beautiful, All
these little, little things are of no use.
common experience of marriage, but for
enjoying love,
So do not judge them. Do not
dominate them. If they ask for your
It's a very, very great blessings and
adivine thing to love. If you can do that,
then you won't find faults. You will find a
way how you can enjoy your married life.
guidance, all right. But all the time say, if
the husband is all the time saying do this
and do that', then he becomes boring,
isn't it. And you should see that you don't
SoI have called you here to tell you
bore
your life and her life because there
that you have to enjoy your married life
and then one thing vou have to remember
-alone you cannot. Alone you cannot.
are so many ways of enjoying life. Even
sitting together you can Talking together
you can. But if you don't understand this
art, then maybe you might have problems,
she might have problems.
So she's your companion. She's
your friend. She's everything to you. Have
beautiful feeling about it. I mean some
If she has some serious problem,
then, of course, we'll cancel the marriage.
We'll find out what sort of a thing. But
normally, try to understand that why, if she
is working in the house, she's equally
important, even more important than youa
people are very overly romantic and some
neople are not at all romantic. So there's
no need to be extremely something'.but,
as a Sahaja Yogi, you should uppreciate
the qualities of your wife and a Sahaja
6.
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page6.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
were very close. See how touching it is.
He came down, I saw this and I was
BITmazed-in the Prime Minister of India3B
Yoga marriage.
The best thing is to trust each other,
not to doubt. There's another problem
with many marriages, that they start
look at him, how he was concerned about
her. So he came down and then he had
doubting and then they separate. So
nothing to doubt Nothing to be frightened
about married life It's a beautifu thing vớu
are entering into. It's a beautiful, I should
say, evolution of yours that you're sharing
your fife with somebody. But there are
many people who fail. Why? Because they
think they are men and these are women.
But both of them can be beautifully joined
together and live very happily.
tea with her. I just hid myself, I said [to
[10
myself] I don't want to interfere!
All these sweet, sweet things, you
see, help you so much and, though Shri
Shastriji, was such a busy man, he always
used to think about her and also the family
But then when I was there, I was surprised.
He told his daughters, "You look after
your children. My wife is not going to be
like a maidservánt. I'm not going to make
her an aya. You just look out!" So what
T have seen some very good
husbands, they are so hardworking they
have no time for their wives, so they
telephone agairI, They'll find out how are
adeference was given to her, compared
to the children, That should be the case.
You see, that's bow we leam to live with
another person. Always if you are thinking
about yourself, "What comfort I have got.
This food was not good", you are Tot living
like Sahaja Yogis.
you. I'll give you an example of Lal
Bahadur Shastri. He was so fond of this
wife. His wife was an ordinary woman,
not educated, nothing, from a very
ordinary family. But once I was in their
house, you see. So in the morning, about
say ten o'clock I was there, and he sent a
letter to her from the office that, "I woke
up early and as is usual my routine, Ihad
a bath and everything and you were still
sleeping, so I didn't want to disturb you.
Because you didn't sleep last night, so l
didn'ı want to disturb you. F'm very sorry,
but I haven't taken my tea as yet, so can
Feome down to take tea with you?" We
A Sahaja Yogi lives for others, not
for himself, starting with your wife. Of
course, if you have problems or anything.
that can be sorted out. You can write to
Me. We can find out. But first thing is you
must see, you have to have emotional
balance. That has to be understood. If the
wife is unhappy, you should ask her,
Why, what's the matter?" Always stand
by her-always, whether it is your
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page7.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
mother, father or anyone, stand by her and
then tell her what is the right thing. But if
you take an opposite position, she won't
understand. But if you take her side and
tell everybody that "Let's find out". And
then establish her self-respect, Let her feel
that she will not be insulted by anyone.
and compassion. If you cannot love your
own wife, who are you going to love?
More than your children, more than
anybody else! You share your love a little
and you'll be amazed
For small, small things also I've seen,
Sahaja Yogis get angry with their wives.
For example now, supposing, I'm
Anybody insults your wife, you should
stand by her [at] that time. Later on, you
supposed to be your Mother and
can sort it out. Nobody dare say anything
to your wife, do anything to your wife,
but take the side of your wife all the time
because, after all, she's a Sahaja Yogini
everything. But sometimes your wife does
some mistake in puja, in something she
does not try to understand. I don't mind.
Later on you tell her that "It was a mistake
and you should not have done it: that's
also, And you can talk to her later on and
ask her what's the matter. You can take
her in the bedroom and ask,
our Mother," and they will respect it. But
"What is the
if you go on shouting, you see, there will
be a gap berween them If you talk to
them like that, their whole life will change
Be kind to them. Be gentle. Very much,
it's necessary. Specially I've seen that in
the western life, people have no training
matter, what has happened?"
**
But, in the presence of others, you
shouldn't shout at her. And you should
not correct her. Moreover, no husband
should shout at their wives. That is
something I can't understand, why should
husbands shout. It shows a very bad
uphringing. We're all Sahaja Yogis. You
are brought up by Me. I am your Mother.
And please never shout at your wives,
s
how to deal with their wife. There's no
arrangement like that but in india we have.
When they first meet the husband or the
wife, there's a big ceremony and the gentle
way ofhandling everything.
never show your teniper. I mean, some
So, though the refationship is there,
you have to establish it. You should move
slowly, gently, in a simple manner, not to
things are so simple and can be solved by
showing love. As you love Me, love you
und ifthere's anything wrong with you also,
| will never shout at you, never. What L'lbouting at theI. Reully, it's not proper
just to jump on the woman and start
.
We've had three, four cases like that, nof
do, l'l take you in a very loving manner.
You have such a great power of love
many. I should say, for so many years Jof
8.
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page8.txt 
 Original Transcript : English
the Indians, you people have better
husbands, no doubt. But sometimes, some
arriages}, but still to handle her gently,
m
talk to her gently, Talk to her in a way
that she feels that you're her husband and husbands, like in India, I think, (Shri
that she is your wife. It's something, that's Mataji asks to someone nearby "Are
an art. And because you are Sahaja there any English people here? Na, 1
Yogis, you have to show to the world that mean to be married?").
"because of Sahaja Yoga, our marriage
has been very successful. Don't listen to
your mother. Don't listen to anybody,
Listen to her first and find out what is the
problem. Otherwise, such marriages docile and not only docile but they spoil
collapse. When you are already married, their women, because of the law that is
So, you see, in England I have seen
men are very docile very docile
because of the law. Lawis so funny and
that's why they are left-sided. They are
you should show no interest in any other
there. But now we have international
woman-no interest whatsoever. First,
marriages and here in Italy also, if you are
is your wife, because that puts them off
unnecessary interest in other women.
There's no need. You've got your woman.
You've got your wife. Why should you
marrying under Italian law, it's not so bad
BuH still, you must remember that whatever
you are doing is according to Divine Laws.
Divine Laws must be obeyed and that
how you should make very successful
's
have interest in other women?
Despite all this, if they are
troublesome, let Me know. I am sitting
here to know about it. But you don't get
desperate. And things can be improved.
marriages.
I'm very anxious to see that, that
you become very happy with these
marriages-something very special,
exceptio
blessings of the Divine and you will enjoy
we can make them alright. Ifyou're not
sensible, then it will be problematic.
nal, that you will have the
Imust say that I think, compared to
your love.
May God bless you.
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page9.txt 
 HINDI TRANSLATION
(English Talk)
Scanned from Hindi Chaitanya Lahari
आज आप विवाह करने जा रही हैं। मैं सम्मव हैं सभी
सम्भव है क्योंकि आप
कुछ
भी तो ऐसी हो सकती है। सहजयोग में
आपको केवल इतना बताना चाहूँगी कि
आपने यह कार्य अत्यन्त सूझ-बूझ के साथ विवाह के लिए हमने आपको चुना है और
हमें आशा है कि आप इस बिवाह को बहुत
करना है।
विवाहित महिला के रूप में सहजयोग ही सफल तथा आनन्ददायी बनाएंगी।
में अपनी मूमिका को समझ लेना अल्यन्त
आवश्यक है कुछ अजीबोगरीब महिलाएं है महिला ने ही विवाह को सफल बनाना
हमारे यहाँ आई जिन्होंने विवाह केवल है किसी व्यक्ति विशेष से यदि आप बिवाह
इसलिए किया क्योंकि वे चिवाह करना नहीं करना चाहतीं तो आप इसके लिए
चाहती थीं और अन्ततः उनके विवाह सफल इन्कार कर सकती है। परन्तु अब जब
न हो सके ऐसी महिलां मेरे लिए इतनी आप विवाह कर रही हैं तो कृपा करके
कष्टकर हैं कि मेरी समझ में नहीं आता सहजयोगिनी दुल्हन के नजरिए से सोचिए
कि विवाह करने से पूर्व वे इस बात को सहजयोग का नाम ऊँचा करना आपकी
समझ क्यों नहीं लेती कि उन्हें क्या करना जिम्मेदारी है। सामाजिक घटना के रूप में
होगा।
सहजयोग में आपको सफल विवाह करने आपका विवाह इसलिए कर रहे हैं कि आप
चाहिएं। ये कोई सर्वसाधारण विवाह नहीं सह
है। सहज विवाह किसी भी तरह से बलिदान आप सहजयोग को गौरव प्रदान करेंगी ।
नहीं है यह तो आनन्द से परिपूर्ण सूझ--बूझ
है। आपको बहुत से कष्ट भी झेलने पड़
सकते हैं, हो सकता है कि किसी की आपका ये नया समूह विवाह के लिए आया
स्थिति पैसे के मामले में अच्छी न हो। ये है और देखना है कि यह किस प्रकार
महिलाओं की जिम्मेदारी बहुत अधिक
हम आपका विवाह नहीं कर रहे। हम
हजयोगिनी हैं. विचेकशील महिला हैं और
मैं यहाँ बताना चाहूँगी कि अब तक
99% विवाह सफल हुए हैं-99%। अब
भी हो सकता है कि किसी पुरूष के पास कार्यान्वित होता है।
ठीक - ठाक पैसा हो फिर भी इस मामले में
आपका ध्यान न रख रहा हो, आपको पैसा हैं, कोई विशेष छवि यदि आपने अपने
न देता हो या बहुत ही रोबीला हो। ये सब मस्तिष्क में बनाई हुए है तो उसे निकाल
आपके मस्तिष्क में यदि कोई धारणाएं
10
१।।
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page10.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
दें। हमने वास्तविकता के अनुरूप चलना गलत फहमियों के विषय में अपने पति से
है और देखना है कि वास्तविकता काल्पनिक बता सकती हैं परन्तु इसके लिए आप में
विचार नहीं होती। इस बात से न तो विशेष आकर्षण और विशेष सूझ-बूझ का
आपको झटका लगना चाहिए और न ही होना आवश्यक है।
मैं आपको अपने जीवन का एक उदाहरण
पुरुष को। परन्तु मान लो कि उसे इझटका
लगता भी है तो भी आपमे सूझ-बूझ होनी दूंगी।
चाहिए। आप में सूझ-बूड की भावन्ता होनी
चाहिए। पुरुषों से आपको इसकी आशा आपके सम्मुख एक उदाहरण दूगी| मेरे
नहीं करनी चाहिए।
जहाँ तक धना्जन का सम्बन्ध है यह
वैसे तो बहुत से उदाहरण हैं परन्तु मैं
पति के दफ्तर से एक व्यक्ति मुझे मिलने
आया। उसने बताया। कि मैने एक वहुत
पुरुषों की जिम्मेदारी है । उनकी अन्य बड़ी गलती की थी कि आपके पति की
जिम्मेदारियाँ है परन्तु सूझ-बूझ महिलाओं संस्था को छोड़कर मैने कहीं और नौकरी
की जिम्मेदारी है । उन्हें अपने पति को, कर ली थी। परन्तु लगता है कि वहाँ पर
पारिवारिक जीवन को तथा उससे जुडीं मैं कभी प्रसन्न नहीं रह सकता, इसलिए में
सभी चीजों को समझना होगा। महिलाओं वापिस आना चाहता हूँ। मेरे पति ने उससे
क
में सूझ बूझ की भावना ही अच्छे परिवारो
का सृजन करती है। सुखद पारिवारिक नहीं है, ये अनुशासनहीनता है जो अच्छी
सम्बन्धों के लिए महिला ही सभी कुछ नहीं है। आपने ऐसा क्यों किया? आपने
करती है। वे पति को समझाती हैं और दूसरी संस्था की नौकरी क्यों स्वीकार की?
अपनी सूझ-बूझ से उसकी सहायता करती उसने उत्तर दिया, "श्रीमान, अब मैं वापिस
हैं
ं कहा था, "तुम्हारे लिए यहाँ कोई स्थान
। एक बार जब पतियों के मन में यह आना चाहता हूँ। इसके लिए मैं आपसे
बात बैठ जाएगी कि आप विवेकशील हैं, प्रार्थना करता हूँ। प्रतिदिन वह इसके लिए
सहजयोग की चिता करती है, आप प्रार्थना करता। परन्तु पुरुषों के मस्तिष्क में
गरिमामय हैं तो आपकी सभी समस्याओं यदि एक बार कुछ घुस जाए तो वे इसे
का समाधान हो जाएगा अपनी ज़िम्मेदारियों जल्दी से बदलते नहीं। अतः वो मेरे पास
की गहन सूझ-बूझ का होना अत्यन्त
आवश्यक है। मुझे विश्वास है कि आप सब मैं वापिस आना चाहता हूँ।" अपने पति को
इस कार्य. में सफल होंगे क्योंकि आप मैं भली-भांति जानती हैूँ, इसलिए मैंने
सहजयोगिनियाँ हैं । कभी रौब न जमाएं। कहा, "ठीक है, देखते हैं क्या हो सकता
इसकी कोई आवश्यकता नहीं है। आप है," तो मैंने
यदि विवेकशील हैं तो आप गलतियों और उनसे कहा, "क्यों नहीं आप उस व्यक्ति
आया और मुझे बताया कि में इसी संस्था
मेरे पति जब बापिस आए
11
नमरट
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page11.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
को पुनः नौकरी में ले लेते?" "ओह, तो
अब वो तुम्हारे पास भी आया था! वो बहुत एक तरीका है, उसे आपने सीखना है,
समझदार है और जानता है कि उसे कहाँ उसमें कुशलता प्राप्त करनी है इसके
जाना चाहिए। मैंने कहा, "नहीं, हो सकता माध्यम से बिना किसी को चोट पहुँचाए,
है वो सोचता हो कि मैं आपसे कहीं अधिक बिना किसी से कटु बोले, बिना किसी से
उदार हूँ।" ये बहुत बड़ी चुनौती थी। अभद्र हुए, आप सभी अच्छे कार्य कर
"इसलिए वह मेरे पास आया था। आपको सकेंगे। ये सब प्रवन्धन है यह विशेष
भी उदार होना चाहिए।" तब उन्होंने उस चीज़ आपको सीखनी होगी तभी सारे झगडें
व्यक्ति को वापिस ले लिया। मैं ये कहना समाप्त हो पाएंगे ठीक है?
चाहूँगी कि इसके बाद पूरा जीवन उसने
मेरे पति की जी-जान से सहायता की।
तो ऐसा ही है। हर कार्य को करने का
परमात्मा आपको धन्य करें। मैं आप
सबको हृदय से आशीष देती हूँ।
12
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page12.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
मैं दुल्हनों से बात-चीत करके आई हूँ। वह क्या कर रही है उससे पूछे? यदि वह
उन्हें बताया है कि उनके कर्तव्य क्या हैं ज्यादा व्यस्त है तो उसकी सहायता करने
तथा उसका अर्थ क्या है? मैने उन्हें चिशेष का प्रयत्न करें। में सोचती हूँ कि अपने
रूप से बताया है कि पुरुष प्रायः थोड़े से प्रेम की अभिव्यक्ति करना पुरुषों के लिए
उत्तेजित होते हैं। विवाह से भी वे उत्तिजित बहुत आवश्यक है अन्यथा आप तो बस
हो जाते हैं । अतः आप लोगों को चाहिए मान लेंगे कि मैं विवाहित हैँ। ये बात नहीं
कि और अधिक विवेकशील बनें और मुझे है। अतः घर लौटकर अपनी पत्नी से
विश्वास है-वो लड़कियाँ ही विवेकशील अच्छी तरह बातचीत करें, उससे पूछे कि
दिखाई दे रहीं थीं। फिर भी आपको ये वह क्या कर रही थी और क्या उसे किसी
बहुत
बात ध्यान में रखनी है कि आप सहजयोग चीज की आवश्यकता है।
सहजयोग में हमारी एक परम्परा या ये
में विवाह कर रहे हैं, विवाह नहीं, सहजयोग
-विवाह कर रहे हैं। ये बात बहुत महत्वपूर्ण कहें नियम है कि अपनी कमाई का सारा
है । अपने विवाह को आपने अत्यन्त सफल पैसा पत्नी के पास रखा जाना चाहिए।
उससे पूछे बिना आपको कोई पैसा नहीं
बनाकर दिखाना है।
घर-गृहस्थी और बच्चों की जिम्मेदारी, खर्चना चाहिए और आपसे पूछे बिना उसे
निःसन्देह-मैं इस बात से सहमत हूँ- भी पैसा नहीं खर्चना चाहिए। पैसा बहुत
लडकियों की या दुल्हनों की होती है
परन्तु आपकी भी ज़िम्मेदारी है कि उसका तो आपको पूरा अधिकार है। यह पति-- पत्नी
ध्यान रखें, उसकी उपेक्षा न करें ये कहकर दोनों की सम्पति है परन्तु पत्नी को इस
कि मैं बहुत व्यस्त हूँ. इसे तर्कसंगत न
ठहराएं। अपनी पत्नी को कुछ समय आपको है। न वो आपसे पूछे बिना खर्च कर सकती
देना ही होगा। इस मामले में आपको है न आप उससे पूछे बिना।
लापरवाही नहीं करनी चाहिए। ये पहली
चीज है। उदाहरण के रूप में जब आप पूरी समझ होनी चाहिए कि किस प्रकार के
काम से घर वापिस आते हैं तो-मैं जानती प्रेम की अभिच्यक्ति आप कर रहें हैं। आप
हूँ, आप थके हुए होते हैं, परन्तु देखें कि यदि उस पर संदेह करते हैं तो गलत है
।
बड़ी समस्या है आपको यदि पैसा चाहिए
बात का ज्ञान होना चाहिए कि पैसा कितना
यह आपसी सूझ-बूझ है। प्रेम की आपको
13
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page13.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
या यदि आप ये सोचते हैं कि ये सब तो है एक दूसरे के साथ बैठकर भी आप
मेरा है आप यदि समझते हैं कि यह सब जीवन आनन्दमय बना सकते हैं। मरस्पर
तो मेरा है वह पूछने वाली कान है तो यह बातचीत करके भी आप जीवन का आनन्द
गलत है। महिलाओं का नौकरी आदि करना ले सकते हैं । परन्तु आपको यदि यह कला
मुझे पसन्द नहीं फिर भी यदि आवश्यक नहीं आती तो सम्भव है कि आपको भी
होगा तो वे कार्य करेंगी। कार्यरत होने की समस्या हो, आपकी पत्नी को भी समस्या
स्थिति में मैने उनसे बताया है कि उन्हें हो।
पत्नी में यदि कोई गम्भीर समस्या है
इस बात के प्रति सावधान रहना कि सर्वप्रथम
वे गृहणियाँ हैं। हम केवल विवाह ही नहीं केवल तभी आप विवाह को तोड़ सकते हैं।
करना चाहते, हम सहजयोगियों के विवाह हम इस समस्या को देखने का प्रयत्न
करना चाहते हैं जिनके सुन्दर बच्चे हों करेंगे परन्तु सामान्य स्थिति में आप ये
और सुन्दर परिवार बने। हम खूबसूरत समझने का प्रयत्न करें कि पत्नी यदि घर
परिवार चाहते हैं।
अंतः पतियों का हावी होना या पत्नियों रूप से महत्वपूर्ण है, आपसे भी अधिक
का दोनों ही गलत धारणाएं है एक दूसरे महत्वपूर्ण है। आपका दृष्टिकोण यदि ये हो
से यदि आप प्रेम कर सके तो यह बहुत कि दो आत्माओं के बीच-बाएं और दाएं
हितकर होगा। मैं देखती हैँ कि छोटी-छोटी के बीच विवाह हुआ है एक दूसरे के प्रति
चीजों के लिए लोग परस्पर लड़ते हैं। पूर्ण सूझ-बूझ आ जाएगी। विवाह का
कपड़ों के लिए खाने के लिए और भावनात्मक पक्ष भी है परन्तु मैं देखती हैँ
छोटी-छोटी चीज़ों के लिए लोग परस्पर प्रायः विवाहित लोगों में भावनात्मक पक्ष की
लड़ते हैं। आप यदि किसी से प्रेम करें तो समझ नहीं होती। पत्नी यदि उदास है या
का कार्य सम्भाल रही है तो वह समान
आपका जीवन अत्यन्त सुन्दर बन जाता रो रही तो आपके प्रेम के दौ शब्द, या
है। यह छोटी-छोटी चीजें व्यर्थ हैं अतः उसके प्रति प्रेम प्रदर्शन बहुत बड़ा कार्य
अपनी पत्नियों को परखें नहीं, उन पर करेंगे किसी को प्रेम करने से अच्छा और
हावी न हों। उन्हें यदि आपके पथ-प्रदर्शन कुछ नहीं हो सकता।
की जरूरत है तो ठीक है। परन्तु यदि
विवाह के सर्वसाधारण अनुभव के लिए
पति हर समय यह कहता रहे ऐसा करो, आपका विवाह नहीं हुआ है। आपका विवाह
वैसा करो तो वह बड़ा उबाऊ हो जाता है। प्रेम का आनन्द लेने के लिए हुआ है। प्रेम
हमैशा ध्यान रखें कि आप अपने और अपनी करना बहुत बड़ा आशीर्वाद है और दिव्य
पत्नी के जीवन को उबाऊ न बना दें। है आप यदि प्रेम करते हैं तो आप दोष
जीवन के आनन्द लेने के बहुत से तरीके नहीं खोजेंगे। अपने विवाहित जीवन के
14
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page14.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
आनन्द लेने के उपाय आप खोजेंगे। मैंने पता लगाते हैं कि वह ठीक तो है।
आपको यहाँ ये बताने के लिए बुलाया है
कि आपने अपने विवाहित जीवन का आनन्द
मैं आपको लाल बहादुर शास्त्री का
उदाहरण देना चाहूँगी। वो अपनी पत्नी से
लेना है और अकेले आप आनन्द नहीं ले बहुत प्रेम करते थे। उनकी पत्नी सर्वसाधारण
सकते अकेले आप आनन्द नहीं ले सकते
अतः आपकी पत्नी आपकी साथी है, आपकी सामान्य परिवार से सम्बन्धित थीं । एक
मित्र है, आपकी सभी है। इसके विषय बार मैं उनके घर पर गई। प्रातः दस बजे
में सुन्दर विचार बनाएं। कहने से मेरा मैं उनके घर पर थी तो लाल बहादुर
अभिप्राय है कि कुछ लोग तो
रोमांटिक होते हैं और कुछ बिल्कुल नहीं पत्र भेजा जिसमें लिखा था रोजमर्रा की
होते। अतः किसी भी चीज की अति नहीं तरह से मैंने स्नान आदि किया परन्तु तुम
होनी चाहिए। सहजयोगी के रूप में आप
अपनी पत्नी के गुणों की प्रशसा करें और नहीं करना चाहा। क्योंकि तुम कल रात
सहजयोग के विवाह को समझें।
निःसन्देह सर्वोत्तम बात तो ये है कि
। महिला थीं, पढ़ी-लिखी भी न थीं और एक
कुछ
बहुत अधिक शास्त्री ने अपने दफ्तर से पत्नी को एक
तब तक सो रही थीं। मैंने तुम्हें परेशान
|
सोई नहीं थी इसलिए मैंने
तुम्हे जगाना
नहीं चाहा। मुझे खेद है। परन्तु मैंने अभी
तक चाय नहीं पी है। क्या मैं तुम्हारे साथ
सन्देह करने लगते हैं और फिर अलग हो चाय पीने आ सकता हूँ? वे परस्पर इतने
परस्पर विश्वास करें विवाहित लोग परस्पर
जाते हैं। अतः सन्देह करने की कोई बात समीप थे! देखिए ये कितना हृदयस्पर्शी है!
नहीं। विवाहित जीवन से डरने की कोई वे आए। मैं उन्हें देखकर आश्चर्यचकित
बात नहीं। विवाह तो एक अत्यन्त सुन्दर थी वे भारत के प्रधानमंत्री थे फिर भी
जीवन में आपका प्रवेश है । मैं कहूँगी कि देखिए किस प्रकार वे अपनी पत्नी का
आपका अपने जीवन को किसी अन्य के ध्यान रखते थे! वे घर पर आए और अपनी
साथ बाँटना सुन्दर उत्क्रान्ति है। परन्तु पत्नी के साथ चाय पी
बहुत से लोग इसमें असफल हो जाते हैं, रही, उनके सामने नहीं आई । मैंने सोचा
क्यों? क्योंकि वो सोचते हैं वो पुरुष हैं और कि मुझे बाधा नहीं बनना चाहिए।
पत्नियाँ महिलाएं। दोनों परस्पर मिलकर
अत्यन्त प्रसन्नता पूर्वक रह सकते हैं।
मैंने देखा है कि कुछ पति बहुत अच्छे हैं अत्यन्त व्यस्त व्यक्ति थे फिर भी वे अपनी
वे इतना कठोर परिश्रम करते हैं कि उनके पत्नी तथा परिवार का सदैव ध्यान रखते
पास पत्नियों के लिए समय ही नहीं होता । थे मैं जब वहाँ थी तो मुझे हैरानी हुई जब
परन्तु फोन करके वे उनकी सुध लेते हैं । उन्होंने अपनी बेटियों से कहा कि "तुम
|
। मैं घर में छिपी
ये सभी छोटी-छोटी चीज़ें जीवन में
बहुत हितकर होती हैं। यद्यपि शास्त्री जी
15
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page15.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
अपने बच्चों की देखभाल स्वयं करो, मेरी दें कि कोई उसे अपमानित नहीं करेगा।
पत्नी तुम्हारी नौकरानी नहीं बनी रहेगी। मैं कोई यदि आपकी पत्नी को अपमानित करें
उसे आया नहीं बना सकता। तुम स्वयं तो उस समय आपको आपनी पत्नी का
इस बात का घ्यान रखो। तो बच्चों के साथ देना चाहिए। बाद में आप उस मामले
मुकाबले पत्नी को क्या स्थान दिया गया। को सुलझा सकते हैं। किसी में साहस नही
ऐसा ही होना चाहिए। इसी प्रकार से हम होना चाहिए कि आपकी पत्नी को कोई
अन्य व्यक्ति के साथ रहना सीखते हैं। हर कुछ कहे। हर समय अपनी पत्नी का साथ
समय यदि आप अपने ही बारे में सोचते दें क्योंकि वह एक सहजयोगिनी है। बाद
रहें, "मुझे कौन से आराम मिल रहे हैं, ये में आप उससे बात करके पूछ सकते हैं
खाना अच्छा न था तो आप सहजयोगियों कि क्या बात है। एकान्त में ले जाकर आप
की तरह से जीवन नहीं व्यतीत कर रहे। उससे पूछे, "क्या बात है, क्या हुआ?
परन्तु अन्य लोगों के सामने आपको
रहता है, केवल अपने लिए नहीं और इस उस पर चिल्लाना नहीं चाहिए और न ही
चीज का आरम्भ उसकी पुत्नी से होता है। उसकी गलतियों को सुधारना चाहिए। इतना
आपकी यदि कोई समस्या है तो, नि:सन्देह, ही नहीं किसी भी पति को अपनी पत्नी पर
उसका समाधान किया जा सकता है। आप चिल्लाना नहीं चाहिए। ये बात मरी समझ
मुझे पत्र लिख सकते हैं और हम इन में नही आती कि पति अपनी पत्नियों पर
समस्याओं को देखेंगे। परन्तु आवश्यक बात चिल्लाए क्यों! इससे उनकी गलत परवरिश
ये है कि आपमें भावनात्मक सन्तुलन होना का पत्ता चलता है। हम सभी सहजयोगीं हैं
चाहिए। उसकी समझ आपको होनी चाहिए मैंने आपकी परवरिश की है । मैं आपकी माँ
पत्नी यदि खिन्न है तो आप उससे पूछे हूँ। कृपा करके कभी अपनी पत्नियों पर
क्यों क्या बात है?" हमेशा उसका साथ चिल्लाएं नहीं। कभी अपना क्रोध उन्हें न
दें-हमेशा। चाहे आपकी माँ-पिता या किसी दिखाएं। मेरा कहने का अभिप्राय है इन
सब छोटी-छोटी बातों का समाधान प्रेम
सहजयोगी अन्य लोगों के लिए जीवित
अन्य का मामला ही क्यों न हो अआप उसका
साथ दें और फिर उसे बताएं उचित क्या प्रदर्शन के द्वारा ही किया जा सकता
है परन्तु यदि आप उसका विरोध करने जैसे आप मुझे प्रेम करते हैं वैसे ही मैं
लगेंगे तो उसे समझ नहीं आएगा। उसका आपको प्रेम करती हैँ। आपमें यदि कोई
साथ देकर यदि आप सबको कहेंगे कि कमी होगी तो मैं आप पर चिल्लाऊंगी
"हम चीजों को देखते हैं" और इस प्रकार नहीं, कभी नहीं। मैं क्या करूगी मैं इसे
से यदि आप उसका आत्म सम्मान स्थापित बड़े प्रेम से लूगी।" आप में प्रेम एवं करुणा
करेंगे तो अच्छा होगा उसे विश्वस्त होने की अत्यन्त महान शक्ति है अपनी पत्नी
16
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page16.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
से यदि आप प्रेम नहीं कर सकते तो मन्द-गति से शान्तिपूर्वक सहजरूप से
किससे करेंगे। अपने बच्चों से या किसी जीवन में चलें। महिलाओं पर उछलें नहीं
अन्य से कहीं अधिक प्रेम अपनी यत्नी को और न ही उन पर चिल्लाने लगें वास्तव
करें। अपना थोड़ा सा प्रेम बाँटकर देंखें में ऐसा करना उचित न होंगा इतने वर्षो
आप आश्चर्य चकित रह जाएंगे।
में हमारे सम्मुख इस प्रकार के केवल
मैने देखा है कि छोटी-छोटी चीजों के तीन-चार मामले आए। इससे अधिक नहीं।
लिए भी सहजयोगी अपनी पत्नी से नाराज फिर भी अपनी पत्नी का संचालन बड़े प्रेम
हो जाते हैं। उदाहरण के लिए मान लें मैं से करें उससे बड़े प्रेम पूर्वक बात करे।
आपकी माँ हूँ सभी कुछ हूँ। परन्तु आपकी पत्नी से इस प्रकार बात करें कि उसे
पत्नी कभी पूजा में कोई गलती करती है, महसूस हो कि आप उसके पति हैं वो
किसी बात को समझने का प्रयत्न नहीं आपकी पत्नी है। ये एक कला है। आप
करती तो मैं बुरा नहीं मानती। बाद में उसे क्योंकि सहजयोगी हैं आपको विश्व के सम्मुख
बताएं कि ये गलती थी और तुम्हें नहीं ये दर्शाना होगा कि सहजयोग के कारण
करनी चाहिए थी। वे हमारी माँ हैं, तब वे आपके विवाह सफल हुए हैं। अपनी माँं या
परन्तु आप यदि किसी अन्य के चलाए न चलें
चिल्लाएंगे तो आप दोनों में दूरी पैदा हो पहले अपनी पत्नी को सुने देखें कि उसकी
जाएगी परन्तु आप यदि इस प्रकार प्रेम से क्या समस्या है अन्यथा ये विवाह टूट जाएगा।
उनसे बात करेंगे तो आपका पूरा जीवन जब आपका विवाह हो चुका है तो किसी
परिवर्तित हो जाएगा उन्हें प्रेम करें, उनसे अन्य महिला में आपको बिल्कुल भी
भद्रता पूर्वक व्यवहार करें। ऐसा करना दिलचस्पी नहीं लेनी चाहिए। आपकी पत्नी
बहुत आवश्यक है। पश्चिम में मैंने विशेष सबसे पहले है। वह अन्य महिलाओं में
रूप से ये बात देखी है कि लोगों को आपकी दिलचस्पी को समाप्त करती है।
अपनी पत्नियों से व्यवहार करने का प्रशिक्षण इसकी कोई आवश्यकता नहीं, आपकी अपनी
ही नहीं है। इस प्रकार का कोई प्रबन्ध ही पत्नी है. अन्य महिलाओं में क्यों आपको
1
बहाँ नहीं है। परन्तु भारत में यह सब कुछ दिलचस्पी लेनी चाहिए?
है। भारत में मति-मत्नी, जब पहली बार
मिलते हैं तो बहुत बड़ा उत्सव होता है पत्नी कष्टकर है तो मुझे बताएं। ये बात
और सभी कुछ अत्यन्त मधुरता पूर्वक होता देखने के लिए मैं यहाँ बैठी हुई हूँ। परन्तु
है।
अतः यद्यपि सम्बन्ध तो हैं परन्तु आपने ठीक कर सकते हैं। परन्तु आप यदि
उन सम्बन्धों को स्थापित करना है अत्यन्त विवेकशील नहीं है तो समस्याएं खड़ी हो
ये सब करने के बावजूद भी यदि आपकी
आप निराश न हों। चीज़ें सुघरेंगी, हम
उन्हें
17
कि
 20010923_Shri Ganesha Puja Marriages_Cabella.pdf-page17.txt 
 Hindi Translation (English Talk)
जाएंगी।
मेरे विचार से भारतीयों के मुकाबले में हमेशा याद रखना है कि जो भी कुछ आप
आप लोगों के पति बेहतर है इसमें कोई कर रहे हैं वह दैवी नियम के अनुसार है।
शक नहीं (श्रीमाताजी साथ खड़े किसी दैवी नियम का पालन होना चाहिए और
व्यक्ति से पूछती हैं क्या यहाँ पर कोई इसी प्रकार से आप अपने विंवाह को सफल
इंग्लैण्ड के दुल्हैे भी हैं?) इंग्लैण्ड में मैंने बना सकते हैं। मैं यही सब देखने के लिए
देखा है पुरुष अत्यन्त दब्यू हैं। कानून के आतुर हूँ कि इन विवाहों से आप आनन्दित
कारण वे अत्यन्त विनम्र है वहाँ का कानून हो जाएं। यह अत्यन्त विशिष्ट चीज है
इतना अजीब है और यही कारण है कि जिससे आपको परमात्मा का आशीर्वाद प्राप्त
वहाँ के लोग बहुत ही भावुक हैं। वे अत्यन्त होगा और आप अपने प्रेम का आनन्द
दब्बू है, इतने दब्बू कि कानून के कारण वे लेंगे।
अपनी पत्नियों को बिगाड़ देते हैं परन्तु
अब हम अन्तर्राष्ट्रीय विवाह करते हैं और
इटली में वहाँ के कानून के अनुसार विवाह
करें तो भी कुछ बुरा नहीं है। परन्तु आपको
परमात्मा आपको धन्य करें।
18
