Yuvadrishiti September, 2001 Volume 2 Issue 3 dication दवाट ...Is the only way you can achieve your ascent

 i jai Sfri Mataji † Contents Риja Talk Ours is a Gyanmarg Shri Krishna Puja 2001 2. Theme: Dedication Dedication समर्पण .. देशभक्ति - समर्पण का 4. 7. दूसरा नाम .8 Friendship Kahlil Gibran- Describes SahajaFriendship Sahaji's Destination What joy in celebrating the 1 Anniversary of t gauiat श्री 10 तुळजाभवानी.. YUVADRISHTI. Nourished by Her love, this Physics of the Subtle sapling grows in the hallowed land of the Divine. Heal the World And with the vision, of our Mother, to reach out it's 11 Heart of the Matter .. 12 canopy to all Her young children, separated miles Caduceous apart by this material world. Kalpataru it could be, Knowledge and Fun where basking under its shadow, we the children of Theme for our Great Mother sing songs in Her praise. Can we the yuva's fulfill Her dream? Surrender to the Goddess for She alone knows the unforeseen. .14 n ..15 Ganapatipule Issue. .. 15 Probably we are too insignificant, even to use the words like Dedication but lets not be aware of the intensity and pour in all that we can, you never know when the Adishakti at the throne begins to smile. So let us all come together and dedicate ourselves to spread this message of Divine Love. yuvadrishti@yahoo.com

 Puja Talk Ours is a Gyanmarg Excerpts from SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 29 July 2001 is your relation, who is your brother, who is your sister? Those who are evolved souls are your relations. They are your own and, for them, if you have to fight the people who are aggressive people, you better do it. You have to do it. Tто oday we have gathered here to worship Shri Krishna, the one who was Virat, who fought all kinds of evil without entering into the arena.. That is the way of dharma. In Gita, Shri Krishna has described a personality which is a sage. We can call him a saint. Or Hecalled itasthithapragya. So when asked what is the definition of the sthithapragya, the description He gave was abouta person who is absolutely at peace with himself and at peace with his atmosphere. So we have three paths as you know, in Sahaj Yog. The one is of bhakti. Bhakti is where you sing the praise of God. have devotion, do all kinds of rituals, everything and you think you are very close to God. This is one which is being accepted by many, many people and by many so-called religions, that we must have complete dedication for God. How did - you are not yet connected to God. How, what are you doing? How can you have any dedication to God, with whom you arenotat all connected? The second one was the karma, that Is very surprising. All this knowledge He gave in first place in Gita. That is - that is the best, that He called as the Gnyanamarga. That is Sahaja Yoga, by which you get the subtle knowledge. But at the same time, when you see Hime advising Arjuna, it is very surprising that here he s talking vou dovour work. You goon doing your workwith adetached only of spirituality, of complete detachment and there He's telling Arjuna that "You go and fight. Theyare already dead people. This conflict is difficult to understand, that how could Shi Krishna, the same person who is preaching that you all have to become sthithapragya, suddenly starts telling Arjuna that you goand fight the force. One side itiscompletedetachment and another side is the war. "How will you explain this? is Shri Krishna's own words, one can say that once you are a realized soul and you have reached that highest position in your awareness, to you everything is futile. But just now, what you have todo is to save the dharma- not the dharma that people talk about. But the dharma means evolutionary process of human beings, which is going on and if all the good people, thosewho stand for righteousness, are finisliced, then how will this evolutionary powerbesaved? Sovouhave to save them and for that, ifyou have to kill, yon don't kill anybody, they're already dead because they're notevolved souls and they don't care for their Realization. mind. I mean it'snot possible, but that's what they sayand we are domg our karmas, good karmas, we do all kinds of good things, go to various places for our cleansing, meet many great people of spirituality, go to all various places and Visit all auspicious places which are being described. fighting?" Whom yoй are pray. All kinds of rituals, we da for that. That is the karma yoga. And that is what the kanna yoga, according to us, is the right side 15 Many people, as you' know, are right-sided. Right-sided people are the people who are, as you know, full ofego, unngance and thinkno end of themselves - very difficult to Cornect them. Theyalso never seanything wrong with them. Whichever way they act, they think is all right. That is the karma yoga, but He has said that whatever karmas you do, whateverits fruits are, that yon cannot say. He said it in a very uncertain manner because definitely, if He had said it with certainty, people would never have understood Him. So He said it is not possible that whatever karmas you are doing could be thekarmas which will get you the blessings of the Divine. He has said it. So you have to fight them. You have to fight the negative forces. You have to fight the wrongdoers. All this Heexplains in a very beautiful manner, that we have witlin'us three kinds of powers, which we also know, and by the middle one that wehave, weriseaboveall these material, physical fmental, emotional - all these problems facing us into a new realm of spirituality. And that's what He wanted to save from the cruel people, from the aggressive, who were also misleading others. It's a very good understanding, ifyou have, that who So then, which karmas we should do? Orshould we give up al the karmas?All the action, we should give up? People were in two minds. This is the style of Shri Krishna, is to put people in two minds so they use their discretion. CAnd third one is the discretion, which He calls as the Gnyanamarg, is the central path, by which you evolve. You evolve into a new state, into a new state of your mind, a new 2

 Puja Talk state of your being, by which you become absolutely above every nonsense. Also you are endowed with power to fight whatever is bad, whatever is comupting, whatever is killing this one. At that stage, you are equipped with a divine power that you can finish offanything that is negative around you. This is to be understood that that's a state. That's not just talking. That's not just believing that I am that, but it's a state. If you come up to that state where you are beyond all these things and you have all the knowledge, pureknowledge, the subtle knowledge of being, this is the Gnyanamarg. Many people say that everybody cannot go to Gnyanamarg and, for that, you have to have a special type of personality, but this is very misleading. Everybody can go into Gyanamarg. It is very, very innately built within us, this. evolutionary attainment. Itis within us and all of us can have that. Only thing is we have no confidence perhaps that we go on avoiding it and go tocheaper things like becoming devoted to something, doing some sort of aritual, going to some sort of aholyplace, all kinds of nonsense, which doesn't give you the evalutionary ascent by which you know the knowledge, the pure knowledge, the real knowledge. sayhowmanymiles it is from here to, say, New York or what trains go there. All this knowledge is not real - how much So far, whatever you have known was written in the book, whateveryour parents toldyou orwhateveryou haveexplored outside. But the knowledge which is the purest, which is the this cloth will cost how much this carpet will cost, in what real knowledge, which is the gnyana, that you can only get through your ascent and establish in yourself properly in that state. If you go on denying it, you canmot make out. Bit everyone has right to get it. You need not be educated, vou need not bea very simple person, vou need not be very dch or poor, makes TIO difference, as long as you are a human being anda humble human being thiaking that you haye to achieve that state. You all can get that state, which you know very well. And at that state you become absolutely knowledgeable, knowledgeableabout yourself, knowledgeable about others, knowledgeable about everything that goes around. But this state must be maintainedand try to go above that state where you have no more doubts leftinyou. This is what Shri Krishna taughtand this is what one has to achieve, but He, beinga diplomat, He tried to tell you other stories "Tiy this, try that, this, that." Butactuallywhat Hehas praised is gnyanamarg. shop you can get. All this knowledge is just useless, is not the real knowledge. Súch a person doesn't know this kind of knowledge, but what he knows is the knowledge about your being knowledge aboutthe whole universe, which is not howmany stars there are or how many universes there are. Ng-itis thesubtle imner personality ofeverything, heknows. Ir that subtlety hedischvers so many new things which he may not even heard about and, thus, you reach a state of great knowledgeable personality. This is what we have to achieve. We are born as human beings and we know so Triany thingsalready. People know so many things, but they dontknow the actual. This knowledge doesn'tcome through your reading or through your intellectual pursuit or for your emotional movement-no. It is shashwat. It is all the time there. Itexists. It will exist. And it is just to be understood, just to be known to yourself what it is. Itcannot change. It Cannot be remolded. Itis what it is. And that is what you krownow. Ours is a gnyanamarg. That is the knowledze, the path of knowledge in which you have to knowall the knowledge. Unless and until you have the whole knowledge, you arenot yet a gnyani, a person who knows. In this way He has established that ourevolutionary process has to come beyond all other human awareness. Other human awareness is of a no value fora human personality. Now he knows something Nobody would doubt that because those who have got this state, they may doubt, they may call you crazy, they may thinkanything, but with the open eyes, the truth Inthe same way, with the open heart and a open brain, when you know that, that is the real truth and that is what is to be kriown. whatever you say %23 3.

 Dedication Dedication Cowley Manon seminar, 31 July, 82 As today I told you, that it is necessary that Complete dedication is the 'only' way you can achieve it. you have to recognize me. And that recognition is fixed, that condition is fixed. I cannot change it. As Christ has already said, that "Anything against me will be tolerated, but anything against the Holy Chost will not be". It's a very big warning. Perhaps people don't realize what it means. Of course none of you are against me, that's only the warning that Christ has given to People still get caught up. Still get into problems. What's the reason? So many people ask me, that once we have got realization how is it Mother we go down? The Jonly reason is that dedication is not complete, if complete' reverence and Tcomplete dedication has not been establishedB you still do not know that I am Divine-to 'that' extent as you should. I do not say all of you. But one must think why we ard not progressing so fast, as we should have been. you. But still if you look into your heart and look into When people are mesmerized they fall/your mind, you will find out that complete completely' flat on the grqund, in front of their/ devotion that you had for say, Christ, or for Krishna, or for any one of those who have been, gurus. Absolutely. They give up their money they give up everything-homes, houses, families, children, and just go flat - when they are mesmerized. Without asking any questions. is not there, Krishna said "Sarva dharmanam parityajya mamekam sharanam iraja", forget all the without going into 'any detail, without trying religions of the world. Religions does not mean to find out the life of their gurn. All such people also go very fast into darkness, into greater darkness, and into complete destruction. But you are Sahaja Yogis and you have to construct yourself. it does not mean the religions like Hindu, Christian, Muslim, but he has meaning all the sustenance. "Forget all the sustenance, and completely dedicate to me"-that was six thousand would still say that "that we have completely dedicated ourselves to Shri Krishna" where is he now? Even those, they say like that. Of course, there is no difference between him and me, but today T am the one. I am the one who is has given your realization. But our first consideration could be our jobs, our own problems, our own family problems and dedication is the last. years Back. And there are many who I didn't want to shatter your egos belore, neyer to tell you in these words. Perhaps this is the first time I am saying this to you "That you have to dedicate yourself completely to me; not to Sahaja Yoga but to me. Sahaja Yoga is just one of my aspects. Leaving everything, you have to dedicate complete Dedication,-otherwise you cannot ascend any further. Without questioning, without arguing

 Dedication have better surroundings; but her devotees. And this Devotion and dedication should not I am illusive - it is true-my name is Maha Maya. I am illusive no doubt, but I am illusive just to judge you. be a frenzy or anything, but should be sustained', 'continuous', ever-flowing, ever growing. That is the only way, now for further Now the Dedication is a very important part of he ascent. Why? Because when you are precariously placed, when there is immediate danger to your existence; at this time, when the whole world is standing at a precarious position where it is going to be destroyed completely, it is very important that you cling on to the thing that is going to save you. With complete might and complete faith. development. EVERY BELL THAT RUNG Every Bell that rung that day, Became a reason for me To jump to attention Open the door and see Then I'd ask myself Why these funny actions? When life moves straight, Why inject these complications? All it adds: Is a certain décoration to this existence. And the background is studded with A sweet and sour perception Like you are getting drenched in ordinary water, does not matter, but if you are sinking in the sea and there is question of 'this moment of existence and that moment of destriction -that time, if a hand comes forward to feteh you out, there is no time for you to think anymore but cling on to it-with all your might, with all you faith. The key to certain doors Is now, in ypur hands Quit your island And trayelafar, to wondrous lands When we have badhas when we are surrounded by negativity, we get aware of it, and little-bit we get confused. And that's the time we want to cling on. But badhas give you ideas which are detrimental. So a big struggle is set At that time what is the best way? The best way is to forget 'everything else' forgel that veu are possessed or there is badhaor anything. With all your might, whatever is there, you have to hold on to me. Believe in dreams And/ideas that are removed from convention & Though you're good at it You could pay this praying soul a little attention Because the road ahead Might be stréwn with a holy mess But devotion is a cool cushion You must confess But our style of dedication is very fashtonable and modern, in which Sahaja Yoga is by the way and mother is very much by the way. I am sofry its not going to work out. I do not have to tll this to you because if you read Devimahatmya its sufficient. She can only be achieved through Dedication. She is the only fond of her bhaktas- the devotees. Its nowhere written that she is fond of people who talk better, who can argue better, who dress better, who live better, who Only you are the doetor For the disease I feel Lack of attachment is the name And hollow is its feel You are a medicine That goes beyond common belief That soothes the parts untouched & Sets free doves that fly in belief

 Dedication ा० ि समर्पण माताजी है और अपनी चित्रकारी से बह इस चित्र मे रंग भर रहीं है। इसी रंग का एक अंश होना हर सहजी के जीवन का लक्ष्य ह । हेतुवाद (RA71ONALI) - आधुनिकमानव का वह शत्रु है जिसके जाल को काटे बिना सर्मपण और उत्सर्ग जैसे शब्दो का समझना कठिन है । इस माया रुपी जाल के बंधन से निकलते ही हम ऐसे ा करूणा सागर और पूर्णतः का आभास करते है. जिसका एक सहजयोगी ही समीकरण कर सकता है । यह स्थिती मानवता के समर्पण स्थूल रूप से नही अपितु सूक्ष्म रूप से प्राप्त से किया जा सकाता है । प्रेम की कहानी हम अपने आप शुरु करे और इसकी महक अपने भाई बंधुओ, दोस्तों में बिखरने का प्रयत्न करें । इसी आपसी प्रेम के दर्पण का प्रतिविम्ब हमारे सहज जीवन आध्यात्मक प्रगति की उँचाई का प्रतिबिम्ब है । श्री माताजी के अपने वचनों में, जब आप पर्वत के सम्मुख होते हैं तो हमे उस पर्वत के विशालता का आभास नही होता यही मायाजाल बहुत से लोगो पर गूढ़ रूप से कार्य करती है और वे अपने अस्तित्व के मुख्य कारण को समझने में भूल करते हैं । वे क्या हैं, उन्होने क्या पाया है, उन्होने जो कुछ पाया है उसका हो में आता है और हम एक बहुतर सहजी होते हैं। अंतत हम सुभी सहजयोगी श्रीमाताजी से यह प्रार्थना करते है कि वे हमारे हृदय में ऐसे समर्पण भाव को भरें जिसके सहारे हम सहज का झंडा हर जगह फहराएँ। और इस अथाह प्रेम सागर की महक और सुगंध से हर प्राणी के जीवन में परिवर्तन मूल्य क्या है, वे कहाँ तक इस दूरी को तय कर पाए है, और ऐसे अनेक प्रश्न और उनके उत्तर उनसे मुँह छुपाए रहते हैं । समर्पैण पत ै पूर्ण । SHRI MATAJI इन सभी प्रश्नों का एक ही समाधान श्री माताजी के उच्चारित कुछ 'समर्पण' संबंधी वाक्यांशः 'आपका' पूर्ण समर्पण मुझ तक रहना है न कि सहजयोग तक । सहजयोग केवल उस का एक रूप मात्र है। सभी कुछ से दूर Are Yoir my brother, are You my friend, Are You my mother, or a guiding light. A light so bright, it lights my sight and guides me through the night, A night so dark, 1 feel so stark- जाकर आपका समर्पण होना है। अन्यथा आपकी प्रगति में अंकुश पड़ सकता है। बिना सवालो के, बिना वाद-विवाद के, समर्पण आपके सभी प्रश्नो का सीधा और सरल सा हल है । इसी से आप आगे बढ़ सकते है । but You are there afar. Tean feel You inside, I can feel You outside श्री कृष्ण के वचन थे 'सर्व धर्मन् परित्यज मामेकम् शरणम् व्रज अर्थात जग से सभी धर्म त्यागकर मेरे चरणो में आओ । यही अपेक्षा श्रीमाताजी हम लोगों से रखती है यह हमारा सौभाग्य है कि हम सभी परमात्मा के इतने विशाल कार्य मे सहभागी हुए । जीवन के निरर्थक पन्नों से बाहर निकलकर I can feel You in my heart. ता And when there is darkness and when there is SOITOW, I know You will always be there shining down on me, For You are my brother, my friend, my mother, and my guiding light. हमें इस महान कार्य मे सहायक होना है । छोटी-छोटी गूढ़ परेशानियों को एक विशाल परदे की ओढ़ मे महत्त्वहीन होता अनुभव करना है । यह वह परदा है जिसकी चित्रकार स्वयं श्री 6

 Dedication देशभक्ति - समर्पण का दूसरा नाम लोगों में भी सहज की कुछ न कुछ प्रकृति आनी चाहिए । तब आप समझ पाएँगे कि इस देश मे कितनी गहन बाते हमारे लिए हो गई देशभक्ति बहुत आवश्यक है । यदि आपके अंदर देशभक्ति नही तो आप सहज में नही आ सकते। इस देश के प्रति आप को ही नही, इन लोगों को भी प्रेम है, जो विदेशों मे है। आपके देश के प्रति इतनी भक्ति है कि जब यह बाहर से आज के युग में यह कल्पना कर पाना अत्यंत कठिन है कि हमारे देश में कितने महान और कर्मवीर नेता हुए जिनके स्वार्थहीन बलिदान के कारण हम आज गर्व से अपने राष्ट्र को स्वतंत्र मानते हैं । देशभक्ति की भावना अत्यंत अनोखी है। इसकी गंगा मे बहकर मानव अपने को एक अलग व्यक्तित्व न मानते हुए उस पूर्ण के आते है तो इस भूमि को झुककर प्रणाम करते हैं । अब यही आपको सिखा सकते हैं कि आप अपने देश की शक्ति को पहचानें और देश का बन्दन करें। एक अविभाज्य के रूप में देखता है, जिस रूप में सागर की एक बूंद सागर को देखती हैं । पृथक, लेकिन फिर भी अविभक्त | छोटा, परंतु फिर भी विशाल । ॐ हमारे पूर्वजों की इस घरोहर को हमें न केवल संभालना है परंतु दूसरों को, और आने वाली पीढ़ी को इस महान योगदान के बारे में संचेत करना है । था] देशभक्ति की भावना बढ़ाने से हम स्वार्थीपन के निरर्थकता के बारे में जानते है। जो हमारा है, व केवल हमारा ही नहीं रुम अपितु इस पूर्ण समुदाय का है, अहंकार और मैं' भावनाको पीछे ढकेलकर हम समग्रता को गले लगाते है । इसी देशभक्ति का सीधा सा प्रतिबिम्ब हमारे सहज जीवन पर भी पड़ता है। श्रेष्ट स्ूर पर देशभक्ति का सुक्ष्म रूपांतर प्रभुभक्ति ही है। एक श्रष्ठ और स्वार्थहीन मानव ही श्रेष्ठ सहजयोगी हो सकता है । देशभक्ति और प्रभुभक्ति लभी उस मील के पत्थर जैसे है, जहाँ पर देशभक्ति रूपी मील पत्थर को पार किए बिना हम प्रभुभक्ति के मील पत्थर तक नही पहुँच सकते । श्री माताजी के श्री वचनों में- With Best compliments From Anu Chopra म Chandigarh Yuva Shakti 'यह हमारा देश कितना महान है । इसको जानने के लिए आप

 Friendskip Friendship TF Devi Puja, France 9.7.89 take us to their home. I never felt any difference between their children and us. As a matter of fact we always felt that they were looking after us more than their own children. It needs a very large heart to be a friend. There was a father who had a friend and a son who had a friend. The father told his son the friendship is If we have worries it is best to talk them over with a friend. Friendship is such a thing that you could share your secrets. Even if you are a you are a friend first. Like you share your problems with me, why not share them with each other. Sahaja Yogis are all friends of each other. I think the relationship of friendship is much higher than any other relationship because there is nothing to be gained out of friendship. It never ceases and you just enjoy the friendship. It is the purest form of understanding of our relationship with each other. A friend is the onethey went to the first friend the friend who is always concerned about his friend. leader, LEFE: that you can always rely on your friend. The son boasted that he had great friends so the father said lets test your friends and my friends. He told the son to tell his friends that he had murdered someone and needed help. Then responded, "You murdered, just get out" and slammed the door. The next one replied, "No no don't even mention that you came to this house just leave". They then went to the father's friend the friend did not answered the knocks, for a while and then apologized saying "I thought Pure friendship is of a very beautiful nature that you enjoy the joy of another person. Ihave seen these kinds of friendships when we were young because in those days people were open hearted My father's friend was an orthodox Brahmin and chairman of the school where I was studying. As my father had to go far away, he left me in the hostel in care of this friend. A Brahmin does not touch eggs, but he knew I eat eggs, so in the mornings he would secretly cook the eggs himself and bring for me. Despite my protests he would not heed, saying that you need nourishment for your exams, your father has gone away and I have to look after you (so sweetly). He was the chairman of the school and he was breaking his own rules for me I was amazed at this friendship. My father and he hardly had any thing in common - but they were good friends nevertheless. something was wrong because you would not have come at this hour, so I was busy collecting my wife's ornaments as you might need them for money. That's why I was late in opening the door. If you have murdered doesn't matter you have children and I do not, so better say that I have murdered." The son was shocked. It is better to have one good friend than 20 half- baked friends. This is real friendship. With a friend you cannot be tense. You are just relaxed enjoying each others company. Even if you have to argue, If you have a different view its alright, there is no need to impose it on the friend. Try to understand each other, that's how we are going to learn a lot from each other. I learnt a lot from friends. For instance I learnt a lot from the French, their ideas of art, music, I have seen such friendships. When my father would go to jail. Friends would come and would

 Friendskip Ishop culture. You have friends everywhere now just with my badge and they will do anything for you. This is friendship. In this world we have thousands of friends, but we ourselves have to be very friendly. There is openness between one friend and the other. Love means complete freedom to yourself and the other. This love has to be very pure. You have to feel such a friendship then you will feel very proud of such friends. You are not alone. Imagine before this we had so many saints and great souls who were treated like singular people, tortured and killed, they were alone, but you are not. You are friends of each other, the greatest friend you have is divine power which is looking after you and doing everything for you. In this country of France where we have got liberation, let us take the real liberation of our spiritto enjoy everything that is available with understanding. go And when he is silent your heart ceases not to listen to his heart; For without words, in friendship, all thoughts, all desires, all expectations are born and shared, with joy that is unacclaimed. When you part from your friend you grieve not; For that which you love most and him may be clearer in his absence, as the mountain to the climber is clearer from the plain. And let there be no purpose in friendship save the deepening of the spirit. For love that seeks aught but the disclosure of its own mystery is not love but a net cast forth: and orly the unprofitable is caught, Ait And let your best be for your friend. Kahalil Gibran Friendshty If he must know tlie ebb of your tide, let him know its flood also. Deserikes Sakaja And a youth said, speak to us-of friendship. For what is your friend that you should seek him with hours to kill? And he answered, Saying: Your friend is your needs answered. Seek him always with hours to live. He is your field which you sow with love and reap with thanksgiving. For it is his to fill your need, but not your emptiness And in the sweetness of friendship let there be laughter, and sharing of pleasures. And he is your board and your-fireside. For you come to him with your hunger, and you seek him for peace. For in the dew of little things the heart finds its moming and is refreshed. When your friend speaks his mind you fear not the 'nay in your own mind, nor do you withhold the 'ay'.

 Sahajis Destination nalion द त्ड ा ळीडिन म र ा श्री तुळजाभवानी ा काई ा कननी क छी (ुर श्री तुळजाभवानी देवी शक्तीदेवता एवं साक्षात् पार्वतीजी का रूप है। अपने भक्तों के संरक्षण हेतु श्री पार्वतीजी का श्री तुळजाभवानी के रूप में धरती पर अवतरण हुआ है। देवी का यह स्थान अत्यंत जागृत है। महाराष्ट्र में बालघाटके पर्वत पर तुळजापुर गाँव है। ि र देवी की अवतरण की कथा स्कंद पुराणों में पायी गई हैं। कर्दम ऋषी की पत्नी अनुभुती ने अपने पति के स्वर्गवास के बाद सती होने का निर्धार किया। लेकिन अपने छोटे बच्चे को छोड़ जाने का धैर्य उसमें नहीं था। अनुभुती ने मंदाकिनी नदी के तट पर तप करना शुरू किया। कुकुर नामक राक्षस ने उसकेतप एवं पतिव्रतता भंग करने का प्रयास किया । अनुभुती की प्रार्थना सुनकर पार्वतीजी ने अष्टभुजा तुळजादेवी का रूप धारण करके कुकुर का वध किया। कुकुर ने मायावी रूप धारण किया परंतु अंतत: देवी ने उसका वध कर दिया। अनुभुती के प्रार्थना हेतु अष्टभुजा देवी ने यमुनाचन पर्वत पर वास्तव्य कर लिया। उस जगह को आज श्री क्षेत्र तुळजापुर कहते हैं। तुळजापुर की देवी श्री तुळजाभवानी की मूर्ति पाषाण की है, जो एक स्वयंभू है। महिषासुर नामक राक्षस का संहार कर देवी ने सृष्टी को घोर संकट से विमुक्त किया। महिषासुर मर्दिनी का यह स्वरूप मंदिर के मूर्ति द्वारा अत्यंत सूक्षमता पुर्वक दर्शित किया गया है। With best compliments From With best Compliments From ाम O.P. Chandana Pramod Kumar पति New Delhi New Delhi 10 ा

 Seience and Spirilwality Physics of the Subtle the energy it emits. Hence both are one and the same thing. Like the subatomic particles, the chakra is at the same time formed and formless, position and wave, identity and energy. Furthermore, in spiritual life also The Uncertainty Principal seems to apply and the devotee is caught in its limitations. Indeed he either usually focuses on the identity of personal God (Jesus, Vishnu, Shiva) and his consciousness loses tracks of the all pervading cosmic manifestation of Divinity outside of this very form; or he focuses on the abstract, undifferentiated aspect of the Divine (Buddhism, Taoism, Advaita Vedantism, forms of Islam) but his heart cannot find the bliss at the Lotus Feet of the identified, recognized Beloved one. The perception of the formed identity drives away the perception of the formless Energy. And vice versa. Classical Physics has found its most elaborate expression in Newton's mechanical model of the universe. In this deterministic model, matter was made of solid stuff or substance evolving within the three dimensional space of Eucledian geometry. It was all very satisfying for the intellect: matter was matter, God its creator was something else, somewhere else, removed from the field of science's confident observations and from man's enquiry. Relativity theory and Quantum theory have shattered these beautiful certainties of the 18th and 19th centuries and, with Albert Einstein, have laid the foundation of Sahaja Physics, that is a physics, which embraces the universe as a vibrating, organic unity. For the Sahaja Yogi the question becomes a very practical one. He feels the relationship to the Formed when he has the darshan (physical presence) of Shri Mataji. He feels the working of the Formless when he feels the vibrations and consequent changes in awareness. Indeed it is one thing to rationally grasp this truth that the two aspects are one but it is another thing to experience this truth as a state of one's own consciousness. If we do not realize the person of Shri Mataji within the formless energy of vibrations we will pine and feel separated from Her and not be able to feel Her Prem (Divine Love). And if we do not realize the formless energy we will constantly forget the true magnitude of Her personality, the perception of Her Divinity and behave as if She were a human being. Uncertainty Principle is one aspect of Maya, embodied as a law of Nuclear Physics as well as an inherent limit of the human psyche. Can it be overcome? - In Physics, no; in Sahaja Yoga, YES. And here is the first surprise!Matter is full of tricks. These subatomic units appear as particles that áre, as entities confined to an extremely small volume or as waves, stretched out through larger portions of space. This dual picture provides us with an unexpected concept of the reality of matter. Its smallest components identified by atomic physics are so to say, "identity" as particles and "energy" as waves. But according to HHeisenberg's famous "Uncertainty principle" these two aspects can never be perceived simultaneously. Without going any further in our exploration, let us make an attempt at reading, in this finding, the parable of one very important aspect of spiritual reality which was the subject of Shri Mataji's enlightening speech, on 18th June 1983 in Paris, Shri Mataji spoke beautifully about the relationship between the formed and the formless aspect of God. For instance, She says, our chakra is both formed and formless. Its formed dimension is the deity presiding over the chakra; its formless dimension -Adapted from 'Sahaja & Physicr', "Numala Yoga" July-August 1983 11

 Hral the Werld Heart of the Matter But in case of arteriosclerosis, a roughness appears on the walls of the vessels which first attracts white cells and then red blood cells. As T he Heart is the central point of creation and all the other Chakras are subservient to it. Heart a consequence, a plaque is created, the lumen diameter or diameter of the vessels is reduced and blood supply to the heart is impaired. Another cardiac disorder is Angina pectoris which is caused by physical exertion or emotional stress. is the seat of Spirit, the ultimate source of all manifested as Shiva. From it flows energy power, to all the other parts of the body. Unfortunately in today's environment most people suffer from problems relating to this very vital organ Coronary heart disease happens when there is an impairment of heart function due to inadequate blood flow to the heart compared to its need, caused by obstructive changes in the blood flow to the heart. Coronary heart diseases may manifest itself in many presentations such as Angina pecforis Myocardial infarction, Cardiac failure, Irregularities of heart and Sudden death. Risk factors for coronary heart diseases are Cigarette and tobacco, Stress,Hypertension, Diabetes, Obesity, Hypercholesterolemia, Arteriosclerosis, Lack of exercise, Genetic factors or Family history. While smoking, carbon monoxide induces atherogenesis, Nicotine generates a stimulation of the adrenergic system (sympathetic) which increases blood pressure and myocardial oxygen demand. During pregnancy, cigarette smoking can interfere with the proper growth of the fetus. As smoking prevents a large quantity of oxygen from reaching the fetus, the newborn may be underweight. Coronary heart disease is à very common pathology which is most often the result of arteriosclerosis. Normally the white blood cells won't get attached to the surface of the vessels. With best compliments From best compliments From With Marychev Evgeny Mr. Ghole Patil Aurangabad Russia 12

 Heal the Worfd According to Sahaja Yoga, angina pectoris is due to a lethargic heart. The root cause resides in the left Vishuddi. If this chakra is damaged, the pumping of the heart becomes uneasy and this organ gets tired. In such situation, it is adviced to pray Shri Vishnumaya Virata and work with a STANDING ON THIS CLIFF Standing on this cliff That rises above the heavens Fails to make one taller candle on the left Vishuddi. Repeating with full confidence "I'm not guilty at all" will also definitely help. Even though he stands on it One could look down from here And guess in which way the city is But my heart finds it's way to you Not where the glitz is LEFT VISHUDDHI The deity controlling the left vishudhi is Shri Vishnu Maya .She is also known as yoga maya. She gave Her life in childhood, enabling lord Krishna to survive failing which king Kansa A thunderous roar reminds me of home That's filled with joy and pain It's like a dozen children's voices from her garden U Then she rushes optand shelters us from rain WOuld iave killed Krishna Soon åfter birth in Life's journey refuses to stop At stations of emotional strain prison The quality But the enginessurely whistle this song Whenever they think of you again embodies self respect correct relationships They said this road is tough And laden with thorns you can't miss are It neverwas about how far we'llg But spans of thoughtlessness we cherish with women and respect for ones mother and self-sacrifice. This chakara acts as a filter Inhalation of smoke particularly cigarette smoke chokes the centre. Left Vishudhi cateh is alse responsible for Cervical Spondylitis ad Ishaemic Suddenly a thought storns the mind About a life as a ghost Although a miserable existence this is A ghost still is an angel, almost disease. coronary Like.abreeze that pierces the windows It sneaks up your door Lets see if she can tickle you to laughter Then soothe our eyes so sore 00 13

 Links from the West Caduceus mm The caduceus central rod represents the central column similar to the spine in the physical body called sushumna. No surgeon will find this sushumna as it is part of the subtle body. The sushumna, our caduceus' rod, parallels the spinal column from the base of the body to the base of the skull. Just as the spinal column is a hollow structure that protects the spinal cord of the central nervous Kundalini is the power of pure desire within us, a motherly and soothing spiritual energy, which lies dormant at the base of the spine in the sacrum bone in three and a half coils. "She is your individual Mother. How can she harm you? She knows everything about you and is anxiously waiting to give you your second birth" explains Shri Mataji Nirmal Devi. The ancient civilizations knew that in this bone resides a sacred energy and that's why called it the system, so the sushumna is a hollow structure that offers an ascending tube for the Kundalini, or light force and within it are three channels. sacrum bone. To the Western mind Kundalini The caduceus' two snake-like tubes, which spiral three and a half times each around the may appear strange but fortunately, there is a familiar symbol of it in Western culture. The symbol for medicine and a common logo on ambulances is the caduceus. IQAN F ROB. central rod, meet and cross at the sushumna in their ascent. They represent two side channels of the flow of the awakened Kundalini energy, called ida and pingala. The channel, ida, is identified with the left side, negatively charged, feminine side of the body, ending above the right nostril and has characteristics of coolness related to the moon; whereas, pingala, is identified with the right side, positively charged, masculine side and ends above the left nostril and has characteristics of heat related to the sun.The two channels are also seen as the sympathetic parasympathetic nervous systems, which Caduceus is a wing-topped staff, with two snakes winding about it, carried by Hermes, given to him (according to one legend) by Apollo. The symbol of two intertwined snakes appeared early in Babylonia and is related to other serpent symbols of fertility, wisdom, and healing, and of sun gods. This is the symbolic representation of the Kundalini in Greek mythology. Hermes, in Greek mythology, messenger of the gods, the son of the god Zeus and of Maia, the daughter of the Titan Atlas. As the special servant and courier of Zeus, Hermes had winged sandals and a winged hat and bore a golden Caduceus, or magic wand, entwined with snakes and surmounted by wings. and to connected enervate the organs of the body. 14

 Knowledge & fun Incarnation in Hindi. Ancient scriptures of India. Swadisthan chakra in Japa- 30. cdADUCEUS SWADISHTAA 31. 32 1 H. nese. VI A A Kundalini in Japanese. 36. ACROSS Representation of Kundalimi in Greek mythology. Fire is the element of this chakra. Shri Krishna revealed this "Roop' to Shri Arjuna. Energy enveloping our body. Gemstone. Shri Brahmaji's onlyincarna tion; Hazrat One of the ten Gurus. Third incarnation of Shri Vishnu. Phenomenon controlled by Shri Varun Dev. Theme of this issue. ANAM N 1. 5. EDICAT D 1D 9. AHOR G. 10. R. FElaU NOX E11 R12. K SH UDHI 14. A A17. R. IN ATA 18. NHAAT "EAPP 19. 21. Gem stone for Heart chakra. DOWN 1 Venue of Krishna Puja 2001. 24. Shri Mataji studied medicine in this city. 27. Astronomical significance of Shri Mataji's birthday. 29. Abode of the Guru Principle. 30. Element of Anahat chakra. 31. Smoking affects left Bliss. 2. 3. Meta Modern 4. Our grandfather (nana). 5 He was bio-graphed by Sir C.P 6 One of the Panchamahabhuta. 7. Author of Geetanjali 8. Plexus associated with Swadisthan chakra. 11. Genesis place of Sahaja Yoga. 13. Venue of Diwali Puja 2000(Abbreviation). 15. Beej mantra for one of the petals of Anahat Chakra. 33. Shri Shiva. 34. Plexus associated with the Heart chakra. 35. Gaandiv was his weapon. 37. "Yum" is the beej mantra of this chakra. 38. Nadi originating from Mooladhar chakra. 39. Gemstone of the chakra with 16 petals. of Time":-Symbol of Vishudhi Chakra. 16. 1ah 17. Raag associated with the Sahasrara. 20. Om was the first 3E Ilar 34 Cardiac 35 Arjun 37. Anahat 38 lde 39. Sapplire 21. Ruby 24 Labore 27. Equin 29 islmdhi II Ng 12 Ai 14. Janak 17. Hoar T8 Main 14 Dedicalior ACROSS: I Caduceus 5 Swadishthan 9 Virata 10. Aara 21 Rudra 30 Avatar 31, Vedan n Han 36 K in 20 Nad 2 Ahe 21 Fgo 2S Flermal 26 Krighng- Tugpre & Aunic 11 Nargol 13LA 1S Kem 16. Wheel 17 DOWN: 1 C 6 Ar 22. Colour of Vishudhi Chakra. 23. Our greatest enemy. 25. Shri Jesus is the 26. He also is Yogeshwar. 28. 11 Ganas for our protection; Ekadash Void 30 Air 31EV child. majohne 2. thvne 1, Fr 4 Sca 5 Shanin TNAMCHI Theme for Ganapatipule Issue 'BHARAT' (भारत the special Ganapatipule issue. All Sahajis are requested to contribute generously in the form of articles, poems and art work covering various aspects of this Great Nation. Let us all come together and collec- tively bring out a Newsletter that can be offered at the Lotus Feet of our Divine Mother in Ganapatipule. (HRa) - A subject very elose to our Mother's heart, is perhaps the most apt theme for Thank you Shri Mataji 15 A/A 15

 विना ही लोजक । कि्यामा कहा है । এ द पनो कनही बेत নী । "elessom Time ন dart Judsement" र मे SUBSCRIPTION FORM Name Address City State Pin E-mail Date of Birth Ph. Cash/DD of Rs.80/- DD No. Drawee Bank DD should be sent in the name of "Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh' payable at Pune. Date ADVERTISEMENT FORM Name Address State City Pin Recived amount: 300/- (1 issue) O 600/- (2 issues) Drawee Bank 900/-(3 issues) 1200/- (4 issues) DD/Cheque No. Content of Advertisement Signature DD should be sent in the name of 'Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh' payable at Pune. Address for correspondance: NSYS Plot No. 79, Survey No. 98 Bhusari Colony, Kothrud, Pune-38 Maharashtra. Phone: (020) 528 0668 yuvadrishti@yahoo.com 16 Snighdha.

 For Private Circulation only Published by : NSYS, Plot No. 79, Survey No. 98, Busari Colony, Kothrud, Pune-38



----------------------

2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yuvadrishiti
September, 2001
Volume 2
Issue 3
dication
दवाट
...Is the only way you
can achieve your ascent
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 i jai Sfri Mataji †
Contents
Риja Talk
Ours is a Gyanmarg
Shri Krishna Puja 2001
2.
Theme: Dedication
Dedication
समर्पण ..
देशभक्ति - समर्पण का
4.
7.
दूसरा नाम
.8
Friendship
Kahlil Gibran- Describes
SahajaFriendship
Sahaji's Destination
What joy in celebrating the 1 Anniversary of t gauiat
श्री
10
तुळजाभवानी..
YUVADRISHTI. Nourished by Her love, this Physics of the Subtle
sapling grows in the hallowed land of the Divine. Heal the World
And with the vision, of our Mother, to reach out it's
11
Heart of the Matter
.. 12
canopy to all Her young children, separated miles Caduceous
apart by this material world. Kalpataru it could be, Knowledge and Fun
where basking under its shadow, we the children of Theme for
our Great Mother sing songs in Her praise. Can we
the yuva's fulfill Her dream? Surrender to the
Goddess for She alone knows the unforeseen.
.14
n
..15
Ganapatipule Issue.
.. 15
Probably we are too insignificant, even to use the
words like Dedication but lets not be aware of the
intensity and pour in all that we can, you never
know when the Adishakti at the throne begins to
smile.
So let us all come together and dedicate ourselves
to spread this message of Divine Love.
yuvadrishti@yahoo.com
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Puja Talk
Ours is a Gyanmarg
Excerpts from SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
29 July 2001
is your relation, who is your brother, who is your sister?
Those who are evolved souls are your relations. They are
your own and, for them, if you have to fight the people who
are aggressive people, you better do it. You have to do it.
Tто
oday we have gathered here to worship Shri Krishna,
the one who was Virat, who fought all kinds of evil without
entering into the arena..
That is the way of dharma.
In Gita, Shri Krishna has described a personality which is a
sage. We can call him a saint. Or Hecalled itasthithapragya.
So when asked what is the definition of the sthithapragya,
the description He gave was abouta person who is absolutely
at peace with himself and at peace with his atmosphere.
So we have three paths as you know, in Sahaj Yog. The one
is of bhakti. Bhakti is where you sing the praise of God. have
devotion, do all kinds of rituals, everything and you think
you are very close to God. This is one which is being accepted
by many, many people and by many so-called religions, that
we must have complete dedication for God. How did - you
are not yet connected to God. How, what are you doing?
How can you have any dedication to God, with whom you
arenotat all connected? The second one was the karma, that
Is very surprising. All this knowledge He gave in first place
in Gita. That is - that is the best, that He called as the
Gnyanamarga. That is Sahaja Yoga, by which you get the
subtle knowledge. But at the same time, when you see Hime
advising Arjuna, it is very surprising that here he s talking vou dovour work. You goon doing your workwith adetached
only of spirituality, of complete detachment and there He's
telling Arjuna that "You go and fight. Theyare already dead
people.
This conflict is difficult to understand, that how could Shi
Krishna, the same person who is preaching that you all have
to become sthithapragya, suddenly starts telling Arjuna that
you goand fight the force. One side itiscompletedetachment
and another side is the war. "How will you explain this? is
Shri Krishna's own words, one can say that once you are a
realized soul and you have reached that highest position in
your awareness, to you everything is futile. But just now,
what you have todo is to save the dharma- not the dharma
that people talk about. But the dharma means evolutionary
process of human beings, which is going on and if all the
good people, thosewho stand for righteousness, are finisliced,
then how will this evolutionary powerbesaved? Sovouhave
to save them and for that, ifyou have to kill, yon don't kill
anybody, they're already dead because they're notevolved
souls and they don't care for their Realization.
mind. I mean it'snot possible, but that's what they sayand
we are domg our karmas, good karmas, we do all kinds of
good things, go to various places for our cleansing, meet
many great people of spirituality, go to all various places and
Visit all auspicious places which are being described.
fighting?"
Whom
yoй
are
pray.
All kinds of rituals, we da for that. That is the karma yoga.
And that is what the kanna yoga, according to us, is the right
side
15
Many people, as you' know, are right-sided. Right-sided
people are the people who are, as you know, full ofego,
unngance and thinkno end of themselves - very difficult to
Cornect them. Theyalso never seanything wrong with them.
Whichever way they act, they think is all right. That is the
karma yoga, but He has said that whatever karmas you do,
whateverits fruits are, that yon cannot say. He said it in a
very uncertain manner because definitely, if He had said it
with certainty, people would never have understood Him.
So He said it is not possible that whatever karmas you are
doing could be thekarmas which will get you the blessings of
the Divine. He has said it.
So you have to fight them. You have to fight the negative
forces. You have to fight the wrongdoers. All this Heexplains
in a very beautiful manner, that we have witlin'us three
kinds of powers, which we also know, and by the middle one
that wehave, weriseaboveall these material, physical fmental,
emotional - all these problems facing us into a new realm of
spirituality. And that's what He wanted to save from the
cruel people, from the aggressive, who were also misleading
others. It's a very good understanding, ifyou have, that who
So then, which karmas we should do? Orshould we give up
al the karmas?All the action, we should give up? People
were in two minds. This is the style of Shri Krishna, is to put
people in two minds so they use their discretion.
CAnd third one is the discretion, which He calls as the
Gnyanamarg, is the central path, by which you evolve. You
evolve into a new state, into a new state of your mind, a new
2
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Puja Talk
state of your being, by which you become absolutely above
every nonsense. Also you are endowed with power to fight
whatever is bad, whatever is comupting, whatever is killing
this one. At that stage, you are equipped with a divine power
that you can finish offanything that is negative around you.
This is to be understood that that's a state. That's not just
talking. That's not just believing that I am that, but it's a
state. If you come up to that state where you are beyond all
these things and you have all the knowledge, pureknowledge,
the subtle knowledge of being, this is the Gnyanamarg.
Many people say that everybody cannot go to Gnyanamarg
and, for that, you have to have a special type of personality,
but this is very misleading. Everybody can go into
Gyanamarg. It is very, very innately built within us, this.
evolutionary attainment. Itis within us and all of us can have
that. Only thing is we have no confidence perhaps that we go
on avoiding it and go tocheaper things like becoming devoted
to something, doing some sort of aritual, going to some sort of
aholyplace, all kinds of nonsense, which doesn't give you the
evalutionary ascent by which you know the knowledge, the
pure knowledge, the real knowledge.
sayhowmanymiles it is from here to, say, New York or what
trains go there. All this knowledge is not real - how much
So far, whatever you have known was written in the book,
whateveryour parents toldyou orwhateveryou haveexplored
outside. But the knowledge which is the purest, which is the this cloth will cost how much this carpet will cost, in what
real knowledge, which is the gnyana, that you can only get
through your ascent and establish in yourself properly in
that state. If you go on denying it, you canmot make out. Bit
everyone has right to get it. You need not be educated, vou
need not bea very simple person, vou need not be very dch
or poor, makes TIO difference, as long as you are a human
being anda humble human being thiaking that you haye to
achieve that state. You all can get that state, which you know
very well. And at that state you become absolutely
knowledgeable, knowledgeableabout yourself, knowledgeable
about others, knowledgeable about everything that goes
around. But this state must be maintainedand try to go above
that state where you have no more doubts leftinyou. This is
what Shri Krishna taughtand this is what one has to achieve,
but He, beinga diplomat, He tried to tell you other stories
"Tiy this, try that, this, that." Butactuallywhat Hehas praised
is gnyanamarg.
shop you can get. All this knowledge is just useless, is not the
real knowledge. Súch a person doesn't know this kind of
knowledge, but what he knows is the knowledge about your
being knowledge aboutthe whole universe, which is not
howmany stars there are or how many universes there are.
Ng-itis thesubtle imner personality ofeverything, heknows.
Ir that subtlety hedischvers so many new things which he
may not even heard about and, thus, you reach a state of
great knowledgeable personality. This is what we have to
achieve. We are born as human beings and we know so
Triany thingsalready. People know so many things, but they
dontknow the actual. This knowledge doesn'tcome through
your reading or through your intellectual pursuit or for your
emotional movement-no. It is shashwat. It is all the time
there. Itexists. It will exist. And it is just to be understood,
just to be known to yourself what it is. Itcannot change. It
Cannot be remolded. Itis what it is. And that is what you
krownow.
Ours is a gnyanamarg. That is the knowledze, the path of
knowledge in which you have to knowall the knowledge.
Unless and until you have the whole knowledge, you arenot
yet a gnyani, a person who knows. In this way He has
established that ourevolutionary process has to come beyond
all other human awareness. Other human awareness is of a
no value fora human personality. Now he knows something
Nobody would doubt that because those who have got this
state, they may doubt, they may call you crazy, they may
thinkanything, but with the open eyes,
the truth Inthe same way, with the open heart and a open
brain, when you know that, that is the real truth and that is
what is to be kriown.
whatever you say
%23
3.
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Dedication
Dedication
Cowley Manon seminar, 31 July, 82
As today I told you, that it is necessary that
Complete dedication is the 'only' way you can
achieve it.
you have to recognize me. And that recognition
is fixed, that condition is fixed. I cannot change
it. As Christ has already said, that "Anything
against me will be tolerated, but anything against
the Holy Chost will not be". It's a very big
warning. Perhaps people don't realize what it
means. Of course none of you are against me,
that's only the warning that Christ has given to
People still get caught up. Still get into problems.
What's the reason? So many people ask me, that
once we have got realization how is it Mother
we go down?
The Jonly reason is that dedication is not
complete, if complete' reverence and
Tcomplete dedication has not been establishedB
you still do not know that I am Divine-to 'that'
extent as you should. I do not say all of
you. But one must think why we ard not
progressing so fast, as we should have been.
you.
But still if you look into your heart and look into
When people are mesmerized they fall/your mind, you will find out that complete
completely' flat on the grqund, in front of their/ devotion that you had for say, Christ, or for
Krishna, or for any one of those who have been,
gurus. Absolutely. They give up their money
they give up everything-homes, houses,
families, children, and just go flat - when they
are mesmerized. Without asking any questions.
is not there,
Krishna said "Sarva dharmanam parityajya
mamekam sharanam iraja", forget all the
without going into 'any detail, without trying religions of the world. Religions does not mean
to find out the life of their gurn. All such people
also go very fast into darkness, into greater
darkness, and into complete destruction. But
you are Sahaja Yogis and you have to construct
yourself.
it does not mean the religions like Hindu,
Christian, Muslim, but he has meaning all the
sustenance. "Forget all the sustenance, and
completely dedicate to me"-that was six
thousand
would still say that "that we have completely
dedicated ourselves to Shri Krishna" where is
he now? Even those, they say like that. Of
course, there is no difference between him and
me, but today T am the one. I am the one who
is has given your realization. But our first
consideration could be our jobs, our own
problems, our own family problems and
dedication is the last.
years Back. And there are many who
I didn't want to shatter your egos belore, neyer
to tell you in these words. Perhaps this is the
first time I am saying this to you "That you have
to dedicate yourself completely to me; not to
Sahaja Yoga but to me. Sahaja Yoga is just one
of my aspects. Leaving everything, you have to
dedicate complete Dedication,-otherwise you
cannot ascend any further. Without questioning,
without arguing
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Dedication
have better surroundings; but her devotees.
And this Devotion and dedication should not
I am illusive - it is true-my name is Maha Maya.
I am illusive no doubt, but I am illusive just to
judge you.
be a frenzy or anything, but should be
sustained', 'continuous', ever-flowing, ever
growing. That is the only way, now for further
Now the Dedication is a very important part of
he ascent. Why? Because when you are
precariously placed, when there is immediate
danger to your existence; at this time, when the
whole world is standing at a precarious position
where it is going to be destroyed completely, it
is very important that you cling on to the thing
that is going to save you. With complete might
and complete faith.
development.
EVERY BELL THAT RUNG
Every Bell that rung that day,
Became a reason for me
To jump to attention
Open the door and see
Then I'd ask myself
Why these funny actions?
When life moves straight,
Why inject these complications?
All it adds:
Is a certain décoration to this existence.
And the background is studded with
A sweet and sour perception
Like you are getting drenched in ordinary water,
does not matter, but if you are sinking in the sea
and there is question of 'this moment of
existence and that moment of destriction -that
time, if a hand comes forward to feteh you out,
there is no time for you to think anymore but
cling on to it-with all your might, with all you
faith.
The key to certain doors
Is now, in ypur hands
Quit your island
And trayelafar, to wondrous lands
When we have badhas when we are
surrounded by negativity, we get aware of it, and
little-bit we get confused. And that's the time
we want to cling on. But badhas give you ideas
which are detrimental. So a big struggle is set
At that time what is the best way? The best way
is to forget 'everything else' forgel that veu are
possessed or there is badhaor anything. With
all your might, whatever is there, you have to
hold on to me.
Believe in dreams
And/ideas that are removed from
convention
& Though you're good at it
You could pay this praying soul a little
attention
Because the road ahead
Might be stréwn with a holy mess
But devotion is a cool cushion
You must confess
But our style of dedication is very fashtonable
and modern, in which Sahaja Yoga is by the way
and mother is very much by the way. I am sofry
its not going to work out. I do not have to tll
this to you because if you read Devimahatmya
its sufficient. She can only be achieved through
Dedication. She is the only fond of her bhaktas-
the devotees. Its nowhere written that she is
fond of people who talk better, who can argue
better, who dress better, who live better, who
Only you are the doetor
For the disease I feel
Lack of attachment is the name
And hollow is its feel
You are a medicine
That goes beyond common belief
That soothes the parts untouched
& Sets free doves that fly in belief
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Dedication
ा०
ि
समर्पण
माताजी है और अपनी चित्रकारी से बह इस चित्र मे रंग भर रहीं
है। इसी रंग का एक अंश होना हर सहजी के जीवन का लक्ष्य ह ।
हेतुवाद (RA71ONALI) - आधुनिकमानव का वह शत्रु है जिसके
जाल को काटे बिना सर्मपण और उत्सर्ग जैसे शब्दो का समझना
कठिन है । इस माया रुपी जाल के बंधन से निकलते ही हम ऐसे
ा
करूणा सागर और पूर्णतः का आभास करते है. जिसका एक
सहजयोगी ही समीकरण कर सकता है । यह स्थिती मानवता के
समर्पण स्थूल रूप से नही अपितु सूक्ष्म रूप से प्राप्त
से
किया जा सकाता है । प्रेम की कहानी हम अपने आप शुरु करे
और इसकी महक अपने भाई बंधुओ, दोस्तों में बिखरने का प्रयत्न
करें । इसी आपसी प्रेम के दर्पण का प्रतिविम्ब हमारे सहज जीवन
आध्यात्मक प्रगति की उँचाई का प्रतिबिम्ब है ।
श्री माताजी के अपने वचनों में, जब आप पर्वत के सम्मुख होते हैं
तो हमे उस पर्वत के विशालता का आभास नही होता यही
मायाजाल बहुत से लोगो पर गूढ़ रूप से कार्य करती है और वे
अपने अस्तित्व के मुख्य कारण को समझने में भूल करते हैं । वे
क्या हैं, उन्होने क्या पाया है, उन्होने जो कुछ पाया है उसका
हो
में आता है और हम एक बहुतर सहजी होते हैं।
अंतत हम सुभी सहजयोगी श्रीमाताजी से यह प्रार्थना
करते है कि वे हमारे हृदय में ऐसे समर्पण भाव को भरें जिसके
सहारे हम सहज का झंडा हर जगह फहराएँ। और इस अथाह
प्रेम सागर की महक और सुगंध से हर प्राणी के जीवन में परिवर्तन
मूल्य क्या है, वे कहाँ तक इस दूरी को तय कर पाए है, और ऐसे
अनेक प्रश्न और उनके उत्तर उनसे मुँह छुपाए रहते हैं ।
समर्पैण
पत
ै पूर्ण ।
SHRI MATAJI
इन सभी प्रश्नों का एक ही समाधान
श्री माताजी के उच्चारित कुछ 'समर्पण' संबंधी वाक्यांशः
'आपका' पूर्ण समर्पण मुझ तक रहना है न कि सहजयोग तक ।
सहजयोग केवल उस का एक रूप मात्र है। सभी कुछ से दूर
Are Yoir my brother, are You
my friend,
Are You my mother, or a guiding light.
A light so bright, it lights my sight
and guides me through the night,
A night so dark, 1 feel so stark-
जाकर आपका समर्पण होना है। अन्यथा आपकी प्रगति में अंकुश
पड़ सकता है। बिना सवालो के, बिना वाद-विवाद के, समर्पण
आपके सभी प्रश्नो का सीधा और सरल सा हल है । इसी से आप
आगे बढ़ सकते है ।
but You are there afar.
Tean feel You inside, I can feel You outside
श्री कृष्ण के वचन थे
'सर्व धर्मन् परित्यज मामेकम् शरणम् व्रज
अर्थात जग से सभी धर्म त्यागकर मेरे चरणो में आओ । यही
अपेक्षा श्रीमाताजी हम लोगों से रखती है
यह हमारा सौभाग्य है कि हम सभी परमात्मा के इतने विशाल
कार्य मे सहभागी हुए । जीवन के निरर्थक पन्नों से बाहर निकलकर
I can feel You in my heart.
ता
And when there is darkness and
when there is SOITOW,
I know You will always be there
shining down on me,
For You are my brother, my friend,
my mother, and my guiding light.
हमें इस महान कार्य मे सहायक होना है । छोटी-छोटी गूढ़
परेशानियों को एक विशाल परदे की ओढ़ मे महत्त्वहीन होता
अनुभव करना है । यह वह परदा है जिसकी चित्रकार स्वयं श्री
6
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Dedication
देशभक्ति - समर्पण का दूसरा नाम
लोगों में भी सहज की कुछ न कुछ प्रकृति आनी चाहिए । तब
आप समझ पाएँगे कि इस देश मे कितनी गहन बाते हमारे लिए
हो गई देशभक्ति बहुत आवश्यक है । यदि आपके अंदर
देशभक्ति नही तो आप सहज में नही आ सकते। इस देश के
प्रति आप को ही नही, इन लोगों को भी प्रेम है, जो विदेशों मे
है। आपके देश के प्रति इतनी भक्ति है कि जब यह बाहर से
आज के युग में यह कल्पना कर पाना अत्यंत कठिन है कि
हमारे देश में कितने महान और कर्मवीर नेता हुए जिनके
स्वार्थहीन बलिदान के कारण हम आज गर्व से अपने राष्ट्र को
स्वतंत्र मानते हैं ।
देशभक्ति की भावना अत्यंत अनोखी है। इसकी गंगा मे बहकर
मानव अपने को एक अलग व्यक्तित्व न मानते हुए उस पूर्ण के
आते है तो इस भूमि को झुककर प्रणाम करते हैं । अब यही
आपको सिखा सकते हैं कि आप अपने देश की शक्ति को
पहचानें और देश का बन्दन करें।
एक अविभाज्य के रूप में देखता है, जिस रूप में सागर की
एक बूंद सागर को देखती हैं । पृथक, लेकिन फिर भी अविभक्त
| छोटा, परंतु फिर भी विशाल ।
ॐ
हमारे पूर्वजों की इस घरोहर को हमें न केवल संभालना है
परंतु दूसरों को, और आने वाली पीढ़ी को इस महान योगदान
के बारे में संचेत करना है ।
था]
देशभक्ति की भावना बढ़ाने से हम स्वार्थीपन के निरर्थकता
के बारे में जानते है। जो हमारा है, व केवल हमारा ही नहीं
रुम
अपितु इस पूर्ण समुदाय का है, अहंकार और मैं' भावनाको
पीछे ढकेलकर हम समग्रता को गले लगाते है ।
इसी देशभक्ति का सीधा सा प्रतिबिम्ब हमारे सहज जीवन
पर भी पड़ता है। श्रेष्ट स्ूर पर देशभक्ति का सुक्ष्म रूपांतर
प्रभुभक्ति ही है। एक श्रष्ठ और स्वार्थहीन मानव ही श्रेष्ठ
सहजयोगी हो सकता है । देशभक्ति और प्रभुभक्ति लभी
उस मील के पत्थर जैसे है, जहाँ पर देशभक्ति रूपी मील
पत्थर को पार किए बिना हम प्रभुभक्ति के मील पत्थर तक
नही पहुँच सकते ।
श्री माताजी के श्री वचनों में-
With Best compliments
From
Anu Chopra
म
Chandigarh Yuva Shakti
'यह हमारा देश कितना महान है । इसको जानने के लिए आप
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Friendskip
Friendship
TF
Devi Puja, France 9.7.89
take us to their home. I never felt any difference
between their children and us. As a matter of
fact we always felt that they were looking after
us more than their own children. It needs a
very large heart to be a friend. There was a
father who had a friend and a son who had a
friend. The father told his son the friendship is
If we have worries it is best to talk them over
with a friend. Friendship is such a thing that you
could share your secrets. Even if you are a
you are a friend first. Like you share your
problems with me, why not share them with each
other. Sahaja Yogis are all friends of each other. I
think the relationship of friendship is much
higher than any other relationship because there
is nothing to be gained out of friendship. It never
ceases and you just enjoy the friendship. It is
the purest form of understanding of our
relationship with each other. A friend is the onethey went to the first friend the friend
who is always concerned about his friend.
leader,
LEFE:
that
you can always rely on your friend. The
son boasted that he had great friends so the
father said lets test your friends and my friends.
He told the son to tell his friends that he had
murdered someone and needed help. Then
responded, "You murdered, just get out" and
slammed the door. The next one replied, "No
no don't even mention that you came to this
house just leave". They then went to the father's
friend the friend did not answered the knocks,
for a while and then apologized saying "I thought
Pure friendship is of a very beautiful nature that
you enjoy the joy of another person. Ihave seen
these kinds of friendships when we were young
because in those days people were open hearted
My father's friend was an orthodox Brahmin and
chairman of the school where I was studying. As
my father had to go far away, he left me in the
hostel in care of this friend. A Brahmin does not
touch eggs, but he knew I eat eggs, so in the
mornings he would secretly cook the eggs
himself and bring for me. Despite my protests
he would not heed, saying that you need
nourishment for your exams, your father has
gone away and I have to look after you (so
sweetly). He was the chairman of the school and
he was breaking his own rules for me I was
amazed at this friendship. My father and he
hardly had any thing in common - but they were
good friends nevertheless.
something was wrong because you would not
have come at this hour, so I was busy collecting
my wife's ornaments as you might need them
for money. That's why I was late in opening the
door. If you have murdered doesn't matter you
have children and I do not, so better say that I
have murdered." The son was shocked. It is
better to have one good friend than 20 half-
baked friends. This is real friendship.
With a friend you cannot be tense. You are just
relaxed enjoying each others company. Even if
you have to argue, If you have a different view
its alright, there is no need to impose it on the
friend. Try to understand each other, that's how
we are going to learn a lot from each other. I
learnt a lot from friends. For instance I learnt a
lot from the French, their ideas of art, music,
I have seen such friendships. When my father
would go to jail. Friends would come and would
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Friendskip
Ishop
culture. You have friends everywhere now just
with my badge and they will do anything for
you. This is friendship. In this world we have
thousands of friends, but we ourselves have to
be very friendly. There is openness between
one friend and the other. Love means complete
freedom to yourself and the other. This love
has to be very pure. You have to feel such a
friendship then you will feel very proud of such
friends. You are not alone. Imagine before this
we had so many saints and great souls who were
treated like singular people, tortured and killed,
they were alone, but you are not. You are friends
of each other, the greatest friend you have is
divine power which is looking after you and
doing everything for you. In this country of
France where we have got liberation, let us take
the real liberation of our spiritto enjoy
everything that is available with understanding.
go
And when he is silent your heart ceases not to
listen to his heart;
For without words, in friendship, all thoughts,
all desires, all expectations are born and
shared, with joy that is unacclaimed.
When you part from your friend you grieve
not;
For that which you love most and him may be
clearer in his absence, as the mountain to the
climber is clearer from the plain.
And let there be no purpose in friendship
save the deepening of the spirit.
For love that seeks aught but the disclosure of
its own mystery is not love but a net cast forth:
and orly the unprofitable is caught,
Ait
And let your best be for your friend.
Kahalil Gibran
Friendshty
If he must know tlie ebb of your tide, let him
know its flood also.
Deserikes Sakaja
And a youth said, speak to us-of friendship.
For what is your friend that you should seek
him with hours to kill?
And he answered, Saying:
Your friend is your needs answered.
Seek him always with hours to live.
He is your field which you sow with love and
reap with thanksgiving.
For it is his to fill your need, but not your
emptiness
And in the sweetness of friendship let there
be laughter, and sharing of pleasures.
And he is your board and your-fireside.
For you come to him with your hunger, and
you seek him for peace.
For in the dew of little things the heart finds
its moming and is refreshed.
When your friend speaks his mind you fear
not the 'nay in your own mind, nor do you
withhold the 'ay'.
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Sahajis Destination
nalion
द
त्ड
ा
ळीडिन
म
र
ा
श्री तुळजाभवानी
ा
काई
ा
कननी
क
छी
(ुर
श्री तुळजाभवानी देवी शक्तीदेवता एवं साक्षात् पार्वतीजी का रूप
है। अपने भक्तों के संरक्षण हेतु श्री पार्वतीजी का श्री तुळजाभवानी
के रूप में धरती पर अवतरण हुआ है। देवी का यह स्थान अत्यंत
जागृत है।
महाराष्ट्र में बालघाटके पर्वत पर तुळजापुर गाँव है।
ि
र
देवी की अवतरण की कथा स्कंद पुराणों में पायी गई हैं। कर्दम ऋषी
की पत्नी अनुभुती ने अपने पति के स्वर्गवास के बाद सती होने का
निर्धार किया। लेकिन अपने छोटे बच्चे को छोड़ जाने का धैर्य उसमें
नहीं था। अनुभुती ने मंदाकिनी नदी के तट पर तप करना शुरू किया।
कुकुर नामक राक्षस ने उसकेतप एवं पतिव्रतता भंग करने का प्रयास
किया । अनुभुती की प्रार्थना सुनकर पार्वतीजी ने अष्टभुजा तुळजादेवी
का रूप धारण करके कुकुर का वध किया। कुकुर ने मायावी रूप
धारण किया परंतु अंतत: देवी ने उसका वध कर दिया। अनुभुती के प्रार्थना हेतु अष्टभुजा देवी ने यमुनाचन पर्वत पर
वास्तव्य कर लिया। उस जगह को आज श्री क्षेत्र तुळजापुर कहते हैं।
तुळजापुर की देवी श्री तुळजाभवानी की मूर्ति पाषाण की है, जो एक स्वयंभू है। महिषासुर नामक राक्षस का संहार कर
देवी ने सृष्टी को घोर संकट से विमुक्त किया। महिषासुर मर्दिनी का यह स्वरूप मंदिर के मूर्ति द्वारा अत्यंत सूक्षमता पुर्वक
दर्शित किया गया है।
With best compliments
From
With
best
Compliments
From
ाम
O.P. Chandana
Pramod Kumar
पति
New Delhi
New Delhi
10
ा
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Seience and Spirilwality
Physics of the Subtle
the energy it emits. Hence both are one and the
same thing. Like the subatomic particles, the chakra
is at the same time formed and formless, position
and wave, identity and energy. Furthermore, in
spiritual life also The Uncertainty Principal seems
to apply and the devotee is caught in its limitations.
Indeed he either usually focuses on the identity of
personal God (Jesus, Vishnu, Shiva) and his
consciousness loses tracks of the all pervading
cosmic manifestation of Divinity outside of this very
form; or he focuses on the abstract, undifferentiated
aspect of the Divine (Buddhism, Taoism, Advaita
Vedantism, forms of Islam) but his heart cannot find
the bliss at the Lotus Feet of the identified,
recognized Beloved one. The perception of the
formed identity drives away the perception of the
formless Energy. And vice versa.
Classical Physics has found its most elaborate
expression in Newton's mechanical model of the
universe. In this deterministic model, matter was
made of solid stuff or substance evolving within the
three dimensional space of Eucledian geometry. It
was all very satisfying for the intellect: matter was
matter, God its creator was something else,
somewhere else, removed from the field of science's
confident observations and from man's enquiry.
Relativity theory and Quantum theory have
shattered these beautiful certainties of the 18th and
19th centuries and, with Albert Einstein, have laid
the foundation of Sahaja Physics, that is a physics,
which embraces the universe as a vibrating, organic
unity.
For the Sahaja Yogi the question becomes a very
practical one. He feels the relationship to the
Formed when he has the darshan (physical
presence) of Shri Mataji. He feels the working of
the Formless when he feels the vibrations and
consequent changes in awareness. Indeed it is one
thing to rationally grasp this truth that the two
aspects are one but it is another thing to experience
this truth as a state of one's own consciousness. If
we do not realize the person of Shri Mataji within
the formless energy of vibrations we will pine and
feel separated from Her and not be able to feel Her
Prem (Divine Love). And if we do not realize the
formless energy we will constantly forget the true
magnitude of Her personality, the perception of Her
Divinity and behave as if She were a human being.
Uncertainty Principle is one aspect of Maya,
embodied as a law of Nuclear Physics as well as an
inherent limit of the human psyche. Can it be
overcome? - In Physics, no; in Sahaja Yoga, YES.
And here is the first surprise!Matter is full of tricks.
These subatomic units appear as particles that áre,
as entities confined to an extremely small volume
or as waves, stretched out through larger portions
of space. This dual picture provides us with an
unexpected concept of the reality of matter. Its
smallest components identified by atomic physics
are so to say, "identity" as particles and "energy" as
waves. But according to HHeisenberg's famous
"Uncertainty principle" these two aspects can never
be perceived simultaneously.
Without going any further in our exploration, let us
make an attempt at reading, in this finding, the
parable of one very important aspect of spiritual
reality which was the subject of Shri Mataji's
enlightening speech, on 18th June 1983 in Paris, Shri
Mataji spoke beautifully about the relationship
between the formed and the formless aspect of God.
For instance, She says, our chakra is both formed
and formless. Its formed dimension is the deity
presiding over the chakra; its formless dimension
-Adapted from 'Sahaja & Physicr', "Numala Yoga" July-August 1983
11
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Hral the Werld
Heart of the Matter
But in case of arteriosclerosis, a roughness
appears on the walls of the vessels which first
attracts white cells and then red blood cells. As
T he Heart is the central point of creation and
all the other Chakras are subservient to it. Heart
a consequence, a plaque is created, the lumen
diameter or diameter of the vessels is reduced
and blood supply to the heart is impaired.
Another cardiac disorder is Angina pectoris
which is caused by physical exertion or
emotional stress.
is the seat of Spirit, the ultimate source of all
manifested as Shiva. From it flows energy
power,
to all the other parts of the body. Unfortunately
in today's environment most people suffer from
problems relating to this very vital organ
Coronary heart disease happens when there is
an impairment of heart function due to
inadequate blood flow to the heart compared
to its need, caused by obstructive changes in
the blood flow to the heart. Coronary heart
diseases may manifest itself in many
presentations such as Angina pecforis
Myocardial infarction, Cardiac failure,
Irregularities of heart and Sudden death.
Risk factors for coronary heart diseases are
Cigarette and tobacco, Stress,Hypertension,
Diabetes, Obesity, Hypercholesterolemia,
Arteriosclerosis, Lack of exercise, Genetic factors
or Family history.
While smoking, carbon monoxide induces
atherogenesis, Nicotine generates a stimulation
of the adrenergic system (sympathetic) which
increases blood pressure and myocardial oxygen
demand. During pregnancy, cigarette smoking
can interfere with the proper growth of the fetus.
As smoking prevents a large quantity of oxygen
from reaching the fetus, the newborn may be
underweight.
Coronary heart disease is à very common
pathology which is most often the result of
arteriosclerosis. Normally the white blood cells
won't get attached to the surface of the vessels.
With
best compliments
From
best compliments
From
With
Marychev Evgeny
Mr. Ghole Patil
Aurangabad
Russia
12
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Heal the Worfd
According to Sahaja Yoga, angina pectoris is due
to a lethargic heart. The root cause resides in
the left Vishuddi. If this chakra is damaged, the
pumping of the heart becomes uneasy and this
organ gets tired. In such situation, it is adviced
to pray Shri Vishnumaya Virata and work with a
STANDING ON THIS CLIFF
Standing on this cliff
That rises above the heavens
Fails to make one taller
candle on the left Vishuddi. Repeating with full
confidence "I'm not guilty at all" will also
definitely help.
Even though he stands on it
One could look down from here
And guess in which way the city is
But my heart finds it's way to you
Not where the glitz is
LEFT VISHUDDHI
The deity controlling the left vishudhi is Shri
Vishnu Maya .She is also known as yoga maya.
She gave Her life in childhood, enabling lord
Krishna to survive failing which king Kansa
A thunderous roar reminds me of home
That's filled with joy and pain
It's like a dozen children's voices from her garden
U Then she rushes optand shelters us from rain
WOuld
iave killed
Krishna
Soon åfter
birth in
Life's journey refuses to stop
At stations of emotional strain
prison
The quality
But the enginessurely whistle this song
Whenever they think of you again
embodies
self
respect
correct
relationships
They said this road is tough
And laden with thorns you can't miss
are
It neverwas about how far we'llg
But spans of thoughtlessness we cherish
with women and respect for ones mother and
self-sacrifice. This chakara acts as a filter
Inhalation of smoke particularly cigarette smoke
chokes the centre. Left Vishudhi cateh is alse
responsible for Cervical Spondylitis ad
Ishaemic
Suddenly a thought storns the mind
About a life as a ghost
Although a miserable existence this is
A ghost still is an angel, almost
disease.
coronary
Like.abreeze that pierces the windows
It sneaks up your door
Lets see if she can tickle you to laughter
Then soothe our eyes so sore
00
13
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Links from the West
Caduceus
mm
The caduceus central rod represents the central
column similar to the spine in the physical body
called sushumna. No surgeon will find this
sushumna as it is part of the subtle body. The
sushumna, our caduceus' rod, parallels the spinal
column from the base of the body to the base of
the skull. Just as the spinal column is a hollow
structure that protects the spinal
cord of the central nervous
Kundalini is the power of pure desire within us,
a motherly and soothing spiritual energy, which
lies dormant at the base of the spine in the
sacrum bone in three and a half coils.
"She is your individual Mother. How can she
harm you? She knows everything about you and
is anxiously waiting to give you your second
birth" explains Shri Mataji
Nirmal Devi. The ancient
civilizations knew that in this
bone resides a sacred energy
and that's why called it the
system, so the sushumna is a
hollow structure that offers an
ascending tube for the Kundalini,
or light force and within it are
three channels.
sacrum bone.
To the Western mind Kundalini
The caduceus' two snake-like
tubes, which spiral three and a
half times each around the
may appear strange but
fortunately, there is a familiar
symbol of it in Western culture.
The symbol for medicine and a
common logo on ambulances is
the caduceus.
IQAN F ROB. central rod, meet and cross at
the sushumna in their ascent.
They represent two side
channels of the flow of the
awakened Kundalini energy,
called ida and pingala. The
channel, ida, is identified with
the left side, negatively charged,
feminine side of the body, ending
above the right nostril and has characteristics of
coolness related to the moon; whereas, pingala,
is identified with the right side, positively
charged, masculine side and ends above the left
nostril and has characteristics of heat related to
the sun.The two channels are also seen as
the sympathetic
parasympathetic nervous systems, which
Caduceus is a wing-topped staff,
with two snakes winding about
it, carried by Hermes, given to
him (according to one legend) by
Apollo. The symbol of two
intertwined snakes appeared early in Babylonia
and is related to other serpent symbols of
fertility, wisdom, and healing, and of sun gods.
This is the symbolic representation of the
Kundalini in Greek mythology.
Hermes, in Greek mythology, messenger of the
gods, the son of the god Zeus and of Maia, the
daughter of the Titan Atlas. As the special servant
and courier of Zeus, Hermes had winged sandals
and a winged hat and bore a golden Caduceus,
or magic wand, entwined with snakes and
surmounted by wings.
and
to
connected
enervate the organs of the body.
14
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Knowledge & fun
Incarnation in Hindi.
Ancient scriptures of India.
Swadisthan chakra in Japa-
30.
cdADUCEUS
SWADISHTAA 31.
32
1
H.
nese.
VI A A
Kundalini in Japanese.
36.
ACROSS
Representation of Kundalimi
in Greek mythology.
Fire is the element of this
chakra.
Shri Krishna revealed this
"Roop' to Shri Arjuna.
Energy enveloping our body.
Gemstone.
Shri Brahmaji's onlyincarna
tion; Hazrat
One of the ten Gurus.
Third incarnation of Shri
Vishnu.
Phenomenon controlled by
Shri Varun Dev.
Theme of this issue.
ANAM
N 1.
5.
EDICAT
D 1D
9.
AHOR
G.
10.
R.
FElaU NOX
E11
R12.
K SH UDHI
14.
A A17.
R.
IN
ATA
18.
NHAAT
"EAPP
19.
21.
Gem stone for Heart chakra.
DOWN
1 Venue of Krishna Puja 2001.
24. Shri Mataji studied medicine
in this city.
27. Astronomical significance of
Shri Mataji's birthday.
29. Abode of the Guru Principle.
30. Element of Anahat chakra.
31. Smoking affects left
Bliss.
2.
3. Meta Modern
4. Our grandfather (nana).
5 He was bio-graphed by Sir C.P
6 One of the Panchamahabhuta.
7. Author of Geetanjali
8. Plexus associated with Swadisthan chakra.
11. Genesis place of Sahaja Yoga.
13. Venue of Diwali Puja 2000(Abbreviation).
15. Beej mantra for one of the petals of Anahat Chakra.
33. Shri Shiva.
34. Plexus associated with the Heart chakra.
35. Gaandiv was his weapon.
37. "Yum" is the beej mantra of this chakra.
38. Nadi originating from Mooladhar chakra.
39. Gemstone of the chakra with 16 petals.
of Time":-Symbol of Vishudhi Chakra.
16.
1ah
17. Raag associated with the Sahasrara.
20. Om was the first
3E Ilar 34 Cardiac 35 Arjun 37. Anahat 38 lde 39. Sapplire
21. Ruby 24 Labore 27. Equin 29 islmdhi
II Ng 12 Ai 14. Janak 17. Hoar T8 Main 14 Dedicalior
ACROSS: I Caduceus 5 Swadishthan 9 Virata 10. Aara
21 Rudra 30 Avatar 31, Vedan n Han 36 K
in 20 Nad 2 Ahe 21 Fgo 2S Flermal 26 Krighng-
Tugpre & Aunic 11 Nargol 13LA 1S Kem 16. Wheel 17
DOWN: 1 C 6 Ar
22. Colour of Vishudhi Chakra.
23. Our greatest enemy.
25. Shri Jesus is the
26. He also is Yogeshwar.
28. 11 Ganas for our protection; Ekadash
Void 30 Air 31EV
child.
majohne 2. thvne 1, Fr 4 Sca 5 Shanin
TNAMCHI
Theme for Ganapatipule Issue
'BHARAT' (भारत
the special Ganapatipule issue. All Sahajis are requested to contribute generously in the form of articles,
poems and art work covering various aspects of this Great Nation. Let us all come together and collec-
tively bring out a Newsletter that can be offered at the Lotus Feet of our Divine Mother in Ganapatipule.
(HRa) -
A subject very elose to our Mother's heart, is perhaps the most apt theme for
Thank you Shri Mataji
15
A/A
15
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 विना
ही लोजक ।
कि्यामा कहा है ।
এ
द पनो कनही बेत নী ।
"elessom Time
ন
dart Judsement"
र मे
SUBSCRIPTION FORM
Name
Address
City
State
Pin
E-mail
Date of Birth
Ph.
Cash/DD of Rs.80/-
DD No.
Drawee Bank
DD should be sent in the name of "Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh' payable at Pune.
Date
ADVERTISEMENT FORM
Name
Address
State
City
Pin
Recived amount:
300/- (1 issue) O 600/- (2 issues)
Drawee Bank
900/-(3 issues)
1200/- (4 issues)
DD/Cheque No.
Content of Advertisement
Signature
DD should be sent in the name of 'Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh' payable at Pune.
Address for correspondance:
NSYS
Plot No. 79, Survey No. 98
Bhusari Colony,
Kothrud, Pune-38
Maharashtra.
Phone: (020) 528 0668
yuvadrishti@yahoo.com
16
Snighdha.
 2001_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 For Private Circulation only
Published by : NSYS, Plot No. 79, Survey No. 98, Busari Colony, Kothrud, Pune-38
