NIRMALA July-August, 2001 Volume: XIII Issue: 7 & 8 VERSAL PURE The Divine Cool Breeze 00 IVI महीं मूलाधारे कमपि मणिपूरे हुतवह स्थितं स्वाधिष्ठाने हृदि मरुत-माकाश-मुपरि। मनोऽपि भ्रूमध्ये सकलमपि भित्वा कुलपथं सहस्रारे पदमें सह रहसि पत्या चिहरसे।। O Devi, Having penetrated the Earth element (Pruthvi Tattva) in the Muladhara, Water element in the Manipura, Fire element in the Swadhishthana, Air element in the Anahata (Heart), The Sky element (Akasa) in the Vishudhi Chakra, Manas (Mind) in the Ajona (Agya), Thou, ascending through the Susumna (Kula Path) sportest with Thy The Thousand Petalled Lotus. Consort in the Solitude of Sahasrara- OHARMA VARSIA RELIGION

 House of Representatives 7th District, New York P- roclamation "78* Birthday Celebration of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi" Whereas: It is the sense of this Congressional Body, that those individuals who have dedicated their fife to public service and to helping others, should be publicly acknowledged and applauded. One such person is Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, and. Shri Mataji was bom in Chindwara, India in 1923 and raised as a Christian. As a child her maturity and wisdom impressed all who she encountered. At a very young age she fought for India's independence working closely with Mahatma Gandhi and today, continues to strive towards the realization of his dream for universal peace and unity, and. Whereas: Whereas: Shri Mataji has a deep and abiding commitment and dedication to world peace, the role of women in society, and "Self-Realizntion". These issucs are what have motivated Shri Mataji to become involved in her fight to improve the quality of life, She is the founder of Sahaja Yoga, a deep meditation which cnhances health and peacefulnes and connects you to a higher level of awareness ofyourself and of the powers that created you. and. Whereas: Shri Mataji has been nominated twice for the Nobel Peace Prize, she has reccived Global Nominations and in 1993 she was appointed Honorary Member of the Presidium of the Petravska Academy of Art and Science in St. Petersburg. In 1986 she was named "Personality of the Year" by the Italian Government and was presented with a Congressional Record Honorarium by the 10s" Congress 1997, and. Whereas: Friends, family and colleagues have gathered on this the 21" day of March, 200 Ito celebrata Shri Mataji's 78" birthday and to honor her for all her accomplishments. Wishing her continued pence, happiness and success, be it therefore Prociaimed: By the power incumbent in me as the duly elected Member of the House of Representatives from New York's Seventh Congressional District, I bestow Congressional Recognition upon ATES STA Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi In Witness Hlhereof, I have hereunto set my hand UNITED Sonly. CONGTDSS JOSEPH CROWLEY Member ol Congres

 Volume XIIIISUE 7& 8 July August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze 78th Birthday Puja, Nirmal Dharm, 21.3.2001 14 78th Birthday Felicitation, 20.3.2001 23 Speech of Shri Mataji, New Delhi, 17.12.2000 25 Sahasrara Puja, Cabella, 5.5.1996 35 Statutes of The Lord, Guru Puja, 1981

 THE DI VINE C o OL Co oL BRE EZE тHE Published by V.J. Nalgirkar 162-A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067 Printed at Amanath Press (P) Ltd. Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph. : 5447291, 5170197 For subscription please write to Mr. O. P. Chandna N-463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi - 110034 Ph.: (011)7013464 Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to: THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple C- 17, Qutub Institutional Area New Delhi - 110016

 78th Birthday Puja Nirmal Dham 21.3.2001 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) are coming to Sahaja Yoga, what you have to get is an ocean of love within your heart Today you all have decided to celebrate my 78th Birthday. You have put beautiful balloons, as you put for a child on his Birthday, with such loving hands. Yesterday as I told and to seek that in others also. It is the love which helps you to do everything so smoothly so beauti- fully. As I have always said that if you how much you can love others? It will really love your country, you can never be much easier to find out through be dishonest. You will have no other introspection, how much you love others interest but to get your freedom or and how much you care for others. If that whatever you want to do for your country. happens, many problems of Sahaja In this country we have had great Martyrs. Perhaps you may not be knowing some of them, and the way they sustained the torturous life, it was only is that people still are hankering after because they loved their country. Your money. They think it is a place where country is spirituality. It is the country of they can make some money. I am complete enjoyment of yourself. It is the surprised! This is not the area where you country where nothing but peace can really work out that. You will be prevails and when you love that country exposed in no time. On the contrary if how can you have all these nonsensical ideas for money and for power and all powers in Sahaja Yoga, as leaders and that? I just can't understand. As it is you deputy leaders, I don't know what all, know very well, that, I am not bothered about these things at all in my life. Of course we need money for work, for politics or else for making money you can everything, but there is no need to run go to racecourses or some place. If you after it or hanker after it. I am surprised you, you have to find out about yourself. Just try to find out also as you love me, Yoga will be solved in no time. Even in Sahaja Yoga what I am told you people are worried about your then also you are sadly mistaken. That's not the place. For that you can join

 July - August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & B 2. 21 even after so many years of my hard the Paradise of Love, if you are still work there are some people still working bothered about these non-sensical out, some stupid stuffs, which I can't things then you will jump very fast into understand and they should know that the hell. I can see that clearly. I should not say this on my Birthday, but this is told last time, the year of exposure and be very careful. absolutely. If you have no love for Sahaja Nobody will be spared this year, what to I have to tell you. It won't keep quite. You know things and make some mess out of your there are certain powers, which flow and self. If you want to destroy yourself you different different years, I find, different. can go to some other fields but not in types of powers start flowing and this is the time when powers for exposure are going to be there. Whether you are a leader or if you are not, if you are making anything in a dishonest way you will be exposed and you will be rightly punished. Sahaja Yoga may not punish you, but there are so many ways that this power they will be exposed in no time. This is the year of exposure, I Yoga, if you have no love for your do? Though its my Birthday, Mother, you run after those non-sensical Sahaja Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga you have to know that you have to be really dedicated and honest. You should enjoy your honesty, you should enjoy your love, you should enjoy your generosity, everything. You will be exposed no doubt but then where will you go? What will be your position? You are doing all those things, you have to go the way people have gone to hell, I should say. Because after coming to works out. The first thing is what we call 'Alakshmi'. Alakshmi means at that time when you are punished, you will be

 July - August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 7 & B surprised you will just become bankrupt. We have to create this world for the You will have no money. You will be exposed, you may be in jail. So though over, who are even in the jungles, who it's a very auspicious day, I must tell you not to be inauspicious. Yesterday's have to spread this beautiful sensation lecture I explained to you to know what your powers are, what you can enjoy, respect and dignity. Very important is to what you can give, what can you work out. But firstly you must know are you respecting your Self? Yesterday only I capable of doing that or you are just said "Know Thyself. If that is the case, working it out in the other way round. I was amazed to hear that after so many is first to respect yourself. If you don't years also people have not given up this kind of a whole, whole of the people who live all are lost into Himalayas, anywhere. We and this beautiful existence of self- see if you are really the Self, Are you Do you respect yourself? Very important know how to respect yourself and you run after useless things temptation that they have. On my Birthday then what should we say? What is the quality that you must remember you have imbibed in Sahaja Yoga except that you how many years you have spent doing Sahaja Yoga. You must have started a business understand all or the nice time you something like that? It is very sad. But there are people had and how many days every year you have spent in enjoying my Birthday and also in understanding how you have grown into it. How you have changed and how you have enjoyed and how you have imbibed all the qualities of Sahaja Yoga? who are still ruined in the mud of these things. You have overcome so many things, I know. You have achieved so many things,I know, which is not possible, humanly impossible things you have done. You have got over all these nonsense but still there are some people First and foremost quality of a Sahaja Yogi is that he has to be absolutely honest. He has not come here to make money. Not for making money. He has not come here to make power. among you who are still in the stinking mud of nonsense. It is nice that you are celebrating my Birthday with such enthusiasm and such happiness. So nice to see all this and I But he has come here to rise into the new beautiful world that we are creating.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 July- August 2001 come Nother want you all to be my decorations. In is the Spirit, the reflection of God the whole world, they should see that Almighty. If you want to live like all other you are my children and that you are of such great values and such great stay out of Sahaja Yoga. But if you think understanding. You are my children. I that you have to really show your worth, have really worked for you in the sense coming into Sahaja Yoga and if you have that every minute, every moment of my life I have thought of you.I wanted to work it out in such a beautiful manner ordinary non-sensical people, you should to feel proud of yourself, then try to understand that in Sahaja Yoga you don't have to have all these weaknesses. that you become really good people, ideal people, special people with understanding. So that is the day when you should feel that your Birthday is being celebrated. When you are completely cleared out, you have become Nirmal, absolutely pure personality of love,that's the day of your Birthday and Mine too. I have to tell about these things because some things have come to my notice and 1 am really shocked the way some people are still not understanding their value, not understanding their worth and that's why the other day I told you that you must know about yourself. First of all the Self When the Kundalini rises, she passes through 6 chakras by enlightening them. I may tolerate you, up to a point but the Kundalini will punish you. She will do what is needed to correct you. Up to a point, she will do and afterwards when she finds it is not possible to correct you then I don't know what will happen and how it will work out! Sahaja Yoga is very easy to come in, to move in and to work it out. But if you go against yourself, if you try to behave like very ordinary useless people, then you can't stay in Sahaja Yoga. You will be thrown out. As soon as you are thrown

 July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 But if you are still running after non- sensical things, if you are still full of lust and greed, then better you leave Sahaja Yoga into itself and you can find some other area where you can do that. It is something surprising, how people do not understand their position in Sahaja Yoga! Your growth has been on the whole, very good. I know there are many people who are wonderful Sahaja Yogis, Who are really great Sahaja Yogis and they have every right to call themselves Sahaja Yogis or Mahayogis. But that is only possible and perceptible if you really grow up inside and your spirit shines like crystal clear ocean of love. Now the connection has been done. You have the knowledge of all the Charkas. You know out, where will you land, what will happen, that you know very well. On this auspicious day I have to request you to be auspicious, not to do anything that is inauspicious. They call it protocol. But there are small things which show you are auspicious, very-very minute subtle things that show you are auspicious, which you don't have to learn. Automatically, spontaneously, it comes and you enjoy your auspiciousness. Because you are holy, because you are Nirmal, and you enjoy that quality within you. When that happens that is your Birthday. You were reborn as you know. All of you were reborn. You are rebom but still you were children and now you have grown up. That growth has to be shown in every way. When a person grows, then he goes all out to do various things how to raise Kundalini. You know also how to cure people and how to treat people. With all that knowledge, with all that life you have got, its like the milk, you give to your energies and then to express himself. In the same way have to when you are you become grown up then you have to show that ener- getic. You can not be lethargic about it. When you are you have grown up in Sahaja Yoga. That you are very deep, and you are lethargic, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. You have to be moving with this flame in your heart that you know what is Seilf and you know a very senior person. I have seen some little children also. They are so grown up and so sensible that sometimes I am amazed that they are great saints reborn. They are great people who are rebom. what you have to do for others. Must be you must have been also great seekers in previous lives. And that seeking, that

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIll Issue 7 & 8 July August 2001 was there, has brought you to Sahaja Yoga. Now with that seeking when you are here, still you are seeking all these useless things! You can't grow and such people cannot make others also grow. grow. You have to become very very deep personalities. You have to grow within yourself, celebrating your own Birthday. Every day, try to see, what is your experience, what did you see. Whom did you meet. How did they talk? I mean, I know so many names, practically every body's name I know, practically everybody's Kundalini I know. I also So the main thing one has to understand that how you are grown in your love. You see, a person who is frightful, who is very strict, who talks very rudely, is not a Sahaja Yogi. No way, But the one who looks after, cares, loves and know whose Kundalini is alright whose is very generous, is the real Sahaja Yogi. is not. I know so many people. So many You are the people of special qualities ask me how do you know so many and those qualities must be shown in your life. I know you love me very much and you know what you have done to celebrate my Birthday. As you have so many of these decorations, I have already told you that you are my decorations, and your lives are my decorations. And the way you behave, and the way you know yourself, things will be so much appreciated all over the world. It is not for any other purpose but call it romance and all that, but it's a very only to remember that you all have to deep feeling. When you enter into the names and how do you remember them?l say, I don't know that part but it is that whenever I see a person I see his Kundalini and from that Kundalini I know who he is? There can be thousands of Kundalinis but I know who is who, because I love them. If you love somebody then you know what he is. It's not stupid love as they

 July August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 garden of your heart and you feel the beautiful fragrance all around, when you think of such nice people as they have been as saints, great saviours and now the Sahaja Yogis, you feel so much grateful that you have achieved that state of collective enjoyment. upon you, about everyone, about every aspect, about every surroundings that you have, so clearly you know and that should happen that you should know very clearly, very-very clearly that what is the situation with you, where are you, and what are you doing? Not that, you have any less powers. You have all the I have never put any restrictions on powers. But for that you have to go deep down. Like there is a well and the well has the water in it but if your bucket does not go down, how can you bring the water? If your bucket is filled with stones, That is the testing ground where you are what's the use of that well to you? In the same way we have everything within us, will you know how far you have come? asI told you yesterday, and Sahaja Yoga So you are the student, you are the is the way you can go down and find examiner and you are the one who has about yourself which is so beautiful, to give you self certificate. And in that clean and that's the thing to be enjoyed case what happens is that you start and not other non-sensical things after understanding. Understanding so many which you are running, which you think you. Do what you like. Whatever way you want to do it you can do it. I have never been bothering you about money or anything. But that is a testing ground. standing. If you do not test yourself, how things, which you have never understood. I mean the knowledge, so called knowledge, is no knowledge are important. I have already told you, it is 'Shudh Ichcha', is the Kundalini. Shudh Ichcha, because it's all falsehood. It's all mental. Pure desire because other desires are But the real absolute knowledge dawns

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 7 & 8 July August 2001 never fulfilled. You try to buy one thing, state, I know. I know I have not told them, then you don't enjoy. You want to buy because I know this is the year they will another one, you don't enjoy. You want to buy another ane, don't enjoy. Because the use of doing something in which you it is not the real desire. This is the will be exposed and that the whole world principle of economics that you are never satisfied, You go on buying, buying, criminal or as a person who does not buying, buying and you buy so many things. Ultimately what happens is that it and if you are here to gain lots of all the industries collapse. That's what ascending steps, you have to have your is happening in America. It has a quality eyes upward and not downward. You that whatever you do, repels back on must see what steps there are? You you. Only the spiritual growth does not. It flowers. Its fragrant, its beautiful, such a beautiful experience to be with your in that beautiful garden, fragrant, garden self, as if you have entered into the of your Self, which is so beautiful. beautiful garden of paradise. If that feeling if you want to have, give up all the world. As so many are lost, so why non-sensical ideas, give up all worldly have you come to Sahaja Yoga? nonsense. Everything you give up and then you will feel that you are now very much there where you should have try to take to spirituality, pure spirituality. been. You will have no doubts. You will Purity, is the word. Purity you must have have no hankerings, you will not feel at all in any way dissatisfied but some people are still at a very elementary state has to improve. Witness state has be all exposed, no doubt. Then what is of Sahaja Yoga will look at you as a need any respect. Either you get out of have to climb up those steps and with these steps where you enter,I tell you, Instead of that you are lost in the mire of Give up those non-sensical ideas, and purity within is you can easily establish with Sahaja Yoga. Your witness

 July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 to be projected so much that this just witnesses and while witnessing conditioning and ego of reaction will anything. it knows. It knows, you don't finish off. You will have no more reactions have to tell, this is this or this is what. Don't have to express too much anything. It is just self expressing, if, you are a clean person, your desires are clean, and that you just have pure desire to ascend. but you just witness and the knowiedge that is real comes always through witnessing. If you do not know how to witness then whatever knowledge you have is nothing but through your ego or through your, we can say, conditionings. Its not absolute knowledge.. So to get absolute knowledge about anything what you have to do is to reach the point of absoluteness. So reach the point where you are absolutely clean, pure, Nirmal. So Again I have to talk about Kundalini that you must have a Kundalini completely establishing itself within you, completely expressing within you, completely enlightening yourself. Such a Kundalini should be there and only Now don't condemn yourself if you possible if you do not put hurdles in her have some defects. There has to be, you growth. If you allow it to grow, it grows are human-beings. But all these defects and it works out. with your power of spirituality you can absolutely overcome. For that what have you to do. First is introspection. First try onlyin 1970, not becausel could not start to findout; you separate your self from it earlier, not because there were all bad your self and say "Hello Mr. How are people in this world but because I was you?" Start with that. "Hello, what are waiting myself to be deft in dealing with you up to?" And you start seeing your self outside, and eradicating, removing all the permutations and combinations all that is not your self. That knowledge that were there and then I just thought if I of Self comes to you when you want the could get hold of a way by which all these knowledge. It should be pure desire to combinations can be worked out in one know about your Self. You are the line, then only Kundalini will rise and it special people no doubt. You are all worked, it happened. With the sincere chosen to be very, very special, no desire, because I felt very sad about doubt. There must be something about people who are spending their lives in you that you have come to the stage something very non-sensical. They can't where you are trying to become the Self. enjoy anything. They have no genuine Self is absolutely self satisfying. It does feeling for anything, They have no genuine not need anything to satisfy itself. Actually it is satisfaction personified. It loved. They can't love. They are notioved just sees things, it just watches things, it and they are in misery. So it was very As you know have started this work all kinds of Kundalinis. I had to work out love for anything and they are not even

 July - August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7.& 8 10 deliberate action on my part, should say, that I watched human beings very carefully. Why they do it like this? Why they behave like this? Why are they not understanding? Why are they harsh, why they shout, why they beat, why they do all Why don't you love? What is the bad thing about that particular person? If he is a Sahaja Yogi and a great Sahaja Yogi, is it out of jealousy, is it out of greed or is it out of lust? Still you are like that. Then the oneness in the whole world of brotherhood is something to be really enjoyed. Enjoyed so beautifully. See all these things you have here. There is so much harmony among them. So much harmony, because it is done with love. If you do anything with love, it is very harmonious. It creates such harmony among people that you see the enjoyment of each other's company. The enjoyment of each other's achievements is so much joy giving that I cannot describe it in words. It's impossible. Words cannot communicate to you the feelings that you have. As I told you, feel as if you are in the Garden of Eden.That sort of a feeling should come into you when you know yourself. Because when you know yourself, actually you know your own being and you are so happy that your Self is so beautiful,that you are so beautiful, that you are so joyous, that you have all these things! this? Because of imbalances. But with introspection if you start seing those imbalances, you now know how to cure yourselfand you can really workitout. You have to just work on your Chakras. See which Chakra is catching? Where is the problem? You have to respect yourself in such a way that you become your own doctor and you know everything about yourself. This is wrong with me. Why am I catching? Why am I catching on that Chakra? Why this is happening? This is the education you have to give to yourself which will be only possible if you experience all those catches. It is for you to grow now. Grow into great people, great personalities, very tremendous people who have made history. Who are respected. All those great saints and all that also were of great calibre but they didn't know how to raise the Kundalini which you know. You To know that within you is really very much fragrant with enjoyment. That state you must have. I see sometimes when you are overjoyed you dance, and sing and so on. That's something really very good. But all the time your spirit should dance at smallest things. At the little thing that is made, say something artistic you see, something you see a gesture of kindness, a gesture of gratitude. You feel have something special knowledge how to raise the Kundalini. How to judge the Kundalini, how to understand where is the problem? And also you know how to tell that person about his problems very beautifully, with love. So the message of your spirit is that you should love each other. If you do not love some one then what's the matter?

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 11 July - August 2001 that depth of that feeling. For example have this you will not deter from doing today I saw the flag. When we got anything that is important. You will have Independene, we made this flag. I had no fear of anyone. You will not go round seen this flag being put up when the and round but you will know how to find other flag was brought down. I can't tell the solution and how to work it out. you what was the feeling that covered us! Such a feeling that the truth has somehow or the other overcome the know yourself. You will have such powers untruth. The justice has been shown over of courage. You will not be a dare devil injustice. That feeling is still so much, I can't even see the flag. I see it and I you will have and that is what is your Self, remember the whole history, the whole which will give youlots of wisdom andlots thing that how many people sacrificed? of courage. It's not a fighting spirit, it's not How many martyers were there? How aviolentnature, it's nota rude nature. But much people have fought for it? That flag it is a very silent, beautiful, courageous stands for them. And you stand for all attitude. There is a story about one that. You stand for all those ideals, you Chinese saint that when this Chinese stand for all those sacrifices and you saintwasasked by one king thathe should stand for all that is to be achieved for teach his cocks as to how to fight in bettering human beings. You have to Cockfights. The Chinese saintsaid, alright achieve a great deal for others. This will happen to you if you really but with wisdom. Courage & with wisdom you bring your cock here. I will teach him. All the cocks ran away from the field because in that standing (King's cock) was the power of wisdom and power of You have to work within yourself what you can do for others. What you can achieve? What is the best way to courage. Courage is silently very imbibe those qualities within you that you powerful. You don't have to bomb become an absolutely unique anybody, you don't kill anybody but you personality. As I told you there have been have to stand up with courage. And that many great leaders and many great is the another quality which will express, people who are remembered by many that is very polite, very sweet. You will be people. Now what you should see? What standing with that courage. I know so made them so great? Why after so many many of you are like that. There is no years people still remember them? I struggle, there is no fight. Just standing have given you the statue of Shivaji with courage and win what ever is right Maharaj. He was another great soul. A and that is quite possible because you great soul who had such principles and such beautifying life, in his language, in Almighty. You have the connection with his attitude and everything. With all that he was a very brave person. Once you have now the connection with the the Param Chaitanya and that will work out everything.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 12 July-August 2001 This is our special temperament, think. We are very corrupt people. India has become so corrupt that I can't believe it. I was here about 35 years back. We had never heard of corruption. Now they have become so corrupt and that's what enters into Sahaja Yoga. When that enters into Sahaja Yoga they will be just found out and will be punished, not by me, or by you but their own Kundalini. So every country has its own speciality as far as doing something wrong. We are not here to do anything wrong. We are not going to express ourselves as wrong people but we are here to prove that we are perfect, we are wonderful people. That is what is the Self, that we are perfect. We don't have to go according to what negativity, we can call it as 'Adharm' we were. It's a new realm we have which is fighting. So you stand on your reached. Its the new area we have reached and let us enjoy that great area. I will be very happy to say that today Thave seen so many of you are such good Sahaja Yogis. Somany of you. Andif you find anyone who is not, please report it to me. Please tell me. Please find outif there is anyone who is trying to be very oppressive and who is trying to control everything, who is trying to make money, who is trying to have lust and greed. It is to be expressed. So once you have really worked out, you should know that this is the area, what we call 'Dharam Yudh'. 'Dharam Yudh' means the warof religion. But not the way people are fighting. Our Dharam Yudh is that we are standing on Dharma and Dharma means not religion butitis 'Vishwa Nirmala Dharam'. You are standing on our religion and this Dharma. Unless and Until you are dharmic you can not have any achievementin Sahaja Yoga. I have seen people who are abroad, they have funny ideas and they will come and tell me, Mother "I have a wife but l am in love with another woman, so what should I do?" I said, You get out, that's all. Just get out. Or he may say, the wife might say that "Mother see I am having relations with another manand what shouldldo?Isaid, "You get out. that's all. You get out of Sahaja Yoga. You are no good for Sahaja Yoga and Sahaja Yoga is no good for you. Isa complete outcast. They havenothing to do with Sahaja Yoga. I think all of you understand me that today I am little worried about people who are dragging Sahaja Yoga down and they should understand that I understand everything. When they will be harmed they should not blame me for that. It is obvious that they are no where near Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga purifies you everyday. You see one experience, you see one person, you see some events and it purifies you. That's the sign. Supposing I see somebody a dishonest man, immediately I start finding, I hope I am not doing any dishonesty myselfl Just imagine, that you are the one who is the curator, correcting influence on yourself. Where do you stand? Do you stand on Also in India we have problem of dishonesty. They are dishonest people.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 July - August 2001 13 I have seen people, how they have managedand looked afterso many things which were difficult and have workeditout the correction point or in getting finished with it.Yesterday's lecture everybody liked very much but this is the extension of that lecture. I am telling you, that you are very great people. You can save the whole world. must say all this will happen in my life time. And it has happened and I see you as very great, very great people. Specially ladies have to work it out more. Because I am a woman and woman have the special capacity to love and to bear. So now we are in for a new world and in thatnew world andnewrace Sahaja Yogis have to show their results. They have to show their powers and their courage and their understanding. It is not serious. It is not frivolous. But it is joyous. It is just joy that you have to feel about yourself. I am telling you all this because this is within you, within your power. It is all the time residing within you and that you have faced it also. Sol wish you all a very very I never expected I expect all of you to become, beautiful Sahaja Yogis and that nothing can convince the whole world but your work, your abilities and also your power to love. So many things I have seen, experienced about you people and when I think about them, I really feel very happy. happy Birthday so that you people have anewbirth and a new understanding and a new personality. Try to accept that personality. Try to respect it. That's the personality is your Self. May God bless you.

 78th Birthday Felicitations Programme (20.3.2001), Nirmal Dham, Delhi न जायते फ्रियते वा कदाचिन्नाय भूत्वा भविता वा न भूयः अजो नित्य शाश्वतोऽयं पुराणो न हन्यते हन्यमाने शरीरे।। Atma is beyond birth and death. It existed always and will remain forever. It is unborn. It exists always. It is Perpetual (Sanatana) and Etemal, It does not perish with the death of the body. The 78th Birthday of our beloved from 96 countries of the world, bathed Mother, "The Adishakti' fell on 21st March, 2001. It was the birthday Vibrations and gave colour and gaity of The One who is beyond Birth and Death, The One who is Eternal participated in the function and (Shashvata) (Akal Murat, Ajuni expressed their gratitude to the Divine Saibhan) (अकाल मूरत अजूनी सैभ) as themseleves in the ocean of Divine to the celebrations. Many dignitaries Mother. Thousands of messages of eminant personalities were received Form and Formless. But The Mother from all over the world, to felicitate Adi Shakti blesses Her Sahaja Yogi Shri Mataji on her 78th Birthday, endeavours Guru Nanaka has described. She is Children to celebrate Her birthday and eulogizing her to derive the ocean of joy and work out ameliorate the condition of the poor their ascent and eternal state of joy. and downtrodden. A few of the Thousands of Sahaja Yogis poured in messages are reproduced in this issue.

 July - August 2001 15 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIIl Issue 7 & B (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) 20.3.2001 Those who deflate when you will PELIRITATION OF H.H MNDU BIRTHDAY FELICITATION OF H.H. MADAJI face the society. Unless and until you face others your ego have found the truth and those who are पू पमताजी की भिर्मला द्वा के 78 वंजन्म दिवस still trying to find, the greatest problem of human beings is (surprising) that they don't know them- selves, they don't know what powers cannot come down. Now how? The ego is there, because when you think that others are better than you, when you they have, they don't know what pro- are afraid to say that they have to trans- form and when you perties they have, they don't know to what height they can rise! This is the main problem of igno-rance about your self. If you could just peep in your heart and start thinking about the spiritual life that you could have, you would know you are a treasurer, treasurer of powers of love, powers of justice and powers of wisdom. The problem is we have no idea as to what we are. And Sahaja Yogis also, they are so humble that they do not realize what powers they have. And sometimes I find they are a little shy to talk about Sahaja Yoga or to tell about it to others, because they think it might be their ego that is speaking. are worried that you are being very aggressive. If you are a Sahaja Yogi and if you are meditating every day, you are cleansing your self, you have a power within yourseif, which will show its results. It will show its powers and manifestation in such a big way that you start surprising at yourself. Is it what I am? With the Kundalini Awakening what happens? That all these petty things, as we call in Sanskrit 'Shadripus', they all drop out. But we must face ourselves. Some people in Sahaja Yoga think that we can become very great people or we can achieve some great positions and all that. That's not the point. It's not outside. It's not the outside ambition, but the Inner Light, which has to shine through. All of you Now I have to tell you one thing that ego will always deflate, it will always

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Isue 7 & 8 July August 2001 16 H.K. MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI 78 BRTHDAY FELICITATION OF पू.माताजी शरी निर्मला देवी के 70 वं जन्म दिवस का अभिनन्दन समाचह are quite intelligent and are experts, 1 should say, as far as the chakra the more you will meditate, the more you knowledge is concerned; but what about will face yourself, you will know that you the knowledge of your self? Do you know have so many great things within you, your self, what you can do, what just like a store-house of jewels. But you you are capable of? That's the point must respect yourself and you must where we are missing. Alright, it is the urge within because you have got your not what you want to achieve outside. self-realization but you still lack in one thing. It's complete confidence in your- leaders, this that. That's all nonsense. self that you know the truth and as the people who know the truth what you have to do is to spread the truth to make this darkness of ignorance pass away. But in Sahaja Yoga also I have seen people, within and you can awaken that. You when they come, they start getting ideas have powers, you can do that very easily, about themselves and trying to organize without hurting anyone, without troubling things. They do all kinds of things. I know anybody, without taking any money, all that. Instead of that if you get full picture kinds of things. But as it is I find the about yourself, what you are capable of people are either money oriented or and what you can achieve by giving power oriented, outside, not inside. realizations to others, by making them lInside is the wealth, inside is the power, understand what their powers are, not inside is everything that you can think yours, their powers, what they can achieve, I tell you, we can go very fast used to come on the stage to speak with the spreading of Sahaja Yoga. But this fear, that we may develop ego, there speakers and I am amazed to see how are many who have this kind of a they have been transformed! The nonsensical idea, you cannot, because about know within yourself, what you have got, Like there are some who try to be That is of no worth. The best thing is to know that you are the treasure of great value system of. There are people I know who never even. Now they have become great

 17 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 July- August 2001 greatest trans-formation is that you know as I told you, they even make money out yourself fully well and that, with that of knowledge you change others. Don't organize things, something to promote keep yoursef limited to yourself. You them. They are on a very different level have to spread out. This power has been but if you are not that kind then you given to you to know yourself fully and should not become just stationary. You to be confident and to be kind and gentle should do what it is to find out, what am and talk to people in that way that they 1? Christ has said, "Know Thyself" know that you are a Sahaja Yogi. It is not given to you just to say that you are Thyself." All of them have said, "Know Sahaja Yogis, but to know yourself fully, Thyself". That means you are something to peep into your own treasures, into your great. You have hidden properties within own understanding. Now I must say you which you do not know. Once you there are so many people in this world, know yourself, you will have self-respect, millions and millions, why you people you will not do wrong things, you will have have come to Sahaja Yoga? I didn't choose you. You chose Me, and when you have chosen Me you must know Sahaja Yoga is. I understand that these within yourself that there must be something in you that has made you Kaliyuga', as people say. Alright. But why come to Sahaja Yoga and to understand are you here during this time? To the subtle system. It's very subtle and it enlighten people, to give them the right can be known only to very subtle people ideas. But how? Unless and until you do and not to gross people. But if you yourself discover yourself and then you capable of this and you are capable of go ahead there can't be any ego because that. You see the life of all great men, I you are not ego. Those who have ego, would say people like Abraham Lincoln. Sahaja Yoga. They even try to Mohammed Sahib has said, "Know no anger. But you will be an ocean of love. That's what it has to be, that's what are the worst days.This is the 'Ghor not know yourself fully that you are

 18 July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 He realized in means spon- taneous. It comes very young age that he has to spontaneously to you. As it is, we know in Sahaja Yoga you get assert on others his own value system by show- ing his example. Though it was very hard for people to understand him, still he has shown such results. I have read many lives of this kind like in Turkey we had Ataturk. We had every where one person like that. In India we had Lal Bahadur Shastri, who was such a great man and who knew about Sahaja yoga, who is to respect me so much, people would wonder, why should he respect me more than he would respect my husband or anyone else. Because he realized what I was. But he didn't get the chance. Now you people have a chance. connected to that own- which aгea Einstein has called as 'Torsion Area'. But that Torsion Area' is there behind you. Param Chaitanaya is there to support you, to help you. All of you have got this but despite that you don't believe in it. Believe in your self. You have that power within you. I know of one fellow who was in Bombay. he was a fisherman and a great Sahaja Yogi, I should say, we have lost him. So one day he was going to: another island for spreading Sahaja Yoga among fishermen. He found in the sky such black clouds, threatening. So he came out and he threatened them, "I Alright, I am quite old now, it's am going for my Mother's work. How correct, but still I am not going to give dare you bring the rain? You should not up. Till I live I will work very hard to bring the rain till I come back." And it was convince you about your own surprising. He went out, did all his job, personality, your own Self. That's what I everything, came back after 5 hours and am living for. Till you are completely when he went to bed it started convinced. You will be amazed that thundering. people who come to Sahaja yoga also do all kinds of non-sensical things. I know, they do. But they are not Sahaja nature is our representative. It helps us. Yogis in a way. Because unless and until If you are of that quality, nature will stand you go deep into yourself, unless and by you. You have seen that many a times until you find out what is your personality, in the real sense of the word, whatever you may do, it is not Sahaja. Sahaja anything, but only thing they realize that The nature will be with you because nature has helped me. It is not because I have any control over them or I tell them

 19 July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 &8 should say, nature itself that it has worked. I was sure about myself. Though outside I may look a very humble housewife, people used to think I don't speak much because I don't know English. This was the situation. But that's not the point. The point is, I knew what I was, I knew what I am, and I knew what I have to be. That's all. That's the only difference. If you people develop that knowledge within yourself, you can be dynamic. You will not have ambitions, you will not have desires, you will not have anger, you will not have greed. All these things will drop out like that. I am here for such and such work and that I am to be supported. In the same way if you can establish it, the nature will know that you are the people who are here to redeem the whole universe. You can do it. I may think that the whole world should be redeemed and all that. But how can I do it? If I could do it I would not have to have channels and these channels who know their jobs, they know themselves, those who are quite capable of doing it. You are special people no doubt, otherwise why are you here? But that specialiy is this that you are a good conductor of this Divine Energy. You are a wonderful conductor. You are an expert on that.it just works. It works automatically but your connection with the Divine should be absolute. First of all we have to know what is our basis. And the most important basis is that we are born in a particular country, and we should get concern about that. They say that I was a revolutionary and all that I did and I went to jail, but that was just to get my country's independence. That was different. But after that independence what should Now talking about absolute value is correct but these absolute values, do they exist within us or not? If they do then why not we make others imbibe them? It's not difficult, it's not at all difficult, I tell you. I am just an ordinary house wife. So what? It's just my love, just my, I have happened? Is to make people

 July - August 2001 20 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 realize what they are. Not only India but means what you are, and he describes in every country one has to understand very nicely that when you are that what what is the need of that country. What happens. Now the gap was how to they have to do to improve, to help, to achieve that state, how to reach that state was not given. He only described never asked you that you change your people who were Tao, who were realized names or anything, though you asked souls, who were of that level.I was for Indian names, alright. But what the surprised that he never said about Kundalini but he talked about the river rise, to transform? You should not; I main concern is that you should have concern for your country men. You are so empowered, your kundalini has Yang-Si. That it is Yang-Si river which is a symbolic way. He was more poetic. But ultimately reaching the reached that state where ocean that river you can do a lot. I know be- comes the some of you ocean and have done a then what are lot and have the qualities worked out of the ocean, but still all of you have to do it. I would he described so beautifully! Now I would just say that 78th Birthday (I forget also) I am just the same. I have not changed much because within myself I feel that I have to tell peopie what they are. I have to tell them what they can achieve and I have to move in such a manner that they see it that nothing is important than to know what you are. You are rich, poor, doesn't matter, nothing matters. What is important, is to know yourself. I am surprised, very little has been written so far but I find Tao by Lao Tse.I don't know if you have read the book of Lao Tse, about Tao, meaning what you are? Tao say you all have become supposing the ocean. So are you behaving like the ocean? Are you understanding your capacity to be an ocean? What an ocean is? Look at the ocean. It has it's own boundaries, 'Maryadas' it does not cross. If you try to push it on one side it will come out side. So you have to be in your maryadas we can call it also in your balance. That's very important that you should be in your balance. Now many people say who have given up smoking,

 July-August 2001 21 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 know that you are the highest. You are the highest but you are highest because you stand at the lowest point.Its true that I have tremendous love for the poor people. It's true also that I have been really very much yearning to do something for that and that is how we have started at least 16 projects in India. Now all that is done just because I can't contain myself. All this kind of miseries and troubles they have. Like Orrisa I Divinity, just starts flowing. Now this have prayed so much because it's a ocean perhaps we don't know, that country very much troubled .We should find out why it is so much troubled? all the heights from the ocean. If the What is the problem there? And I tell ocean is at zero point then what is the you it is a very great country, Orrisa is. height of the Himalayas. So it keeps at I have visited it also. And main thing the lowest because being the lowest it missing there is that they still have no receives all the waters, all the things that confidence. If they develop Sahaja Yoga within themselves, no floods can come, no problems can come to that country. Same in our country, same in your those clouds and the whole circle is country and everybody's country. have again started smoking, who have given up drinking, again have started drinking. That means you have lost your maryadas.So those Maryadas must be watched. Watch yourself .If you go on watching yourself you will know what you are. Must watch yourself .You call yourself "Hello Mr, So now, what are you up to?" Then you will see how your mind is working. With that thing what happens that this ocean which is the love of ocean is the lowest thing. We measure are coming from the rivers or from the rain. Then it burns it's body in the sun. It's open. And when it burns, it creates created that these clouds can go and shower rain on people. And again they become rivers and they come back to the sea. Everything has to go to the sea First of all we must have much more Sahaja Yogis and we must have Sahaja Yogis who know they are Sahaja Yogis. To be very much confident of the fact that after all you are Sahaja Yogis. Why not? What ever I can do, you all can do also.Why not? You are my children. You can do it. But the confidence should be because it is the lowest. So you stand at the lowest point with your confidence. At the lowest point don't compare yourself with another person who is doing very well in life or may be something, but see that you are the lowest and at the lowest point you 1 there that as Mother is, we could be the same, without any ego coming in. Because mostly I have seen people very afraid of their ego. There is no ego in it because you are like the ocean, I have said, which stands at the lowest point. In the same way it works out. It's so stand and you would be amazed that everything will come to you. Everything will see that it flows into you. Main thing is Knowing Thyself, it means that you

 22 July August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-Xill Issue 7 & 8 beautiful to love the whole world. It's so explode all the myths of the world. I know beautiful to enjoy your compassion, to that. But I don't know how to ignite, what enjoy your generosity. I enjoy my to do, how to tell them? generosity much more than anything else. But in that generosity I know that I am not doing anything. It's just one thing that on this Birthday if you expression of my sense of joy. I see really want to give me something then flowers, I am very happy. In the same give me this that you show your way I give something to someone I feel confidence and you work it out. Where very joyous. It's a joy. Joygiving quality ever you are, don't have to change the and all joygiving qualities are within you, atmosphere, don't have to change which you should discover. You have got anything. Where ever you are with also peace giving qualities. Such a lot honesty, with sincerity and with humble of peace is within you, which you can transmit, to the atmosphere, to the country you can do it and in the whole people to everyone in case your world you can do it. This is my greatest peace in established. If there is anger desire and I hope, I am a person who is temper this, that, it won't workout. So you desireless, you will fulfil this subtle desire should watch yourself, see yourself, I have, that we should transform the should meditate and find out, what is world. lacking. It is such a tremendous force, I think, sitting before me. They can Now I would again and again tell you nature you can really do a lot. In every May God bless you.

 July - August 2001 23 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 &8 Speech of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi On the occasion of release of book by Sir C.P. Shrivastava : 'Corruption - India's Enemy Within' New Delhi, 17.12.2000 become corrupt, I don't know! I have never seen a corrupt man being peaceful or happy. My parents know and I know so I bow to all the seekers of truth. After these all great speeches, l don't know what to add to it. But only solution I many of their colle- agues and friends, they sacrificed every- thing for the country. Because I am an feel as a Mother that if you have really love for your mother country 'Deshbhakti', that is the solution of ancient person I have seen all that. How could they do all that suffering, all kinds of going to jails and bearing all kinds of atrocities! How could they do it, I have seen it. And why not now, we the Indians remember that this is our great land. And we have to love it. Great people have born in this country. Nowhere in the world you will find so many great people being born. Their greatness is their 'Desh- Dharma', that they love their country and that's how we get nobility. As he has said there are so many things in our 'Desh- Dharm' and as you know that people have talked of nobility, of greatness and all that but why is it today, I don't understand, that we are drowned into this the whole problem. If you are a Deshbhakta you can't become corrupt. This is a quality if you can some how or the other inculcate, by reading about great patriotic people, by reading about people who have sacrificed their lives! They have done so much to achieve this freedom. If you can just understand what feelings they had for this country! This kind of emotional intelligence as they call it, if you could only develop that kind of love for your country, I am sure that you will become absolutely honest. No question, there is nothing to be done, but this is something very much innate and very much desired by the Divine. If you have to really have peace of mind, why

 July August 2001 24 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 7 & 8 foreign service but I told him that I don't want to go to any foreign country. I want to be here. Here you choose Indian Administrative Services, and he did it. nonsense of corruption! 35 years back we left India, both of us. And when we came back, I was shocked, we had never heard at that time anybody being corrupt at that level. Even a chaprasi would only ask for a rupee or something. I mean we don't see the poverty of this country. They are not concerned as to what's happening to us with this horrible corruption. It's a disease worse than cancer. And to cure it, I think one way is to worship your Mother- land. Morning you worship your Motherland. You have her photograph. You see Her, do namaskar to Her and remember that you Not only he did it, but I must say, he never complained about something missing in life. Of course I am another person of a different type but he himself is like that. I was so happy that this book has come out. That though my vision, as you know, is very global and I want the great transformation but I know it will take too much time. A book like this, if people take it and understand it and do it seriously then may be my vision can be easily achieved. That's what I feel and I pray that all of you should take a vow that you owe a lot. To be born in India itself is a very blessful thing, that you are born in this great country. Be grateful to that. will love your country and will have no You will be amazed, it is greatness to joy in harming in anyway your country. If enjoy that kind of love. Thank God I have you can learn that, that is sufficient to a husband who is another desh-bhakta. give you a very great light to finish off I have been always telling him that I am this horrible thing called corruption. May God bless you all. out and out deshbhakta. He was in the

 July- August 2001 25 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XiII isue 7 & 8 Sahasrara Puja Cabella - 5.5.96 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today we are celebrating opening are not Mohammed Saheb, Rama was of the Sahasrara. On this dayI must say, Rama, and Krishna was Krishna. We are not that. How can you expect human for all the humanity. It was such an beings to behave like them. So, achievement which I never realised absolutely they separated the Divine before. Now I can see that without self Personalities away, very much away, realisation, it would have been impossible from human personalities. It was just an to talk to people. When this happened I adoration, I can say, faith, but when they thought that how will I talk to people about said we try to follow them, they could not. it,because no one will understand it and They could not follow them because l think human movement is on parallel lines with the Divine; and these lines do not meet unless and until you give them self realization. Human level is moving on another plane and it has to come up it was a great happening that took place it would be a big mistake on my part to say something about Sahasrara. Because even in the scriptures nowhere anything was described about the sahasrara.lt was absolutely an ambiguous description, I would say, to a higher plane to understand that what where people could not have even they know is not reality. I wouldn't say thought that there is a realm beyond what is needed for that because in my Sahasrara. And one has to enter into that own experience all kinds of people came to Sahaja Yoga. These people described to be very bad, cruel, another ones who That time what I saw around me, I were very licencious, this that; then feit it is all darkness and unless and until another ones who were very cheats. there are many lights people wili never They say that, Mother, they were realise that how important it is to have horrible. But I have seen that every lights. It is a human error also, all the time, human being is made of the same that if somebody achieves something, character as far as the Spirit is then they put that person unto a shelf. concerned. Outside they may be different to look at, their way of talking may be different, their styles may be different, their fondness for things may be different. realm where the reality is. For example, Christ, all right He was Christ, we are not Christ, Mohammed Saheb, he was Mohammed Saheb, we

 July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 26 say, in a very short time. I didn't say that it took me long or I had to go through lots of various experiences because to me all these experiences are nothing. If a ship is sea worthy it can face all kinds of high tides, all kinds of sharks, everything, without any difficulty, because it is sea The greatest thing has now worthy. Sol didn't feel that way,but only I happened is that which I now realise, I felt that from human level to this spiritual am very happy about it, that Sahaja Yogis level, to this Divine level, when you are feel very responsible about Sahaja Yoga. coming, then some of that still lingers on, some of that is still there. It has to be enlightenment everywhere. It is their cleansed, it has to be brightened or innate desire now to spread Sahaja absolutely enlightened. But what was the Yoga. Firstly it was that they should great thing about Sahaja Yoga that you become Spirits, before that there was yourself did all that. It is nice to say, also some people who didn't actually 'Mother You did this, you did that'. May seek the Spirit but they also became be enlightement part of it. But see now there are lights here and these lights some of you thatI never expected that unless and until they are attended to, they would go so far and suddendly you looked after and given oil of love, how can hearthat such and such person has gone they go on burning? This is something there, has done this, has done that. So what I must say that you people some when you came into the Realm of Reality, how or other realised how important it was to become good Sahaja Yogis. May be introspection, I don't say, may be standing. But one thing you realised that somebody else talked about it, may be you are definitely connected with the its your own understanding. Whatever it Divine. Some people had tremendous was, all of you tried to be good Sahaja experiences, some had mild experience Yogis. Of course, there are people who but most of them, Isaw, started believing are sometimes very angry with me, like in themselves, understanding them- why don't you cure my sister or why don't selves and having confidence about you cure my father if you are God, this, themselves. Because there are so many that is there. But makes no difference to me because they are so frustrated, so But inside they are all very beautiful. And this I found out one after another. You don't know how much it was giving me joy, not only joy, butalso encouragement, support and patience. And then, now you see, how Sahaja Yoga has spread! They feel that they have to spread this Sahaja Yogis, and I am surprised with I don't know which principles you accepted first. That is your under- myths about God, Religion, Gurus, that when they saw the light of the Spirit which gave them sense of reality, as if they studied their mind, they studied themselves. All this happened, I must beautiful people. upset, so they are talking like that. If you see one or two such persons here and there, you see there are thousands such

 July- August 2001 27 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 Complete emancipation of this himself because all other Sahaja Yogis earth, of this globe, I am sure, will take place, if you people all take up the responsibility. The responsibility has certain problems which we should know. When you feel responsible, you must know that you are not incharge, one thing, secondly, you also must know that there are so many other forces, so many Angels and Ganas are with you. You are not alone. So, to think that you are doing anything will make you, may be, egoistic. At that time, what you have to do is best to say, 'all right, I am not doing anything, it is the Divine that is working it out.' Not that the Divine wants any credit for it. But by saying that, this balloon of ego will not come up, and you will become humble. This humility will definitely improve this gravity of spirituality within you. Definitely, it will make you a very evolved personality, no doubt about it. But first of all, we have to say, "I am not doing anything ". It is a very important to understand when you have Spiritual authority to do things. It is not a testing ground. I can tell you this much. are also having the same kind of experiences of this Reality which cannot be described in words. But to start feeling that oneness, that nearness, that friendship without any expectation. You start feeling, 'Oh he is a Sahaja Yogi'. A kind of a complete integrated organism you become, become an organization,I should say, it is a living organization, In that you do not feel that you are something separate. Any Sahaja Yogi whether he is highly placed, or not doing much in life, this integration, this oneness, is feeling of identification with others, makes you so large, so big, so great, so powerful. You are not alone and you say, "I am not doing anything." So you become so humble that you forget all these false ideas about class consciousness or religion consciousness or, I don't know,all sorts of consciousness people have. I don't know much about these consciousnesses that human beings suffer from, but I have seen how it happens. And then that humility becomes your character, not that you are humble because there is something to be done, you are humble. When people are doing some sort of a business then they wil be extremely humble and nice and they will be very unkind otherwise. Here you become absolutely humble and there is no duality in your personality left. But that doesn't mean you become weak. Humility is only possible for people who are strong, because they don't need any reactions. They don't need any protection. Their humility keeps them Many people think that Mother is testing us. I am not testing, you are testing yourself. I am not saying, don't do this or don't do that. You are testing yourself and now you must know that you are in the beautiful Garden of Reality where very few have entered. And there in that garden when you enter, what do you see is that everything is full of beauty. Every person has something sweet about

 28 July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 protected also very much. So you just going to do. What I have to do? If I have start thinking or feeling, thinking is a decided ,I must do that. What ever you have decided is alright, but if it does not small dust particle. At the same time materialise there is nothing to worry, you feel you are the whole sky. It there is nothing to be upset, there is depends on where you are, what you are nothing to be overly nervous about it. I doing, what you are seeing, what you are give an example. One day I was going to witnessing. Sometimes you feel that all America. And of course, you know as it these big- johnnies are useless. To feel is as all the Sahaja Yogis are, they get quite worried that Mother has to go to very small and with some people you feel America. Every body is upset. They are that you are very small. Such a flexible looking at the time, now the time is this, temperament you develop, and that time is that, I said, I have to go to America, makes you subtler and subtler because why are you worried? And suddenly one you can penetrate into anything, any of the Sahaja Yogi's child fell down and subject, any personality, any broke her hand and she couldn't move understanding, any book, anything, any her fingers.Sol was just coming out and as soon as he brought the child, I said all you immediately see, what is to be done. right, I am not going just now to the Because you become so subtler. And airport.They were very upset. Now She then when you become very great, then is not going to the airport, as if all the you start thinking or, I should say, feeling havens are going to fall down or what. what you can do to help so many people, But I said now let me see the child. I treated the child and the child was all funny word, feeling that you are a nothing to worry about them, They are enterprise, in a very subtler manner, and to do this great job, to do that. This when happens to you, they don't think that you right. All right, I said, let's now go to the are egoistical. Nor you should think that airport. They were saying 'Mother the you are very small, Only thing is now you plane must have left. It is all right,does not matter, lets go to the airport. We went to the airport and this plane that was anything, it could expand into anything, going to take me was just there because there was something wrong with the disappear anywhere. This subtle plane and there was another plane going personality, that you are, which is your to Washington and I actually wanted to spirit, you even don't use it but it uses go to Washington instead of New york. Solwas in the other plane, nicely going to Washington. But one must know that you are not doing. Everything is So the second thing should be that arranged and planned and beautifully you should not determine what you are kept for you. You decide something are the spirit. My spirit is very subtle, so very subtle light, but it can penetrate into it can remain anywhere but it can you all the time. Without your knowledge it uses you.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 7 & 8 July-August 2001 29 all right, if your decision is all right, if you have to do that, it will work out. If it doesn't work out, it should not have been worked out. Now this is the difference between a person who is a realised soul and who is not a realised personality is this way, that in the nature we see very clearly. In the nature what we see is that a tree grows. Now it has to expand but it cannot, so it does not. If it can, it will, and also it tries to bring all the leaves exposed to the sunlight, somehow. I don't think the trees have that soul. much intelligence to organize it. But there is something that organizes them so beautifully. It is not only one tree, but A realised soul person is not bothered what he wants, what he likes, what he is fond of. What he gets is alright. Now I can see you are living under this thousands and thousands and thousands. The one who does all that is the one with whom you are in contact. roof which is so horrible. There is no proper arrangements here, nothing. I The trees are not, they are just playing don't know how you are living here? I into the hands of nature. But they can not don't know what to do. We are trying to manipulate, manoeuver, understand this get a land and this land owner is such a Divine power.They cannot. Animals greedy fellow butI don't mind a greed part cannot. Even human beings cannot. But but still he is not giving us the land. It is you can, because you have crossed the alright. What to do. But you all enjoy it. limit of this human bondage. And now you You don't mind, otherwise normally, are just like great citizens of the great people would say, nol want this kind of a realm of Divinity. room, I want this kind of house and this that. That you can live in under any circumstances because you don't worry works out every thing and also, it guides about your physical comforts any more. you and manages you. So what you have What you think of is your own Spiritual to do is to keep yourself open for the Comfort. I have seen people, Sahaja guidance. At the same time you must act. Yogis so beautiful, even children, if there is something going on,something funny from within, by which you will know this comes in, immediately they will close their eyes. They don't want to see this. Nobody you feel that it was not achieved by you, has to tell them because you see they when you feel that still I don't know why I have a sort of insight they have built in that subtle personality which cannot stand nonsense. If there is something, they may not be harsh, but just they shun up, you should not desire. I have seen and go away from such places, Sahaja Yogis' desires are much more automatically. So to describe the new powerful than mine. The reason is that I So this Divine Force helps you, Because the guidance will also come is whatI have to do. Supposing even then couldn't get what I wanted.Try to understand that is what is the best for us. It never means that you should give

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIilI Issue 7 & 8 July - August 2001 30 So when this Sahasrara lotus opens, Try to see, fathom out, if I have any then the Kundalini pierces through your desires? I see I have no desire of any fontanel and you get your realization. This kind. It is alright, I do not earnestly want is what has happened. Now the only anything. You can say itis a very frivolous thing is to keep this lotus open and temperament. But it is all, you see, very there we fail sometimes because still different with you people. You people are there are some lingering human very differently made. Because you have feelings within us. Firstly it is all covered achieved something, I have not achieved with ego and conditioning oryou can say anything. I am what I am. Because you super ego-two balloons. These two balloons again and again try to close the Sahasrara. So you have to be on the of your achievement, I think, it is a boon guard that what is closing my Sahasrara. that whatever you desire works out. The first is ego which how to attack? Because you have worked so hard, it's a Because you want to attack your ego, you boon, it is a special blessing for you will have to attack through your ego only. whatever you desire. So many times I That's the only way you can. So we have have told you, don't desire anything which this state of Nirvichara, of Thoughtless is not proper because whatever you will Awareness where we have to be. But the desire that works out and that will be simple thing to do is very practical. Try to understand why you are being egoistical; with whom you are angry? Why you are angry? What makes you think to dominate someone or to control am desireless. I have no desires as such. have achieved something, you know how you were and what you are now. Because effective. Now try to realise that you are no more ordinary human beings. You have crossed the bondage and now you are not even the Sahasrara, you are beyond it. Sahasrara is the liymbic area and this limbic area is closed like a lotus. And when you get your Kundalini entering into it then lotus opens like this. And that's what is written in the Bible, that I will appear before you like tongues of flames. This is the Divine saying. So these petals are nothing but nerves which are enlightened just like these and they look like flames, but these flames are without someone or to check someone? Why? The mind will not answer. The simple thing if you can do that whatever things that upset you and make you feel very great, try to understand that compared to you nothing is great. Compared to your love, nothing is great, compared to your compassion, nothing is great, because in this there is the light of Divine Force. You hate someone, you get angry with someone, just know that you have to love that person. any heat. We call in Sanskrit 'Taap heen', no heat, extremely cooling, soothing, beautifully burning. Now how will you love that person? There is no way to have any

 31 July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 &8 The identification with others is very measurement of that. But love itself will suggest how satisfied you are feeling, important. And you can do it because you how happy you are. I will give you an example. The other day, I received a letter from someone in Poland, other person is. And then you will realize challenging me very much, that her mother is sick with cancer or something identification is the only way, I think, one and challenging me all the time. If you are God, you must cure my mother, if you immediately sucked in as soon as you are God, do this,do that very amusing. I put your loving attention on that person. said alright. I put my attention to this lady. In your life time you will get so many Perhaps her motheris better. But instead experiences like that, that you will be of getting angry, I said, she is so frustrated, she is so upset, she is so things? Because you are a realized soul. worried, even if she says if you are God, she is challenging me,it is alright, makes no difference. Whether she calls me God identified with another person you put that or no God makes no difference. person incharge of Divinity. Just a feeling Whatever I am, I am. So instead of of oneness. Some times we have also getting angry I felt tremendous compassion for her. She is a human being and her mother is so sick there. we have our own ideas about something. That's the only source of her life, then I Say, some sort of a living standards, can understand why she is so upset. So some people have will act. I don't like it, I if you just try, which you can do very like itand I don't like it. Not a saint, a Saint easily, very easily. Its not difficult because never says that. That time when you say you are realised souls, I am talking to that you are falsely identifying yourself saints. If you just put your attention on a with another person. Now supposing, person with love, then what happens, you somebody has done such a beautiful get understanding. Understanding of that flower arrangement. Instead of person. You realize, as if identifying with appreciating and enjoying it, you come that person, then you realize if I was in and say, I don't like it, this could have her place as a human being what I would been better, just to show. I don't know, have felt? This desperation, this anger. why people say like that? But if you If I was sad,If I was the same type of identify yourself with the man who has person with the same kind of problems, done it, or the gentleman who has done then what would I do? That solves the it, you will enjoy it the way that person problem. So the identification part, you enjoyed, doing it. Because you are just have such powers, you can penetrate. thinking are realized souls, you can do it. Just place yourself in the same position as the that you have powers of love and can understand love. This ego will be amazedat yourself, how canIdo all those Also, as I said, when you are very wrong ideas about ourselves and about others. In small small things also about yourself, self

 July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & B 32 opinionatedness with which you think that only who can manipulate it, not the this is not done so good, that could have trees,not the flowers, then what you will been better, this could have been better. do is to create oceans of joy. So then we Who are you to judge any one? This come to Sahaja.What has Sahaja given critisizing nature comes from a terrible you is alright. But what have you given to misunderstanding about oneself. What Sahaja Yoga. What have I given to are we ? Why we should judge anybody Sahaja Yoga? Have I created oceans of else? Are we paid for it? So why waste joy for others? What kindness I have energy on judging others? We should shown ? What compossion I have shown? What love I have expressed? the realm of realities, it is all good, Alright, whatever Sahaja Yoga has given me, I have taken it for granted. Once they But if you are trying to see what wrong come to Sahaja Yoga, they think it is a with others, then you are not in reality. contract already signed and if this thing You can watch, you can witness but doesn't work out then what is this. We you do not get upset with it or you do had a contract with God and we have not not even say something that would been awarded fully for whatever we have upset others. You are watching it, it is paid, whatever we have done. But what all beautiful, I mean just the joy of the have you done in this realm of Reality? person put it all these beautiful things of Have you enjoyed the reality? Have you all the persons is just bubbling through felt the joy of this real love of Divine? Are that. But unless and until you are you dissolved into that or you are still identified with those who have done this, standing on the shores watching? You can create, you are quite capable of been better, that should have been better. creating tremendous joy, tremendous You can be in the same position. happiness and peace. See the world Supposing you do something, another today, in what conditions it is? It is one will come and say, you should have complete turmoil, confusion, all kinds of corrupt and destructive things going on. So ugly this world has become. Can you spiritual energy. Then again you become beautify it? You can, because you can like the sky, I tell you, the greatness. They transform people. But if you are not are too great to botherabout these things. yourself a beautiful Sahaja Yogi how can Wasting our energy on very-very trivial you do it. So it is our attention on things, and useless things and just ourselves when we work out that we have to bring others into this realm of Reality. This is one side ourselves where we have to understand our subtleties, the other side is that we are still identified see, what is good in others, Because in everything is fine, everything first class. you might say this was, this should have done it this way, that way. Wasting our energy for nothing at all. Our energy is making yourself small ! But if this spiritual energy is used, because you can use it, you are the ones

 33 July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-Xill Issue 7 & 8 something like banging-banging- banging. I said ,what is the matter? I thought he is suffering from epilepsy or what. Sol rushed to other people and told them that this gentleman is suffering from epilepsy. They said " No, he doesn't suffer."I said why this sound comes?No,he is rubbing the chandan. You know, Sandal wood. And with such a big thud, every time he was putting that stone on the ground that I thought he had epilesly. They said, whatever you may tell him, he will never listen, he does it everyday. What is this? This we understand as stupidity when we see others, when we see human beings. But even realized souls, who are in the Realm with things which we should not have been identified. We can just find out, identified with ideas, identified with some sort of a consciousness. All these things make you really, to be very frank, they befool you. All the fools, who are conditioned are really, I don't know what to say about that, because they are like a train which has no driver. God knows when it is going to collide. Because such people who are identified, I know, now you must have seen also those who go to church, get ready nicely, go to church, sit down, sing hymns, come home and again quarrel and fight. But if they see a church, they will bow. Nothing goes inside of those who go to that church. All there are, who are like you must have seen the Jews, you see, wailing wall they have got and before that they do all kinds of things. What happens to them? Nothing. Same with the muslims. They are so conditioned. I mean, cannot be described about their conditionings, how stupid they are! And these conditionings go on making fool out of them. I know so many people. Once in my own life, I some relation of mine. This gentleman used to get up at four o' clock and would start singing some sort of a 'Ramraksha.' kills the joy, that kills the full experience The whole house is sleeping, children are of Reality. If you want to have the full sleeping but he is shouting at the top of experience of the beauty of reality, then his voice Even Rama might be sleeping you should shed out all these things at this time. But he would shout. His which are really befooling you morning bathing was another thing. Everybody till evening. People take advantage of knew that he is having the bath because he used to sing another shalokas or you,entrepreneurs, will start with one something, go on. But it happened that! fashion, every body will take to that. But was in the next room, and I heard of Reality, you do accept sometime unrealities, because of age old conditionings .Your forefather was like this, your father was like this, your forefather's forefathers were like this .So SO that is still coming. They call it genes. But in Sahaja Yoga these genes also change. So this kind of a conditioning which is lingering on still to your bodies, to your minds, to your emotions, has to be seen and cleansed out because that was with such people very much. As I have told we are not brainless people. Not only that

 34 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 &8 July - August 2001 facing us because of stupidity. This integration, I am sure, will take place and when that takes place, you will see the life of the Divine will be absolutely out- shining all these darknesses or destructive forces. Its is going to happen. If so many Sahasraras could be opened out, then why not the Sahasrara of this world also is opened out to truth and reality. It will. we have brains, but also enlightened brains. We do not take to things which are just in fashions, we don't, What we do, we have our own fashion. This is not ego. This is identification with your own Spirit. You won't take to any thing stupid or non -sensical, if you have the wisdom of spirit in you. So in the Realm of Reality, We have all the seven chakras, absolutely enlightened, integrated nourished. At that position, what we see is Ourselves, as I said as nothing is limited. Absolutely unlimited. Even this when we say, we penetrate, we do. When we say we expand, we do. When we contract, we do. Its absolutely a flexible personality and a personality that creates peace, joy, harmony. With the Sahasrara opening, I am sure, the whole world will be integrated. One day I will understand these problems that are So today is such an important day for us. In the history of spirituality, I think it is the very important day. For us is to realize that we are enlightened, we are the light of joy, light of compassion, light of love. Like the silent flames of the Sahasrara, in and different colours, beautifully dancing. Then we will know what the enjoyment of reality is. May God Bless You.

 Statutes of The Lord Essential to Become Gurus (Guru Puja - 1981) (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Why is this Puja arranged? One should know that it is very important for complete moon. A Guru has to be a every disciple to worship his Guru. But complete personality to talk about the Guru has to be a real Guru, not one these Statutes and to elevate his Today is Purnima, which means who is just exploiting the disciples and disciples to this level of understanding who is not authorised by God. A Puja is by which they imbibe those Statutes. arranged, because you have been He is here to fulfill this Gap and for that initiated into the statutes of the Lord it is essential that every Guru has to be You have been told what are the a realized soul of a very high quality Dharmas of a human being. For that and greatly evolved. He need not be a actually you do not need a Guru. You person who is an ascetic or a person can read a book and know what are the who is living in a forest. He could be a Statutes of the Lord. But Guru has to common householder. He could be a see that you practice them. These king. All these outward manifestations Statutes are to be practised, to be of one's life do not matter, whatever brought into your own life, which is a may be your position, I would say the difficult thing and without a Guru, a so-called position is this world, makes correcting force, it is very difficult to follow these Statutes of the Lord you have imbibed the Statutes of the because, there is a very big gap Lord. no difference to your being a Guru if between Human Awareness and Again I say you have to imbibe the Statutes of the Lord. Let us see what Divine Awareness and that gap can only be filled by a Guru, who himself is complete. are the Statutes. The first is, "You

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 Juiy - August 2001 36 The second statute is that you have to stand on your own legs. And cannot do harm to any one'. Animals do harm without knowing that they are harming someone. If you go near a know that you are here one with the snake he'll bite. If a scorpion is there Truth, the testimony of Truth, that he'll put his poison into your being. you have seen the Truth. You know Humans are not to harm any one. They what the truth is, and you cannot can correct but not harm. But the compromise with false-hood. You just principle of not harming others is taken to a point where reality disappears; anyone. You have just to profess it. e.g. when it was said "Do not harm You have to stand anyone", people started saying, have seen the Truth and this is the "Alright we will not harm mosquitoes Truth, and you have to be one with it so and bugs and will not kill them." And that people see that light of Truth in you there are some people who are and they accept it. following religions in which this is an absurdity. Taking anything to absurdity, cannot be reality. First of all others that you have to be truthful and we should not harm anyone who is this is the Truth we have seen and this walking in the path of God, the one is what God's laws are, how they work who is a realized soul. There may be out. Through vibratory awareness we some mistakes in him. He may need have been able to see that this is the correction. Nobody is perfect as yet. Truth. But be completely confident So do not harm. Always try to help. about it. But for that, first of all, you Secondly, anybody who is a real must test yourself completely, seeker, he may be wrong. He might otherwise you might be playing into the have gone to wrong Gurus, he might hands of evil. It happens with many have done wrong things. But have people who start doing Sahaja Yoga in feelings for them because you have the beginning. They have to receive been going on wrong path yourself Vibrations. So be cautious. sometimes. You have been misled cannot. For that you need not harm Test yourself. It is not for telling Be sure that you are telling the before, so have some sympathy .That is why if you have done mistakes- in a Truth and nothing else and that you way it is good, because you have more have felt the Truth in full ways. Those sympathies for such people. Then you who have not felt the Vibrations, are not to harm human beings in any should not talk of Sahaja Yoga. They way, you are not to cause them any have no authority. They have to bodily harm, or any emotional receive Vibrations. They have to upsetting just for harm's sake, for fully imbibe within them and then correction it is alright. they can say Yes ,we felt. This is a

 July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 37 very important task Sahaja Yogis up, adorn yourself with that Truth, and have to do in the modern times,- i.e. talk to people and people will know to tell aloud that they have found the that you have found it. Truth. That part is very week. Whatever way you like you can announce the Truth. You can write soul and a non- realized soul is that The difference between a realized books, you can talk to your friends, with that authenticity with which you relations and tell them: "This is the speak people will know that you have found it. The Truth now-that you have entered into the kingdom of God. That difference bet- ween a realized soul and a non- you have been blessed by the Grace of god." realized soul is basically this; He does not talk of woes and his seperation with God. He says " I Now you can the announce Truth. That you have found it now, This is it. Like Christ said, I are realized souls, that you have felt am the light, I am the path". Or anybody else can claim that, but you can make out that it is not the Truth. this Divine Power which is prevailing everywhere. That you can give realization to others and know that, by your accepting the Truth, you are not With adding anything to the Truth but you complete understanding coming out of are adoring yourself. the confidence, with that your heart people can make out," This is absolute Truth", and then all kinds of One requires courage to enjoy the falsehood must be denounced. Truth. Some-times people may mock Doesn't matter if someone feels bad, at you, laugh at you, and per-secute because, by telling that you are saving you also, but that should not be any them and not harming them. But, it worry to you, because your relation- must be told in a correct way, not in a ship is with the Statutes, with the frivolous way. In a very persuasive Grace of God. When that is your way, you must tell them that this is connection, you should not worry wrong. You must wait for the time when about other people, and what they you can tell people, more in have to say about it. You have to stand confidence. Tell them "This is wrong, it

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XiII Issue 7 & 8 July - August 2001 38 is wrong, you don't know. We have you hate every-one. Both things are done the same thing." This is how you just the same. So, detachment must are going to express your principle of be developed. The detacment is that Mastery or you can say "Guru Tatwa" you are your father, you are your You have to be truthful. First and mother, you are everything. Only your foremost thing is that you should know spirit is everything to you, only your the truth and stand the testimony and spirit you have to enjoy. Then the that you should announce it. detachment comes from them; then you really do good to them, because, The third thing, to become a by detaching you see the complete Guru, a Sahaja Yogi has to do is to develop detachment. Gradually you be done. Attachment to crazes. For do develop it because you find that example people have attachment with unless and until you develop that some crazes. Human beings always detachment, you are not receiving become crazy about something. I vibrations in the full way. All kinds of mean it can be anything. detachments have to be developed, means your priorities change. Once your attention gets fixed up with should be only one craze-i.e. to be your spirit, the catch or the hold on settled, absolutely settled, in your things which are of no importance spirit. All other crazes will disappear starts reducing on itself, e.g. you because it is the greatest joy-giving have a father and a mother and a thing. That's the most nourishing thing, sister. This is a bigger problem in India. Here you are over detached. But in India, people are very much involved in that which is that source of all their own children. "This is my son" and enjoyment. You get yourself attached others are orphans? Only your sons and daughters are the real children." working. Sometimes detachment is My daughter. I must do this for My son, taken as a licence for becoming dry to My father, My mother". Two types of others, which is absurd. This is a attachments are there. One through human quality to make everything dirty Moha-involvement-into that. That you which is beautiful. Actually, a person want to do this for them, that for them, who is detached is the most beautiful want to give them property, have person, is the extremely loving person insurance for them and every sort of is love. Look at the flowers, they are thing. And another could be the other detached. They are dying tomorrow, way, as we have here (London).You they are not going to live, but every hate your father, you hate your mother, minute they are emitting fragrance to vision about them and about what is to One has to understand that there that's the most beautiful thing. So all the other things fall off; you enjoy only to your spirit, and detachment starts

 July - August 2001 39 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-Xill Issue 7 & 8 filthy. You would not even know that a person has come with bad intentions. A you. The trees are not attached to anything; they will die tomorrow, doesn't matter. But if anybody comes to them they give shade, they give say:-" Come along, what do you want? person comes to you, to steal. You'll You'll offer him tea and all that. Then fruits. he says "I have come to rob you." Attachment means death of love, alright, rob me, if you want to"- So he death of love is attachment. For might not rob you at all. That is what is example, in a tree, the sap rises, goes innocence, which one may develop. to all the necessary parts, all the only through detachment. Detachment flowers, all the fruits, then goes back to is of the attention. Do not allow your Mother Earth. It is not attached to attention to get involved into anyone. Supposing, the sap goes and something, even rituals of anything. gets attached into one fruit. What will Say, now we have not washed Mataji's happen? The fruit will die and the tree Feet. Alright will die. Detachment gives you the movement of your love, circulation of your love. For things now.Things have it does not matter. You love me, alright. If some mistakes may be committed, what does it matter? If you see on the abstract plane. It's love. This is just a step forward, like somebody ran very fast and fell down before reaching ME and says, Mother, Sorry, I fell down before reaching you, I should not have done that. But Mother see how, I prostrated before you" It's a complete poetry- detachment. So, one has to develop no value unless and until there are emotions behind it. For example, the sari I am wearing today, was bought for Guru Day, Guru Purnima. But they had no sari. The other day, they wanted to have sari for Puja. Then I said if you insist I may have, but I wore it today just to say that this was bought with that devotion, that love that on Guru that detachment to be a Guru. And that Day, Mother would like to wear detachment does not mean sanyas or something of a lighter shade; white - anything like that. Sometimes one has the pure colour of silk-complete to wear those dresses to announce to detachment. But in white all the colours the world because, if you have to work are mixed, then only it becomes white,- in a short time then you have to take to such a balance and unity it is .It should that intensive behaviour ,like Christ, be that you should become white and you can say or Adishankaracharya. All whiter than snow. these people had a very, very short life. In that short life they had to achieve such a tremendous task that they had to actually take a military uniform just to avoid problems. Not to impress is purity, innocence. Innocence is such a light, light that really blinds you to all that is is Detachment %24

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XiII Issue 7 & 8 July-August 2001 40 others. Now-a-days people do it just to you have to lead a moral life. None of impress others that they are detached tham had said that you do not get married, that you should not talk to your wife or you should have no So, we understand that first work relationship with your wife. All this is is not to harm anyone. Ahimsa. Not to nonsense. Lead a moral life. When you kill anyone. That does not mean that are young and not married, keep your you do not have to eat meat and fish eyes on the ground. Mother earth gives and all that. That is all nonsense. Of you that innocence. Most of the confusions and problems, specially in the Western life, have come because anyone means Do not kill a human they have thrown morality to the sea, being. Thou shall not kill. So, first thing and to accept morality as the very basis of society is very difficult for them. It is complete reversion. But you Second is to know that you have have to do it, you have to turn the whole found the truth and give the testimony wheel back. So many things were done of the truth. Third is the detachment, in the beginning of the society to about establish these pure relationships. detachment. Not to get attached to any There are laws which act, just as Chemical laws are there. Physical laws are there in Chemistry and Physics. feeling and also not to Hate anyone. There are human laws which one should understand, the relationship between each other. The sublimity of mouth of all Sahaja Yogis; "I hate". It is their relationship, the purity of their called as Dandak, is the statute. You relationship must be understood. Lead a moral life. The Purity of the relationship between husband and wife must be understood. Then only can and do just the things opposite to it. course you should not hanker after food, no doubt about it. You do not kill is not to harm anyone. the way l've told you one person because he is a relation or something. But develop a universal That is the worst kind of attachment. This word should go away from the cannot hate anyone, even Rakshasas. Better not hate them. Give them a chance. you have a very, very happy married life, which is the basis. Now, the fourth statute of the Lord is, to lead a moral life. These Statutes "Thou shalt not commit adultery", Christ has said: (perhaps He knew the modern people as they would be using their brains for this ). He said " Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes". What a vision, in those days to think! Even I were given by Gurus. Take them from Socrates onward, Moses, Ibrahim, Dattatreya, Janaka, Mohammed Sahib and take up to the point when it was about a 100 years back at the most, was Sainath. All of them have said that

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 July-August 2001 41 Then for a could not under- stand it when I Guru, He should was in India. Only after coming here I could see, what it could mean. It is a not accumulate things; he should not have much possessions if he has possessions, they should be just what needs. A Guru possession on the eyes, -possess- ion. It's a joyless, he useless beha- must give away viour. Attention is his possessions. He should not fritt-ered away completely., There's dignity. Eyes should be steady. If you look at somebody stea-dily, he should know that you have Sahaja Yoga in have stamp coll- ections ( for financial gain) and all such kinds of collections. Whatever things are useful and beautiful, which give you. With love, with res-pect, with happiness and joy to others, to their eyes, such things must be collected. He should have such things which give no dignity. Not starting at people, which is just playing in the hands of these possessions. The whole society is symbolic meaning to his life, very possessed. All the Satanic forces have symbolic, which suggest that he is a been let loose, I think, and the way dharmic person. He should not have people are possessed, they cannot things that are symbolic of adharmikta, of irreligious life. Everything that he has or wears or shows should be is to be looked after. That is the representative of his Dharmikta. most important thing Because Anything that is impure, giving bad attention is the one which is going vibrations should not be possessed. Even whatever you have, you should think to whom you can give this. So, it means you should have possessions see through these things. They are supposed to be Christians. Attention to be enlightened. So, we have to know what morality is. Let people laugh and say that these are goodie goodies or this sort of thing. We are proud and not ashamed of being righteous people. This is a very important part of righteousness. Those who do not follow this will lose their vibrations very fast. to express your generosity. A Sahaja Yogi has to be generous like the sea. A miserly Sahaja Yogi, I cannot think of that- it is like mixing of darkness with light. Miserliness is not allowed in Sahaja Yoga. Anybody

 42. July-August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 whose mind goes on how much money for those people. Then, for a Sahaja I can save, how much labour I can Yogi it is important to use things which save-there are many labour saving are more natural in their character, devices, and money- saving devices- Give up articiality by and be more and also cheating others or making natural. I do not mean that you take out money out of a few things here and the roots and eat them or you eat the there, and all such things are against fish raw. I do not mean that. Always Sahaja Yoga. They will put you down. Enjoy your generosity. How many things. But try to lead a life which is times have I told you about more natural. Natural, in the sense that Generosity? Apart from the way you people know there is no vanity about give it, the emotional side is so beautiful, you cannot imagine it. I met a way round. You see they will dress up lady after say 30 years of her married life in London, suddenly, and she said," attention. I mean there can be both Oh, What a coincidence," i said ways. Then I find some people "Why?" She said" I am wearing the colouring their hair and all that. So you same pearl necklace you had given me on my wedding day, today, and I behaviour. So, be natural. It can mean should meet you". The whole thing, the anything absurd also to some people whole drama changed with that who do not use their wisdom. meeting. It is how you give even a small thing. It is the greatest art of giving that one has to learn in Sahaja Sahaja Yoga. That you have to keep Yoga. Give up the mundane type of intact all the time. Natural means you things, like if you go to somebody's must wear natural dresses, which are birthday, you send a card," Thank you suitable to you, e, g. in this climate very much". Make it a more deeper there is no use to wear dress like significant thing. Let us see how you RAMA used to wear. He will not wear develop your symbols of love. When anything on the top, there was no you have these things of vibrations and you will give it to a Sahaja Yogi, he will you must avoid going too far with the you. Some people can be the other as a tramp, just to attract more have to be a very natural person in your Wisdom is very important in need.You have to wear the dress of whatever country you belong to, whatever suits the occasion. Whatever you think is dignified and good. It speaks for your more elegance and your personality. Whatever suits you, you should wear, not like all the people wearing moss- coloured dress, the great suit, horrible looking and making know what it is. Never lack in generosity specially among Sahaja Yogis. Gradually, you will be amazed how through small things you win over, as if the vibrations flow through these things and work out

 July - August 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XilI Issue 7 & 8 43 clowns out of them. No clownish things of discriminations and identifications are necessary, no dandy stuff is according to races, colour and necessary Simple beautiful dresses different religions in which you are should be worn which give you born. As a Christian you don't belong dignity. to a church, you are not born in a church. Thank God, otherwise all the Actually, in the East, people spirits there will capture you, believe that God has given you a immediately. But these identifications will linger on. To accept anything new, with the beauty of what human beings you have to be reborn and you are reborn now. Now, you are Dharmatita- means -you need not follow any India, women wear their saris and particular type of religion. You are beautiful body and it is to be adorned have created, just to respect it, just to worship your body. For example in open to all religions and the essence and expression of their worship of their of all religions you have to take. You bodies, because you must respect have not to denounce any religion or insult any religious incarnation at any time. It is a sin. It is a great sin in Sahaja Yoga- and you know who they are. There should be no racial saris are expressive of their moods your body. Dresses should be such that they should be for utility as well as for dignity. There is no need to have uniform clothes for Sahaja Yogis at all. I don't like it. There should be a variety as nature is. Every-one should look a different person. For Puja etc. all can wear something similar, it doesn't matter But outside you should be a You understanding of oneself. You could be Chinese or any group. As long as we are human beings, we should know that we laugh the same way, we smile the same way, we hold the same way. This is all conditioning in our mind- of this society that some are touchables and some are untouchables. This is in all normal are person. householders, nobody has to announce something. For you people I don't even advise to put the red mark when walking on the street. You should be a normal person, not to be pointed out. You need not be dressed absurdly or in a funny way, but in a normal way as others wear. To be normal is very important in Sahaja That is why, deliberately, he was b Yoga. our Indian Community. Horrible. Brahamanism of India has ruined India completely and you learn from it, for example, who was Vyasa, the one who wrote Geeta, who was he? He was the illegitimate son of a fisher-woman. born like that. All the Brahmins who read Geeta, ask them -who was Vyasa? Then we have to know that Brahmins are those who are realized souls, there is nothing like where and Sahaja Yogis have to get over all kinds

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 July-August 2001 44 Mr. Ego, which is being pampered by education and this society, which teaches you how to everything in the West, we find this smoke a cigar and how to have your nonsense of nationalism. I just can't lager (beer), morning till evening. All understand. If somebody is fair or this training and conditioning has to be dark, after all God had to make variety thrown away just like filth, and see that in colour in every way. Who told you God created all of you as His own that you are the most handsome children. It is such a beautiful thing. Why do you want to make it ugly with these ugly ideas? All this ugliness of" I like or dislike" is in what caste or community you are born. With all going around? Maybe for markets people some here, or in Holly- wood, it may be fit but in the Kingdom of God, all these nonsense. Only there should be one word "I love" so- called 'hand- some peopile will be denied entry- Forget everything. There is no need to remember what marrying seven the British did to husbands and all the Indians or the sort of things. They will all be put in Hell. God has created Germans did to the Jews. Forget all of you as His own children. The everything. Those people who did it beauty is of the heart and not of the face, that shows and shines. May be people are a little bit aware of it, that is why they go and tan their faces, I do not know. They are quite aware, but you, which you have to imbibe. But, there is too much 'showing-Off' they today, I authorise you to be the Gurus. are doing. Some people like black hair, So that through your own character others like red hair, I mean there have and through your own personality the to be all types of hair, why do you like a way you practice Sahaja Yoga in your particular type of hair, this I can't own life- and manifest the light, others are dead and finished. We are different people. We are Saints. This is for the statutes I have told will follow you, And that will establish the statutes of the Lord in their hearts understand. and emancipate them. Give them their salvation, because you have got your salvation. You are the channels- There is nothing to like or dislike. What God has created is all beautiful, who are you to judge that I like or dislike ? 'I', Who is this 'I ,you see, is without the channels this all pervading

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8 July-August 2001 45 power cannot work out. That's the First of all you have to know that void system. If you see the Sun, it's light catches when you had a wrong type of spreads through it's rays-from your Guru. You must know about your guru heart the blood flows through the entirely. Try to find out the character of arteries, they become smaller and smaller. You are the arteries which is your Guru is very elusive. She is going to flow this blood, of my love, to Mahamaya. Not easy to find out. She all the people. If arteries are broken, behaves in a normal way- and the blood will not reach the people. sometimes you are out witted. But you That is why you are so important. The see how in small things also, She bigger you become, the bigger the your Guru. Rather difficult because behaves. How Her character is you expressed, how Her Love is encompass more people, by that you expressed? Try to remember Her forgiveness. Then you should know that you have the Guru that many Guru must have the dignity. Guru people must have desired to have. means the weight, is the gravity, Who is the source of all Gurus. It is the ardent desire of even Brahma, Vishnu, Then become. arteries are not responsible. gurutatwa means gravity. You must have the gravity by your weight, and Mahesha to have a Guru like that. means the weight of your character, They must all be jealous of you, But weight of your dignity, weight of your this Guru is very elusive. So to behaviour, weight of your faith; and improve your VOID, say that, " Mother your light. You become a Guru not you are our Guru". Because of this through frivolousness and vanity. elusiveness, that fear, or that awe, that Cheapness, vulgar language, cheap respect which is necessary, for the jokes, anger and temper-all must be Guru, is not established. Unless and avoided completely. Wield the weight until you develop that awe- complete of your sweetness, of your tongue, within you, your Guru principle will not which will attract people just like the be established. No liberty is to be taken. I am telling you Myself, but I am attracting the bees from all over. In the extremely elusive; next moment, I same way you will be attracting make you laugh and forget about it people. Be proud of that, be very because I am testing your freedom to proud of that and have sympathies for do it- compiete freedom. I play with you in such a manner that you will be forgetting every moment that I am your Guru, every moment. So first of all you how you have to do it yourself. You must find out about your own Guru have to work out your void clearly. establish Her in your heart. I mean you flower which is loaded with nectar, others and care for others. Now, in short, I have to tell you

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Isue 7 & 3 July-August 2001 46 have a wonderful 'Guru' -otherwise I you must remember that when you must say, I wish I had one like that myself! And She is desireless and Sahaja Yoga, remember that they sinless, absolutely sinless. Whatever I will see you all the time and try to do it is not a sin for Me. I can kill anyone and do whatever intrigue or anything. I really tell you, that's a fact. Do anything, I am above sin but I see try to love them, I definitely Love you to it that I do not do anything like that in your presence, so that you do not get different state all together. Under one of these things, because that is My quality. You have a very supreme Guru, no doubt, but still you must know that those powers of supremacy you from that don't have. I am above all these shaktis of all the powers, so you things. I don't know what temptations are, nothing, I mean I do! Whatever I like it is all my Whim. But despite that I have made myself very normal by you! Unless and until you desire because I must appear before you in My good health, I will have bad health. such a manner that you understand what is the statutes, For Me there are no statutes. I make these Statutes. Because of you I do all these things should really prosper so that There and teach you small things because you are still children. In the same way, 1 are talking to other people about see how far you are in it. As I understand you, you try to understand them. As I love you, you but I am NIRMALA, I am beyond love, circumstances these you are much better off because no Guru ever goes to that extent. Apart I am the source of all the can have all the powers from Me, whatever you like, I am desireless. Look at that, how much I am bound It is to that extent. But to me what is good health and bad health? Under these beautiful conditions you should be no problems for you to be Gurus.

 Sucial Recgntion Vecognition pecial WHEREAS, on March 21st, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, founder of Sahaja Yoga Meditation, will celebrate her 78th birthday: and WHEREAS, Shri Mataji is one of the most significant voices on world peace today and has been nominated twice for the Nobel Peace Prize for her extraordinary humanitarian efforts; and WHEREAS, Sahaja Yoga is a meditation practice which has helped hundreds of thousands in over 75 countries worldwide enjoy more peaceful, healthy, and balanced lives; and WHEREAS, the City of Plano would like to send birthday felicitations and well wishes to Shri Mataji on the day of her 78th birthday, March 21, 2001 NOW, THEREFORE, I, JERAN AKERS, MAYOR OF THE CITY OF PLANO, TEXAS do hereby extend special recognition to Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi for her revolutionary and seifless work in the field of yoga, meditation and world peace, Office ofithe Mayer

 OCCASI SINE. SPIENDOR Shri Mataji On behalf of the Government and People of British Columbia I am pleased to offer you my hearty congratulations and very best wishes on the occasion of your Seventy-eighth Birthday May you enjoy every future happiness March 21, 2001 Premier

 New York State Assembly Citation HONORING Shri Martai Nirmala Devi, founder of Sahuja Yoga Meslitation, an the occasion of her 78 Rirthday WHEREAS, & i sthe sesr of thir A ul Bady o amearte and acinenledge these iividaals hubo idevne their fiver to promoting prace, hnahfi ad wel-bring, keredy bringing hope u heryone thiry ourh, anid nd ackaomledge these indvidatls HE born ar Marce 11. 193 . WHEREAS, Shri Mauji Nirali Deni, founder of Sahaja Yoga Medimion. in Chindhutra, India, her father was ane of the authars of India' Canition, and WHEREAS, SHi Manaji's special spanliries were revogninnd by Mahu uta Gand, and she oftien stared in inis Ashirun; hr indind mndirine and nun arme in ihe movetent Aar the hndepenutence of Iadia auf mfence of Indat auf WHEREAS, Siri Manapi jonnudend Ahe ecmomir cundition of Indim mm, and a konjpiiul which urglully enplayr Saha Yopa an intermutiomat srhiot for children in indlia, an argnianin te imprve amiane n improne is a dynmic and pnurfal peesence wiheu rnvetr werktuide, gháng speeches n f womm in soriety and self realinin and WHEREAS, Sin Manyi arld pruce, the role of WHEREAS, Shri Mataji'n insights inte the probdenes of tmniy ane deep and mealing she has been gurst spealer a mary intermatiomaf semiscara md ronferencet; id leas eeicer been nominnef fr như Nobel Pnacr Prir, laer deem lnnoresd by ilhe WHEREAS, Sri Mngi ted Sutes Cangrets Comtriturion an peatr, henith aml the well-being prople in aver 75 mion and Nw nhe Nobel Pnace Pribr, luc dem Aonored s, amud har received iy intemutionl anands and charioey in reriguitin of her FHEREAS, Salugia Togn ir amght localy, with charge, at the Sute Uninaity of New Yonk at New Paltz and at the Dkry Top Drig Rehabiliturin fariliry in hinrbert, Niew Yorit ; auf Rhinrberk, New Yort ; anf WHEREAS, Suktjia Foga ir eurrently she sudýecr of sinesine eseurch ar the Narionaf lesnitute af Hashir Wishingon, D.C, rganeg he mefical benefiar of te prtice, anf alur dijet of cinesive eseurch ar Astituten of Hashin WHEREAS, Ths Arsemdilend Body is greutly moved to etemd a Sari Atataji itr roidanion for er E mt dnptef commin ndiman, ne, thereore. be ir in Aeping coeatr calmer, bnihier, mone Iaalaornf ho trough RESOLVED, Thar ilis Legislaive Bedy paur iw ies delibenutions an homr Shri Maaji AiHunir Devi, der of Shaluju Yagu Mediui Shri Manaji Nirmnir Devi, her e dhe ocrasin of her 78ch. Birthday; nd be ir furdh ion, RESOLVED, Th a copy of thir Catim, y engrusunt, be uuited Stri Mataji Nirmie Dent. By Gnlier of 4.Calull Kevin A. Cahill, Member of Assemddy

 STATE OF TEXAS OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR To all to whom these presents shall come, Greetings: Know je, that this certificate is presented to Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi On The Occasion Of Her 78th Birthday In testinany swhiaresf I latve rigued my name and caused the Staf af the State af Tear ta fr affised at the City of Austin, thir the 13 day a Atareli, 2001. STATE Rice FuRRy RICK Rick Perry Governor of Texas TEXAS

 or 1781 Birthday Greetings Shri Natji Nirmada Jeri We in the "City of the Angels" extend our very best wishes for a wonderful birthday celebration filled with family, friends and fond memories. March 21, 2001 bealttohie Richard J Riordan Mayor

 Proclamation City of Cincinnati Be It Proclaimed: Whereas, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. founder of Sihaja Yoga Meulitarion hice-naminaierd for the Nobel Prace Prize, ir nht en person io aken en-mIse kundalini an CHerg which ir the key e health, balance, inner peace and uell-bein This encrg enubles individuale to sffortlesslv enter into a state of higher anwtrenear anl to become a Pource of well-bring in their funilies, conimunities and sacieties; anl. Whereas, in more than 70 cities throughout North America, public Sahtja Yoga programs are heing conducted. In the Greater Cincinnati area Sahaja Yoga Meitaiom has been taught, free of charge, at the Cincinmati Art Museum, Xavier Unnerninj, Raymond Halters College, Clermont Callege and Minmi University fior aver 15 years Cwrently. frer reekly programs are being offered to the public at the Comaunin Friendt AMeeting House in North Avondale; and Whereas, in over 80 countries, for the past 30 years, Sahaja Yoga has beet afferef and taught te huntredr of ihoutands of people negardlenr of agr or backgraund. The Irunaformational results are healing, uplifting and universal From Bombay to Brazil Soutl Africa to North Amerien, Sahajn Yoga Meditation har heiped improve liver and cOmmum and, Whereas, Shvi Mataji foundet Sahaja Yoga International in 1970 as a thon- profit, volunieer organization, dedictted to helping peonle through the ure of ear-to-learn nditation techniguen. Problms of alcohol and drug addicion, heulth and emottonal isuE have been much inproved through the sie of Sahaja Yaga, anıd, Whereas, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi har made outstaniling contrihutions ho modern ife through her discoveryi of Sahaja Yoga and her muny churiiahle and humanitar endeavars. These include Internationnat schooin for childrew around the worlit, organizations to improve the conomie coMulition of lndian mOme, MAulical facilities that ue non-Iva Sahaje Yoga echmiyuer, ongoing rerearch using Sakuia Yoga techniquer at the National Institutes of Heulth, Hethesda, MD. warkplace atress-reduction pirogram in mumeruuu US. Companies, outreach progrums to social service agencier such as beternd wamen ' sheltern, correctional facilities, drug rehabilitation centers, renior cilizen centers, publicationi of her book "Afeta-Afodern Era" and her ongolng Iruvel worldwide to speak at free Sahuju Yoga programs: Nolu, Theretore, 3, Charlie Luken, Mayor of the City of Cincianati do hereby proclaim Wednesday, Afarch 21, 2001, wx "SHRI NIRMALA DEVI DAY" in Cincinnan. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, 1 have hereinto et Iny hand and caused this seal of the Ciry of Cincinnari to be affixed this 15 day of March in the year Tep Thausand and One. Charlie Luken, Mayer Cio of Cincinnari

 County of Allegheny Office of the Chief Executibe Community Citation of Merit #wanded tn Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi In celebration uf your 78 birthday on March 21, 2001, I offer best wishes and recognize your significant contributions to world peace and extraordinary humanitarian achievements; and in EEco gnition of distinguished endeavor and accomplishment, which have eamed the esteem of the citizens of Allegheny County. Presented on behalf of the citizens of Allegheny County by tlhe Office of the Chief Executive, this tath day of March, 2001 le CKief ExccutivE

 GOVERNOR GRAY DAVIS Commendation Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Mach 21, 2001 It is a great pleasure to join your family and friends in celebrating your 78 birthday. Your dedication to your community is truly an inspiration. I hope the gathering of your dear family and friends helps you celebrate this momentous occasion in a very meaningful way. On behalf of the people of the State of California, please accept my congratulations on this very special day. tay Davis aNNE Governor Gray Davis STATE CAPITOL SACRAMENTO, CALIFORNIA 95814 (916) 445-2841

 City of Pittsburgh Office of the Mayor A Proclamation A By virtue of the authority vested in me as Mayor of the City of Pittsburgh, I do hereby issue this proclamation honoring Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi WHEREAS, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi was born on March 21, 1923 in Chindiwara, India and as a young girl Mahatma Gandhi recognized her deep and special qualities and; WHEREAS, she is a world renowned spiritual leader and the founder of Sahaja Yoga, a natural, effortless way to spiritual enlightenment and: WHEREAS, she has founded many charitable organizations and has been awarded the United Nations Peace Medal, has been invited by the United Nations four times to speak on world peace and has twice been nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize. NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that I, as Mayor of the City of Pittsburgh, do hereby congratulate Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi on her 78* birthday and do hereby declare Wednesday, March 21, 2001 to be "Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Day" in the City of Pittsburgh. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the City of Pittsburgh to be uffixed. Tom Murphy March 21, 2001 Date Mayur

 March 21", 2001 Congratulations Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi On your 78th Birthday Edmonton City Council Robert Noce Вгyan Анderson Michael Phair Allan Bolstad Rose Rosenberger Terry Cavanagh Leroy Chahley Jim Taylor Dave Thiele Wendy Kinsella Larry Langley Bil Samith Mayor COMBNTE Ciry ERT



----------------------

2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 NIRMALA
July-August, 2001
Volume: XIII Issue: 7 & 8
VERSAL PURE
The Divine Cool Breeze
00
IVI
महीं मूलाधारे कमपि मणिपूरे हुतवह
स्थितं स्वाधिष्ठाने हृदि मरुत-माकाश-मुपरि।
मनोऽपि भ्रूमध्ये सकलमपि भित्वा कुलपथं
सहस्रारे पदमें सह रहसि पत्या चिहरसे।।
O Devi, Having penetrated the Earth element (Pruthvi Tattva) in the Muladhara,
Water element in the Manipura, Fire element in the Swadhishthana, Air element in the
Anahata (Heart), The Sky element (Akasa) in the Vishudhi Chakra, Manas (Mind) in
the Ajona (Agya), Thou, ascending through the Susumna (Kula Path) sportest with Thy
The Thousand Petalled Lotus.
Consort in the Solitude of Sahasrara-
OHARMA
VARSIA
RELIGION
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 House of Representatives
7th District, New York
P-
roclamation
"78*
Birthday Celebration of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi"
Whereas:
It is the sense of this Congressional Body, that those individuals who have
dedicated their fife to public service and to helping others, should be publicly
acknowledged and applauded. One such person is Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
and.
Shri Mataji was bom in Chindwara, India in 1923 and raised as a Christian. As a
child her maturity and wisdom impressed all who she encountered. At a very
young age she fought for India's independence working closely with Mahatma
Gandhi and today, continues to strive towards the realization of his dream for
universal peace and unity, and.
Whereas:
Whereas:
Shri Mataji has a deep and abiding commitment and dedication to world peace,
the role of women in society, and "Self-Realizntion". These issucs are what have
motivated Shri Mataji to become involved in her fight to improve the quality of
life, She is the founder of Sahaja Yoga, a deep meditation which cnhances health
and peacefulnes and connects you to a higher level of awareness ofyourself and
of the powers that created you. and.
Whereas:
Shri Mataji has been nominated twice for the Nobel Peace Prize, she has reccived
Global Nominations and in 1993 she was appointed Honorary Member of the
Presidium of the Petravska Academy of Art and Science in St. Petersburg. In
1986 she was named "Personality of the Year" by the Italian Government and
was presented with a Congressional Record Honorarium by the 10s" Congress
1997, and.
Whereas:
Friends, family and colleagues have gathered on this the 21" day of March, 200 Ito
celebrata Shri Mataji's 78" birthday and to honor her for all her accomplishments.
Wishing her continued pence, happiness and success, be it therefore
Prociaimed:
By the power incumbent in me as the duly elected Member of the House of
Representatives from New York's Seventh Congressional District, I bestow
Congressional Recognition upon
ATES
STA
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
In Witness Hlhereof, I have hereunto set my hand
UNITED
Sonly.
CONGTDSS
JOSEPH CROWLEY
Member ol Congres
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Volume XIIIISUE 7& 8 July August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
78th Birthday Puja, Nirmal Dharm, 21.3.2001
14
78th Birthday Felicitation, 20.3.2001
23
Speech of Shri Mataji, New Delhi, 17.12.2000
25
Sahasrara Puja, Cabella, 5.5.1996
35
Statutes of The Lord, Guru Puja, 1981
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 THE DI VINE C o OL
Co oL
BRE EZE
тHE
Published by
V.J. Nalgirkar
162-A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067
Printed at
Amanath Press (P) Ltd.
Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph. : 5447291, 5170197
For subscription please write to
Mr. O. P. Chandna
N-463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi - 110034
Ph.: (011)7013464
Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to:
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple
C- 17, Qutub Institutional Area
New Delhi - 110016
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 78th Birthday Puja
Nirmal Dham 21.3.2001
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
are coming to Sahaja
Yoga, what you have
to get is an ocean of
love within your heart
Today you all
have decided to
celebrate my 78th
Birthday. You have
put beautiful balloons,
as you put for a child
on his Birthday, with
such loving hands.
Yesterday as I told
and to seek that in
others also.
It is the love
which helps you to
do everything so
smoothly so beauti-
fully. As I have
always said that if you
how much you can love others? It will really love your country, you can never
be much easier to find out through be dishonest. You will have no other
introspection, how much you love others interest but to get your freedom or
and how much you care for others. If that whatever you want to do for your country.
happens, many problems of Sahaja In this country we have had great
Martyrs. Perhaps you may not be
knowing some of them, and the way they
sustained the torturous life, it was only
is that people still are hankering after because they loved their country. Your
money. They think it is a place where country is spirituality. It is the country of
they can make some money. I am complete enjoyment of yourself. It is the
surprised! This is not the area where you country where nothing but peace
can really work out that. You will be prevails and when you love that country
exposed in no time. On the contrary if how can you have all these nonsensical
ideas for money and for power and all
powers in Sahaja Yoga, as leaders and that? I just can't understand. As it is you
deputy leaders, I don't know what all, know very well, that, I am not bothered
about these things at all in my life. Of
course we need money for work, for
politics or else for making money you can everything, but there is no need to run
go to racecourses or some place. If you after it or hanker after it. I am surprised
you, you have to find
out about yourself.
Just try to find out
also as you love me,
Yoga will be solved in no time.
Even in Sahaja Yoga what I am told
you people are worried about your
then also you are sadly mistaken. That's
not the place. For that you can join
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 July - August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & B
2.
21
even after so many years of my hard the Paradise of Love, if you are still
work there are some people still working bothered about these non-sensical
out, some stupid stuffs, which I can't things then you will jump very fast into
understand and they should know that the hell. I can see that clearly. I should
not say this on my Birthday, but this is
told last time, the year of exposure and be very careful.
absolutely. If you have no love for Sahaja Nobody will be spared this year, what to
I have to
tell you. It won't keep quite. You know
things and make some mess out of your there are certain powers, which flow and
self. If you want to destroy yourself you different different years, I find, different.
can go to some other fields but not in types of powers start flowing and this is
the time when powers for exposure are
going to be there. Whether you are a
leader or if you are not, if you are making
anything in a dishonest way you will be
exposed and you will be rightly punished.
Sahaja Yoga may not punish you, but
there are so many ways that this power
they will be exposed in no time. This is
the year of exposure, I
Yoga, if you have no love for your do? Though its my Birthday,
Mother, you run after those non-sensical
Sahaja Yoga.
In Sahaja Yoga you have to know
that you have to be really dedicated and
honest. You should enjoy your honesty,
you should enjoy your love, you should
enjoy your generosity, everything. You
will be exposed no doubt but then where
will you go? What will be your position?
You are doing all those things, you have
to go the way people have gone to hell,
I should say. Because after coming to
works out.
The first thing is what we call
'Alakshmi'. Alakshmi means at that time
when you are punished, you will be
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 July - August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 7 & B
surprised you will just become bankrupt. We have to create this world for the
You will have no money. You will be
exposed, you may be in jail. So though over, who are even in the jungles, who
it's a very auspicious day, I must tell you
not to be inauspicious. Yesterday's have to spread this beautiful sensation
lecture I explained to you to know what
your powers are, what you can enjoy, respect and dignity. Very important is to
what you can give, what can you work
out. But firstly you must know are you respecting your Self? Yesterday only I
capable of doing that or you are just said "Know Thyself. If that is the case,
working it out in the other way round. I
was amazed to hear that after so many is first to respect yourself. If you don't
years also people
have not given up
this kind of a
whole, whole of the people who live all
are lost into Himalayas, anywhere. We
and this beautiful existence of self-
see if you are really the Self, Are you
Do you respect yourself? Very important
know how to
respect yourself
and you run after
useless things
temptation that
they have. On my
Birthday
then what should
we say? What is
the quality that
you
must remember
you have imbibed
in Sahaja Yoga
except that you
how many years
you have spent
doing Sahaja
Yoga. You must
have started a
business
understand all
or
the nice time you
something like
that? It is very sad. But there are people
had and how many days every year you
have spent in enjoying my Birthday and
also in understanding how you have
grown into it. How you have changed and
how you have enjoyed and how you have
imbibed all the qualities of Sahaja Yoga?
who are still ruined in the mud of these
things. You have overcome so many
things, I know. You have achieved so
many things,I know, which is not
possible, humanly impossible things you
have done. You have got over all these
nonsense but still there are some people
First and foremost quality of a
Sahaja Yogi is that he has to be
absolutely honest. He has not come here
to make money. Not for making money.
He has not come here to make power.
among you who are still in the stinking
mud of nonsense.
It is nice that you are celebrating my
Birthday with such enthusiasm and such
happiness. So nice to see all this and I
But he has come here to rise into the
new beautiful world that we are creating.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
July- August 2001
come
Nother
want you all to be my decorations. In is the Spirit, the reflection of God
the whole world, they should see that Almighty. If you want to live like all other
you are my children and that you are
of such great values and such great stay out of Sahaja Yoga. But if you think
understanding. You are my children. I that you have to really show your worth,
have really worked for you in the sense coming into Sahaja Yoga and if you have
that every minute, every moment of my
life I have thought of you.I wanted to
work it out in such a beautiful manner
ordinary non-sensical people, you should
to feel proud of yourself, then try to
understand that in Sahaja Yoga you don't
have to have all these weaknesses.
that you become really good people,
ideal people, special people with
understanding. So that is the day when
you should feel that your Birthday is
being celebrated. When you are
completely cleared out, you have
become Nirmal, absolutely pure
personality of love,that's the day of your
Birthday and Mine too. I have to tell about
these things because some things have
come to my notice and 1 am really
shocked the way some people are still
not understanding their value, not
understanding their worth and that's why
the other day I told you that you must
know about yourself. First of all the Self
When the Kundalini rises, she
passes through 6 chakras by
enlightening them. I may tolerate you,
up to a point but the Kundalini will punish
you. She will do what is needed to correct
you. Up to a point, she will do and
afterwards when she finds it is not
possible to correct you then I don't know
what will happen and how it will work out!
Sahaja Yoga is very easy to come in, to
move in and to work it out. But if you go
against yourself, if you try to behave like
very ordinary useless people, then you
can't stay in Sahaja Yoga. You will be
thrown out. As soon as you are thrown
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
But if you are still running after non-
sensical things, if you are still full of lust
and greed, then better you leave Sahaja
Yoga into itself and you can find some
other area where you can do that. It is
something surprising, how people do not
understand their position in Sahaja Yoga!
Your growth has been on the whole, very
good. I know there are many people who
are wonderful Sahaja Yogis, Who are
really great Sahaja Yogis and they have
every right to call themselves Sahaja
Yogis or Mahayogis. But that is only
possible and perceptible if you really
grow up inside and your spirit shines like
crystal clear ocean of love. Now the
connection has been done. You have the
knowledge of all the Charkas. You know
out, where will you land, what will
happen, that you know very well. On this
auspicious day I have to request you to
be auspicious, not to do anything that is
inauspicious. They call it protocol. But
there are small things which show you
are auspicious, very-very minute subtle
things that show you are auspicious,
which you don't have to learn.
Automatically, spontaneously, it comes
and you enjoy your auspiciousness.
Because you are holy, because you are
Nirmal, and you enjoy that quality within
you. When that happens that is your
Birthday.
You were reborn as you know. All
of you were reborn. You are rebom but
still you were children and now you have
grown up. That growth has to be shown
in every way. When a person grows, then
he goes all out to
do various things
how to raise Kundalini. You know also
how to cure people and how to treat
people. With all that knowledge, with all
that life you have
got, its like the milk,
you give to your
energies and then
to express himself.
In the same way
have to
when you are
you
become
grown up then you
have to show that
ener-
getic. You can not
be lethargic about
it. When you are
you have grown up
in Sahaja Yoga.
That you are very
deep, and you are
lethargic, then you
are not a Sahaja
Yogi. You have to
be moving with this
flame in your heart
that you know what is Seilf and you know
a very senior
person. I have
seen some little
children also. They are so grown up and
so sensible that sometimes I am amazed
that they are great saints reborn. They
are great people who are rebom.
what you have to do for others. Must be
you must have been also great seekers
in previous lives. And that seeking, that
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIll Issue 7 & 8
July August 2001
was there, has brought you to Sahaja
Yoga. Now with that seeking when you
are here, still you are seeking all these
useless things! You can't grow and such
people cannot make others also grow.
grow. You have to become very very
deep personalities. You have to grow
within yourself, celebrating your own
Birthday.
Every day, try to see, what is your
experience, what did you see. Whom did
you meet. How did they talk? I mean, I
know so many names, practically every
body's name I know, practically
everybody's Kundalini I know. I also
So the main thing one has to
understand that how you are grown in
your love. You see, a person who is
frightful, who is very strict, who talks very
rudely, is not a Sahaja Yogi. No way, But
the one who looks after, cares, loves and
know whose Kundalini is alright whose
is very generous, is the real Sahaja Yogi. is not. I know so many people. So many
You are the people of special qualities ask me how do you know so many
and those qualities must be shown in
your life. I know you love me very much
and you know what you have done to
celebrate my Birthday. As you have so
many of these decorations, I have
already told you that you are my
decorations, and your lives are my
decorations. And the way you behave,
and the way you know yourself, things
will be so much appreciated all over the
world. It is not for any other purpose but call it romance and all that, but it's a very
only to remember that you all have to deep feeling. When you enter into the
names and how do you remember
them?l say, I don't know that part but it
is that whenever I see a person I see his
Kundalini and from that Kundalini I know
who he is? There can be thousands of
Kundalinis but I know who is who,
because I love them.
If you love somebody then you know
what he is. It's not stupid love as they
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 July August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
garden of your heart and you feel the
beautiful fragrance all around, when you
think of such nice people as they have
been as saints, great saviours and now
the Sahaja Yogis, you feel so much
grateful that you have achieved that state
of collective enjoyment.
upon you, about everyone, about every
aspect, about every surroundings that
you have, so clearly you know and that
should happen that you should know
very clearly, very-very clearly that what
is the situation with you, where are you,
and what are you doing? Not that, you
have any less powers. You have all the
I have never put any restrictions on powers. But for that you have to go deep
down. Like there is a well and the well
has the water in it but if your bucket does
not go down, how can you bring the
water? If your bucket is filled with stones,
That is the testing ground where you are what's the use of that well to you? In the
same way we have everything within us,
will you know how far you have come? asI told you yesterday, and Sahaja Yoga
So you are the student, you are the is the way you can go down and find
examiner and you are the one who has about yourself which is so beautiful,
to give you self certificate. And in that clean and that's the thing to be enjoyed
case what happens is that you start and not other non-sensical things after
understanding. Understanding so many which you are running, which you think
you. Do what you like. Whatever way you
want to do it you can do it. I have never
been bothering you about money or
anything. But that is a testing ground.
standing. If you do not test yourself, how
things, which you have never
understood. I mean the knowledge, so
called knowledge, is no knowledge
are important.
I have already told you, it is 'Shudh
Ichcha', is the Kundalini. Shudh Ichcha,
because it's all falsehood. It's all mental.
Pure desire because other desires are
But the real absolute knowledge dawns
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 7 & 8
July August 2001
never fulfilled. You try to buy one thing, state, I know. I know I have not told them,
then you don't enjoy. You want to buy because I know this is the year they will
another one, you don't enjoy. You want
to buy another ane, don't enjoy. Because the use of doing something in which you
it is not the real desire. This is the will be exposed and that the whole world
principle of economics that you are never
satisfied, You go on buying, buying, criminal or as a person who does not
buying, buying and you buy so many
things. Ultimately what happens is that it and if you are here to gain lots of
all the industries collapse. That's what ascending steps, you have to have your
is happening in America. It has a quality eyes upward and not downward. You
that whatever you do, repels back on must see what steps there are? You
you. Only the spiritual growth does not.
It flowers. Its fragrant, its beautiful, such
a beautiful experience to be with your in that beautiful garden, fragrant, garden
self, as if you have entered into the of your Self, which is so beautiful.
beautiful garden of paradise. If that
feeling if you want to have, give up all the world. As so many are lost, so why
non-sensical ideas, give up all worldly have you come to Sahaja Yoga?
nonsense. Everything you give up and
then you will feel that you are now very
much there where you should have try to take to spirituality, pure spirituality.
been. You will have no doubts. You will Purity, is the word. Purity you must have
have no hankerings, you will not feel at
all in any way dissatisfied but some
people are still at a very elementary state has to improve. Witness state has
be all exposed, no doubt. Then what is
of Sahaja Yoga will look at you as a
need any respect. Either you get out of
have to climb up those steps and with
these steps where you enter,I tell you,
Instead of that you are lost in the mire of
Give up those non-sensical ideas,
and purity within is you can easily
establish with Sahaja Yoga. Your witness
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
to be projected so much that this just witnesses and while witnessing
conditioning and ego of reaction will anything. it knows. It knows, you don't
finish off. You will have no more reactions have to tell, this is this or this is what.
Don't have to express too much
anything. It is just self expressing, if, you
are a clean person, your desires are
clean, and that you just have pure desire
to ascend.
but you just witness and the knowiedge
that is real comes always through
witnessing. If you do not know how to
witness then whatever knowledge you
have is nothing but through your ego or
through your, we can say, conditionings.
Its not absolute knowledge.. So to get
absolute knowledge about anything what
you have to do is to reach the point of
absoluteness. So reach the point where
you are absolutely clean, pure, Nirmal.
So Again I have to talk about
Kundalini that you must have a Kundalini
completely establishing itself within you,
completely expressing within you,
completely enlightening yourself. Such
a Kundalini should be there and only
Now don't condemn yourself if you possible if you do not put hurdles in her
have some defects. There has to be, you growth. If you allow it to grow, it grows
are human-beings. But all these defects and it works out.
with your power of spirituality you can
absolutely overcome. For that what have
you to do. First is introspection. First try onlyin 1970, not becausel could not start
to findout; you separate your self from it earlier, not because there were all bad
your self and say "Hello Mr. How are people in this world but because I was
you?" Start with that. "Hello, what are waiting myself to be deft in dealing with
you up to?" And you start seeing your
self outside, and eradicating, removing all the permutations and combinations
all that is not your self. That knowledge that were there and then I just thought if I
of Self comes to you when you want the could get hold of a way by which all these
knowledge. It should be pure desire to combinations can be worked out in one
know about your Self. You are the line, then only Kundalini will rise and it
special people no doubt. You are all worked, it happened. With the sincere
chosen to be very, very special, no desire, because I felt very sad about
doubt. There must be something about people who are spending their lives in
you that you have come to the stage something very non-sensical. They can't
where you are trying to become the Self. enjoy anything. They have no genuine
Self is absolutely self satisfying. It does feeling for anything, They have no genuine
not need anything to satisfy itself.
Actually it is satisfaction personified. It loved. They can't love. They are notioved
just sees things, it just watches things, it and they are in misery. So it was very
As you know
have started this work
all kinds of Kundalinis. I had to work out
love for anything and they are not even
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 July - August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7.& 8
10
deliberate action on my part, should say,
that I watched human beings very
carefully. Why they do it like this? Why
they behave like this? Why are they not
understanding? Why are they harsh, why
they shout, why they beat, why they do all
Why don't you love? What is the bad
thing about that particular person? If he
is a Sahaja Yogi and a great Sahaja Yogi,
is it out of jealousy, is it out of greed or is
it out of lust? Still you are like that. Then
the oneness in the whole world of
brotherhood is something to be really
enjoyed. Enjoyed so beautifully. See all
these things you have here. There is so
much harmony among them. So much
harmony, because it is done with love. If
you do anything with love, it is very
harmonious. It creates such harmony
among people that you see the
enjoyment of each other's company. The
enjoyment of each other's achievements
is so much joy giving that I cannot
describe it in words. It's impossible.
Words cannot communicate to you the
feelings that you have. As I told you, feel
as if you are in the Garden of Eden.That
sort of a feeling should come into you
when you know yourself. Because when
you know yourself, actually you know
your own being and you are so happy
that your Self is so beautiful,that you are
so beautiful, that you are so joyous, that
you have all these things!
this? Because of imbalances. But with
introspection if you start seing those
imbalances, you now know how to cure
yourselfand you can really workitout. You
have to just work on your Chakras. See
which Chakra is catching? Where is the
problem? You have to respect yourself in
such a way that you become your own
doctor and you know everything about
yourself. This is wrong with me. Why am
I catching? Why am I catching on that
Chakra? Why this is happening?
This is the education you have to
give to yourself which will be only
possible if you experience all those
catches. It is for you to grow now. Grow
into great people, great personalities,
very tremendous people who have made
history. Who are respected. All those
great saints and all that also were of
great calibre but they didn't know how to
raise the Kundalini which you know. You
To know that within you is really very
much fragrant with enjoyment. That state
you must have. I see sometimes when
you are overjoyed you dance, and sing
and so on. That's something really very
good. But all the time your spirit should
dance at smallest things. At the little thing
that is made, say something artistic you
see, something you see a gesture of
kindness, a gesture of gratitude. You feel
have something special knowledge how
to raise the Kundalini. How to judge the
Kundalini, how to understand where is
the problem? And also you know how to
tell that person about his problems very
beautifully, with love.
So the message of your spirit is that
you should love each other. If you do not
love some one then what's the matter?
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
11
July - August 2001
that depth of that feeling. For example have this you will not deter from doing
today I saw the flag. When we got anything that is important. You will have
Independene, we made this flag. I had no fear of anyone. You will not go round
seen this flag being put up when the and round but you will know how to find
other flag was brought down. I can't tell the solution and how to work it out.
you what was the feeling that covered
us! Such a feeling that the truth has
somehow or the other overcome the know yourself. You will have such powers
untruth. The justice has been shown over of courage. You will not be a dare devil
injustice. That feeling is still so much, I
can't even see the flag. I see it and I you will have and that is what is your Self,
remember the whole history, the whole which will give youlots of wisdom andlots
thing that how many people sacrificed? of courage. It's not a fighting spirit, it's not
How many martyers were there? How aviolentnature, it's nota rude nature. But
much people have fought for it? That flag it is a very silent, beautiful, courageous
stands for them. And you stand for all attitude. There is a story about one
that. You stand for all those ideals, you Chinese saint that when this Chinese
stand for all those sacrifices and you saintwasasked by one king thathe should
stand for all that is to be achieved for teach his cocks as to how to fight in
bettering human beings. You have to Cockfights. The Chinese saintsaid, alright
achieve a great deal for others.
This will happen to you if you really
but with wisdom. Courage & with wisdom
you bring your cock here. I will teach him.
All the cocks ran away from the field
because in that standing (King's cock)
was the power of wisdom and power of
You have to work within yourself
what you can do for others. What you
can achieve? What is the best way to courage. Courage is silently very
imbibe those qualities within you that you powerful. You don't have to bomb
become an absolutely unique anybody, you don't kill anybody but you
personality. As I told you there have been have to stand up with courage. And that
many great leaders and many great is the another quality which will express,
people who are remembered by many that is very polite, very sweet. You will be
people. Now what you should see? What standing with that courage. I know so
made them so great? Why after so many many of you are like that. There is no
years people still remember them? I struggle, there is no fight. Just standing
have given you the statue of Shivaji with courage and win what ever is right
Maharaj. He was another great soul. A and that is quite possible because you
great soul who had such principles and
such beautifying life, in his language, in Almighty. You have the connection with
his attitude and everything. With all that
he was a very brave person. Once you
have now the connection with the
the Param Chaitanya and that will work
out everything.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
12
July-August 2001
This is our special temperament, think.
We are very corrupt people. India has
become so corrupt that I can't believe it.
I was here about 35 years back. We had
never heard of corruption. Now they have
become so corrupt and that's what enters
into Sahaja Yoga. When that enters into
Sahaja Yoga they will be just found out
and will be punished, not by me, or by
you but their own Kundalini. So every
country has its own speciality as far as
doing something wrong. We are not here
to do anything wrong. We are not going
to express ourselves as wrong people
but we are here to prove that we are
perfect, we are wonderful people. That
is what is the Self, that we are perfect.
We don't have to go according to what
negativity, we can call it as 'Adharm' we were. It's a new realm we have
which is fighting. So you stand on your reached. Its the new area we have
reached and let us enjoy that great area.
I will be very happy to say that today
Thave seen so many of you are such good
Sahaja Yogis. Somany of you. Andif you
find anyone who is not, please report it to
me. Please tell me. Please find outif there
is anyone who is trying to be very
oppressive and who is trying to control
everything, who is trying to make money,
who is trying to have lust and greed. It is
to be expressed. So once you have really
worked out, you should know that this is
the area, what we call 'Dharam Yudh'.
'Dharam Yudh' means the warof religion.
But not the way people are fighting. Our
Dharam Yudh is that we are standing on
Dharma and Dharma means not religion
butitis 'Vishwa Nirmala Dharam'. You are
standing on our religion and this
Dharma. Unless and Until you are
dharmic you can not have any
achievementin Sahaja Yoga. I have seen
people who are abroad, they have funny
ideas and they will come and tell me,
Mother "I have a wife but l am in love with
another woman, so what should I do?" I
said, You get out, that's all. Just get out.
Or he may say, the wife might say that
"Mother see I am having relations with
another manand what shouldldo?Isaid,
"You get out. that's all. You get out of
Sahaja Yoga. You are no good for Sahaja
Yoga and Sahaja Yoga is no good for you.
Isa complete outcast. They havenothing
to do with Sahaja Yoga.
I think all of you understand me that
today I am little worried about people who
are dragging Sahaja Yoga down and
they should understand that I understand
everything. When they will be harmed
they should not blame me for that. It is
obvious that they are no where near
Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga purifies you
everyday. You see one experience, you
see one person, you see some events
and it purifies you. That's the sign.
Supposing I see somebody a dishonest
man, immediately I start finding, I hope I
am not doing any dishonesty myselfl Just
imagine, that you are the one who is the
curator, correcting influence on yourself.
Where do you stand? Do you stand on
Also in India we have problem of
dishonesty. They are dishonest people.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
July - August 2001
13
I have seen people, how they have
managedand looked afterso many things
which were difficult and have workeditout
the correction point or in getting finished
with it.Yesterday's lecture everybody
liked very much but this is the extension
of that lecture. I am telling you, that you
are very great people. You can save the
whole world. must say
all this will happen in my life time. And it
has happened and I see you as very
great, very great people. Specially ladies
have to work it out more. Because I am
a woman and woman have the special
capacity to love and to bear.
So now we are in for a new world and in
thatnew world andnewrace Sahaja Yogis
have to show their results. They have to
show their powers and their courage and
their understanding. It is not serious. It is
not frivolous. But it is joyous. It is just joy
that you have to feel about yourself. I am
telling you all this because this is within
you, within your power. It is all the time
residing within you and that you have
faced it also. Sol wish you all a very very
I never expected
I expect all of you to become,
beautiful Sahaja Yogis and that nothing
can convince the whole world but your
work, your abilities and also your power
to love. So many things I have seen,
experienced about you people and when
I think about them, I really feel very happy.
happy Birthday so that you people have
anewbirth and a new understanding and
a new personality. Try to accept that
personality. Try to respect it. That's the
personality is your Self.
May God bless you.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 78th Birthday Felicitations Programme
(20.3.2001), Nirmal Dham, Delhi
न जायते फ्रियते वा कदाचिन्नाय भूत्वा भविता वा न भूयः
अजो नित्य शाश्वतोऽयं पुराणो न हन्यते हन्यमाने शरीरे।।
Atma is beyond birth and death. It existed always and will remain forever. It is unborn. It exists
always. It is Perpetual (Sanatana) and Etemal, It does not perish with the death of the body.
The 78th Birthday of our beloved from 96 countries of the world, bathed
Mother, "The Adishakti' fell on
21st March, 2001. It was the birthday Vibrations and gave colour and gaity
of The One who is beyond Birth and
Death, The One who is Eternal participated in the function and
(Shashvata) (Akal Murat, Ajuni expressed their gratitude to the Divine
Saibhan) (अकाल मूरत अजूनी सैभ) as
themseleves in the ocean of Divine
to the celebrations. Many dignitaries
Mother. Thousands of messages of
eminant personalities were received
Form and Formless. But The Mother from all over the world, to felicitate
Adi Shakti blesses Her Sahaja Yogi Shri Mataji on her 78th Birthday,
endeavours
Guru Nanaka has described. She is
Children to celebrate Her birthday and eulogizing
her
to
derive the ocean of joy and work out ameliorate the condition of the poor
their ascent and eternal state of joy. and downtrodden. A few of the
Thousands of Sahaja Yogis poured in messages are reproduced in this issue.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 July - August 2001
15
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIIl Issue 7 & B
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
20.3.2001
Those
who
deflate when you will
PELIRITATION
OF H.H MNDU
BIRTHDAY FELICITATION OF H.H. MADAJI
face the society.
Unless and until you
face others your ego
have found the truth
and those who are
पू पमताजी की भिर्मला द्वा के 78 वंजन्म दिवस
still trying to find, the
greatest problem of
human beings is
(surprising) that they
don't know them-
selves, they don't
know what powers
cannot come down.
Now how? The ego
is there, because
when you think that
others are better
than you, when you
they have, they don't
know what pro-
are afraid to say that
they have to trans-
form and when you
perties they have,
they don't know to
what height they can rise! This is the
main problem of igno-rance about your
self. If you could just peep in your heart
and start thinking about the spiritual life
that you could have, you would know you
are a treasurer, treasurer of powers of
love, powers of justice and powers of
wisdom. The problem is we have no idea
as to what we are. And Sahaja Yogis
also, they are so humble that they do
not realize what powers they have. And
sometimes I find they are a little shy to
talk about Sahaja Yoga or to tell about
it to others, because they think it might
be their ego that is speaking.
are worried that you
are being very aggressive. If you are a
Sahaja Yogi and if you are meditating
every day, you are cleansing your self,
you have a power within yourseif, which
will show its results. It will show its
powers and manifestation in such a big
way that you start surprising at yourself.
Is it what I am? With the Kundalini
Awakening what happens? That all these
petty things, as we call in Sanskrit
'Shadripus', they all drop out. But we
must face ourselves. Some people in
Sahaja Yoga think that we can become
very great people or we can achieve
some great positions and all that. That's
not the point. It's not outside. It's not the
outside ambition, but the Inner Light,
which has to shine through. All of you
Now I have to tell you one thing that
ego will always deflate, it will always
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Isue 7 & 8
July August 2001
16
H.K. MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
78 BRTHDAY FELICITATION OF
पू.माताजी शरी निर्मला देवी के 70 वं जन्म दिवस का अभिनन्दन समाचह
are quite intelligent and are experts, 1
should say, as far as the chakra the more you will meditate, the more you
knowledge is concerned; but what about will face yourself, you will know that you
the knowledge of your self? Do you know have so many great things within you,
your self, what you can do, what just like a store-house of jewels. But you
you are capable of? That's the point must respect yourself and you must
where we are missing. Alright, it is the
urge within because you have got your not what you want to achieve outside.
self-realization but you still lack in one
thing. It's complete confidence in your- leaders, this that. That's all nonsense.
self that you know the truth and as the
people who know the truth what you have
to do is to spread the truth to make this
darkness of ignorance pass away. But
in Sahaja Yoga also I have seen people, within and you can awaken that. You
when they come, they start getting ideas have powers, you can do that very easily,
about themselves and trying to organize without hurting anyone, without troubling
things. They do all kinds of things. I know anybody, without taking any money, all
that. Instead of that if you get full picture kinds of things. But as it is I find the
about yourself, what you are capable of people are either money oriented or
and what you can achieve by giving power oriented, outside, not inside.
realizations to others, by making them lInside is the wealth, inside is the power,
understand what their powers are, not inside is everything that you can think
yours, their powers, what they can
achieve, I tell you, we can go very fast used to come on the stage to speak
with the spreading of Sahaja Yoga. But
this fear, that we may develop ego, there speakers and I am amazed to see how
are many who have this kind of a they have been transformed! The
nonsensical idea, you cannot, because
about
know within yourself, what you have got,
Like there are some who try to be
That is of no worth.
The best thing is to know that you
are the treasure of great value system
of. There are people I know who never
even. Now they have become great
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 17
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
July- August 2001
greatest trans-formation is that you know as I told you, they even make money out
yourself fully well and that, with that of
knowledge you change others. Don't organize things, something to promote
keep yoursef limited to yourself. You them. They are on a very different level
have to spread out. This power has been but if you are not that kind then you
given to you to know yourself fully and should not become just stationary. You
to be confident and to be kind and gentle should do what it is to find out, what am
and talk to people in that way that they 1? Christ has said, "Know Thyself"
know that you are a Sahaja Yogi. It is
not given to you just to say that you are Thyself." All of them have said, "Know
Sahaja Yogis, but to know yourself fully, Thyself". That means you are something
to peep into your own treasures, into your great. You have hidden properties within
own understanding. Now I must say you which you do not know. Once you
there are so many people in this world, know yourself, you will have self-respect,
millions and millions, why you people you will not do wrong things, you will have
have come to Sahaja Yoga? I didn't
choose you. You chose Me, and when
you have chosen Me you must know Sahaja Yoga is. I understand that these
within yourself that there must be
something in you that has made you Kaliyuga', as people say. Alright. But why
come to Sahaja Yoga and to understand are you here during this time? To
the subtle system. It's very subtle and it enlighten people, to give them the right
can be known only to very subtle people ideas. But how? Unless and until you do
and not to gross people. But if you
yourself discover yourself and then you capable of this and you are capable of
go ahead there can't be any ego because that. You see the life of all great men, I
you are not ego. Those who have ego, would say people like Abraham Lincoln.
Sahaja Yoga. They even try to
Mohammed Sahib has said, "Know
no anger. But you will be an ocean of
love. That's what it has to be, that's what
are the worst days.This is the 'Ghor
not know yourself fully that you are
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 18
July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
He realized in
means
spon-
taneous. It comes
very young age
that he has to
spontaneously to
you. As it is, we
know in Sahaja
Yoga you get
assert on others
his own value
system by show-
ing his
example. Though
it was very hard
for people to
understand him,
still he has shown such results. I have
read many lives of this kind like in Turkey
we had Ataturk. We had every where one
person like that. In India we had Lal
Bahadur Shastri, who was such a great
man and who knew about Sahaja yoga,
who is to respect me so much, people
would wonder, why should he respect
me more than he would respect my
husband or anyone else. Because he
realized what I was. But he didn't get the
chance. Now you people have a chance.
connected to that
own-
which
aгea
Einstein
has
called as 'Torsion
Area'. But that
Torsion Area' is there behind you. Param
Chaitanaya is there to support you, to
help you. All of you have got this but
despite that you don't believe in it.
Believe in your self. You have that power
within you. I know of one fellow who was
in Bombay. he was a fisherman and a
great Sahaja Yogi, I should say, we have
lost him. So one day he was going to:
another island for spreading Sahaja
Yoga among fishermen. He found in the
sky such black clouds, threatening. So
he came out and he threatened them, "I
Alright, I am quite old now, it's am going for my Mother's work. How
correct, but still I am not going to give dare you bring the rain? You should not
up. Till I live I will work very hard to bring the rain till I come back." And it was
convince you about your own surprising. He went out, did all his job,
personality, your own Self. That's what I everything, came back after 5 hours and
am living for. Till you are completely when he went to bed it started
convinced. You will be amazed that thundering.
people who come to Sahaja yoga also
do all kinds of non-sensical things. I
know, they do. But they are not Sahaja nature is our representative. It helps us.
Yogis in a way. Because unless and until If you are of that quality, nature will stand
you go deep into yourself, unless and by you. You have seen that many a times
until you find out what is your personality,
in the real sense of the word, whatever
you may do, it is not Sahaja. Sahaja anything, but only thing they realize that
The nature will be with you because
nature has helped me. It is not because
I have any control over them or I tell them
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 19
July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 &8
should say, nature itself that it has
worked. I was sure about myself. Though
outside I may look a very humble
housewife, people used to think I don't
speak much because I don't know
English. This was the situation. But that's
not the point. The point is, I knew what I
was, I knew what I am, and I knew what
I have to be. That's all. That's the only
difference. If you people develop that
knowledge within yourself, you can
be dynamic. You will not have
ambitions, you will not have desires, you
will not have anger, you will not have
greed. All these things will drop out like
that.
I am here for such and such work and
that I am to be supported. In the same
way if you can establish it, the nature
will know that you are the people who
are here to redeem the whole universe.
You can do it. I may think that the whole
world should be redeemed and all that.
But how can I do it? If I could do it I would
not have to have channels and these
channels who know their jobs, they know
themselves, those who are quite capable
of doing it. You are special people no
doubt, otherwise why are you here? But
that specialiy is this that you are a good
conductor of this Divine Energy. You are
a wonderful conductor. You are an
expert on that.it just works. It works
automatically but your connection
with the Divine should be absolute.
First of all we have to know what is
our basis. And the most important basis
is that we are born in a particular country,
and we should get concern about that.
They say that I was a revolutionary and
all that I did and I went to jail, but that
was just to get my country's
independence. That was different. But
after that independence what should
Now talking about absolute value is
correct but these absolute values, do
they exist within us or not? If they do then
why not we make others imbibe them?
It's not difficult, it's not at all difficult, I tell
you. I am just an ordinary house wife.
So what? It's just my love, just my, I have happened? Is to make people
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 July - August 2001
20
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
realize what they are. Not only India but means what you are, and he describes
in every country one has to understand very nicely that when you are that what
what is the need of that country. What happens. Now the gap was how to
they have to do to improve, to help, to achieve that state, how to reach that
state was not given. He only described
never asked you that you change your people who were Tao, who were realized
names or anything, though you asked souls, who were of that level.I was
for Indian names, alright. But what the surprised that he never said about
Kundalini but he talked about the river
rise, to transform? You should not; I
main concern is that you should have
concern for your country men. You are
so empowered, your kundalini has
Yang-Si. That it is Yang-Si river which is
a symbolic way. He was more poetic. But
ultimately
reaching the
reached that
state where
ocean that
river
you can do a
lot. I know
be-
comes the
some of you
ocean and
have done a
then what are
lot and have
the qualities
worked out
of the ocean,
but still all of
you have to
do it. I would
he described
so beautifully!
Now I would
just say that
78th Birthday
(I forget also)
I am just the
same. I have not changed much because
within myself I feel that I have to tell
peopie what they are. I have to tell them
what they can achieve and I have to
move in such a manner that they see it
that nothing is important than to know
what you are. You are rich, poor, doesn't
matter, nothing matters. What is
important, is to know yourself. I am
surprised, very little has been written so
far but I find Tao by Lao Tse.I don't know
if you have read the book of Lao Tse,
about Tao, meaning what you are? Tao
say you all
have become
supposing the
ocean. So are you behaving like the
ocean? Are you understanding
your capacity to be an ocean? What an
ocean is?
Look at the ocean. It has it's own
boundaries, 'Maryadas' it does not cross.
If you try to push it on one side it will
come out side. So you have to be in your
maryadas we can call it also in your
balance. That's very important that you
should be in your balance. Now many
people say who have given up smoking,
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 July-August 2001
21
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
know that you are the highest. You are
the highest but you are highest because
you stand at the lowest point.Its true that
I have tremendous love for the poor
people. It's true also that I have been
really very much yearning to do
something for that and that is how we
have started at least 16 projects in India.
Now all that is done just because I can't
contain myself. All this kind of miseries
and troubles they have. Like Orrisa I
Divinity, just starts flowing. Now this have prayed so much because it's a
ocean perhaps we don't know, that country very much troubled .We should
find out why it is so much troubled?
all the heights from the ocean. If the What is the problem there? And I tell
ocean is at zero point then what is the you it is a very great country, Orrisa is.
height of the Himalayas. So it keeps at I have visited it also. And main thing
the lowest because being the lowest it missing there is that they still have no
receives all the waters, all the things that confidence. If they develop Sahaja Yoga
within themselves, no floods can come,
no problems can come to that country.
Same in our country, same in your
those clouds and the whole circle is country and everybody's country.
have again started smoking, who have
given up drinking, again have started
drinking. That means you have lost your
maryadas.So those Maryadas must be
watched. Watch yourself .If you go on
watching yourself you will know what you
are. Must watch yourself .You call
yourself "Hello Mr, So now, what are you
up to?" Then you will see how your mind
is working. With that thing what happens
that this ocean which is the love of
ocean is the lowest thing. We measure
are coming from the rivers or from the
rain. Then it burns it's body in the sun.
It's open. And when it burns, it creates
created that these clouds can go and
shower rain on people. And again they
become rivers and they come back to
the sea. Everything has to go to the sea
First of all we must have much more
Sahaja Yogis and we must have Sahaja
Yogis who know they are Sahaja Yogis.
To be very much confident of the fact
that after all you are Sahaja Yogis. Why
not? What ever I can do, you all can do
also.Why not? You are my children. You
can do it. But the confidence should be
because it is the lowest.
So you stand at the lowest point with
your confidence. At the lowest point
don't compare yourself with another
person who is doing very well in life or
may be something, but see that you are
the lowest and at the lowest point you
1
there that as Mother is, we could be the
same, without any ego coming in.
Because mostly I have seen people very
afraid of their ego. There is no ego in it
because you are like the ocean, I have
said, which stands at the lowest point.
In the same way it works out. It's so
stand and you would be amazed that
everything will come to you. Everything
will see that it flows into you. Main thing
is Knowing Thyself, it means that you
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 22
July August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-Xill Issue 7 & 8
beautiful to love the whole world. It's so explode all the myths of the world. I know
beautiful to enjoy your compassion, to that. But I don't know how to ignite, what
enjoy your generosity. I enjoy my to do, how to tell them?
generosity much more than anything
else. But in that generosity I know that I
am not doing anything. It's just one thing that on this Birthday if you
expression of my sense of joy. I see really want to give me something then
flowers, I am very happy. In the same give me this that you show your
way I give something to someone I feel confidence and you work it out. Where
very joyous. It's a joy. Joygiving quality ever you are, don't have to change the
and all joygiving qualities are within you, atmosphere, don't have to change
which you should discover. You have got anything. Where ever you are with
also peace giving qualities. Such a lot honesty, with sincerity and with humble
of peace is within you, which you can
transmit, to the atmosphere, to the country you can do it and in the whole
people to everyone in case your world you can do it. This is my greatest
peace in established. If there is anger desire and I hope, I am a person who is
temper this, that, it won't workout. So you desireless, you will fulfil this subtle desire
should watch yourself, see yourself, I have, that we should transform the
should meditate and find out, what is world.
lacking. It is such a tremendous force, I
think, sitting before me. They can
Now I would again and again tell you
nature you can really do a lot. In every
May God bless you.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 July - August 2001
23
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 &8
Speech of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
On the occasion of release of book by
Sir C.P. Shrivastava : 'Corruption - India's Enemy Within' New Delhi, 17.12.2000
become corrupt, I
don't know! I have
never seen a corrupt
man being peaceful or
happy. My parents
know and I know so
I bow to all the
seekers of truth. After
these
all
great
speeches, l don't
know what to add to
it. But only solution I
many of their colle-
agues and friends,
they sacrificed every-
thing for the country.
Because I am an
feel as a Mother that
if you have really love
for your mother
country 'Deshbhakti',
that is the solution of
ancient person I have seen all that. How
could they do all that suffering, all kinds
of going to jails and bearing all kinds of
atrocities! How could they do it, I have
seen it. And why not now, we the Indians
remember that this is our great land. And
we have to love it. Great people have
born in this country. Nowhere in the world
you will find so many great people being
born. Their greatness is their 'Desh-
Dharma', that they love their country and
that's how we get nobility. As he has said
there are so many things in our 'Desh-
Dharm' and as you know that people
have talked of nobility, of greatness and
all that but why is it today, I don't
understand, that we are drowned into this
the whole problem. If you are a
Deshbhakta you can't become corrupt.
This is a quality if you can some how or
the other inculcate, by reading about
great patriotic people, by reading about
people who have sacrificed their lives!
They have done so much to achieve this
freedom. If you can just understand what
feelings they had for this country! This
kind of emotional intelligence as they call
it, if you could only develop that kind of
love for your country, I am sure that you
will become absolutely honest. No
question, there is nothing to be done, but
this is something very much innate and
very much desired by the Divine. If you
have to really have peace of mind, why
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 July August 2001
24
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 7 & 8
foreign service but I told him that I don't
want to go to any foreign country. I want
to be here. Here you choose Indian
Administrative Services, and he did it.
nonsense of corruption! 35 years back
we left India, both of us. And when we
came back, I was shocked, we had never
heard at that time anybody being corrupt
at that level. Even a chaprasi would only
ask for a rupee or something. I mean we
don't see the poverty of this country.
They are not concerned as to what's
happening to us with this horrible
corruption. It's a disease worse than
cancer. And to cure it, I think one way is
to worship your Mother- land. Morning
you worship your Motherland. You have
her photograph. You see Her, do
namaskar to Her and remember that you
Not only he did it, but I must say, he never
complained about something missing in
life. Of course I am another person of a
different type but he himself is like that.
I was so happy that this book has come
out. That though my vision, as you know,
is very global and I want the great
transformation but I know it will take too
much time. A book like this, if people take
it and understand it and do it seriously
then may be my vision can be easily
achieved. That's what I feel and I pray
that all of you should take a vow that you
owe a lot. To be born in India itself is a
very blessful thing, that you are born in
this great country. Be grateful to that. will love your country and will have no
You will be amazed, it is greatness to joy in harming in anyway your country. If
enjoy that kind of love. Thank God I have you can learn that, that is sufficient to
a husband who is another desh-bhakta. give you a very great light to finish off
I have been always telling him that I am this horrible thing called corruption.
May God bless you all.
out and out deshbhakta. He was in the
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 July- August 2001
25
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XiII isue 7 & 8
Sahasrara Puja
Cabella - 5.5.96
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today we are celebrating opening are not Mohammed Saheb, Rama was
of the Sahasrara. On this dayI must say, Rama, and Krishna was Krishna. We are
not that. How can you expect human
for all the humanity. It was such an beings to behave like them. So,
achievement which I never realised absolutely they separated the Divine
before. Now I can see that without self Personalities away, very much away,
realisation, it would have been impossible from human personalities. It was just an
to talk to people. When this happened I adoration, I can say, faith, but when they
thought that how will I talk to people about said we try to follow them, they could not.
it,because no one will understand it and They could not follow them because l
think human movement is on parallel
lines with the Divine; and these lines do
not meet unless and until you give them
self realization. Human level is moving
on another plane and it has to come up
it was a great happening that took place
it would be a big mistake on my part to
say something about Sahasrara.
Because even in the scriptures nowhere
anything was described about the
sahasrara.lt was absolutely an
ambiguous description, I would say, to a higher plane to understand that what
where people could not have even they know is not reality. I wouldn't say
thought that there is a realm beyond what is needed for that because in my
Sahasrara. And one has to enter into that own experience all kinds of people came
to Sahaja Yoga. These people described
to be very bad, cruel, another ones who
That time what I saw around me, I were very licencious, this that; then
feit it is all darkness and unless and until another ones who were very cheats.
there are many lights people wili never They say that, Mother, they were
realise that how important it is to have horrible. But I have seen that every
lights. It is a human error also, all the time, human being is made of the same
that if somebody achieves something, character as far as the Spirit is
then they put that person unto a shelf. concerned. Outside they may be different
to look at, their way of talking may be
different, their styles may be different,
their fondness for things may be different.
realm where the reality is.
For example, Christ, all right He was
Christ, we are not Christ, Mohammed
Saheb, he was Mohammed Saheb, we
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
26
say, in a very short time. I didn't say that
it took me long or I had to go through lots
of various experiences because to me all
these experiences are nothing. If a ship
is sea worthy it can face all kinds of high
tides, all kinds of sharks, everything,
without any difficulty, because it is sea
The greatest thing has now worthy. Sol didn't feel that way,but only I
happened is that which I now realise, I felt that from human level to this spiritual
am very happy about it, that Sahaja Yogis level, to this Divine level, when you are
feel very responsible about Sahaja Yoga. coming, then some of that still lingers on,
some of that is still there. It has to be
enlightenment everywhere. It is their cleansed, it has to be brightened or
innate desire now to spread Sahaja absolutely enlightened. But what was the
Yoga. Firstly it was that they should great thing about Sahaja Yoga that you
become Spirits, before that there was yourself did all that. It is nice to say,
also some people who didn't actually 'Mother You did this, you did that'. May
seek the Spirit but they also became be enlightement part of it. But see now
there are lights here and these lights
some of you thatI never expected that unless and until they are attended to,
they would go so far and suddendly you looked after and given oil of love, how can
hearthat such and such person has gone they go on burning? This is something
there, has done this, has done that. So what I must say that you people some
when you came into the Realm of Reality, how or other realised how important it
was to become good Sahaja Yogis. May
be introspection, I don't say, may be
standing. But one thing you realised that somebody else talked about it, may be
you are definitely connected with the its your own understanding. Whatever it
Divine. Some people had tremendous was, all of you tried to be good Sahaja
experiences, some had mild experience Yogis. Of course, there are people who
but most of them, Isaw, started believing are sometimes very angry with me, like
in themselves, understanding them- why don't you cure my sister or why don't
selves and having confidence about you cure my father if you are God, this,
themselves. Because there are so many that is there. But makes no difference to
me because they are so frustrated, so
But inside they are all very beautiful. And
this I found out one after another. You
don't know how much it was giving me
joy, not only joy, butalso encouragement,
support and patience. And then, now you
see, how Sahaja Yoga has spread!
They feel that they have to spread this
Sahaja Yogis, and I am surprised with
I don't know which principles you
accepted first. That is your under-
myths about God, Religion, Gurus, that
when they saw the light of the Spirit which
gave them sense of reality, as if they
studied their mind, they studied
themselves. All this happened, I must beautiful people.
upset, so they are talking like that. If you
see one or two such persons here and
there, you see there are thousands such
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 July- August 2001
27
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
Complete emancipation of this himself because all other Sahaja Yogis
earth, of this globe, I am sure, will take
place, if you people all take up the
responsibility. The responsibility has
certain problems which we should know.
When you feel responsible, you must
know that you are not incharge, one
thing, secondly, you also must know
that there are so many other forces,
so many Angels and Ganas are with
you. You are not alone. So, to think
that you are doing anything will make
you, may be, egoistic. At that time,
what you have to do is best to say, 'all
right, I am not doing anything, it is the
Divine that is working it out.' Not that
the Divine wants any credit for it. But by
saying that, this balloon of ego will not
come up, and you will become humble.
This humility will definitely improve this
gravity of spirituality within you. Definitely,
it will make you a very evolved
personality, no doubt about it. But first
of all, we have to say, "I am not doing
anything ". It is a very important to
understand when you have Spiritual
authority to do things. It is not a testing
ground. I can tell you this much.
are also having the same kind of
experiences of this Reality which cannot
be described in words. But to start feeling
that oneness, that nearness, that
friendship without any expectation. You
start feeling, 'Oh he is a Sahaja Yogi'. A
kind of a complete integrated organism
you become, become an organization,I
should say, it is a living organization, In
that you do not feel that you are
something separate. Any Sahaja Yogi
whether he is highly placed, or not doing
much in life, this integration, this
oneness, is feeling of identification with
others, makes you so large, so big, so
great, so powerful. You are not alone and
you say, "I am not doing anything." So
you become so humble that you forget
all these false ideas about class
consciousness or religion consciousness
or, I don't know,all sorts of consciousness
people have. I don't know much about
these consciousnesses that human
beings suffer from, but I have seen how
it happens. And then that humility
becomes your character, not that you are
humble because there is something to be
done, you are humble. When people are
doing some sort of a business then they
wil be extremely humble and nice and
they will be very unkind otherwise. Here
you become absolutely humble and there
is no duality in your personality left. But
that doesn't mean you become weak.
Humility is only possible for people
who are strong, because they don't
need any reactions. They don't need any
protection. Their humility keeps them
Many people think that Mother is
testing us. I am not testing, you are testing
yourself. I am not saying, don't do this or
don't do that. You are testing yourself and
now you must know that you are in the
beautiful Garden of Reality where very
few have entered. And there in that
garden when you enter, what do you see
is that everything is full of beauty. Every
person has something sweet about
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 28
July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
protected also very much. So you just going to do. What I have to do? If I have
start thinking or feeling, thinking is a decided ,I must do that. What ever you
have decided is alright, but if it does not
small dust particle. At the same time materialise there is nothing to worry,
you feel you are the whole sky. It there is nothing to be upset, there is
depends on where you are, what you are nothing to be overly nervous about it. I
doing, what you are seeing, what you are give an example. One day I was going to
witnessing. Sometimes you feel that all America. And of course, you know as it
these big- johnnies are useless. To feel is as all the Sahaja Yogis are, they get
quite worried that Mother has to go to
very small and with some people you feel America. Every body is upset. They are
that you are very small. Such a flexible looking at the time, now the time is this,
temperament you develop, and that time is that, I said, I have to go to America,
makes you subtler and subtler because why are you worried? And suddenly one
you can penetrate into anything, any of the Sahaja Yogi's child fell down and
subject, any personality, any broke her hand and she couldn't move
understanding, any book, anything, any her fingers.Sol was just coming out and
as soon as he brought the child, I said all
you immediately see, what is to be done. right, I am not going just now to the
Because you become so subtler. And airport.They were very upset. Now She
then when you become very great, then is not going to the airport, as if all the
you start thinking or, I should say, feeling havens are going to fall down or what.
what you can do to help so many people, But I said now let me see the child. I
treated the child and the child was all
funny word, feeling that you are a
nothing to worry about them, They are
enterprise, in a very subtler manner, and
to do this great job, to do that. This when
happens to you, they don't think that you right. All right, I said, let's now go to the
are egoistical. Nor you should think that airport. They were saying 'Mother the
you are very small, Only thing is now you plane must have left. It is all right,does
not matter, lets go to the airport. We went
to the airport and this plane that was
anything, it could expand into anything, going to take me was just there because
there was something wrong with the
disappear anywhere. This subtle plane and there was another plane going
personality, that you are, which is your to Washington and I actually wanted to
spirit, you even don't use it but it uses go to Washington instead of New york.
Solwas in the other plane, nicely going
to Washington. But one must know that
you are not doing. Everything is
So the second thing should be that arranged and planned and beautifully
you should not determine what you are kept for you. You decide something
are the spirit. My spirit is very subtle, so
very subtle light, but it can penetrate into
it can remain anywhere but it can
you all the time. Without your knowledge
it uses you.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII issue 7 & 8
July-August 2001
29
all right, if your decision is all right, if
you have to do that, it will work out. If
it doesn't work out, it should not have
been worked out. Now this is the
difference between a person who is a
realised soul and who is not a realised
personality is this way, that in the nature
we see very clearly. In the nature what
we see is that a tree grows. Now it has to
expand but it cannot, so it does not. If it
can, it will, and also it tries to bring all the
leaves exposed to the sunlight,
somehow. I don't think the trees have that
soul.
much intelligence to organize it. But there
is something that organizes them so
beautifully. It is not only one tree, but
A realised soul person is not
bothered what he wants, what he likes,
what he is fond of. What he gets is alright.
Now I can see you are living under this
thousands and thousands and
thousands. The one who does all that is
the one with whom you are in contact.
roof which is so horrible. There is no
proper arrangements here, nothing. I The trees are not, they are just playing
don't know how you are living here? I into the hands of nature. But they can not
don't know what to do. We are trying to manipulate, manoeuver, understand this
get a land and this land owner is such a Divine power.They cannot. Animals
greedy fellow butI don't mind a greed part cannot. Even human beings cannot. But
but still he is not giving us the land. It is you can, because you have crossed the
alright. What to do. But you all enjoy it. limit of this human bondage. And now you
You don't mind, otherwise normally, are just like great citizens of the great
people would say, nol want this kind of a realm of Divinity.
room, I want this kind of house and this
that. That you can live in under any
circumstances because you don't worry works out every thing and also, it guides
about your physical comforts any more. you and manages you. So what you have
What you think of is your own Spiritual to do is to keep yourself open for the
Comfort. I have seen people, Sahaja guidance. At the same time you must act.
Yogis so beautiful, even children, if there
is something going on,something funny from within, by which you will know this
comes in, immediately they will close their
eyes. They don't want to see this. Nobody you feel that it was not achieved by you,
has to tell them because you see they when you feel that still I don't know why I
have a sort of insight they have built in
that subtle personality which cannot
stand nonsense. If there is something,
they may not be harsh, but just they shun up, you should not desire. I have seen
and go away from such places, Sahaja Yogis' desires are much more
automatically. So to describe the new powerful than mine. The reason is that I
So this Divine Force helps you,
Because the guidance will also come
is whatI have to do. Supposing even then
couldn't get what I wanted.Try to
understand that is what is the best for
us. It never means that you should give
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIilI Issue 7 & 8
July - August 2001
30
So when this Sahasrara lotus opens,
Try to see, fathom out, if I have any then the Kundalini pierces through your
desires? I see I have no desire of any fontanel and you get your realization. This
kind. It is alright, I do not earnestly want is what has happened. Now the only
anything. You can say itis a very frivolous thing is to keep this lotus open and
temperament. But it is all, you see, very there we fail sometimes because still
different with you people. You people are there are some lingering human
very differently made. Because you have feelings within us. Firstly it is all covered
achieved something, I have not achieved with ego and conditioning oryou can say
anything. I am what I am. Because you super ego-two balloons. These two
balloons again and again try to close the
Sahasrara. So you have to be on the
of your achievement, I think, it is a boon guard that what is closing my Sahasrara.
that whatever you desire works out. The first is ego which how to attack?
Because you have worked so hard, it's a Because you want to attack your ego, you
boon, it is a special blessing for you will have to attack through your ego only.
whatever you desire. So many times I That's the only way you can. So we have
have told you, don't desire anything which this state of Nirvichara, of Thoughtless
is not proper because whatever you will Awareness where we have to be. But the
desire that works out and that will be simple thing to do is very practical. Try
to understand why you are being
egoistical; with whom you are angry?
Why you are angry? What makes you
think to dominate someone or to control
am desireless. I have no desires as such.
have achieved something, you know how
you were and what you are now. Because
effective.
Now try to realise that you are no
more ordinary human beings. You
have crossed the bondage and now you
are not even the Sahasrara, you are
beyond it. Sahasrara is the liymbic area
and this limbic area is closed like a lotus.
And when you get your Kundalini entering
into it then lotus opens like this. And that's
what is written in the Bible, that I will
appear before you like tongues of flames.
This is the Divine saying. So these petals
are nothing but nerves which are
enlightened just like these and they look
like flames, but these flames are without
someone or to check someone? Why?
The mind will not answer. The simple
thing if you can do that whatever things
that upset you and make you feel very
great, try to understand that compared
to you nothing is great. Compared to your
love, nothing is great, compared to your
compassion, nothing is great, because
in this there is the light of Divine Force.
You hate someone, you get angry with
someone, just know that you have to love
that person.
any heat. We call in Sanskrit 'Taap heen',
no heat, extremely cooling, soothing,
beautifully burning.
Now how will you love that person?
There is no way to have any
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 31
July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 &8
The identification with others is very
measurement of that. But love itself will
suggest how satisfied you are feeling, important. And you can do it because you
how happy you are. I will give you an
example. The other day, I received a
letter from someone in Poland, other person is. And then you will realize
challenging me very much, that her
mother is sick with cancer or something identification is the only way, I think, one
and challenging me all the time. If you
are God, you must cure my mother, if you immediately sucked in as soon as you
are God, do this,do that very amusing. I put your loving attention on that person.
said alright. I put my attention to this lady. In your life time you will get so many
Perhaps her motheris better. But instead experiences like that, that you will be
of getting angry, I said, she is so
frustrated, she is so upset, she is so things? Because you are a realized soul.
worried, even if she says if you are God,
she is challenging me,it is alright, makes
no difference. Whether she calls me God identified with another person you put that
or no God makes no difference. person incharge of Divinity. Just a feeling
Whatever I am, I am. So instead of of oneness. Some times we have also
getting angry I felt tremendous
compassion for her. She is a human
being and her mother is so sick there. we have our own ideas about something.
That's the only source of her life, then I Say, some sort of a living standards,
can understand why she is so upset. So some people have will act. I don't like it, I
if you just try, which you can do very like itand I don't like it. Not a saint, a Saint
easily, very easily. Its not difficult because never says that. That time when you say
you are realised souls, I am talking to that you are falsely identifying yourself
saints. If you just put your attention on a with another person. Now supposing,
person with love, then what happens, you somebody has done such a beautiful
get understanding. Understanding of that flower arrangement. Instead of
person. You realize, as if identifying with appreciating and enjoying it, you come
that person, then you realize if I was in and say, I don't like it, this could have
her place as a human being what I would been better, just to show. I don't know,
have felt? This desperation, this anger. why people say like that? But if you
If I was sad,If I was the same type of identify yourself with the man who has
person with the same kind of problems, done it, or the gentleman who has done
then what would I do? That solves the it, you will enjoy it the way that person
problem. So the identification part, you enjoyed, doing it. Because you are just
have such powers, you can penetrate. thinking
are realized souls, you can do it. Just
place yourself in the same position as the
that you have powers of love and
can understand love. This ego will be
amazedat yourself, how canIdo all those
Also, as I said, when you are
very wrong ideas about ourselves and
about others. In small small things also
about yourself,
self
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & B
32
opinionatedness with which you think that only who can manipulate it, not the
this is not done so good, that could have trees,not the flowers, then what you will
been better, this could have been better. do is to create oceans of joy. So then we
Who are you to judge any one? This come to Sahaja.What has Sahaja given
critisizing nature comes from a terrible you is alright. But what have you given to
misunderstanding about oneself. What Sahaja Yoga. What have I given to
are we ? Why we should judge anybody Sahaja Yoga? Have I created oceans of
else? Are we paid for it? So why waste joy for others? What kindness I have
energy on judging others? We should shown ? What compossion I have
shown? What love I have expressed?
the realm of realities, it is all good, Alright, whatever Sahaja Yoga has given
me, I have taken it for granted. Once they
But if you are trying to see what wrong come to Sahaja Yoga, they think it is a
with others, then you are not in reality. contract already signed and if this thing
You can watch, you can witness but doesn't work out then what is this. We
you do not get upset with it or you do had a contract with God and we have not
not even say something that would been awarded fully for whatever we have
upset others. You are watching it, it is paid, whatever we have done. But what
all beautiful, I mean just the joy of the have you done in this realm of Reality?
person put it all these beautiful things of Have you enjoyed the reality? Have you
all the persons is just bubbling through felt the joy of this real love of Divine? Are
that. But unless and until you are you dissolved into that or you are still
identified with those who have done this, standing on the shores watching? You
can create, you are quite capable of
been better, that should have been better. creating tremendous joy, tremendous
You can be in the same position. happiness and peace. See the world
Supposing you do something, another today, in what conditions it is? It is
one will come and say, you should have complete turmoil, confusion, all kinds of
corrupt and destructive things going on.
So ugly this world has become. Can you
spiritual energy. Then again you become beautify it? You can, because you can
like the sky, I tell you, the greatness. They transform people. But if you are not
are too great to botherabout these things. yourself a beautiful Sahaja Yogi how can
Wasting our energy on very-very trivial you do it. So it is our attention on
things, and useless things and just ourselves when we work out that we
have to bring others into this realm of
Reality. This is one side ourselves where
we have to understand our subtleties,
the other side is that we are still identified
see, what is good in others, Because in
everything is fine, everything first class.
you might say this was, this should have
done it this way, that way. Wasting our
energy for nothing at all. Our energy is
making yourself small !
But if this spiritual energy is used,
because you can use it, you are the ones
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-36.txt 
 33
July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-Xill Issue 7 & 8
something like banging-banging-
banging. I said ,what is the matter? I
thought he is suffering from epilepsy or
what. Sol rushed to other people and told
them that this gentleman is suffering from
epilepsy. They said " No, he doesn't
suffer."I said why this sound
comes?No,he is rubbing the chandan.
You know, Sandal wood. And with such
a big thud, every time he was putting that
stone on the ground that I thought he
had epilesly. They said, whatever you
may tell him, he will never listen, he does
it everyday. What is this? This we
understand as stupidity when we see
others, when we see human beings. But
even realized souls, who are in the Realm
with things which we should not have
been identified. We can just find out,
identified with ideas, identified with some
sort of a consciousness. All these things
make you really, to be very frank, they
befool you. All the fools, who are
conditioned are really, I don't know what
to say about that, because they are like
a train which has no driver. God knows
when it is going to collide. Because such
people who are identified, I know, now
you must have seen also those who go
to church, get ready nicely, go to church,
sit down, sing hymns, come home and
again quarrel and fight. But if they see a
church, they will bow. Nothing goes inside
of those who go to that church. All there
are, who are like you must have seen the
Jews, you see, wailing wall they have got
and before that they do all kinds of things.
What happens to them? Nothing. Same
with the muslims. They are so
conditioned. I mean, cannot be described
about their conditionings, how stupid they
are! And these conditionings go on
making fool out of them. I know so many
people. Once in my own life, I
some relation of mine. This gentleman
used to get up at four o' clock and would
start singing some sort of a 'Ramraksha.' kills the joy, that kills the full experience
The whole house is sleeping, children are of Reality. If you want to have the full
sleeping but he is shouting at the top of experience of the beauty of reality, then
his voice Even Rama might be sleeping you should shed out all these things
at this time. But he would shout. His which are really befooling you morning
bathing was another thing. Everybody till evening. People take advantage of
knew that he is having the bath because
he used to sing another shalokas or you,entrepreneurs, will start with one
something, go on. But it happened that! fashion, every body will take to that. But
was in the next room, and I heard
of Reality, you do accept sometime
unrealities, because of age old
conditionings .Your forefather was like
this, your father was like this, your
forefather's forefathers were like this .So
SO
that is still coming. They call it genes.
But in Sahaja Yoga these genes also
change. So this kind of a conditioning
which is lingering on still to your bodies,
to your minds, to your emotions, has to
be seen and cleansed out because that
was with
such people very much. As I have told
we are not brainless people. Not only that
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-37.txt 
 34
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 &8
July - August 2001
facing us because of stupidity. This
integration, I am sure, will take place and
when that takes place, you will see the
life of the Divine will be absolutely out-
shining all these darknesses or
destructive forces. Its is going to happen.
If so many Sahasraras could be opened
out, then why not the Sahasrara of this
world also is opened out to truth and
reality. It will.
we have brains, but also enlightened
brains. We do not take to things which
are just in fashions, we don't, What we
do, we have our own fashion. This is not
ego. This is identification with your own
Spirit. You won't take to any thing stupid
or non -sensical, if you have the wisdom
of spirit in you.
So in the Realm of Reality, We
have all the seven chakras, absolutely
enlightened, integrated
nourished. At that position, what we
see is Ourselves, as I said as nothing
is limited. Absolutely unlimited. Even
this when we say, we penetrate, we do.
When we say we expand, we do. When
we contract, we do. Its absolutely a
flexible personality and a personality that
creates peace, joy, harmony. With the
Sahasrara opening, I am sure, the whole
world will be integrated. One day I will
understand these problems that are
So today is such an important
day for us. In the history of spirituality,
I think it is the very important day.
For us is to realize that we are
enlightened, we are the light of joy,
light of compassion, light of love. Like
the silent flames of the Sahasrara, in
and
different colours, beautifully dancing.
Then we will know what the enjoyment
of reality is.
May God Bless You.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Statutes of The Lord
Essential to Become Gurus (Guru Puja - 1981)
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Why is this Puja arranged? One
should know that it is very important for complete moon. A Guru has to be a
every disciple to worship his Guru. But complete personality to talk about
the Guru has to be a real Guru, not one these Statutes and to elevate his
Today is Purnima, which means
who is just exploiting the disciples and disciples to this level of understanding
who is not authorised by God. A Puja is by which they imbibe those Statutes.
arranged, because you have been He is here to fulfill this Gap and for that
initiated into the statutes of the Lord it is essential that every Guru has to be
You have been told what are the a realized soul of a very high quality
Dharmas of a human being. For that and greatly evolved. He need not be a
actually you do not need a Guru. You person who is an ascetic or a person
can read a book and know what are the who is living in a forest. He could be a
Statutes of the Lord. But Guru has to common householder. He could be a
see that you practice them. These king. All these outward manifestations
Statutes are to be practised, to be of one's life do not matter, whatever
brought into your own life, which is a may be your position, I would say the
difficult thing and without a Guru, a so-called position is this world, makes
correcting force, it is very difficult to
follow these Statutes of the Lord you have imbibed the Statutes of the
because, there is a very big gap Lord.
no difference to your being a Guru if
between Human Awareness and
Again I say you have to imbibe the
Statutes of the Lord. Let us see what
Divine Awareness and that gap can
only be filled by a Guru, who himself is
complete.
are the Statutes. The first is, "You
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-39.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
Juiy - August 2001
36
The second statute is that you
have to stand on your own legs. And
cannot do harm to any one'. Animals
do harm without knowing that they are
harming someone. If you go near a know that you are here one with the
snake he'll bite. If a scorpion is there Truth, the testimony of Truth, that
he'll put his poison into your being. you have seen the Truth. You know
Humans are not to harm any one. They what the truth is, and you cannot
can correct but not harm. But the compromise with false-hood. You just
principle of not harming others is taken
to a point where reality disappears; anyone. You have just to profess it.
e.g. when it was said "Do not harm You have to stand
anyone", people started saying, have seen the Truth and this is the
"Alright we will not harm mosquitoes Truth, and you have to be one with it so
and bugs and will not kill them." And that people see that light of Truth in you
there are some people who are and they accept it.
following religions in which this is an
absurdity. Taking anything to
absurdity, cannot be reality. First of all others that you have to be truthful and
we should not harm anyone who is this is the Truth we have seen and this
walking in the path of God, the one is what God's laws are, how they work
who is a realized soul. There may be out. Through vibratory awareness we
some mistakes in him. He may need have been able to see that this is the
correction. Nobody is perfect as yet. Truth. But be completely confident
So do not harm. Always try to help. about it. But for that, first of all, you
Secondly, anybody who is a real must test yourself completely,
seeker, he may be wrong. He might otherwise you might be playing into the
have gone to wrong Gurus, he might hands of evil. It happens with many
have done wrong things. But have people who start doing Sahaja Yoga in
feelings for them because you have the beginning. They have to receive
been going on wrong path yourself Vibrations. So be cautious.
sometimes. You have been misled
cannot. For that you need not harm
Test yourself. It is not for telling
Be sure that you are telling the
before, so have some sympathy .That
is why if you have done mistakes- in a Truth and nothing else and that you
way it is good, because you have more have felt the Truth in full ways. Those
sympathies for such people. Then you who have not felt the Vibrations,
are not to harm human beings in any should not talk of Sahaja Yoga. They
way, you are not to cause them any have no authority. They have to
bodily harm, or any emotional receive Vibrations. They have to
upsetting just for harm's sake, for fully imbibe within them and then
correction it is alright.
they can say Yes ,we felt. This is a
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-40.txt 
 July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
37
very important task Sahaja Yogis up, adorn yourself with that Truth, and
have to do in the modern times,- i.e. talk to people and people will know
to tell aloud that they have found the that you have found it.
Truth. That part is very week.
Whatever way you like you can
announce the Truth. You can write soul and a non- realized soul is that
The difference between a realized
books, you can talk to your friends, with that authenticity with which you
relations and tell them: "This is the speak people will know that you
have found it. The
Truth
now-that
you have entered
into the kingdom
of God. That
difference bet-
ween a realized
soul and a non-
you have been
blessed by the
Grace of god."
realized soul is
basically this; He
does not talk of
woes and his
seperation with
God. He says " I
Now you can
the
announce
Truth. That you
have found it
now, This is it.
Like Christ said, I
are realized souls,
that you have felt
am the light, I am
the path". Or
anybody else can claim that, but you
can make out that it is not the Truth.
this Divine Power
which is prevailing
everywhere. That you can give
realization to others and know that, by
your accepting the Truth, you are not With
adding anything to the Truth but you complete understanding coming out of
are adoring yourself.
the confidence, with that
your heart people can make out," This
is absolute Truth", and then all kinds of
One requires courage to enjoy the falsehood must be denounced.
Truth. Some-times people may mock Doesn't matter if someone feels bad,
at you, laugh at you, and per-secute because, by telling that you are saving
you also, but that should not be any them and not harming them. But, it
worry to you, because your relation- must be told in a correct way, not in a
ship is with the Statutes, with the frivolous way. In a very persuasive
Grace of God. When that is your way, you must tell them that this is
connection, you should not worry wrong. You must wait for the time when
about other people, and what they you can tell people, more in
have to say about it. You have to stand
confidence. Tell them "This is wrong, it
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XiII Issue 7 & 8
July - August 2001
38
is wrong, you don't know. We have you hate every-one. Both things are
done the same thing." This is how you just the same. So, detachment must
are going to express your principle of be developed. The detacment is that
Mastery or you can say "Guru Tatwa" you are your father, you are your
You have to be truthful. First and mother, you are everything. Only your
foremost thing is that you should know spirit is everything to you, only your
the truth and stand the testimony and spirit you have to enjoy. Then the
that you should announce it.
detachment comes from them; then
you really do good to them, because,
The third thing, to become a by detaching you see the complete
Guru, a Sahaja Yogi has to do is to
develop detachment. Gradually you be done. Attachment to crazes. For
do develop it because you find that example people have attachment with
unless and until you develop that some crazes. Human beings always
detachment, you are not receiving become crazy about something. I
vibrations in the full way. All kinds of mean it can be anything.
detachments have to be developed,
means your priorities change. Once
your attention gets fixed up with should be only one craze-i.e. to be
your spirit, the catch or the hold on settled, absolutely settled, in your
things which are of no importance spirit. All other crazes will disappear
starts reducing on itself, e.g. you because it is the greatest joy-giving
have a father and a mother and a thing. That's the most nourishing thing,
sister. This is a bigger problem in India.
Here you are over detached. But in
India, people are very much involved in that which is that source of all
their own children. "This is my son" and enjoyment. You get yourself attached
others are orphans? Only your sons
and daughters are the real children." working. Sometimes detachment is
My daughter. I must do this for My son, taken as a licence for becoming dry to
My father, My mother". Two types of others, which is absurd. This is a
attachments are there. One through human quality to make everything dirty
Moha-involvement-into that. That you which is beautiful. Actually, a person
want to do this for them, that for them, who is detached is the most beautiful
want to give them property, have person, is the extremely loving person
insurance for them and every sort of is love. Look at the flowers, they are
thing. And another could be the other detached. They are dying tomorrow,
way, as we have here (London).You they are not going to live, but every
hate your father, you hate your mother, minute they are emitting fragrance to
vision about them and about what is to
One has to understand that there
that's the most beautiful thing. So all
the other things fall off; you enjoy only
to your spirit, and detachment starts
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-42.txt 
 July - August 2001
39
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-Xill Issue 7 & 8
filthy. You would not even know that a
person has come with bad intentions. A
you. The trees are not attached to
anything; they will die tomorrow,
doesn't matter. But if anybody comes
to them they give shade, they give say:-" Come along, what do you want?
person comes to you, to steal. You'll
You'll offer him tea and all that. Then
fruits.
he says "I have come to rob you."
Attachment means death of love, alright, rob me, if you want to"- So he
death of love is attachment. For might not rob you at all. That is what is
example, in a tree, the sap rises, goes innocence, which one may develop.
to all the necessary parts, all the only through detachment. Detachment
flowers, all the fruits, then goes back to is of the attention. Do not allow your
Mother Earth. It is not attached to attention to get involved into
anyone. Supposing, the sap goes and something, even rituals of anything.
gets attached into one fruit. What will Say, now we have not washed Mataji's
happen? The fruit will die and the tree Feet. Alright
will die. Detachment gives you the
movement of your love, circulation of
your love. For things now.Things have
it does not matter. You
love me, alright. If some mistakes may
be committed, what does it matter? If
you see on the abstract plane. It's love.
This is just a step forward, like
somebody ran very fast and fell down
before reaching ME and says,
Mother, Sorry, I fell down before
reaching you, I should not have done
that. But Mother see how, I prostrated
before you" It's a complete poetry-
detachment. So, one has to develop
no value unless and until there are
emotions behind it. For example, the
sari I am wearing today, was bought for
Guru Day, Guru Purnima. But they had
no sari. The other day, they wanted to
have sari for Puja. Then I said if you
insist I may have, but I wore it today
just to say that this was bought with
that devotion, that love that on Guru that detachment to be a Guru. And that
Day, Mother would like to wear detachment does not mean sanyas or
something of a lighter shade; white - anything like that. Sometimes one has
the pure colour of silk-complete to wear those dresses to announce to
detachment. But in white all the colours the world because, if you have to work
are mixed, then only it becomes white,- in a short time then you have to take to
such a balance and unity it is .It should that intensive behaviour ,like Christ,
be that you should become white and you can say or Adishankaracharya. All
whiter than snow.
these people had a very, very short life.
In that short life they had to achieve
such a tremendous task that they had
to actually take a military uniform just
to avoid problems. Not to impress
is
purity,
innocence. Innocence is such a light,
light that really blinds you to all that is
is
Detachment
%24
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-43.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XiII Issue 7 & 8
July-August 2001
40
others. Now-a-days people do it just to you have to lead a moral life. None of
impress others that they are detached tham had said that you do not get
married, that you should not talk to
your wife or you should have no
So, we understand that first work relationship with your wife. All this is
is not to harm anyone. Ahimsa. Not to nonsense. Lead a moral life. When you
kill anyone. That does not mean that are young and not married, keep your
you do not have to eat meat and fish eyes on the ground. Mother earth gives
and all that. That is all nonsense. Of you that innocence. Most of the
confusions and problems, specially in
the Western life, have come because
anyone means Do not kill a human they have thrown morality to the sea,
being. Thou shall not kill. So, first thing and to accept morality as the very
basis of society is very difficult for
them. It is complete reversion. But you
Second is to know that you have have to do it, you have to turn the whole
found the truth and give the testimony wheel back. So many things were done
of the truth. Third is the detachment, in the beginning of the society to
about establish these pure relationships.
detachment. Not to get attached to any There are laws which act, just as
Chemical laws are there. Physical laws
are there in Chemistry and Physics.
feeling and also not to Hate anyone. There are human laws which one
should understand, the relationship
between each other. The sublimity of
mouth of all Sahaja Yogis; "I hate". It is their relationship, the purity of their
called as Dandak, is the statute. You relationship must be understood. Lead
a moral life. The Purity of the
relationship between husband and wife
must be understood. Then only can
and do just the things opposite to it.
course you should not hanker after
food, no doubt about it. You do not kill
is not to harm anyone.
the
way l've told you
one person because he is a relation or
something. But develop a universal
That is the worst kind of attachment.
This word should go away from the
cannot hate anyone, even Rakshasas.
Better not hate them. Give them a
chance.
you have a very, very happy married
life, which is the basis.
Now, the fourth statute of the Lord
is, to lead a moral life. These Statutes
"Thou shalt not commit adultery",
Christ has said: (perhaps He knew the
modern people as they would be using
their brains for this ). He said " Thou
shalt not have adulterous eyes". What
a vision, in those days to think! Even I
were given by Gurus. Take them from
Socrates onward, Moses, Ibrahim,
Dattatreya, Janaka, Mohammed Sahib
and take up to the point when it was
about a 100 years back at the most,
was Sainath. All of them have said that
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
July-August 2001
41
Then for a
could not under-
stand it when I
Guru, He should
was in India. Only
after coming here
I could see, what it
could mean. It is a
not accumulate
things; he should
not have much
possessions if he
has possessions,
they should be
just what
needs. A Guru
possession on the
eyes, -possess-
ion. It's a joyless,
he
useless
beha-
must give away
viour. Attention is
his possessions.
He should not
fritt-ered
away
completely.,
There's
dignity. Eyes should be steady. If you
look at somebody stea-dily, he should
know that you have Sahaja Yoga in
have stamp coll-
ections ( for financial gain) and all such
kinds of collections. Whatever things
are useful and beautiful, which give
you. With love, with res-pect, with happiness and joy to others, to their
eyes, such things must be collected.
He should have such things which give
no
dignity. Not starting at people, which is
just playing in the hands of these
possessions. The whole society is symbolic meaning to his life, very
possessed. All the Satanic forces have symbolic, which suggest that he is a
been let loose, I think, and the way dharmic person. He should not have
people are possessed, they cannot things that are symbolic of adharmikta,
of irreligious life. Everything that he
has or wears or shows should be
is to be looked after. That is the representative of his Dharmikta.
most important thing Because Anything that is impure, giving bad
attention is the one which is going vibrations should not be possessed.
Even whatever you have, you should
think to whom you can give this. So, it
means you should have possessions
see through these things. They are
supposed to be Christians. Attention
to be enlightened.
So, we have to know what morality
is. Let people laugh and say that these
are goodie goodies or this sort of thing.
We are proud and not ashamed of
being righteous people. This is a very
important part of righteousness.
Those who do not follow this will
lose their vibrations very fast.
to express your generosity.
A Sahaja Yogi has to be generous
like the sea. A miserly Sahaja Yogi, I
cannot think of that- it is like mixing of
darkness with light. Miserliness is not
allowed in Sahaja Yoga. Anybody
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-45.txt 
 42.
July-August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
whose mind goes on how much money for those people. Then, for a Sahaja
I can save, how much labour I can Yogi it is important to use things which
save-there are many labour saving are more natural in their character,
devices, and money- saving devices- Give up articiality by and be more
and also cheating others or making natural. I do not mean that you take out
money out of a few things here and the roots and eat them or you eat the
there, and all such things are against fish raw. I do not mean that. Always
Sahaja Yoga. They will put you down.
Enjoy your generosity. How many things. But try to lead a life which is
times have I told you about more natural. Natural, in the sense that
Generosity? Apart from the way you people know there is no vanity about
give it, the emotional side is so
beautiful, you cannot imagine it. I met a way round. You see they will dress up
lady after say 30 years of her married
life in London, suddenly, and she said," attention. I mean there can be both
Oh, What a coincidence," i said ways. Then I find some people
"Why?" She said" I am wearing the colouring their hair and all that. So you
same pearl necklace you had given me
on my wedding day, today, and I behaviour. So, be natural. It can mean
should meet you". The whole thing, the anything absurd also to some people
whole drama changed with that who do not use their wisdom.
meeting. It is how you give even a
small thing. It is the greatest art of
giving that one has to learn in Sahaja Sahaja Yoga. That you have to keep
Yoga. Give up the mundane type of intact all the time. Natural means you
things, like if you go to somebody's must wear natural dresses, which are
birthday, you send a card," Thank you suitable to you, e, g. in this climate
very much". Make it a more deeper there is no use to wear dress like
significant thing. Let us see how you RAMA used to wear. He will not wear
develop your symbols of love. When anything on the top, there was no
you have these things of vibrations and
you will give it to a Sahaja Yogi, he will
you must avoid going too far with the
you. Some people can be the other
as a tramp, just to attract more
have to be a very natural person in your
Wisdom is very important in
need.You have to wear the dress of
whatever country you belong to,
whatever suits the occasion. Whatever
you think is dignified and good. It
speaks for your more elegance and
your personality. Whatever suits you,
you should wear, not like all the people
wearing moss- coloured dress, the
great suit, horrible looking and making
know what it is.
Never lack in generosity specially
among Sahaja Yogis. Gradually, you
will be amazed how through small
things you win over, as if the vibrations
flow through these things and work out
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-46.txt 
 July - August 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XilI Issue 7 & 8
43
clowns out of them. No clownish things of discriminations and identifications
are necessary, no dandy stuff is according to races, colour and
necessary Simple beautiful dresses different religions in which you are
should be worn which give you born. As a Christian you don't belong
dignity.
to a church, you are not born in a
church. Thank God, otherwise all the
Actually, in the East, people spirits there will capture you,
believe that God has given you a immediately. But these identifications
will linger on. To accept anything new,
with the beauty of what human beings you have to be reborn and you are
reborn now. Now, you are Dharmatita-
means -you need not follow any
India, women wear their saris and particular type of religion. You are
beautiful body and it is to be adorned
have created, just to respect it, just to
worship your body. For example in
open to all religions and the essence
and expression of their worship of their of all religions you have to take. You
bodies, because you must respect have not to denounce any religion or
insult any religious incarnation at any
time. It is a sin. It is a great sin in
Sahaja Yoga- and you know who they
are. There should be no racial
saris are expressive of their moods
your body. Dresses should be such
that they should be for utility as well as
for dignity. There is no need to have
uniform clothes for Sahaja Yogis at all.
I don't like it. There should be a variety
as nature is. Every-one should look a
different person. For Puja etc. all can
wear something similar, it doesn't
matter But outside you should be a
You
understanding of oneself. You could
be Chinese or any group. As long as
we are human beings, we should know
that we laugh the same way, we smile
the same way, we hold the same way.
This is all conditioning in our mind- of
this society that some are touchables
and some are untouchables. This is in
all
normal
are
person.
householders, nobody has to
announce something. For you people I
don't even advise to put the red mark
when walking on the street. You
should be a normal person, not to be
pointed out. You need not be dressed
absurdly or in a funny way, but in a
normal way as others wear. To be
normal is very important in Sahaja That is why, deliberately, he was b
Yoga.
our Indian Community. Horrible.
Brahamanism of India has ruined India
completely and you learn from it, for
example, who was Vyasa, the one who
wrote Geeta, who was he? He was the
illegitimate son of a fisher-woman.
born
like that. All the Brahmins who read
Geeta, ask them -who was Vyasa?
Then we have to know that Brahmins are those who are realized
souls, there is nothing like where and
Sahaja Yogis have to get over all kinds
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-47.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
July-August 2001
44
Mr. Ego, which is being pampered by
education and this society, which teaches you how to
everything in the West, we find this smoke a cigar and how to have your
nonsense of nationalism. I just can't lager (beer), morning till evening. All
understand. If somebody is fair or this training and conditioning has to be
dark, after all God had to make variety thrown away just like filth, and see that
in colour in every way. Who told you God created all of you as His own
that you are the most handsome children. It is such a beautiful thing.
Why do you want to
make it ugly with
these ugly ideas?
All this ugliness of"
I like or dislike" is
in what caste or community you are
born. With all
going
around? Maybe for
markets
people
some
here, or in Holly-
wood, it may be fit
but in the Kingdom
of God, all these
nonsense. Only
there should be
one word "I love"
so- called 'hand-
some peopile will
be denied entry-
Forget everything.
There is no need to
remember what
marrying
seven
the British did to
husbands and all
the Indians or the
sort of things. They
will all be put in Hell. God has created Germans did to the Jews. Forget
all of you as His own children. The everything. Those people who did it
beauty is of the heart and not of the
face, that shows and shines. May be
people are a little bit aware of it, that is
why they go and tan their faces, I do
not know. They are quite aware, but you, which you have to imbibe. But,
there is too much 'showing-Off' they today, I authorise you to be the Gurus.
are doing. Some people like black hair, So that through your own character
others like red hair, I mean there have and through your own personality the
to be all types of hair, why do you like a way you practice Sahaja Yoga in your
particular type of hair, this I can't own life- and manifest the light, others
are dead and finished. We are
different people. We are Saints.
This is for the statutes I have told
will follow you, And that will establish
the statutes of the Lord in their hearts
understand.
and emancipate them. Give them their
salvation, because you have got your
salvation. You are the channels-
There is nothing to like or dislike.
What God has created is all beautiful,
who are you to judge that I like or
dislike ? 'I', Who is this 'I ,you see, is
without the channels this all pervading
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-48.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Issue 7 & 8
July-August 2001
45
power cannot work out. That's the First of all you have to know that void
system. If you see the Sun, it's light catches when you had a wrong type of
spreads through it's rays-from your Guru. You must know about your guru
heart the blood flows through the entirely. Try to find out the character of
arteries, they become smaller and
smaller. You are the arteries which is your Guru is very elusive. She is
going to flow this blood, of my love, to Mahamaya. Not easy to find out. She
all the people. If arteries are broken, behaves in a normal way- and
the blood will not reach the people. sometimes you are out witted. But you
That is why you are so important. The see how in small things also, She
bigger you become, the bigger the
your Guru. Rather difficult because
behaves. How Her character is
you expressed, how Her Love is
encompass more people, by that you expressed? Try to remember Her
forgiveness. Then you should know
that you have the Guru that many
Guru must have the dignity. Guru people must have desired to have.
means the weight, is the gravity, Who is the source of all Gurus. It is the
ardent desire of even Brahma, Vishnu,
Then
become.
arteries
are not responsible.
gurutatwa means gravity. You must
have the gravity by your weight, and Mahesha to have a Guru like that.
means the weight of your character, They must all be jealous of you, But
weight of your dignity, weight of your this Guru is very elusive. So to
behaviour, weight of your faith; and improve your VOID, say that, " Mother
your light. You become a Guru not you are our Guru". Because of this
through frivolousness and vanity. elusiveness, that fear, or that awe, that
Cheapness, vulgar language, cheap respect which is necessary, for the
jokes, anger and temper-all must be Guru, is not established. Unless and
avoided completely. Wield the weight until you develop that awe- complete
of your sweetness, of your tongue, within you, your Guru principle will not
which will attract people just like the be established. No liberty is to be
taken. I am telling you Myself, but I am
attracting the bees from all over. In the extremely elusive; next moment, I
same way you will be attracting make you laugh and forget about it
people. Be proud of that, be very because I am testing your freedom to
proud of that and have sympathies for do it- compiete freedom. I play with
you in such a manner that you will be
forgetting every moment that I am your
Guru, every moment. So first of all you
how you have to do it yourself. You must find out about your own Guru
have to work out your void clearly. establish Her in your heart. I mean you
flower which is loaded with nectar,
others and care for others.
Now, in short, I have to tell you
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-49.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIII Isue 7 & 3
July-August 2001
46
have a wonderful 'Guru' -otherwise I you must remember that when you
must say, I wish I had one like that
myself! And She is desireless and Sahaja Yoga, remember that they
sinless, absolutely sinless. Whatever I will see you all the time and try to
do it is not a sin for Me. I can kill
anyone and do whatever intrigue or
anything. I really tell you, that's a fact.
Do anything, I am above sin but I see try to love them, I definitely Love you
to it that I do not do anything like that in
your presence, so that you do not get different state all together. Under
one of these things, because that is
My quality. You have a very supreme
Guru, no doubt, but still you must know
that those powers of supremacy you from that
don't have. I am above all these shaktis of all the powers, so you
things. I don't know what temptations
are, nothing, I mean I do! Whatever I
like it is all my Whim. But despite that I
have made myself very normal by you! Unless and until you desire
because I must appear before you in My good health, I will have bad health.
such a manner that you understand
what is the statutes, For Me there are
no statutes. I make these Statutes.
Because of you I do all these things should really prosper so that There
and teach you small things because
you are still children. In the same way,
1
are talking to other people about
see how far you are in it. As I
understand you, you try to
understand them. As I love you, you
but I am NIRMALA, I am beyond love,
circumstances
these
you
are
much better off because no Guru
ever goes to that extent. Apart
I am the source of all the
can have all the powers from Me,
whatever you like, I am desireless.
Look at that, how much I am bound
It is to that extent. But to me what
is good health and bad health?
Under these beautiful conditions you
should be no problems for you to be
Gurus.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-50.txt 
 Sucial Recgntion
Vecognition
pecial
WHEREAS, on March 21st, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, founder of Sahaja
Yoga Meditation, will celebrate her 78th birthday: and
WHEREAS, Shri Mataji is one of the most significant voices on world
peace today and has been nominated twice for the Nobel Peace Prize for her
extraordinary humanitarian efforts; and
WHEREAS, Sahaja Yoga is a meditation practice which has helped
hundreds of thousands in over 75 countries worldwide enjoy more peaceful,
healthy, and balanced lives; and
WHEREAS, the City of Plano would like to send birthday felicitations and
well wishes to Shri Mataji on the day of her 78th birthday, March 21, 2001
NOW, THEREFORE, I, JERAN AKERS, MAYOR OF THE CITY OF
PLANO, TEXAS do hereby extend special recognition to Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi for her revolutionary and seifless work in the field of yoga, meditation and
world peace,
Office ofithe Mayer
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-51.txt 
 OCCASI
SINE.
SPIENDOR
Shri Mataji
On behalf of the Government and
People of British Columbia
I am pleased to offer you my
hearty congratulations and very
best wishes on the occasion of your
Seventy-eighth Birthday
May you enjoy every
future happiness
March 21, 2001
Premier
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-52.txt 
 New York State Assembly
Citation
HONORING Shri Martai Nirmala Devi, founder of Sahuja Yoga Meslitation, an the occasion of her 78
Rirthday
WHEREAS, & i sthe sesr of thir A ul Bady o amearte and acinenledge these iividaals
hubo idevne their fiver to promoting prace, hnahfi ad wel-bring, keredy bringing hope u heryone thiry
ourh, anid
nd ackaomledge these indvidatls
HE born ar Marce 11. 193
.
WHEREAS, Shri Mauji Nirali Deni, founder of Sahaja Yoga Medimion.
in Chindhutra, India, her father was ane of the authars of India' Canition, and
WHEREAS, SHi Manaji's special spanliries were revogninnd by Mahu
uta Gand, and she oftien stared in
inis Ashirun; hr indind mndirine and nun arme in ihe movetent Aar the hndepenutence of Iadia auf
mfence of Indat auf
WHEREAS, Siri Manapi jonnudend
Ahe ecmomir cundition of Indim mm, and a konjpiiul which urglully enplayr Saha Yopa
an intermutiomat srhiot for children in indlia, an argnianin te imprve
amiane n improne
is a dynmic and pnurfal peesence wiheu rnvetr werktuide, gháng speeches n
f womm in soriety and self realinin and
WHEREAS, Sin Manyi
arld pruce, the role of
WHEREAS, Shri Mataji'n insights inte the probdenes of tmniy ane deep and mealing she has been
gurst spealer a mary intermatiomaf semiscara md ronferencet; id
leas eeicer been nominnef fr như Nobel Pnacr Prir, laer deem lnnoresd by ilhe
WHEREAS, Sri Mngi
ted Sutes Cangrets
Comtriturion an peatr, henith aml the well-being prople in aver 75 mion and
Nw nhe Nobel Pnace Pribr, luc dem Aonored
s, amud har received iy intemutionl anands and charioey in reriguitin of her
FHEREAS, Salugia Togn ir amght localy, with charge, at the Sute Uninaity of New Yonk at New
Paltz and at the Dkry Top Drig Rehabiliturin fariliry in hinrbert, Niew Yorit ; auf
Rhinrberk, New Yort ; anf
WHEREAS, Suktjia Foga ir eurrently she sudýecr of sinesine eseurch ar the Narionaf lesnitute af Hashir
Wishingon, D.C, rganeg he mefical benefiar of te prtice, anf
alur dijet of cinesive eseurch ar
Astituten of Hashin
WHEREAS, Ths Arsemdilend Body is greutly moved to etemd a Sari Atataji itr roidanion for er
E mt dnptef commin
ndiman, ne, thereore. be ir
in Aeping coeatr calmer, bnihier, mone Iaalaornf ho trough
RESOLVED, Thar ilis Legislaive Bedy paur iw ies delibenutions an homr Shri Maaji AiHunir Devi,
der of Shaluju Yagu Mediui
Shri Manaji Nirmnir Devi,
her
e dhe ocrasin of her 78ch. Birthday; nd be ir furdh
ion,
RESOLVED, Th a copy of thir Catim, y engrusunt, be uuited
Stri Mataji Nirmie Dent.
By Gnlier of
4.Calull
Kevin A. Cahill, Member of Assemddy
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-53.txt 
 STATE OF TEXAS
OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR
To all to whom these presents
shall come, Greetings: Know je, that
this certificate is presented to
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
On The Occasion Of Her
78th Birthday
In testinany swhiaresf I latve rigued my name
and caused the Staf af the State af Tear ta fr
affised at the City of Austin, thir the 13 day a
Atareli, 2001.
STATE
Rice FuRRy
RICK
Rick Perry
Governor of Texas
TEXAS
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-54.txt 
 or
1781
Birthday Greetings
Shri Natji
Nirmada Jeri
We in the "City of the Angels"
extend our very best wishes for
a wonderful birthday celebration
filled with family, friends and fond memories.
March 21, 2001
bealttohie
Richard J Riordan
Mayor
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-55.txt 
 Proclamation
City of Cincinnati
Be It Proclaimed:
Whereas, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. founder of Sihaja Yoga Meulitarion
hice-naminaierd for the Nobel Prace Prize, ir nht en person io aken en-mIse kundalini
an CHerg which ir the key e health, balance, inner peace and uell-bein This encrg
enubles individuale to sffortlesslv enter into a state of higher anwtrenear anl to become a
Pource of well-bring in their funilies, conimunities and sacieties; anl.
Whereas, in more than 70 cities throughout North America, public Sahtja
Yoga programs are heing conducted. In the Greater Cincinnati area Sahaja Yoga Meitaiom
has been taught, free of charge, at the Cincinmati Art Museum, Xavier Unnerninj, Raymond
Halters College, Clermont Callege and Minmi University fior aver 15 years Cwrently. frer
reekly programs are being offered to the public at the Comaunin Friendt AMeeting House in
North Avondale; and
Whereas, in over 80 countries, for the past 30 years, Sahaja Yoga has beet
afferef and taught te huntredr of ihoutands of people negardlenr of agr or backgraund. The
Irunaformational results are healing, uplifting and universal From Bombay to Brazil Soutl
Africa to North Amerien, Sahajn Yoga Meditation har heiped improve liver and cOmmum
and,
Whereas, Shvi Mataji foundet Sahaja Yoga International in 1970 as a thon-
profit, volunieer organization, dedictted to helping peonle through the ure of ear-to-learn
nditation techniguen. Problms of alcohol and drug addicion, heulth and emottonal isuE
have been much inproved through the sie of Sahaja Yaga, anıd,
Whereas, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi har made outstaniling contrihutions ho
modern ife through her discoveryi of Sahaja Yoga and her muny churiiahle and humanitar
endeavars. These include Internationnat schooin for childrew around the worlit, organizations
to improve the conomie coMulition of lndian mOme, MAulical facilities that ue non-Iva
Sahaje Yoga echmiyuer, ongoing rerearch using Sakuia Yoga techniquer at the National
Institutes of Heulth, Hethesda, MD. warkplace atress-reduction pirogram in mumeruuu US.
Companies, outreach progrums to social service agencier such as beternd wamen ' sheltern,
correctional facilities, drug rehabilitation centers, renior cilizen centers, publicationi of her
book "Afeta-Afodern Era" and her ongolng Iruvel worldwide to speak at free Sahuju Yoga
programs:
Nolu, Theretore, 3, Charlie Luken,
Mayor of the City of Cincianati do hereby proclaim
Wednesday, Afarch 21, 2001, wx
"SHRI NIRMALA DEVI DAY"
in Cincinnan.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, 1
have hereinto et Iny hand and caused
this seal of the Ciry of Cincinnari to be
affixed this 15 day of March in the
year Tep Thausand and One.
Charlie Luken, Mayer
Cio of Cincinnari
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-56.txt 
 County of
Allegheny
Office of the Chief Executibe
Community Citation of Merit
#wanded tn
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
In celebration uf your 78 birthday on March 21, 2001, I offer best wishes and recognize your
significant contributions to world peace and extraordinary humanitarian achievements; and in
EEco gnition of distinguished endeavor and accomplishment, which have eamed the esteem of the
citizens of Allegheny County.
Presented on behalf of the citizens of Allegheny
County by tlhe Office of the Chief Executive,
this tath day of March, 2001
le
CKief ExccutivE
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-57.txt 
 GOVERNOR GRAY DAVIS
Commendation
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Mach 21, 2001
It is a great pleasure to join your family and friends in celebrating
your 78 birthday.
Your dedication to your community is truly an inspiration. I hope
the gathering of your dear family and friends helps you celebrate
this momentous occasion in a very meaningful way.
On behalf of the people of the State of California, please accept my
congratulations on this very special day.
tay Davis
aNNE
Governor Gray Davis
STATE CAPITOL SACRAMENTO, CALIFORNIA 95814 (916) 445-2841
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-58.txt 
 City of Pittsburgh
Office of the Mayor
A Proclamation
A
By virtue of the authority vested in me as Mayor of the City of Pittsburgh,
I do hereby issue this proclamation honoring
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
WHEREAS, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi was born on March 21, 1923
in Chindiwara, India and as a young girl Mahatma Gandhi recognized her
deep and special qualities and;
WHEREAS, she is a world renowned spiritual leader and the founder
of Sahaja Yoga, a natural, effortless way to spiritual enlightenment and:
WHEREAS, she has founded many charitable organizations and has
been awarded the United Nations Peace Medal, has been invited by the
United Nations four times to speak on world peace and has twice been
nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that I, as Mayor of the City
of Pittsburgh, do hereby congratulate Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi on her 78*
birthday and do hereby declare Wednesday, March 21, 2001 to be "Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi Day" in the City of Pittsburgh.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the
Seal of the City of Pittsburgh to be uffixed.
Tom Murphy
March 21, 2001
Date
Mayur
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-59.txt 
 March 21", 2001
Congratulations
Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi
On your 78th Birthday
Edmonton City Council
Robert Noce
Вгyan Анderson
Michael Phair
Allan Bolstad
Rose Rosenberger
Terry Cavanagh
Leroy Chahley
Jim Taylor
Dave Thiele
Wendy Kinsella
Larry Langley
Bil Samith
Mayor
COMBNTE
Ciry
ERT
