The Divine Cool Breeze January - February, 2001 Volume : XIII Issue : 1 & 2 You are yourself and you must see yourself as your Self, as your Spirit. And spirit is a Universal Being, is the innocence, is the virgin within yOu. This body is a palace and it is the House of God. Within it God kept the infinite flame. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi

 In this issue: Editorial 1 2. Ganesh Puja 16-09-2000 15 Shri Krishna Puja 20-8-2000 29 Gudi Padawa Puja 05-04-2000 The importance of Dedication and Devotion 06-08-1982 36 Edited by Published by Yogi Mahajan V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi-110 067

 Promise to Keep When an atom explodes how much devastation it causes but when a heart opens how many rivers of love flow from it. These rivers form an ocean of love. The love of a Sahaja collectivity cannot stay within itself. It has to expand and reach out to the society. It expresses its concern for others, concern for the society and human crisis. This concern is the movement of love, it is called Compassion. Compassion emanates from the goddess herself. She is worshipped as Sandra Karuna. We have been so blessed to receive her Karuna. Now we are to become the vehicles of her Karuna. In her Divine compassion she has started several projects for the needy. Recently she laid the foundation of a home for destitute women and street children. The beautiful talk she gave on that eve brought tears of compassion which entwined us with pain she felt in her heart and we promise to redeem that pain. The movement of compassion takes us to greater depths. As our attention turns towards benevolence, we think less of oursleves. Consequently the ego receives less fuel and starts subsiding. Also, our thoughts become benevolent. For instance in previous Diwalis we enjoyed bursting crackers worth five hundred rupees, so this Diwali the benevolent thought came why not give half to the NGO for street children. "Someday these street children would be able to light lamps in honour of the goddess Laxmi". The benevolent thought also brings a lot of inner joy. Like this may lights would ignite a thousand other lights. Those who have not received their realization are also street children, lost in the dark streets fo wilderness. May the light of the spirit take them to the feet of Shri Mahalaxmi Sakshat! Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. Let us all contribute open heartedly to the cause taken up by our Divine Mother.

 The Divine Cool Breeze January-February 2001 GANESHA PUJA CABELLA, 16-09-2000 Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi understanding. So to be innocent is not possible. You have to be innocent in the sense that you are innately innocent. This happens after Sahaja Yoga, after realization and your power to fight all the wrong, negative feelings within you and without are absolutely supported, protected by the Mother of Shri Ganesha. Its difficult, Today we have gathered here to do Ganesha Puja. As you know very well that Ganesha is the symbol of purity, of sanctity so it is worshipping the innocence. When you are worshipping Shri Ganesha, you have to know that He is the embodiment of innocence. I wonder if we understand the meaning of innocence. these days, to tell somebody about innocence, but you know the life of Jesus Christ. He was innocent. He did know what sort of people were all Innocence is a quality, which is innate, which cannot be forced, which cannot be trained into. Its just a quality, innate quality within a human being. When around. He thought they were all innocent. So he was talking to them he becomes Shri Ganesha's disciple, he becomes an innocent person. in a manner that nobody who was May be, you say that innocent persons are attacked by the cunning, by the aggressive. But innocence is such a great thing that it cannot be destroyed. It is the quality of the spirit. Innocence is the quality of the spirit and when the spirit within you is awakend you get the power of innocence by which you overcome all that is negative, all that is wrong, all that is detrimental to your growth, your spiritual cunning would have done that. Because cunning always understand the cunningness of the other and say things which may not have been understood by the people. But whatever He said, had the vibrations of innocence that should have put all these people in the proper sense in a proper relationship with him. But somehow that was not the time for So the them to be realized souls.

 January - February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze innocence of Shri Ganesha was not non-sense that He created alcohol. What He did was to change the water into the taste of grape juice. Alcohol is called as grape juice in Hibrew language. I mean it is not called but wine means alcohol as well as grape iuice. But it cannot be. Because that we should say defeated but very much created an atmosphere of such sanctity and beauty that you can see in the life of Christ. I am happy you all have heard about marriages. Why the marriage? What is the need to have a marriage? After all these days people are living without marriage. But marriage instantly you cannot create alcohol. Alcohol takes time. It has to rot and rot and rot, then it becomes alcohol. But if Christ has made it in such a means the sanctity of marriage. Sahaja manner, spontaneously, how can it be alcohol, that is intoxicating? So many people specially in Christian religion, believe that Christ sanctified wine, which is absolutely wrong. He never sanctified alcohol. He changed Because of the sanctity of your physical, mental and emotional integration. If you do not have the sanctity and live with the person then it is not perfect marriage. The children produced will not be alright. That's the grape juice into wine taste. why the marriage is necessary and, as you know, Christ went to attend a wedding. Why did he pay so much The other day I happened to meet a person and he said, Mother please give me realization. I said alright, get me some water. They brought some attention to a wedding? Because that sanctifies your relationships with each other. Anything is alright, but water, I put my fingers into it and then relationship between husband and he tasted it and said Mother it tastes wife have to be sanctified. Otherwise like wine. I said that's it, that's what the children they produce could turn Christ had done. So there is no Sanctity of alcohol. How can you expect Christ to do something like robbers, they may be cheats, they may that by which your awareness be liers. They may be very cruel absolutely goes? Those people who people if there is no sanctity about drink, you know, are not normal out to be anything. They may be the marriage. That's why He went to people. Something goes wrong with their brains. When they drink they sanctify the marriage institution. create problems. When they are But it is absolutely wrong and

 The Divine Cool Breeze January-February 2001 avoiding all such things which destroy your health. So the married life is a sanctified life. Is a life which is being talking to somebody, you can make out that they are not normal. They try to be very aggressive, sometimes they blessed. Now we have priests. But I can be very passive also. Mostly they would say in Sahaja Yoga they are all blessed by me. So one should understand that this is a very big thing are very aggressive and they behave in a manner that does not behove a human being. So you must that you have got. But there are many who come and say that Mother we understand that this wine, so called, which is being fermented for days want to have divorce. We are trying to make up good marriage. All kinds of stories they tell. If you know it a together, is very wrong and against the spiritual life. All those countries where alcohol is accepted as a very sanctified marriage, a marriage which is being done under all the ceremonies of Sahaja Yoga which cannot be a bad sanctified thing are just going to dogs. Which is against Shri Ganesha, its against innocence. So such a person can become very cunning, very marriage. But if you are bad then shrewd, very dominating. All kinds nobody can help you. If you have funny ideas about marriages you should try to correct it. If you want to marry in Sahaja Yoga then please see that you respect the sanctity of of bad things can come through them. And one cannot trust a person who drinks and becomes drunkard. He can get after his wife, his children, anybody, and try to destroy their lives because he knows he is himself marriage. I know sometimes women can be destroyed. So the onething one has to understand that innocence does not bad, men can be bad. There can be problems, but a person who is wise will try to endure all that. Because he or she wants to respect the sanctity of marriage. This is a very contradictory allow you to have anything like that which goes against your awareness. Because human awareness is very important. That must be respected. thing that Christ was born without Anything that spoils your awareness, or spoils your health is all wrong, specially for Sahaja Yogis. You have to keep your health alright. How do sanctity from outside. They are you keep your health alright? By innocent and innocent people don't marriage and Ganesha was also born without marriage. They themselves are sanctity. They don't need any

 January - February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze the circumstances, when you are in need any kind of ritual and any kind thoughtless awareness, you do not react. That is the sign of innocence of a ceremony. That's how they have been born, absolutely pure of innocence. But that doesn't mean that and the people who do not react, keep we should take their example on young. They will never show their ourselves. They were divine age, they keep young. Because to react is not a very good thing, which personalities and they were to be born makes you get involved into another like that, while we have to be person. But if you don't react, you sanctified and lead a sanctified life. are just watching, you are just witness, This is the difference between an then you don't get involved into incarnation and a human being. It is anything. You are away from it, and that's how your innocence grows and you get very confident. I have read a easy to criticize incarnations, very simple to criticize them incarnations have been criticized by All . story about a Chinese king who went human beings, because human beings to a saint and asked himn, that he wants cannot understand them, but try to be really very pure and innocent, then some help from him, that I want my you will understand why your lives son to be developed into a person who were on a different line, on a different can face all kinds of problems. style. Now if you say, we can develop Whatever people may do, he should innocence, Mother, you can not. be able to face them. Alright, you Which is the way to become leave your son with me, so when the innocent? In Sahaja Yoga we have argument started, when the fighting proper method, how we can become started, his son was just standing innocent. It happens through our straight watching everything in thoughtless awareness. If you are in thoughtless awareness. So everybody the state of thoughtless awareness from the arena went back, they all then what happens? You don't react, went away and they could not stand do not get involved into wrong things. before the innocence of the boy who You do not get involved into any was very young. And the king was surprised how his son could face all discussions, arguments but you just of them, all their arguments, all their aggression and all kind of horrible things they said to him. If anybody watch and the innocence within you rises beautifully, like a lotus, rises out of a dirty pond. So whatever may be

 January-February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze says anything to you, you should be just innocent. find anything, they make a toy out of it. Other day we had gone to Zenova and I saw there were big blockades At that time your power of kept there. Some children came from innocence will show that this person somewhere and they just climbed on who is trying to dominate you, to trouble you, is very much in the were enjoying them. You see they find that and made horses out of it and wrong, and the person himself might realize that I am doing all these things and this person whom I am trying to anything, any space they make a joyful thing for them. A play for them. For them life is also a joyful dominate is not taking any note of it. So he feels very weak, since he has play. Just a thing of enjoyment and no power to dominate a person. So they make you also enjoy everything. as Sahaja Yogis, now we can get into If you are not in a good mood, they thoughtless awareness. Try to reduce will come and behave in such a manner that you have to come round and become a very simple, natural your reactions. Reaction to anything. People have such funny ideas about person. So to see a simple natural themselves that they react. For person you always say 'they are like children' means they do not example somebody showed me those carpets. I started watching. I was very happy, and they told me all the Sahaja understand the cunning, they do not understand the stupidity of the people Yoginis have made this with their and they live in their own world of hands, so beautifully. innocence. In the same way all the It was really so joyful to know that they have done it. But if I was a very normal person, I would have said, Oh my God! what a colour! what a thing! and like that. So whatever they have done I could have even enjoyed that. Sahaja Yogis have to develop that aura around them. Let people see you, how innocent you are? How sweet you are? No argument, no quarreling, no fighting. It is just the inner satisfaction of thoughtless awareness. Many people say that Mother we One thing the enjoyment is lost. For cannot become thoughtless. Why? Why cannot you become thoughtless? a child enjoyment is complete. Whatever he sees, he enjoys. Makes joyful thing out of it. Look at the children. I have seen children, they Gradually stop reacting, introspect Because all the time you want to react.

 January-February 2001 7. The Divine Cool Breeze something which is absolute honest intelligence. It is not which works for yourself, see for yourself. If you are all the time trying to react, tell your mind to behave itself. If there is any reaction, just don't say anything, keep quite. Gradually you will be amazed and surprised how you become thoughtlessly aware! How beautiful you become and everybody who sees you, will know that you are something different. You are not like the normal some purpose but it is purposeless. It is absolutely purposeless and thus it achieves that height of joy because there is no purpose in anything. It sees the futility of all kinds of endeavors that we have. It just enjoys, why people are running up and down, why are they fighting! Just stands up and persons. But the normal reaction of a human being is that if there is a sees, why should they don't like that? Some may think that they are quarrel going on in the street, everybody will join the quarrel. They alright, there is nothing wrong in them like to fight. They want to be the part but its not so. Innocence is something, and parcel of that fight or quarrel. as I have told an innate quality, and They don't want to get out of it. At you should not deceive yourself by that time if you just have your thinking you are innocent. innocence, that will act. On the contrary you just put some introspection upon yourself and see for yourself what have I been doing I told you that innocence is the spirit and the spirit is the innocence, which cannot be destroyed by so far as far as others are concerned? What is your attitude? I have already anything. The fact is that it cannot be destroyed by anything and it can talked to you about emotional intelligence. Emotional intelligence is the expression of innocence. It is the be reestablished through Sahaja Yoga. You might have been a very aggressive person. You might have expression of Shri Ganesha Children been a very unhappy person. You who are gifted with this will always try to please you. They know what you want, what you need. They will give all the joy that you want. They will do all the things that you like, just to please you. They don't want to have their own demands. They might have been a person who is all the time disturbing others. Maybe, but after Sahaja Yoga you can make your personality so sweet and beautiful, that not only you can enjoy but others can also enjoy. This innocence is

 8 January-February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze look at him, he does not eat like a never say I want this, you do for me. Never. They only want to see what horse. So they are so innocent that sometimes they say things by which you are exposed completely. There are so many jokes about it and if you write some books, writing the jokes of children, I tell you, people will just enjoy. Because so innocently they say things which are nothing but the truth. you want. What do you want to have? And they put all the effort to supply you with that. Its very interesting how the children behave towards others, elders. Just like I would say a great understanding like very elderly innocence you So in personality. become extremely grown up, They cannot tell lies. They are so truthful that is the quality of matured. Very matured. With that innocence. They never tell lies. You maturity you know what this person needs and what the other person did this? Ya, I did. You didn't do this? should not have, and the way they No I did not do. They never tell lies. It is the grown ups who teach them establish is very interesting. Children how to tell lies, how to be cheating. are the most interesting things, I think in the world. For me roses are Then we teach our children another beautiful but children are the most bad thing that you must possess interesting thing and they teach you so many things that you are surprised at their innocence. So many jokes are everything, specially in the West it is a thing they do. They tell their child that this is yours, you should not give it to anyone. This is your own. On the contrary we should tell them, you there about the children. How they behave, how they talk and they are can do what you like. Leave it to their innocence. You will be amazed they will give away everything that they have. In such a beautiful manner they will behave that you will be amazed, so innocent that they will tell everything to everyone. They have no way of hiding anything. Very difficult I know one joke when a gentleman came to the house for dinner. So the how they try to please everyone and try to do something to entertain! All their capacity of this is so great that child was looking at him very intensely and then he said, mother he does not eat like a horse as you told me. So everybody was shocked. He sometimes one wonders how these little things have developed this does not eat like a horse. Mother must capacity. have told that he eats like a horse. So 00

 The Divine Cool Breeze January-February 2001 It is the blessing of Shri Ganesha. It is His blessing that children are so you, is trying to harm you, is trying to put you down. Nobody can put very sweet and so much entertaining down the innocent. and so beautiful. Try to become like Innocence is the quality that them. You have to be like them. You survives all kinds of non-sense and might have read many books, you might have got lots of degrees, you might be something great, but you are not only that but age, health, your mind, your thinking. If your emotions are extremely innocent then you not childlike. You have to be a child like person. Otherwise no one likes enjoy yourself. Now-a-days there is a big way of shamelessness. The your company. We will call them bores. But I think boring comes to the people who have no innocence at all. people I have seen they have no lajja I don't know, some men want to attract women and some women want They are trying to tell you, you must to attract men. Children never do like do this. If you want to be successful that. They don't know what is this to you do that. All these lectures are useless for children. In the same way attract men or to attract women or to attract anyone. They will try to please the dog, try to please a horse but I it should be within your own understanding that this all nonsense have never seen they will go all out they are talking. to attract someone. The reason is that As the children don't care for what their self-esteem is complete. They you suggest to them, to be nasty, to know about themselves fully. So why be horried, in the same way if you should they do all this nonsense of are innocent, you will not accept. You running after women, running after may listen to anything. Let them tell men and creating problems for what they want to. Does not matter. themselves. You never do that. Because you Their self esteem in complete. cannot, because you are innocent and the innocence will guard you. It will Innocence is like that. It gives you give you proper guidance, what is to complete self-esteem. You do not be done, what is not be done. Now bow to anyone, nor you make anybody else bow. This is the beauty of innocence which works out, so well within you. That's why I always say try to introspect and see for yourself. are you innocent or not? People think that somebody is trying to overpower

 January - February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze 10 basic as you can see is the respect that worship Shri Ganesha. I know of somebody who was very highly of your innocence in every manner. placed and suddenly I was surprised Like when you have to get angry how he was paralysed! What with somebody or something, the happened? He was very good man, best way is to keep quite or else you how he was paralysed? Then I found must respect your tongue, respect out that he had very bad intentions your eyes. Some people have a very about women and that's how he got bad habit of looking at women or this problem. So I thought its better some women are like that. They to worship Shri Ganesha. Worship don't respect their eyes. Then they Shri Ganesha, worshipping of Shri develop the problems of the eyes, Ganesha improves your mooladhara, not only that but mind also. Mind improves your sense of shame, gets so much ruined by that kind of improves your own dignity, your self esteem. You dress up in a way that shows that you respect your body. You talk in such a way that it shows behavior that it has no sense, which cannot enjoy anything. Such person cannot enjoy anything. If you are a person who respects your eyes, your that you respect your tongue, your nose, your ears, I tell you that you language. You cannot have a foul will be amazed that everything is so mouth if you are in Sahaja Yoga. enjoyable. In this world there are so You cannot have a mind that can many things that can be enjoyed. But people cannot hear anything that is abuse and say horrible words. I have seen in America, they talk in such a good. There are birds, who are funny manner, that you are shocked. There is no need to use these dirty words to express yourself. With that your tongue is spoiled. So innocence chirping, they cannot hear. There are trees which are growing, they cannot see or flowers which are fragrant, they cannot smell. Because they are is gone from your tongue. If you have lost innocence from your Because they are very low level tongue, whatever you say will never people, I should say, who cannot so much low in their self-esteem. come true, will never come true. enjoy everything around. And they But if you are innocent and your should be the source of enjoyment. tongue is innocent then everything See children how they are source of that you say will come true. So the enjoyment. Anybody who comes on

 January - February 2001 11 The Divine Cool Breeze the stage and runs about, how we normally they are always guided by their innocence. Whether you are enjoy! Why? Why do we enjoy a child running about? We don't say aware of it or not its such a sweet he has gone amock or he is drunk. thing, such a sweet thing that it makes people rise in their nobleness in their But we enjoy the child, why? That is greatness and that is what we have to the sweetness of the child that make develop within us as Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis go anywhere, try to do us so happy, because that innocence, his power is innocence. With that anything, meet anybody, any social work, anything, people should feel that joy that you have within you. For power, he is just looking so sweet, so beautiful, that it gives us the real joy within us. that joy only the Adi Shakti created So the second thing is that Shri Ganesha. Because that joy innocence is joy giving. Innocence within, that innocent joy, does not gives joy to people. Anything said innocently, anything done innocently is very very joy giving and in that you harm anybody. It does not expect anything, it does not demand anything, it does not want anything. see the person, so transparent, so beautiful that you enjoy that But just emitting joy all over. That sort of personality you should have. There is nothing wrong in wearing transparency and that sanctifies in a way. That's why Ganesha in good dresses, nothing wrong in eating worshipped first. Ganesha was the good food, nothing wrong in having conversation. But in all that, it is the first deity that was created by Adi Shakti. Because if she has to create respect of the innocence, the something she must know that there expression of innocence should be has to be power of innocence. there. With this innocence we can Otherwise people will go wrong and do all kinds of wrong things. So first solve the problems. All the problems of the world can be solved. That's She created Ganesha, whose why Shri Ganesha in so important. innocence you can call, the vibrations. If you do not have he proper are so strong that it controls. Of understanding of Shri Ganesha and if course there are people who abandon your Shri Ganesha is in a jeopardy, I don't know what can happen to you! completely their innocence and just think no end of themselves. Just These days you see so many horrible forget about them. But normally,

 12 January-February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze diseases are coming, because they like people to talk of divorce from the very first day. But if there is really a problem, Alright in Sahaja Yoga are not sanctified. Their relationships are not sanctified. we have allowed divorce. Not Every relationship has to be Catholic Church. They don't allow sanctified with your innocence. Like you have a sister, you have mother, you have a brother, you have father. You have all the relationships which divorce. So men have all kinds of relationships and women have all kinds of relationships That's not there. Instead of doing all kinds of are so good, so beautiful and sanctified because there is the should be very innocent happening. non-sense you have divorce. But it relationship of innocence. If you are divorcing a person because You love your father out of your innocence is challenged, its innocence and you love your daughter alright. There I agree with you, you out of innocence, you love your should have. So preserve your mother out of innocence. Why should innocence. In these modern times it is very important to preserve your you love? For some sort of a overpowering, then its cunning. Its innocence that Shri Ganesha should just love for love's sake. That's be awakened within you and also in other people. That is going to save possible if you are innocent. So now this world. Nothing else but the I am happy. Tomorrow you are all innocence, that you have is going to going to get married and these people save the world. who are getting married should Whatever you may know, whatever you may say, whatever you may write, please see that you are not hurting the innocence within understand that it's a sanctified marriage. So very important. Its not like any other marriage. This marriage is taking place in my presence. So be you. Its not necessary to live a life careful. If you do not want to marry, alright, finish it. You are given a of immorality, this that. What is needed is your innocence. Innocence chance to know that person or itself gives your moral strength, understand. But afterwards if you try moral understanding. You don't have to be funny then its going to be very to read books; you don't have to go difficult for you and for me. I may to any guru for that. Innocence will give up having marriages. So I don't guide you and tell you that this is

 January -February 2001 13 The Divine Cool Breeze I did not give any lecture to the girls, what it is, Sahaja. This is what you have to have. You all have got I think it is more responsibility of realization. This is very big thing that the men to make their marriage has happened to you people. I successful. Men have to understand always want you to worship Shri Ganesha within you. Shri Ganesha is your innocence. It is the spirit. When you want to know your spirit, should be given to marriage. The way it is Shri Ganesha. You become one that marriage is a very important part of their life. At due time respect you care for your wife from the very beginning helps you a lot. From the with Shri Ganesha. It is within you and it is absolutely very first day be careful and not to possible for all of you to be completely enlightened by the power of Shri Ganesha. I am very happy bringing, own ideas. Try to that you have accepted all the understand them and respect them. marriages and all have decided to You must take it up very seriously, marry. But even now if you say no, its not just a joke. Specially in Sahaja better to finish it off. But don't try Yoga you should understand that any tricks. Don't try to be funny marriage is a very important thing by because it is not be going to help which you are a couple which is you in any way to enjoy your sanctified, and they carry the marriage. On the very first day try responsibility of making the Sahaja misunderstand. She comes from an other country. So she has her own up to understand that you have to be very kind, to your partner. Very Yoga very successful. Sahaja Yoga is respectful, very caring, very loving. a great thing because it can transform That's a very important thing which the whole world into a very beautiful people don't understand and take place and you are responsible for that. for granted. So I have heard that because it is Sahaja Marriage so responsibility as a great person who people take it for granted. No. Never is the sort of head of the family. take it for granted. If you want to Yesterday I told you that I don't have real joy then have innocent believe in divorce. I expect you to be love within yourself and enjoy you very good husbands who will give all As men you should understand your life. love, all affection and all care to their wives. In Sahaja Yoga men and May God Bless you. Thank you. women are absolutely equal, may

 14 January-February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze not be similar but absolutely equal Yoga. She is coming from another family, another country, another atmosphere. So try to make her understand and make her adjustable. and they are complimentary to each other. You should not think that your life is the most important and that your wife is something negligible. I So don't try to find faults with her have seen most of the marriages in but make her feel comfortable and Sahaja Yoga are successful and they happy that she can grow in Shaja have nice children also. Marriages Yoga very well. And your children only fail when there is play of ego. must respect, the mother absolutely. As you respect, your children should also respect their mother. I assure you, you are going to have a very nice time That is more with men than in women and that can ruin your life, life of your wife and chidren. Women are sensible but they can if you are sensible about your tolerate up to a point. So we should marriage. There is no force in Sahaja see how much wisdom you should Yoga, you have decided to marry in have to make a good family. That is Sahaja Yoga. So the marriage has what we need. In good families only taken place. I have not told anything we will have good children and to ladies becausee they are so universal Sahaja Yoga. So please do sensible; so anxious and looking for not have expectations about your the future. I think always men should self but about your wife, what she try to understand the responsibility of wants, what her desires are, what marriage then women. Innately the her needs are. You must look after women understand that it is important that side, as your responsibility. You are not marrying for marriage sake but you have responsibility. At least 95% Sahaja Yoga marriages are that their married life should be successful, but I have found sometimes that men have taken them for granted. It should not be such. For successful and very beautiful she does everything for you with love and affection. It must be appreciated. children are born to Sahaja Yogis. who are sensible but if you have any You should appreciate. This is the problem you must tell me. only way you can show your love to Sahaja Yoga is one big global family. So you have also the responsibility to the whole organization of Sahaja her. You know, in Sahaja Yoga we cont'd on page 28

 The Divine Cool Breeze 15 January-February 2001 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA CABELLA, 20-08-2000 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today, we are here to worship Shri self-realization! It is to know God Krishna within us. As you know that you all have been seeking, before coming to Sahaja Yoga. You went to different places, read lots of books and also some of you were lost. And in that seeking, perhaps you did not or the Goddess. That is the purpose of self realization. But after getting self realization what should happen to you? Many of you have lost interest in nonsensical things like drugs and all those things. You have lost interest in reading useless books. know that you were seeking. What you were seeking was to know You have lost interest in other habits yourself. In all religions it is said *Know Thyself, It is a common enough, that's not enough. That thing, all of them have said. This is could happen in any way. What has one point which is absolutely there, to happen by knowing God is that, in every religion, "Know Thyself". why does God wants you to know Because without knowing yourself him? Because He wants to see his like drinking and all that. That's not you will not know God. You will not reflection in you He wants to see know spirituality. His reflection. That's why He has created you So the first step was to know yourself and for that people did all kinds of and He wants to see his reflection in tricks with you, they taught you in you. Same with the Goddess. She the different ways and tried to has given you self-realization, actually loot you and cheat you. All because She wants to see her those things have happened and reflection in you. So you have to finished. So when you come to prepare yourself for that reflection, Sahaja Yoga and get your self which is so much purer, beautiful, realization, what is the purpose of loving, compassionate and, above

 16 January - February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze forces which acted upon him. In his all, full of wisdom. So this is the point, one has to reach, where you playfulness only He has done it. In understand that you have to have his childhood he has done it. How wisdom. If you are lacking in mature he was as a child you can wisdom then your are not a see that he killed Putna and there self-realized person. are two horrible Rakshas also. He killed them. At the same time he was At the level of Shri Krishna you see, He wants you to become part and playing with the Gopis and teasing parcel of the Virata or the them, troubling them, making fun of Viratangana. That you should become them, Why? Because he wanted part and parcel of the virata, not because you are realized souls now, them to be playful and all kinds of celebrations here in. Once a big rain came and he lifted a complete big so you go about thinking; you are perfectly alright, you don't have to mountain on his finger tip. These o people should have understood that do anything about it. What do you do beyond this is the point; that after it is not possible. It is a miracle, but self-realization you have to see the He was just standing there with one reflection that should be within you finger at the mountain. In a very from the lives of these people like simple unassuming manner he was doing all that to protect all the boys Shri Krishna. who were playing there. Then he Shri Krishna was first born in a went and killed Kalia, the one who very difficult situation as you know and he was carried from there, to go was a very big snake, in the water. In the water, this horrible fellow was to where he was brought up by creating venom by which many "Yashoda'. There He started his people were killed. It took him no playfulness. So you have to be time and he jumped into the waters playful. You have to create fun of Yamuna, from where he rescued, and joy. He didn't say that you sit in a way, all the people by killing or down like a old sage, somewhere in hitting or you can say that winning the Himalayas but you mix up with over this Kalia. children, you talk to then, you play But the wife of this big serpant with them. Have fun At the same time He was destroying all the negative asked him that please forgive him and

 January - February 2001 17 The Divine Cool Breeze should have a very spontaneous he forgave. All these things show that a child of 6-7 years doing all decision, instant decision. What I these great things without feeling find, the style is very different. They will go from shop to shop, then make what he was doing! We can say that the list of it, make all without even thinking about it. But measurements, then go home and he achieved it because he was aware say that we will decide it tomorrow. that He was Shri Krishna. That's not the way a Sahaja Yogi So first thing you have to be behaves. A Sahaja Yogi has to decide aware that you are self-realized everything absolutely spontaneously, people. You are not ordinary people, at that moment. You should be like to behave in an ordinary way. You are this. Now Somebody is getting special people, made specially to drowned. So the first impulse should reflect the qualities of God Almighty. be that you have to save, and how Its not expected that you go and kill do you save? You jump in the water, Kalia but the situation is such today because you are protected. Nothing that you are all the time protected. can happen to you. So just jump in No one can harm you, no ne can the water and save the person. kill you and you are being looked Minimum of minimum this should after because you are Sahaja Yogis. be your attitude, this should be your temperament that you take very Now what should be the attitude spontaneous decision. All these of a Sahaja Yogi towards taking of things change, and all kinds of decisions, one should understand. It decision making and having a big should be a spontaneous decision. conference for decision and all that You do not have to tally with this, is not with you. In day to day life go there and find out, immediately have to be like that. Also in also you and spontaneously, like Shri Krishna every political life, economic life or who jumped inside the river. So in any other life you have to lead you the same way you should have a have to be very spontaneous. very spontaneous decision for become How anything. Now you want to buy, say do you spontaneous? What quality I have got, what is the weapon you have got? a carpet. Alright, you go in the shop and you immediately know which is You have to know what decision to the one. In every walk of life you

 January - February 2001 18 The Divine Cool Breeze take. Do you know you have got who was with me, said Ha!, what a vibrations, you have the feel of the place Mother! You cannot buy it. know what vibrations. You vibrations are. You know what So I told the mayor I am buying it, vibrations tell you and convey and When? Today, Now. He was amazed. communicate you. They speak to I said you tell me how can I buy? He said very easy in this Italy, you you. So through your vibrations you have to buy, like this, that you to pay 1/3 of the price. Alright, and then should know in a second what should you do. For example now somebody told me that Mother when I come you can оссиру. If you find something wrong with the place you to Cabella I feel tremendous vibrations. It's a fact. But how many can give it up, but then you will not of you feel that way. Because your get back your money. But if the other fellow who is selling you says sensitivity is not yet developed. You have to be sensitive about your no then he has to pay double the money you have to pay. I said very vibrations. You should know, looking at anyone, sitting next of anyone. good bargain. I am buying. I have Even shaking hands with anyone you told you I am buying. I am buying. should know what sort of vibrations And Everybody was surprised what that person has. This kind of Mother was doing? So what decided, sensitivity, if you develop, then you was the Vibrations. Vibrations of the will definitely take very spontaneous place. Just decided and I said I am decisions. You know, I am very good buying'. That way they took me to seven castles I think ! I said no. at it, I bought this Cabella in five minutes. Really five minutes. When Outside only I could say No. They were surprised that I didn't even go inside. I said ask them what was I came here, they said you cannot go up because you have a big car. here? They said nunnery. I said, So the mayor said alright come see. Now you should develop that along. I will take you in my car. So I kind of a spontaneous decision. went with him on the car andI Then you will be amazed how in such found, it was all dilapidated, no doubt. It was all absolutely in a a short time you can really achieve shamble and looked like a ghostly such a great thing! But it does not mean that you all should do that way. place. No doubt, And everybody

 19 January- February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze First you should have that sensitivity such a nice person, and this will of vibrations.If you have that happen and that will happen. I said alright, you show me his photograph. sensitivity of vibrations, then I would I said I am sorry I cannot meet him. say, you are now mature in Sahaja Yoga. So the maturity has to be They cannot understand. Such a brought in. You cannot just say, now alright, I have got self realization. I great man, will be a minister tomorrow, I don't want to meet him. And you find just the next day a big can do this. First you tally your sense of sensitivity. So now how do you report about him in the newspaper know? For example you take a that he is a very bad man. So you must tally your experience and your spontaneous decision to find that you have got nothing, its all nonsense. understanding of what you have Possible. But you can see for yourself decided spontaneously. But still I that your decisions, if spontaneous, would say keep to spontaneous decisions. Don't think about it. How if they fail, if they are wrong, if there are some mistakes that will make you suffer. Whether economically, it should work out, what should we do? politically, in every way. Then your whole values system will be judged It has a very farfatched influence on your mind also that you see that well. How far you have gone very you know what is right and what is into Sahaja Yoga? How far you have wrong. I don't know how many of achieved your self-realization and you have seen the house I have built. where are you. This is what is the way to test yourself. You should not be afraid of failures and not get was that he was extremely creative. The another side of Shri Krishna enamoured by success, because you In his childhood he did all things, are self- realized souls. Of course if these pranks and when He became a you are sensitive, immediately you will know what it is. Of course I won't say that you should have the same as I have but you should try to. grown up person, He became the king of Dwarika, of that area and He used to dress up like a king also. After all He was a king. When He was a child, He used to wear a small little piece Now I have seen some people who of feather from the peacock but praise some man that Mother he is when He became the king, He was so good, you must meet him, he is

 20 January - February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze know what a solace, what a blessing wearing all the things and He used you receive! So now you have got to sit on a throne and talk to people in that manner. All that greatness was there, and he was extremely creative. your self realization. You got it very easily, I must say. They all say that it is the Instant Nirvana. He built a very very beautiful castle, or you can say a palace, in Dwarika out of gold. Can you believe it? Shri Sahaja Yoga is Instant Nirvana, its true. But whatever you get so Krishna did it and it was all then easily and instantly, you don't covered with water. understand the value of that. You Now the intellectuals in India, all always say for India that they got trained by Western people, I think, the freedom so easily. They did not said that its not possible. There is get it that easily that they don't know the value of it. But its true if you get anything free and without any special effort then you don't value nothing in the water and he never built his palace there. Its all a story. Just like a myth. But some people believed it, you don't understand. in it and, they went down and found that there was a big palace. There You think it is the matter of right. was gold, little bit left, but not all of it was there. They were amazed such a huge big palace he had made. have suffered to get self-realization? Under the water it had gone, but it But do you know how much people They used to go on Himalayas, used to stand on their legs, sometimes on was there. Like this all these their heads for months together, and incarnations who came were they didn't get their self-realization extremely creative. If you are not I have heard of some people who creative what's the use of self- lived in a room for twenty eight years realization? What is the greatest to get self-realization. Why they lived like that because they thought that by keeping away from other people or the bad atmosphere, everything, they might get realization. They never got creative thing you can do very easily is to make others Sahaja Yogis. The easiest and most joy giving thing is to make others Sahaja Yogis and give them the blessings of the Divine which they have been seeking from it. So one must understand though the ages. By giving them you don't you have got it so easily, it is

 January - February 2001 21 The Divine Cool Breeze something so precious, so great. Its "I like other's children, not mine. not very easy to get self-realization. Just imagine! How can you be doing You read about the people who are that? How can you say such a thing, self realized. Perhaps they didn't even you don't like your own children! know how they got it. They didn't First of for all of you all I would say that you should never say, I like or know even about the Kundalini, but I don't like'. These are Anti- they got it. Through their Guru, may Mantras. I like this, this is very be through their efforts. Buddha, common. Who are you? I don't like how much he had to suffer till he this carpet, I don't like that silver got his realization! Think of it. How thing. Who are you? Can you make he got his realization. I mean you one like that? To take a decision like shudder to see his life, ultimately he that also shows, they think it is very died of hunger and poverty. But nothing happened to you. You have got it without difficulties, in a very spontaneous, its not. It has come from your conditionings that you sweet manner, all of you. Nothing, think I have a right to say I don't you don't have to pay anything for like, I don't want. But who are you? it. But that does not mean you If you are the spirit, you will never use these words because it might should not value it. Like a seed, hurt somebody. which is put in the mother earth spontaneously sprouts and gives a life to the primule which grows into a shrub and then into a tree. But you You will never say something that will hurt others. You will never do anything that will be dangerous for others. But always say something that is extremely loving and have to put water in it and have to have the care of a gardener or you someone. In your case you are the compassionate and peace giving. You one who has to do all that. will emit joy for others. There is the First of all you have to put nourishment of compassion and love. Have you got that compassion and love? Do you love people? Like power of spirit that it gives joy to others. If you are a glummed person then you are not a self-realized. You should be able to give joy today somebody told me and I was shocked that "I don't like children." I and love and compassion and it should happen absolutely asked "you don't like children"? No,

 22 January-February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze generous. Extremely generous. It never tries to save something or spontaneously. There is a story about a saint in India in Maharashtra. So they all used to take water in a cheat people or steal something. It is out of question. Because there is container, call it as 'Kavad' and would take it all the way to Gujrat no greed left in him. There is no to a temple of Shri Krishna. That greed at all and that is why such a was regarded as a great surrendering person who is a realized soul, cannot to Shri Krishna. So that saint also be guilty. Has to be extremely carried the water in the container generous. I have seen many people like that who have been extremely called Kavad'. All the way he generous and who have been very understanding about the problems of carried it, from his village in Maharashtra and when he reached the others. While a Sahaja Yogi who has temple at the foot hill of that temple, he saw a donkey very thirsty, dying his own problems is not a Sahaja out of thirst. So he gave that water to Yogi at all. You are there to solve that donkey. Everybody said, the problems of others and not to imagine, you have brought this water solve his own problems and go about from miles together, for days together talking about, this is the problem to be poured on the deity here and have. Now this is the new word that has developed in modern times. We have never used this word 'problem' now you have given it to this donkey! He said you don't know before, I tell you. Only for geometry we used this word 'problem'. But God has come all the way down here to take the water. See the attitude of now it has started. They say there that person! So for a self-realized person the compassion should be there is no problem'. They are all in like this, of very generous nature. a problem. Actually they are If you are not generous, if you are problems I think. miserely, always worried about your money and saving of it then firstly, understand that you should not give you are not a matured Sahaja Yogi. your problems to others. You should So what you have to do is to You are not. Apart from that, this not ask for anything. Please do this kind of money will never give you for me. Please do that for me. Its very any happiness. Misereliness is against surprising that people try to take the spirit. Spirit is extremely

 January - February 2001 23 The Divine Cool Breeze can sleep anywhere. You can have advantage of others. Now some food. You need not have food people like to visit some country; so they will ask me, please call me, I Whatever type of food, you get, its alright. Because you are so satisfied. would like to come to your country and a generous Sahaja Yogi will say On the contrary you like to cook for alright "Come along". Now who is others. You give them food. failing here is a person who asked. Whatever possible you try to do as You should not ask for anything long as you can work it out, you do whatsoever because you are it. But there are people who have complete. Not that you are only their own problems. They are not satisfied but complete. What can Sahaja Yogis. How can the spirit anybody give you? All desires just have problems. How can that have. disapper when you are in complete So just understand that you are now shape. Like today, when I was coming the Spirit, and beyond everything. I saw lots of stars had come out. I So your creativity also goes to other said, as soon as the moon will come dimensions. they will all disappear. In the same Of course you start giving way, when you are complete, you do not expect anybody to do realization to other people. You create anything for you. On the contrary art. You know Baba Mama he was very bad at literature and he didn't know any language. He was very you want to find out what you can do for others. You become the others in a way that whatever is the good at Mathematics. Because my problem of others you take it upon your head. You jump into it. mother was a mathematician. But language he did not. I used to write his essays. He was so bad. But after Its a very very interesting realization he wrote such beautiful growth that should come in you. poems, unbelievable. Nobody could It should happen to all of you believe that this Baba could do that. because you have got self- realization. You develop a kind of language. I used to write his essays Because he did not know any a personality which only lives for as I told you earlier. So amazingly, others, not for oneself. You will be from where he started writing Urdu amazed, you can live anywhere, you poetry, Marathi poetry, Hindi poetry and one of my brothers asked him,

 January - February 2001 24 The Divine Cool Breeze How do you get this urdu poetry. Somehow you are above all that and He said "Shri Mataji has, 'She tells you are there and you just don't me. Everything he used to say understand why human beings "Mataji tells me." behave like that. Why their So the creativity with in you is behaviour is like that. Even when just flowers and you are amazed at they came to Sahaja Yoga they have yourself, How, this creativity has great desire to be leaders or they come? Now imagine for a person who have great desire to be a great organiser of Sahaja Yoga, very well known in Sahaja Yoga. They want is a mathematician suddenly becomes a poet. Its an impossible situation and to have an international fame as a you have these capacities. You all have this capacity that you can great Sahaja Yogi. But they do not think what creativity I have shown. become very creative and you have to become creative in every way. I am very creative, I must say. I am all the What have I created. All these things are so common in human beings that time working out something, which they always want others to praise comes out very well and also I don't them, to have a big exposure. Of What? If you are a spirit, everybody have that interest as normally people have that it should be praised by knows. What is there to expose, what is there to show off, what is there to everyone or it should be sort of in come forward. Even if you are at the newspapers. No interest in that. the back, you know there is light. You create for creation. For the sake So you have to get out of your of creation you create. And you just darkness because you are the light enjoy that creation and you become and you spread light. Instead of that very adaptive or you become so if you are in the darkness what light congenial with all the things people can you spread. So your spirit cannot say, talk or act with them. have problems. They will be offensive, they will It has no fear. But above all it be praising you. And all that. You don't know, that they are praising you. and that is the sign of you, being a has wisdom, tremendous wisdom Even sometimes when you say "Shri very higher personality. As I told you this is evolution and when you are Mataji ki Jai" I also say and then I forget they are talking about me. transformed, you are evolved above.

 The Divine Cool Breeze January - February 2001 25 be hit with the Bible and she got such Very different nature you become a fright that I was laughing. I was saying, look at the stupidity, this lady has came to hit me with the Bible. mean I can understand stone or anything else but Bible will never hit me. All these things have happened in your presence, and you know about and you stand up. The Sahaja Yogis are like other people. What is the use of taking to Sahaja Yoga. Who I was Christ. He was the son of a carpenter. He never got education. But what did he do. He was the spirit. He reflected god within him and that's why he got himself crucified them. There are negative forces that also. In Sahaja Yoga you do not have try to harm you. They will harm you badly, they will harm you mentally. They might harm you emotionally. There are no such testing things But when you are above this. Then for you. But your value system is to no one harms you. At least you never be checked. You must find out how feel the harm. You are not bothered to get crucified. are you working about the harm. But what have you introspection. Should ask yourself. created. Today I had some ladies and Now, "Mr Sahaja Yogi, How are some men and all for divorce. After you?" Are you indulging into all these getting married into Sahaja Yoga, they things that these people who are not want to have divorce. Can you self-realized are doing. Just try to imagine? I was shocked and they had find out. Because the growth of funny ideas that my husband is like Sahaja Yoga is shown in your my brother. I said, really. All kinds behaviour, in your styles, on your of stupid ideas coming into their face. There are no wrinkles on the heads. I mean there is no light of spirit person like this. He has no worry. in them. If you have the light of spirit You don't worry then how will you then your understanding is very out through get wrinkles. different. You don't worry about yourself. You are only worried about Such a person doesn't get upset with anyone. I mean, on the contrary others and you try to find out he laughs at things. Once in a church, solutions for them. You try to help them. It is very easy for you. What in Switzerland, one lady come to hit me with the Bible and I started IS so easy for the light? To burn. laughing I said what a thing I am, to Once it is enlightened it is burning.

 26 January- February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze at the door said, No, you cann't Its difficult for it to go out of the meet Him. He said Alright, you just light. But human beings, I cannot understand even after realization, go and tell him that Sudama has after growing for years together come. He was sitting on the throne, thing are so stupid, that they don't discussing something. He said, realize the value of their self- Sudama has come! He Rushed out realization. It is something the spirit, and went to the door and hugged you can't kill it. It can't blow off. him again and again and He said This light will go off. But the light "Why are you standing here?" He of spirit will never go off. What is took him and put him on the throne the oil that keeps it. It is your that He was supposed to sit and he compassion, is love, care of others. told his wife, "please come and wash I know there are people who are his feet." And then they brought for him clothes and all that and gave him very dominating, may troublesome, but care for them. You be a bath. He made him sleep on his know that they are not like you, they bed. See the love of Shri Krishna. are not complete. They have He had very dirty feet, all were problems. So care for them. But cracked. He tried to put on them instead of that you start thinking that why should I care for him. How does he could be alright. He tried to do some sort of a medicine by which he care for me or something. Then whatever was possible to cure those you are finished. So this kind of a crackes and he asked him to sleep reflection or I should say, a reaction is not that of spirit. A spiritual fan on his bed. And asked the ladies to him, person's reactions are very very different. In the life of Shri Krishna, compassion of Shri Krishna which so that he can sleep. See the he had a friend who was very poor shows so beautifully. Are we that and he wanted to meet Shri Krishna compassionate. There was no need and the wife of the friend gave him for Him to do that, no drama, some rice. nothing but His heart took a As you must take something for spontaneous decision. When He your friend. He was little-shy and heard, Sudama is there, he rushed there. He felt so happy that my old when he went to Shri Krishna, Shri friend has come. Then when he went Krishna was in his palace and people

 January - February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze 27 to Hasthinapur, there Duryodhan, Yogi, it does not mean that you are the Kaurava's eldest son came and higher than others. But you are asked him "Why don't you come different. You are above them. You and stay in my palace?" He said have no superiority. That's why you Alright I will come and stay but I are different. You are so humble, will go and have food with Vidur. that's why you are different. Vidur was the son of a maid. He You are so joyous, you are so went and had his food with Vidur. Vidur being a poor man. I don't peaceful that's why you are different. know, what food he must have There are so many things I can tell you from the life of Shri Krishna, given him. While Duryodhan would have given him sumptuous food. So showing he was called Yogeshwara. for such people the taste, the level He was the lord of Yoga. It is because of food does not matter. It was the He was Virata but He showed His respect of Vidur, who was a realized form only to Arjuna and on one else. soul. Respecting other Sahaja Yogis. Because nobody was like Arjuna. If a Sahaja Yogi respects somebody Arjuna also got a fright when he saw who is a governor, I cann't it. So he lived like Shri Krishna, understand. The spirit is above like a cow-boy. He was living in Gokul and He never showed off his everything and does not respect a Sahaja Yogi if there is something powers. His powers were within wrong with him. He should himself which were expressing understand that a spiritual person is Spontaneously. This power has higher than all these people who wisdom and discretion, complete have these all kinds of big names discretion. If he does not have, then behind them. And that love is shown this is not divine power, this is some in everybody's life. All the saints, satanic power. Because somebody is all the incarnations, everyone had nice to you if you are nice to that that love, which was above person, nothing more, Mostly we had everything. Without expecting in India people who are called as Avdhutas. They were the realized anything. Not doing it just to expect something. It is a kind of a souls who had gone away from the personality which really reflects societies from the multitudes and God's love. That reflection should gone and lived in some small little come from you. You are a Sahaja

 28 January - February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze place, or some cave or some place, be literature, may be writing, hidden from others. Because they whatever it is, you have to create thought nobody is going to understand them so what's the use Sahaja Yogis. That is the main and above all you have to create creation you have to achieve. That's of talking to them. the main thing you have to have is They were singled out, one creating Sahaja Yogis all over. I am person here and one person there. What could they do? They were not there, I can go to places, can have programmes, do everything but you have to show with your own example like you, so many of Sahaja Yogis together. You have so many friends and so many others with you. They they have achieved that state. You that this is something great. How were lonely people and they hid themselves from the society. They will be the ones who will really should also achieve that state. So you would not meet people. Because if inspire them, who will really make them follow you and take to a life they tried anything, they would be crucified. But not you people of a Sahaja Yogi. Actually you are Mahayogis if you become complete. because you have society. You have a beautiful enlightened society of And you have to become. Nothing is very good friends, of very good spiritual people. With all this if you more important them to become a Mahayogi by which your spirit gives cann't create, what should I say. You joy, peace and blessings to every one. have to create something, may be May God bless you. art, may music, may be poetry, may cont'd from page 14. not married to an ordinary girl but don't allow to go along with other men. It is not allowed at all, in no way. I think you are all sensible and And you pay all the respect to her. will understand your responsibility, That's how you will glorify Sahaja of marrying a Sahaja Yogini. You are Yoga. you are marrying a Sahaja Yogini. May God Bless You.

 The Divine Cool Breeze January - February 2001 29 GUDI PADAWA PUJA Noida Bhawan, 05-04-2000 Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi In India Nava Ratri falls twice in a force was manifested in the centre. year. Once it is in the month of Chaitra In the form of Durga and her other as it is today. On this day Devi is forms-manifested in Heart Chakra. worshiped as Shail Putri, means the She is present there. If some one hurts daughter of Himalaya. Devi has many you, confuses or disturbs you then this other names also but first of all She power will protect you and destroy incarnated as Shail Putri in the cold your enemy. When Kundalini rises of Himalayas. She incarnated and and reaches the Heart Chakra then it whatever She was to do. She started manifests and becomes more there. Further story is known to you. powerful and effective because Kundalini is Jagdamba. In Sahaja Daksha did not invite Lord Shiva in the Havana that he performed and Yoga when Kundalini is awakened it settles in heart chakra. It protects you Shail Putri was the consort of Lord Shiva. She is called Sati because she and takes care of you nicely. No one entered the Holy fire of Havana and could harm you at all, if you keep oblated herself. But by then Lord the Mother in your heart. The power Shiva reached there. He lifted her of the Mother always protects the burnt up body from the fire. Burnt children. Whenever there is some pieces of the body of Shail Putri fell danger, it is mentioned in medical at many places. All these places are terminology that the sternum bone considered to be Shakti Pithas, the starts shaking and antibodies that are places of worship, as there is in present all around get alarmed. In Vindhyachala and many other places. Sahaja language these antibodies are Her power moves there and it is said called Ganas. They get ready to fight that it Sanctifies everything. Her it out. She is the empress of these Seventh power is considered to be the Ganas. They follow her commands Power of Destruction. Shakti as there is no difference between Shri manifested itself on the right side as Ganesha and Devi. Both are so Savitri and Gayitri but the destroying identified. Ganesha is Her Son and

 30 January - February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze She is His Mother. In Sahaja Yoga powers otherwise the work of she protects all those who have awakening the Kundalini would not have been possible in this extreme themselves. She protects them just Kaliyuga. So Devi had to assume the form of Maha Maya because if the negative forces recognised that she is in awakened Shri Ganesha like her own children at every step. She supports them because she is the Mother and you are the Ganesha. But Adishakti then they will be after Her life. Prior to that she never incarnated the Ganesha within you should be as Mahamaya. She always incarnated fully awakened and pure. If there is in her original and powerful form. In obstruction in this chakra, it should be removed. those days no one could think of killing the Devi. That was altogether Thus she performs many duties. But first of all she incarnated as Shail born in the lap of Himalayas and Putri. Before that when Adi Shakti married to the most powerful Deity- different time. Moreover she was came on this Earth, She incarnated as Lord Shiva. So, many a times people a cow. Gokul, the area of parama are confused about the Navratris. chaitanya was created. Earlier, Adi Shakti remained there as cow. Also regarding Devi, they say that she Whatever is created, its reflection is Mahakali, Maha Saraswati and all. But they are part and parcel of Adishakti. They manifested at a comes in us, as Shiva is the reflection of Sada Shiva. Devi manifested herself as Shail Putri. But in the proper time. The way goddess Shakambhari manifested in Meerut kingdom of Parama Chaitanya Adi District. She increases prodctivity of crops. When I was in Meerut I also used to produce vegetables. Such big Shakti incarnated in the form of a cow. That is the reason we do not kill cows. She is the mother. Lot of difference is there in Indian and size of brinzals, tomatoes and foreign cows. I remember, my grand daughter used to say, "Nani why the cucumbers that one could not beleive! This is the power of Goddess Shakambhari. Goddess has different colour of buffaloes here in the West is white. Treta and Dwaper Yuga were forms and names and sometimes not the time for Adishakti to people are confused about them. But incarnate. She was to come in she manifests herself according to the Kaliyuga with all the Devis and need of the particular area. Durga and

 The Divine Cool Breeze 31 January February 2001 Chamunda and many others are her should children take birth where there different forms. The way different is no motherhood? deities manifest themselves to do certain thing, similarly the Goddess About India, I think, that men should love and respect the women. Maybe manifests herself as their power after sometime India is considered to Shakti. Without 'the Shakti no deity could work out things, whether it is be the ultiamte guide for spiritualism. incarnation of Rama, Krishna, Jesus But the condition of women in India, Christ or anyone else. All of them had particularly in Northern part of it is a Goddess as their power (Shakti). very miserable. Respect of women is That is the reason so much out of question there. Quite frequently they are beaten up. And then the importance and respect is given to dowry system is there to torture the mother in our country. Indians are women. Men always try to show down the women and prove himself worshippers of Shakti, irrespective of all the difference and problems. They superior which he actually is not. The are the worshippers of Shakti. countries, where women are insulted, Those who follow Vishnu or Shiva perish and same is the case of the are also worshippers of Shakti country where no respect is given to COLuntry because Shakti is the mother and the mother. So women are not to be behaved like that. But at the same mother belongs to all. Mother is a very significant institution in our time men should not run after the country. So we should always respect women. Men and women are no the mother. The women in our doubt equal but they are not similar. But I have seen in north India. There is absolutely no respect of women and they are tortured. They are harassed country are not so much spoiled. They know the qualities that earn respect for the mother and help produce the nice children. Those ladies who have in every way. We are trying to change no respect for motherhood, do not get the condition of women in India. Lot children. It is the case in Germany, of work needs to be done in that America and some other European direction. If the people of this country countries. The women there do not develop creativity in them, our Bharat have motherly love in them. Of Bhumi will flourish and become they understanding this factor now. Why have started Shasya Shyamalam. No new legislations are needed for this. With course

 January - February 2001 32 The Divine Cool Breeze in ourselves we have to realise that develop your powers then you will understand it immediately. About women are the shaktis. I am not talking of the spoiled ladies. every human being you will come to Otherwise they are like Devis and it know on your vibrations. At once we is the duty of everyman to respect shall know because our system has them, protect them and help them in become sensitive now. But for that every way. But generally men meditation is important. There is dominate the women. If men have no other way. Big pujas and bhajans superior brains, the women have loving hearts. So she should be meditate and introspect. Why am I understood and respected, as long as doing it? What is the purpose. We she behaves like Shakti. Spoiled should be ourselves and not others. women could not be respected. So There will be no use of that. You have women must have divine qualities. to correct yourself. If you want to have no significance. We should correct others then you have to watch Such women could be denounced but yourself. What am I doing? Why am I thinking like that? Why such things come in my brain? You have to watch yourself and look at others with love. sometimes it is seen that dominating women are worshiped and nice ladies are harassed. Sahaja Yogis have to become wonderful consorts. Between themselves they should have love and understanding, only then Sahaja Yoga will grow. Our heart should be full of love for others. You have to see that I love and forgive others. Many forms of the Devi are described So there are two things, one is in our scriptures. There is absolutely meditation and the other one is no error in it. But to understand its introspection. These are the two depth, one has to grow deep in Sahaja methods of human growth. In Yoga. On vibrations you will achieve meditation chaitanya makes you the power of descrimination. You will grow and by introspection you see that all the forms of the the Devi remove all your negativities. have different vibrations. This is very Suppose a river is flowing and many subtle quality. The more you go stones are there to obsruct the flow deeper in Sahaja Yoga the more you of the water. If the stones are will understand it. If you are removed, the flow will be normal. established yourself in meditation and Similarly Kundalini will flow with

 January-February 2001 33 The Divine Cool Breeze state comes one gets nourished like a small child. All these powers help great speed once the chakras are clear. You will enjoy this change. I know you people meditate regularly but you have to introspect also. You have to him every moment. The Divine power provides all the necessities think about it also. There is no need to such a person and that is the to criticise. You have to watch reason we worship the Shakti more yourself as a witness and see, 'do I than any other incarnation. love others?' Am I pure? Have I This Divine force makes us recognize the incarnation. This power is your controlled my ego? If you see all this then all these negativities will run Guru, your Mother and your Guide. There is no need to follow any other away from you, the way a thief runs away if the master is awake, These power. Once you have accepted this negativities will run away, if you start introspecting. This clearance, this Divine force it will make you purity is essential. Kundalini is doing understand all other incarnations. Had you not accepted me, you would not have reached any where. Christ its work. She will help you, but all these negativities will run away if you said that I shall send you the just keep your attention there. Comforter. He said Holy Ghost would come. If he could do the work Some people are power oriented. Even after getting the power they do then why should He has said this? not stop. There is no end to this race. Once you realise that it is foolishness Mohammed Sahib also said the same thing because he said that the time has to run after these things, then it will be alright. But people keep running, running and running. They have no time to enjoy whatever is available. When Sahaja state comes, all the not yet come to take the people to absolute truth. But he told that such a state is likely to come. A powerful incarnation will be there on the earth. You only keep you attention pure and Divine powers will be at your remember the almighty. But he did disposal. They will take care of you, not tell about the collective guide you and bless you. So long as consciousness. You are blessed with it, and now you have to grow in it. you keep on saying that I have to You have to meditate and introspect and you will achieve the third dimension that is you will be able to do this work, I shall do like that and so on, then you have not yet achieved that Sahaja state. When Sahaja

 January - February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze 34 see the beauty and goodness of is the daughter of Hiamalaya which others. Over looking the negativities is the highest mountain. From there of the people your attention will go one could view the whole world. So let Her attention fall on all the human to their virtues and you will adopt them. You cannot imagine how much beings. Shail Putri looks at people you enjoy the state of introspection! with curiosity of small children. You will enjoy the beauty that is Shailja is her another name. within you and the beauty of others. According to our scriptures the first incarnation of the Devi was Shail When you start searching the positivity in others then you will be surprised to find that everyone has Putri. It is celebrated everywhere in India. In Bihar they celebrate on Sixth Day. some good points. But they are unable to derive joy out of this goodness. Without having a nose how could one smell the fragrance of a flower? So you should have a heart in you which Right sided people should not chant Gayatri Mantra. They should say the mantra of the left side and left sided people should chant the mantra of could understand that love and right side. This will give them goodness. You should take to that, balance. This is the time to enjoy. It you are capable of enjoying the is very significant. I was also born at fragrance of others. Whether that such a time. Navratri starts after 21st person could enjoy or not. So you have to learn to enjoy others. This is combination. Indians sing many the work of the Shakti. Shakti is the Chaitra songs. Indian singers and giver of joy. When you start enjoying poets could discover joy in Chaitra then you will understand that now I and rendered there feelings in poetry. of March. So it is a tremendous have become Sahaja. So in Sahaja Villagers celebrate in the month of state, attention will not go to the Chaitra. If you listen to their songs, negativity. What is the use? You do not have to go and kill the negative you will wonder how they are full of joy, enthusiasm and love! There is people. That is the job of the Devi. You don't have to do it. To find out abundant joy in the songs of village women. Because of their pure heart they could achieve this joy. They had the joy hidden in different things and enjoy it is inherent in you. the capacity to receive it. Now we Today is the day of Shail Putri. She people have become a little right

 January-February 2001 35 The Divine Cool Breeze we shall meditate and introspect sided. Yet Sahaja state is to be achieved. You could have more joy daily. We shall introspect about ourselves, not about others and lead from this Chaitra Song than what they our lives very sweetly. We should express and behave in a very sweet could have since you are in Sahaja state. With great joy you can listen to these songs. King Vikramaditya manner, so that we do not hurt celebrated the third day of the others. If at all we have to lay Navratri and named it as Akshaya imphasis on some thing that should Tritya (Eternal Third Day). He got his also be done very lovingly. You have calenders start from the Akshaya to think as to how to speak with Tritya Day. Shalivahana kings started others. Its a routine for me. Such and Samvatsara (afrom this very such person is coming, how shall I day. So the new year of both starts talk to him and make him understand? from this very day. Shalivahana When we see this love all around, it of fills our heart. Exchange this love Vikramaditya and defeated them. with others and talk to them sweetly. Shalivahanas are very truthful. To Sahaja Yogis should not be angry with celebrate their victory they started this anyone. Meet people very Shak-Samvat (Hda). First day of new affectionately. You should be pure kingdom the attacked year is Akshaya Tritya. The Hizri of within and this purity of heart should Muslims also falls on this very day. be visible. There should be no anger Persians called it Navroze. All of and hatred. Only then people will them were inspired by the same appreciate you. Now you are all self- power. They have attached big realised and I am telling you, how importance to this day. It is said that your personality should become any new enterprise which is started magnatic. I hope you follow this on this day is a roaring succes. So advice and look within with love, not people start a new enterprises and an auspicious thing on this day because this day is very auspicious. with hatred. You will be able to see your powers and you will become a Satvik (pure) person and Sahaja Yoga will spread all around. Its my vision Its a great pleasure to me that all of that the whole world is transformed and every human being becomes you came here today. We have known about the importance of this day. Sahaja Yogi. Today we have to be determined that My blessing to you all.

 36 January - February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze THE IMPORTANCE OF DEDICATION AND DEVOTION Nirmala Palace, London 6 Aug. 1982 Today I will talk to you about the so stunned. It is beyond you, it's importance of Dedication in Sahaja fantastic, it is too much. It is really Yoga, and the Devotion that one beyond you. should have. Now think of it. "You have got Actually when we are close to realisation." Can you believe it that mountain, we can not see much of it, you can, in your life time you can get and that's why we don't realise the selfrealization? If somebody had told volume that is so close to us, the you this, you would never have greatness that is facing us. This is one believed it, that how can you get your of the illusions that works out, for realisation in this birth? Of course, people who do not realise it mentally you were seeking, because people what they are in for, where are they, were saying you have to seek, also what have they found, what is self- you felt you have to seek, but you realisation, what is its magnitude, how never thought that this will materialize far they have to go, why are they like this, that you will get your chosen, what is their purpose of life, realization. how far they have come up, how far Then after getting realisation, you they can understand?. All these things are beyond the grasp, and one gets could not feel "What it was". As if stunned. One does not know what has you have been dropped into the ocean happened to him when he gọt and you do not know what is the realisation actually. dimension of this ocean, how far you have gone into it, what is it, where That's why, to understand this is only possible if you can understand how to dedicate yourself, how to devote are we, what is our purpose?" To add up to all the mess, we become thoughtless! So you cannot even find out as to rationally what it is. yourself. If you want to analyse anything on the basis of your nationality, you are So the immensity of this experience, the glory of your Mother's coming,

 January-February 2001 37 The Divine Cool Breeze or the precious gift of your self- realization, nothing can be realised through your understanding? Can you understand what has happened? No, you cannot. Because rationality granted. You are harassing yourself by accepting that forgiveness. If you think all the time "O, Mother you a so forgiving, please forgive me". You are already forgiven, as it is. Once you call me Mother, I have forgiven. But re cannot give you the dimensions into what you have fallen now. The what is the advantage? You do not have any advantage out of it. You are a loser. And this point atleast rationally if you understand, then you will understand what is Devotion. rationality is actually broken up. There is no rationality left now anymore to even communicate as to what you have been seeking and where have you landed. So, in Devotion of Sahaja Yoga, one has to realise that the things that are in Sahaja Yoga, that you have seen in Sahaja Yoga, are beyond your mind, first thing. Definitely they are beyond human conception. So on human level you do not discuss them, and So the only method you have got now, or only way is left to you, for a drop which has become an ocean, is to dissolve those in the ocean, so that you feel the ocean at least. And to communicate with other drops in such you do not talk about it. But on the a way that you know the whole collective level you can talk. through all of them. So first is a complete Devotion, it is And when you come to the collective very important. In this incarnation level, then you have to understand that relationship with me is more established, better established, if you only it is so very important, because you have got realization. If you did not have realisation" Alright, establish your' relationship with murmuring souls, alright. Half baked others, in a very collective and people, alright. Little misbehaving, alright. This can be bit homogeneous way. forgiven, that can be forgiven. As I told you, the drop becomes the everybody thinks that Mother is ocean, and the drop has to become forgiving us. But that is not the point. the ocean by dissolving all its drop- ness with other drops. And all the I am forgiving because of my own drops dropping their dropness nature. But 'you' do not take it for become the ocean ultimately.

 38 January-February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze allow them, they can not be there. No So we see that Devotion is double evil person is your enemy, because he cannot be effective if you are edged. One is to each other, and one is to your Mother. spiritually equipped. So, you are your own enemy, is decided. The only way to get rid of that enemy of yours, is In Sahaja Yoga, whatever I see, you can not see. This is proved or not, to you people? Or do you want more that you have to Dedicate. proofs? Now it is proved that Mother sees much beyond us, and whatever Supposing you say that I have faith she sees, happens. So anybody who in Mother, or in God, so you are tries to play tricks with Mother, is holding on to something, is not it? actually playing tricks with himself. And you are discarding something. *Any tricks you try to play with me, But this hold has to be 'very' strong. or you think that Mother is very Rationally at that time when you are forgiving. So she will forgive us, - sinking, will you rationalize whether, 'really' you are torturing yourself, you "Ishould hold the hand of this person are - it is detrimental to you. 11 who is saving, is correct or not." No, your grip will be very strong. It will Many people are there who will say that, 'It is my left Swadhishthana. Some will say, "I was possessed, there be extremely strong and you will grip it with 'full-force, with full faith that somehow or the other save me. was bhoot." Somebody will blame something else. Whatever you are blaming, actually who is asking you the explanation? It is only you asking yourself. You are not facing yourself. And that kind of a feeling should be within us, that "I am a person who is sinking because of myself. And if I am to be saved. I have to be Absolutely 'completely' submerged So the devotion to me means actually facing yourself. You face your self first of all, and see for yourself what in Sahaja Yoga 'Absolutely I have to be one with it. Then only I can be saved." are you doing. Because at this level, where you are realized souls of a higher level, now for a next jump - as I was saying to you- is Devotion. Anything else has be secondary, under the You are your own enemy. No body is your enemy. Your Mother is not, definitely. She is not your enemy, by any chance. And no bhoots are your enemies, in the way, if you do not to

 39 January-February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze circumstances. If it is primary and psychology. She might be insecure, Mother." This is typically somewhere your attention is still on that, then you cannot have this second jump. read in the book-" because of insecurity somebody does that." Actually now we have seen in Sahaja First jump you have already had, you Yoga, that most of the so called unsecured are the 'most' aggressive have got your realizatioin. But from first jump to second jump, you have to work hard. You have come to the second jump. In the second jump you haye to face it up. You should not feel disgusted with yourself, nor dejected people. They play tricks with others, spoil their lives, and enjoy it. They are the greatest sadists ever born. You have seen those people. And that is with yourself, nothing. But treat yourself as a separate entity. how they play tricks with themselves. Now once you understand that you And Dedication is actually turning back to yourself and looking forward towards the Divine personality in you. are not to play tricks with yourself. Why do you want to play tricks with yourself? Why do you want to play Once there is Divine personality in you, there is no problem of Devotion. You will just become one with it, you tricks with yourself? You have to be yourself, that's all. We should not be our own enemies. Are we? start enjoying it. So once you start facing yourself, you will like yourself. You would not feel But this rationality is the worst thing. that plays tricks with you, which disgusted. Because that is your self I deviates you from understanding that am talking about - is glorious, is whatever life you have led so far has beautiful, is "without' any Kalanka nien (blemish) on that, is absolutely been a very material, gross life. You came out of it, you have grown out detached. of it. You have come up. Now, to But first of all your attention has to accept it, that "This detachment is my life. I am a different personality. blossom, to become fragrant, you have to give up rationality. That is a binding. " Detachment is my nourishment. Try to avoid rationality, try to avoid Detach yourself. arguments. Try to avoid giving reasons. Even now I find sometimes Sahaja Yogis give an explanation of One gentleman came to see me in my house. I had a very beautiful lamp,

 40 January-February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze and he liked it. I said, you (can) have you, once you are a master, you play tricks with them. it." He was so amazed, you see. His wife telephone to me, "How could it So many times I have seen. I have said so many things, and then again after be? How could you give away such a nice lamp?" I said, "What is there? sometime, people start talking about it. Within scientific proof or things like that, you have seen that, many a t times it has happened. Am I going to carry it with me when I die? Is it going to go with me? Just see rationally. If he has liked it, let him have it. I have so many lamps in the house, if he takes one how does it Now when I say something I am sure matter?" She said, "But you see I about it, what I say, I never say asked my husband, will you give this lamp like this, if you have, to her? He said, no, I would not. I really. would not, he said. He was very anything but the Truth. I know that I am saying only the truth. But I do not go inside and find out, whether it is truth or not. I don't read a book to honest, he said, I would not. But still find out. I do not ask you. I have faith in myself, 'full faith' in myself. Whatever I say is the truth, I know I cannot understand, why not? So, you know till the last end we are holding on to something 'very' little there. for definite that whatever I say comes out truth. But that is not your case. If this, even a little bit is holding the That is not your case, that whatever saree, you know that, that can holo the whole saree. Even a little bit is you say is the truth. So first is to establish that state, that whatever I say attaching to this saree, the saree can be held back. The whole thing you will be the truth. can hold it, with one little pin. Now how do you do it? The tongue should be such, that whatever you say should be the truth. Ultimately it will come out as truth. And that is why the Dedication should All these small pins that are there the hangs up, are to be denied, to be seen going further. Look at yourself, "Oh that's Mr. Ego, alright. Now let me see how do you go back"- To see all those things. You see, as a play you be there. What Dedication: "Why should I tell should see yourself. And then play lies?" - There is no need to tell lies. tricks with your ego and super ego. Even if I tell lies, it will come truth, Actually they are playing tricks with

 41 The Divine Cool Breeze January-February 2001 (faai); tejas, sharpness of light. That 'tejasvita' is there, sharpness of light. That is the proof of your truth" in my case, so called lies. They are 'never' lies. If I say to somebody, he is a bad man, apparently to you. "Oh You are not afraid of any Prime Mother, he is such a fine man! How can you say such a thing about him? Minister or any Minister, or any king, or anyone. But "This is the fact. This is the thing I know. I am a realized soul, I am the truth." If you say," I am the truth," whatever you will say We had one Mr. Michael like that. "Oh, he is such a loving person, Mother "Somebody said, Mother, are you jealous of him? - upto that extent you know! But when he showed his real teeth, you see, then people will be the truth, no doubt about it. What ever you will do will be the truth. But say, "I am the truth. understood him. So to develop that kind of But for that a real purification is understanding about the truth, first of needed about facing yourself fully, in all you should absolutely fix yourself Dedication means, you are holding on on the truth. And the truth is "That to your Mother, you are holding on you are the instrument of God, that to Sahaja Yoga, you are holding on you have got realization, that you to that truth which you have found have got a special awareness which out- And here you are facing others. people do not have," Stand on that. And proclaim it. You are not to be afraid of it. You have got realization, no doubt. You have felt it. Say it, "I Without that you cannot do it, your source is that. You are standing on the truth. And that is such a power, such a strength. have got realization. Nothing doing, All of them, you see -Christ had that I know I am a realized soul." Firm on power, Mohammad had that power, all these great people had that powers "To say the truth, with full courage with that assertion that people will accept it". And they would even suffer for that, they would not mind. But whatever is the truth has to be said. that. In this expression of truth, you have to be like the light. The light asserts. It not only asserts, but it shows others also that it shines, it shows others, that "I am the light." That, "you walk in my light. And if you don't try to do it, I may burn you." They have that, what you call, that "tejasvita" That is the first point one should know about Dedication That you are

 42 January- February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze dedicated fully, that you are not afraid But at the same time you have to have complete Dedication. of anyone. You are not worried about your losses. Supposing there is no oil in this Some people have lost their heads, (lamp), it will all go off. It has to have also, completely cut their heads. oil. So the Dedication part is the oil People have tortured them. Some in you, is the attachment. Complete people had all their money taken attachment to your source. That's the away, have been tortured in every Dedication. But that Dedication way, but they thought this was the should not give you any other ideas truth, they stood by it. Some of them but of a light which shines, which were stupid fools, they stood for corrects others, guides the path of something that was not truth, they did. other people. If that is not so, then the source that But 'now' you know that you are standing on the truth, and for that you should be willing to sacrifice. you are tapping is not coming to you fully, and that your light is not burning Because you are not sacrificing the properly. truth. What you are sacrificing is So, into Dedication when you go, you 13 untruth. must not think that it is any For that you require people of surrendering, the so called strength and courage, and not these surrendering, that you become like a half-baked people you see, morning cabbage. That is the idea people have, till evening asking for forgiveness that you become like cabbage. But you become dynamic! You become from Mother. What is it? What is there to ask for forgiveness because I real power; not of destruction, but of am forgiving you every moment. But construction, I mean, for destruction what are you doing yourself? What you do not need much power. Only for construction you need power. For sort of a person you are? destruction how much do you need? You think about it, that you have to - Very little. You can destroy the stand on the truth. For that you have whole thing in no time. But, for the to be a strong, courageous person with construction you 'really' require that sharpness, with that tejasvita "great' power. And that power, within you of the light of the beacon. sustained power, flowing power has

 January February 2001 43 The Divine Cool Breeze and comes and says to me, "Mother, to be there. For that Dedication is forgive me.", or does something harsh needed. just for the whim of the mind: "Mother, forgive me." But when you Holding on to your source of power, you have to stand firm energetically. *Without' any fear. That is the truth. That is the truth you have to achieve. That's very important. ask for that I would like to know, have you given compassion to another person? Even after getting forgiveness from me, that source of of But this is only one side of the thing. That's not sufficient. Just being the truth, the aspect of one side is there. forgiveness, that compassion, have you given compassion to others? Have you been compassionate to others? You see, it should not be one sided. If you are taking the advantage of my compassion, it should not be one sided that you use it for your own benefit and forget about it. Then you will never grow you will never grow. source But the other side of it is, that when this source comes to you, you become the Compassion. The truth and the Compassion are one thing. You would not believe, but it is so. Like, the wick and the oil combine to form the light, it is the burning of the oil gives you the light, in the same way If you have to grow, then you must store that compassion within. the compassion gives you the truth. There is no difference whatsoever, Whatever compassion I have given only the state is different. That you you, love I have given you, you must cannot see the light which is oil, and oil which is burning. store within you. And give that back to others. Otherwise you will be finished, you will be nowhere. Is the growth which is sustained only - not only by sucking from one side but by So compassion is the one which is the source as well as your store. So from the source of compassion, you get giving to others. Otherwise you will your compassion. be stagnated. There has to be outflow. You see, I have seen people who want to have compassion from me; they want that I should love them. But reflect it back; do they love others like that? I have known people, say for one person says harsh things to other But that is a very hard thing, because people are very good at taking compassion from Mother. Or even if they are compassionate, they will be mostly compassionate to people who

 January - February 2001 44 The Divine Cool Breeze are, say, in Viet Nam, not in the Now the basic thing is, that our Ashram. They are more worried Compassion, if that is flowing, then about Viet Nam people, you know. only can we get compassion from "Oh Mother! We are worried about Mother. I have done t0o much Viet Nam People, we are collecting compassion business and what I find money for them, and we are trying to that now unless and until you flow it send money to Viet Nam.," And here how am I to give you compassion? I among Ashramites - fighting. This is mean there is no space left for it now. Better give it away, empty yourself a little bit, then I can give you more Sahaja Yogis among themselves are compassion. It's simple business. In a different race, and they have to this respect one has to understand, that support each other, all the time, and the source can not flow unless and look after them. When I find Sahaja until it expands the flow of it. not compassion by any chance. Yogis criticizing Sahaja Yogis, I am amazed! I am really amazed! Because Like the river Thames. We went to see the place from where it starts. It you are part and parcel of the same. How can you criticiz! One eye is a small little stream, from seven criticizing another, I just cannot streams, - little-little. 'Very little-little, we can say trickling down it has become the river Thames. Supposing it does not widen, that will stop at the beginning only. It cannot come out. understand. I can criticize, alright, but why should you? Why should you criticize each other? Only thing you have to do is to love each other. It cannot flow. It is not because it is angry or upset or anything like that, Christ has said it thrice, I must have said it 108 times already that, "you have to love each other, that is the but because of the nature of its flow only it cannot flow, what to do? only way you are expressing Compassion". If I have given you any So that is what it is, that one has to love any time, you have to have give compassion to others. It should patience with others, love for others. not be formal compassion, or the I sometimes try to coax people, and I affected one, but it should be a natural find that people immediately come out with some sort of criticism of feeling' from within. It is not an one, very natural, spontaneous expression of your ego, super ego or others or something like that.

 45 January-February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze being, means it reaches the source, It over-sentimentality, but is a kind of is in this light we have to understand. an understanding that he is a Sahaja Yogi, you are a Sahaja Yogi, you are brothers. Not the way the brothers Exclusiveness, or "We are now have been, but a different type of married, we should have separate brothers who are 'spiritual brothers. . place, we should live separately". - it is alright, you must have little privacy as married people, I am not saying You are spiritual people. So the compassion has to be there, that. But as far as compassion is and unless and until you develop concerned, as married people, you much more passionate fatherly or motherly have feeling for others... I mean I am the compassionate. But you will only be to worry about your 'own children, about your 'own comfort, about your "own' husband, about your own mother of a person who is about a hundred and eight years of age. You have to really mother others, and have that feeling of compassion and love wife'. In Sahaja Yoga, there is no for others. You don't have to think place for such people. It is all about your own comfort, you don't collective. When you bring sweets for have to think about your advantages, your own child, bring for other children in the Ashram. You are one but you have to think about the family and all the family has to move with the same waves. I have told you before that we cannot have separate comfort of others. You have to think, "What you can do to make others comfortable," than to see what will food arrangements, separate this and make you comfortable. So this flow of compassion when it separate that. In the same way, we starts, the Dedication is complete. living for different people. cannot have separate standards of Because "Whatever we got from you, Mother, we are giving it to others." We all have to enjoy whatever is That is the Dedication. So the flow enjoyed by all of us. That should be of Dedication is not one sided. It is so. And that should be achieved on double sided. You stick on to material level. On emotional level any something, you get connected with marriage which is absurd, which something, to get something out of makes every one unhappy is useless. it, you give it to others. And But marriages are made to make ultimately it reaches the collective everyone happy. So before you decide

 46 January- February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze doing compassion. There is no other to marry, think, that you are not playing tricks. Playing tricks in Sahaja Yoga is very-very dangerous. You are not playing tricks with your marriages, you are trying to involve somebody else, thinking that Mother purpose behind it. Only this will give you something that is of permanent nature, of a 'sthayi' () nature. You have seen people as I was telling in the morning, who have gone to an would forgive you and all that. I will organization, made a beautiful organization out of it. And once they forgive, but your ascent is difficult. So do not try to play tricks with anything that you have been doing Because they do not give anything before, but change yourself substantial to that organization. And completely, transform yourself what is to be given, is a large heart of leave, the organization is finished. completely. compassion. If you do not give it that, Now you change your attitude once you go away from that, the rest of them are again barren. It is not towards life. You can, because it is growth. If you bring water, plant changed already. If you try to be the other person, you cannot be. Now you have become a flower, now you things and give water to that area then it becomes very beautiful, and you can say it is a very lush growth. But cannot become suddenly the leaf. as soon as that water source is Now you are a flower, and you have removed, it gets again dried up. to live like a flower. And that is what you have to remember, that compassion is such an outflow, is Sahaja Yoga you not only grow as a But Sahaja Yoga is different. In such a natural thing for Sahaja Yogi. It is not natural for anybody else. Other people who talk of compassion or this and that are actually not at all plant, but also, as the source of the plant. If this plant is removed from here put somewhere else, it will give water to other plants. Do you know this new dimension that you have within yourself? - That once this plant is uprooted from here and taken out, compassionate. They are doing it for money, they are doing for position, they are doing for ego satisfaction. But you are having compassion because you have to have it, jolly well. It is flowing, the compassion, because it has to flow. And you are it will not die! Not at all. It will grow, and it will make others grow. This is another type of a growth that we have. And it is a very different position we

 47 January-February 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze are in, and that is what now I want, that all of you, 'even' if you are is only possible if you know that you are here for a 'very great' universal uprooted and put into any other place, task. Not only for England, for India .. I have seen, when I ask people that or for America but you are here for a you better shift from here to there, global task which is the epitome of they just get frightened. "You better our evolution. This is the highest thing go there and do this, they got we have to do for our creation and frightened. You are a plant which can for over creator. And you are chosen not only go and prosper in any place, for that. And so don't divert your but, you will give the necessary attention to anything that is not nourishment to other plants. That is fulfilling your own manifestation. what you are! So do not stick on to Descard all that. Do not waste your one place. If you stick on, then think energy. And your manifestation is that there must be something wrong your Compassion, your Love. with the place. Like a glue if you are sticking on to one place, it is very But still it should not remain rational. Whatever I have said to you is just to dangerous. And be sure, that you must run away from such a place which put you into a condition where you glues you. That does not mean that start sucking the Vibrations as well as people are here, they never stay in as giving the vibrations. It is an action, the house, all the time running out. It it is a happening that should take does not mean that. Again I have to place, within you. It is not rationality, strike that point. Because otherwise it is not thinking about it. Only by the people are here, are all the time saying these things, I really stun your running away from their houses. That thinking. You should allow this to is not the point. The point is that you happen to you. Just with the Vibratory should not be glued to anything, and awareness you should judge yourself, not be afraid of leaving any place, "Am I the one who is giving because now you are Sahaja Yogis. vibrations to the others? Am I the one You have joined the ocean, and ocean who has stored these vibrations or am can take you anywhere. So just Igetting ruined? prepare yourself to move into any All this will give you a great meaning, place, because you have to take this and employment, as I said, Compassion everywhere and to "employed by God. prosper. In this kingdom of God you May God Bless You. have to serve Him. And this service

 14



----------------------

2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
January - February, 2001
Volume : XIII Issue : 1 & 2
You are yourself and you must see yourself as your Self, as your Spirit.
And spirit is a Universal Being, is the innocence, is the virgin within yOu.
This body is a palace and it is the House of God. Within it God kept the
infinite flame.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this issue:
Editorial
1
2.
Ganesh Puja 16-09-2000
15
Shri Krishna Puja 20-8-2000
29
Gudi Padawa Puja 05-04-2000
The importance of Dedication and
Devotion 06-08-1982
36
Edited by
Published by
Yogi Mahajan
V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi-110 067
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Promise to Keep
When an atom explodes how much devastation it causes but when a heart
opens how many rivers of love flow from it. These rivers form an ocean of
love.
The love of a Sahaja collectivity cannot stay within itself. It has to expand
and reach out to the society. It expresses its concern for others, concern for
the society and human crisis. This concern is the movement of love, it is
called Compassion. Compassion emanates from the goddess herself. She is
worshipped as Sandra Karuna.
We have been so blessed to receive her Karuna. Now we are to become the
vehicles of her Karuna. In her Divine compassion she has started several
projects for the needy. Recently she laid the foundation of a home for destitute
women and street children. The beautiful talk she gave on that eve brought
tears of compassion which entwined us with pain she felt in her heart and we
promise to redeem that pain.
The movement of compassion takes us to greater depths. As our attention
turns towards benevolence, we think less of oursleves. Consequently the ego
receives less fuel and starts subsiding. Also, our thoughts become benevolent.
For instance in previous Diwalis we enjoyed bursting crackers worth five
hundred rupees, so this Diwali the benevolent thought came why not give
half to the NGO for street children. "Someday these street children would be
able to light lamps in honour of the goddess Laxmi".
The benevolent thought also brings a lot of inner joy. Like this may lights
would ignite a thousand other lights. Those who have not received their
realization are also street children, lost in the dark streets fo wilderness. May
the light of the spirit take them to the feet of Shri Mahalaxmi Sakshat! Shri
Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi.
Let us all contribute open heartedly to the cause
taken up by our Divine Mother.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
January-February 2001
GANESHA PUJA
CABELLA, 16-09-2000
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
understanding. So to be innocent is
not possible. You have to be innocent
in the sense that you are innately
innocent. This happens after Sahaja
Yoga, after realization and your
power to fight all the wrong, negative
feelings within you and without are
absolutely supported, protected by the
Mother of Shri Ganesha. Its difficult,
Today we have gathered here to do
Ganesha Puja. As you know very well
that Ganesha is the symbol of purity,
of sanctity so it is worshipping the
innocence. When you
are
worshipping Shri Ganesha, you have
to know that He is the embodiment
of innocence. I wonder if we
understand the meaning of innocence.
these days, to tell somebody about
innocence, but you know the life of
Jesus Christ. He was innocent. He did
know what sort of people were all
Innocence is a quality, which is innate,
which cannot be forced, which cannot
be trained into. Its just a quality, innate
quality within a human being. When
around. He thought they were all
innocent. So he was talking to them
he becomes Shri Ganesha's disciple,
he becomes an innocent person.
in a manner that nobody who was
May be, you say that innocent persons
are attacked by the cunning, by the
aggressive. But innocence is such a
great thing that it cannot be destroyed.
It is the quality of the spirit. Innocence
is the quality of the spirit and when
the spirit within you is awakend you
get the power of innocence by which
you overcome all that is negative, all
that is wrong, all that is detrimental
to your growth, your spiritual
cunning would have done that.
Because cunning always understand
the cunningness of the other and say
things which may not have been
understood by the people. But
whatever He said, had the vibrations
of innocence that should have put all
these people in the proper sense in a
proper relationship with him. But
somehow that was not the time for
So the
them to be realized souls.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 January - February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
innocence of Shri Ganesha was not
non-sense that He created alcohol.
What He did was to change the water
into the taste of grape juice. Alcohol
is called as grape juice in Hibrew
language. I mean it is not called but
wine means alcohol as well as grape
iuice. But it cannot be. Because
that we should say defeated but very
much created an atmosphere of such
sanctity and beauty that you can see
in the life of Christ.
I am happy you all have heard about
marriages. Why the marriage? What
is the need to have a marriage? After
all these days people are living
without marriage. But marriage
instantly you cannot create alcohol.
Alcohol takes time. It has to rot and
rot and rot, then it becomes alcohol.
But if Christ has made it in such a
means the sanctity of marriage.
Sahaja manner, spontaneously, how
can it be alcohol, that is intoxicating?
So many people specially in Christian
religion, believe that Christ sanctified
wine, which is absolutely wrong. He
never sanctified alcohol. He changed
Because of the sanctity of your
physical, mental and emotional
integration. If you do not have the
sanctity and live with the person then
it is not perfect marriage. The children
produced will not be alright. That's
the grape juice into wine taste.
why the marriage is necessary and,
as you know, Christ went to attend a
wedding. Why did he pay so much
The other day I happened to meet
a person and he said, Mother please
give me realization. I said alright, get
me some water. They brought some
attention to a wedding? Because that
sanctifies your relationships with each
other. Anything is alright, but water, I put my fingers into it and then
relationship between husband and he tasted it and said Mother it tastes
wife have to be sanctified. Otherwise like wine. I said that's it, that's what
the children they produce could turn
Christ had done. So there is no
Sanctity of alcohol. How can you
expect Christ to do something like
robbers, they may be cheats, they may that by which your awareness
be liers. They may be very cruel absolutely goes? Those people who
people if there is no sanctity about drink, you know, are not normal
out to be anything. They may be
the marriage. That's why He went to
people. Something goes wrong with
their brains. When they drink they
sanctify the marriage institution.
create problems. When they are
But it is absolutely wrong and
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
January-February 2001
avoiding all such things which destroy
your health. So the married life is a
sanctified life. Is a life which is being
talking to somebody, you can make
out that they are not normal. They try
to be very aggressive, sometimes they
blessed. Now we have priests. But I
can be very passive also. Mostly they
would say in Sahaja Yoga they are all
blessed by me. So one should
understand that this is a very big thing
are very aggressive and they behave
in a manner that does not behove a
human being. So you must
that you have got. But there are many
who come and say that Mother we
understand that this wine, so called,
which is being fermented for days
want to have divorce. We are trying
to make up good marriage. All kinds
of stories they tell. If you know it a
together, is very wrong and against
the spiritual life. All those countries
where alcohol is accepted as a very
sanctified marriage, a marriage which
is being done under all the ceremonies
of Sahaja Yoga which cannot be a bad
sanctified thing are just going to dogs.
Which is against Shri Ganesha, its
against innocence. So such a person
can become very cunning, very marriage. But if you are bad then
shrewd, very dominating. All kinds nobody can help you. If you have
funny ideas about marriages you
should try to correct it. If you want to
marry in Sahaja Yoga then please see
that you respect the sanctity of
of bad things can come through them.
And one cannot trust a person who
drinks and becomes drunkard. He can
get after his wife, his children,
anybody, and try to destroy their lives
because he knows he is himself
marriage.
I know sometimes women can be
destroyed. So the onething one has
to understand that innocence does not
bad, men can be bad. There can be
problems, but a person who is wise
will try to endure all that. Because he
or she wants to respect the sanctity of
marriage. This is a very contradictory
allow you to have anything like that
which goes against your awareness.
Because human awareness is very
important. That must be respected.
thing that Christ was born without
Anything that spoils your awareness,
or spoils your health is all wrong,
specially for Sahaja Yogis. You have
to keep your health alright. How do sanctity from outside. They are
you keep your health alright? By innocent and innocent people don't
marriage and Ganesha was also born
without marriage. They themselves
are sanctity. They don't need any
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 January - February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
the circumstances, when you are in
need any kind of ritual and any kind
thoughtless awareness, you do not
react. That is the sign of innocence
of a ceremony. That's how they have
been born, absolutely pure of
innocence. But that doesn't mean that
and the people who do not react, keep
we should take their example on young. They will never show their
ourselves. They were divine age, they keep young. Because to
react is not a very good thing, which
personalities and they were to be born
makes you get involved into another
like that, while we have to be
person. But if you don't react, you
sanctified and lead a sanctified life.
are just watching, you are just witness,
This is the difference between an
then you don't get involved into
incarnation and a human being. It is
anything. You are away from it, and
that's how your innocence grows and
you get very confident. I have read a
easy to criticize incarnations, very
simple to criticize them
incarnations have been criticized by
All
.
story about a Chinese king who went
human beings, because human beings
to a saint and asked himn, that he wants
cannot understand them, but try to be
really very pure and innocent, then some help from him, that I want my
you will understand why your lives son to be developed into a person who
were on a different line, on a different can face all kinds of problems.
style. Now if you say, we can develop Whatever people may do, he should
innocence, Mother, you can not. be able to face them. Alright, you
Which is the way to become leave your son with me, so when the
innocent? In Sahaja Yoga we have argument started, when the fighting
proper method, how we can become started, his son was just standing
innocent. It happens through our straight watching everything in
thoughtless awareness. If you are in thoughtless awareness. So everybody
the state of thoughtless awareness from the arena went back, they all
then what happens? You don't react, went away and they could not stand
do not get involved into wrong things. before the innocence of the boy who
You do not get involved into any was very young. And the king was
surprised how his son could face all
discussions, arguments but you just
of them, all their arguments, all their
aggression and all kind of horrible
things they said to him. If anybody
watch and the innocence within you
rises beautifully, like a lotus, rises out
of a dirty pond. So whatever may be
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 January-February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
says anything to you, you should be
just innocent.
find anything, they make a toy out of
it. Other day we had gone to Zenova
and I saw there were big blockades
At that time your power of
kept there. Some children came from
innocence will show that this person
somewhere and they just climbed on
who is trying to dominate you, to
trouble you, is very much in the were enjoying them. You see they find
that and made horses out of it and
wrong, and the person himself might
realize that I am doing all these things
and this person whom I am trying to
anything, any space they make a
joyful thing for them. A play for
them. For them life is also a joyful
dominate is not taking any note of it.
So he feels very weak, since he has play. Just a thing of enjoyment and
no power to dominate a person. So they make you also enjoy everything.
as Sahaja Yogis, now we can get into If you are not in a good mood, they
thoughtless awareness. Try to reduce will come and behave in such a
manner that you have to come round
and become a very simple, natural
your reactions. Reaction to anything.
People have such funny ideas about
person. So to see a simple natural
themselves that they react. For
person you always say 'they are like
children' means they do not
example somebody showed me those
carpets. I started watching. I was very
happy, and they told me all the Sahaja
understand the cunning, they do not
understand the stupidity of the people
Yoginis have made this with their
and they live in their own world of
hands, so beautifully.
innocence. In the same way all the
It was really so joyful to know that
they have done it. But if I was a very
normal person, I would have said, Oh
my God! what a colour! what a thing!
and like that. So whatever they have
done I could have even enjoyed that.
Sahaja Yogis have to develop that
aura around them. Let people see you,
how innocent you are? How sweet
you are? No argument, no quarreling,
no fighting. It is just the inner
satisfaction of thoughtless awareness.
Many people say that Mother we
One thing the enjoyment is lost. For
cannot become thoughtless. Why?
Why cannot you become thoughtless?
a child enjoyment is complete.
Whatever he sees, he enjoys. Makes
joyful thing out of it. Look at the
children. I have seen children, they Gradually stop reacting, introspect
Because all the time you want to react.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 January-February 2001
7.
The Divine Cool Breeze
something which is absolute honest
intelligence. It is not which works for
yourself, see for yourself. If you are
all the time trying to react, tell your
mind to behave itself. If there is any
reaction, just don't say anything, keep
quite. Gradually you will be amazed
and surprised how you become
thoughtlessly aware! How beautiful
you become and everybody who sees
you, will know that you are something
different. You are not like the normal
some purpose but it is purposeless. It
is absolutely purposeless and thus it
achieves that height of joy because
there is no purpose in anything. It sees
the futility of all kinds of endeavors
that we have. It just enjoys, why
people are running up and down, why
are they fighting! Just stands up and
persons. But the normal reaction of a
human being is that if there is a
sees, why should they don't like that?
Some may think that they are
quarrel going on in the street,
everybody will join the quarrel. They alright, there is nothing wrong in them
like to fight. They want to be the part but its not so. Innocence is something,
and parcel of that fight or quarrel. as I have told an innate quality, and
They don't want to get out of it. At you should not deceive yourself by
that time if you just have your thinking you are innocent.
innocence, that will act.
On the contrary you just put some
introspection upon yourself and see
for yourself what have I been doing
I told you that innocence is the
spirit and the spirit is the innocence,
which cannot be destroyed by
so far as far as others are concerned?
What is your attitude? I have already
anything. The fact is that it cannot
be destroyed by anything and it can
talked to you about emotional
intelligence. Emotional intelligence is
the expression of innocence. It is the
be reestablished through Sahaja Yoga.
You might have been a very
aggressive person. You might have expression of Shri Ganesha Children
been a very unhappy person. You
who are gifted with this will always
try to please you. They know what
you want, what you need. They will
give all the joy that you want. They
will do all the things that you like,
just to please you. They don't want
to have their own demands. They
might have been a person who is all
the time disturbing others. Maybe, but
after Sahaja Yoga you can make your
personality so sweet and beautiful,
that not only you can enjoy but others
can also enjoy. This innocence is
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 8
January-February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
look at him, he does not eat like a
never say I want this, you do for me.
Never. They only want to see what horse. So they are so innocent that
sometimes they say things by which
you are exposed completely. There
are so many jokes about it and if you
write some books, writing the jokes
of children, I tell you, people will just
enjoy. Because so innocently they say
things which are nothing but the truth.
you want. What do you want to have?
And they put all the effort to supply
you with that. Its very interesting how
the children behave towards others,
elders. Just like I would say a great
understanding like very elderly
innocence you
So in
personality.
become extremely grown up, They cannot tell lies. They are so
truthful that is the quality of
matured. Very matured. With that
innocence. They never tell lies. You
maturity you know what this person
needs and what the other person
did this? Ya, I did. You didn't do this?
should not have, and the way they No I did not do. They never tell lies.
It is the grown ups who teach them
establish is very interesting. Children
how to tell lies, how to be cheating.
are the most interesting things, I think
in the world. For me roses are Then we teach our children another
beautiful but children are the most bad thing that you must possess
interesting thing and they teach you
so many things that you are surprised
at their innocence. So many jokes are
everything, specially in the West it is
a thing they do. They tell their child
that this is yours, you should not give
it to anyone. This is your own. On
the contrary we should tell them, you
there about the children. How they
behave, how they talk and they are
can do what you like. Leave it to their
innocence. You will be amazed they
will give away everything that they
have. In such a beautiful manner they
will behave that you will be amazed,
so innocent that they will tell
everything to everyone. They have no
way of hiding anything. Very difficult
I know one joke when a gentleman
came to the house for dinner. So the
how they try to please everyone and
try to do something to entertain! All
their capacity of this is so great that
child was looking at him very
intensely and then he said, mother he
does not eat like a horse as you told
me. So everybody was shocked. He
sometimes one wonders how these
little things have developed this
does not eat like a horse. Mother must
capacity.
have told that he eats like a horse. So
00
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
January-February 2001
It is the blessing of Shri Ganesha.
It is His blessing that children are so
you, is trying to harm you, is trying
to put you down. Nobody can put
very sweet and so much entertaining
down the innocent.
and so beautiful. Try to become like
Innocence is the quality that
them. You have to be like them. You
survives all kinds of non-sense and
might have read many books, you
might have got lots of degrees, you
might be something great, but you are
not only that but age, health, your
mind, your thinking. If your emotions
are extremely innocent then you
not childlike. You have to be a child
like person. Otherwise no one likes enjoy yourself. Now-a-days there is
a big way of shamelessness. The
your company. We will call them
bores. But I think boring comes to the
people who have no innocence at all.
people I have seen they have no lajja
I don't know, some men want to
attract women and some women want
They are trying to tell you, you must
to attract men. Children never do like
do this. If you want to be successful
that. They don't know what is this to
you do that. All these lectures are
useless for children. In the same way
attract men or to attract women or to
attract anyone. They will try to please
the dog, try to please a horse but I
it should be within your own
understanding that this all nonsense
have never seen they will go all out
they are talking.
to attract someone. The reason is that
As the children don't care for what
their self-esteem is complete. They
you suggest to them, to be nasty, to know about themselves fully. So why
be horried, in the same way if you should they do all this nonsense of
are innocent, you will not accept. You running after women, running after
may listen to anything. Let them tell men and creating problems for
what they want to. Does not matter. themselves.
You never do that. Because you
Their self esteem in complete.
cannot, because you are innocent and
the innocence will guard you. It will Innocence is like that. It gives you
give you proper guidance, what is to complete self-esteem. You do not
be done, what is not be done. Now bow to anyone, nor you make
anybody else bow. This is the beauty
of innocence which works out, so well
within you. That's why I always say
try to introspect and see for yourself.
are you innocent or not? People think
that somebody is trying to overpower
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 January - February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
10
basic as you can see is the respect
that worship Shri Ganesha. I know
of somebody who was very highly of your innocence in every manner.
placed and suddenly I was surprised Like when you have to get angry
how he was paralysed! What with somebody or something, the
happened? He was very good man, best way is to keep quite or else you
how he was paralysed? Then I found must respect your tongue, respect
out that he had very bad intentions your eyes. Some people have a very
about women and that's how he got bad habit of looking at women or
this problem. So I thought its better some women are like that. They
to worship Shri Ganesha. Worship don't respect their eyes. Then they
Shri Ganesha, worshipping of Shri develop the problems of the eyes,
Ganesha improves your mooladhara, not only that but mind also. Mind
improves your sense of shame, gets so much ruined by that kind of
improves your own dignity, your self
esteem. You dress up in a way that
shows that you respect your body.
You talk in such a way that it shows
behavior that it has no sense, which
cannot enjoy anything. Such person
cannot enjoy anything. If you are a
person who respects your eyes, your
that you respect your tongue, your
nose, your ears, I tell you that you
language. You cannot have a foul
will be amazed that everything is so
mouth if you are in Sahaja Yoga. enjoyable. In this world there are so
You cannot have a mind that can
many things that can be enjoyed. But
people cannot hear anything that is
abuse and say horrible words. I have
seen in America, they talk in such a
good. There are birds, who are
funny manner, that you are shocked.
There is no need to use these dirty
words to express yourself. With that
your tongue is spoiled. So innocence
chirping, they cannot hear. There are
trees which are growing, they cannot
see or flowers which are fragrant,
they cannot smell. Because they are
is gone from your tongue. If you
have lost innocence from your Because they are very low level
tongue, whatever you say will never people, I should say, who cannot
so much low in their self-esteem.
come true, will never come true.
enjoy everything around. And they
But if you are innocent and your should be the source of enjoyment.
tongue is innocent then everything See children how they are source of
that you say will come true. So the enjoyment. Anybody who comes on
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 January - February 2001
11
The Divine Cool Breeze
the stage and runs about, how we normally they are always guided by
their innocence. Whether you are
enjoy! Why? Why do we enjoy a
child running about? We don't say aware of it or not its such a sweet
he has gone amock or he is drunk. thing, such a sweet thing that it makes
people rise in their nobleness in their
But we enjoy the child, why? That is
greatness and that is what we have to
the sweetness of the child that make
develop within us as Sahaja Yogis.
Sahaja Yogis go anywhere, try to do
us so happy, because that innocence,
his power is innocence. With that
anything, meet anybody, any social
work, anything, people should feel
that joy that you have within you. For
power, he is just looking so sweet, so
beautiful, that it gives us the real joy
within us.
that joy only the Adi Shakti created
So the second thing is that
Shri Ganesha. Because that joy
innocence is joy giving. Innocence within, that innocent joy, does not
gives joy to people. Anything said
innocently, anything done innocently
is very very joy giving and in that you
harm anybody. It does not expect
anything, it does not demand
anything, it does not want anything.
see the person, so transparent, so
beautiful that you enjoy that
But just emitting joy all over. That
sort of personality you should have.
There is nothing wrong in wearing
transparency and that sanctifies in a
way. That's why Ganesha in
good dresses, nothing wrong in eating
worshipped first. Ganesha was the
good food, nothing wrong in having
conversation. But in all that, it is the
first deity that was created by Adi
Shakti. Because if she has to create
respect of the innocence, the
something she must know that there
expression of innocence should be
has to be power of innocence. there. With this innocence we can
Otherwise people will go wrong and
do all kinds of wrong things. So first
solve the problems. All the problems
of the world can be solved. That's
She created Ganesha, whose
why Shri Ganesha in so important.
innocence you can call, the vibrations.
If you do not have he proper
are so strong that it controls. Of
understanding of Shri Ganesha and if
course there are people who abandon
your Shri Ganesha is in a jeopardy, I
don't know what can happen to you!
completely their innocence and just
think no end of themselves. Just
These days you see so many horrible
forget about them. But normally,
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 12
January-February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
diseases are coming, because they like people to talk of divorce from
the very first day. But if there is really
a problem, Alright in Sahaja Yoga
are not sanctified. Their relationships
are not sanctified.
we have allowed divorce. Not
Every relationship has to be Catholic Church. They don't allow
sanctified with your innocence. Like
you have a sister, you have mother,
you have a brother, you have father.
You have all the relationships which
divorce. So men have all kinds of
relationships and women have all
kinds of relationships That's not
there. Instead of doing all kinds of
are so good, so beautiful and
sanctified because there is the should be very innocent happening.
non-sense you have divorce. But it
relationship of innocence.
If you are divorcing a person because
You love your father out of your innocence is challenged, its
innocence and you love your daughter alright. There I agree with you, you
out of innocence, you love your should have. So preserve your
mother out of innocence. Why should innocence. In these modern times it
is very important to preserve your
you love? For some sort of a
overpowering, then its cunning. Its innocence that Shri Ganesha should
just love for love's sake. That's
be awakened within you and also in
other people. That is going to save
possible if you are innocent. So now
this world. Nothing else but the
I am happy. Tomorrow you are all
innocence, that you have is going to
going to get married and these people
save the world.
who are getting married should
Whatever you may know,
whatever you may say, whatever
you may write, please see that you
are not hurting the innocence within
understand that it's a sanctified
marriage. So very important. Its not
like any other marriage. This marriage
is taking place in my presence. So be
you. Its not necessary to live a life
careful. If you do not want to marry,
alright, finish it. You are given a
of immorality, this that. What is
needed is your innocence. Innocence
chance to know that person or itself gives your moral strength,
understand. But afterwards if you try moral understanding. You don't have
to be funny then its going to be very to read books; you don't have to go
difficult for you and for me. I may to any guru for that. Innocence will
give up having marriages. So I don't guide you and tell you that this is
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 January -February 2001
13
The Divine Cool Breeze
I did not give any lecture to the girls,
what it is, Sahaja. This is what you
have to have. You all have got I think it is more responsibility of
realization. This is very big thing that the men to make their marriage
has happened to you people. I successful. Men have to understand
always want you to worship Shri
Ganesha within you. Shri Ganesha
is your innocence. It is the spirit.
When you want to know your spirit, should be given to marriage. The way
it is Shri Ganesha. You become one
that marriage is a very important part
of their life. At due time respect
you care for your wife from the very
beginning helps you a lot. From the
with Shri Ganesha.
It is within you and it is absolutely very first day be careful and not to
possible for all of you to be
completely enlightened by the power
of Shri Ganesha. I am very happy bringing, own ideas. Try to
that you have accepted all the understand them and respect them.
marriages and all have decided to You must take it up very seriously,
marry. But even now if you say no, its not just a joke. Specially in Sahaja
better to finish it off. But don't try Yoga you should understand that
any tricks. Don't try to be funny marriage is a very important thing by
because it is not be going to help which you are a couple which is
you in any way to enjoy your sanctified, and they carry the
marriage. On the very first day try responsibility of making the Sahaja
misunderstand. She comes from an
other country. So she has her own up
to understand that you have to be
very kind, to your partner. Very Yoga very successful. Sahaja Yoga is
respectful, very caring, very loving. a great thing because it can transform
That's a very important thing which the whole world into a very beautiful
people don't understand and take place and you are responsible for that.
for granted. So I have heard that
because it is Sahaja Marriage so responsibility as a great person who
people take it for granted. No. Never is the sort of head of the family.
take it for granted. If you want to Yesterday I told you that I don't
have real joy then have innocent believe in divorce. I expect you to be
love within yourself and enjoy you very good husbands who will give all
As men you should understand your
life.
love, all affection and all care to their
wives. In Sahaja Yoga men and
May God Bless you.
Thank you.
women are absolutely equal, may
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
January-February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
not be similar but absolutely equal Yoga. She is coming from another
family, another country, another
atmosphere. So try to make her
understand and make her adjustable.
and they are complimentary to each
other. You should not think that your
life is the most important and that
your wife is something negligible. I So don't try to find faults with her
have seen most of the marriages in but make her feel comfortable and
Sahaja Yoga are successful and they happy that she can grow in Shaja
have nice children also. Marriages Yoga very well. And your children
only fail when there is play of ego.
must respect, the mother absolutely.
As you respect, your children should
also respect their mother. I assure you,
you are going to have a very nice time
That is more with men than in
women and that can ruin your life,
life of your wife and chidren.
Women are sensible but they can
if you are sensible about your
tolerate up to a point. So we should marriage. There is no force in Sahaja
see how much wisdom you should Yoga, you have decided to marry in
have to make a good family. That is Sahaja Yoga. So the marriage has
what we need. In good families only taken place. I have not told anything
we will have good children and to ladies becausee they are so
universal Sahaja Yoga. So please do sensible; so anxious and looking for
not have expectations about your the future. I think always men should
self but about your wife, what she try to understand the responsibility of
wants, what her desires are, what marriage then women. Innately the
her needs are. You must look after
women understand that it is important
that side, as your responsibility. You
are not marrying for marriage sake
but you have responsibility. At least
95% Sahaja Yoga marriages are
that their married life should be
successful, but I have found
sometimes that men have taken them
for granted. It should not be such. For
successful and very beautiful
she does everything for you with love
and affection. It must be appreciated.
children are born to Sahaja Yogis.
who are sensible but if you have any
You should appreciate. This is the
problem you must tell me.
only way you can show your love to
Sahaja Yoga is one big global family.
So you have also the responsibility
to the whole organization of Sahaja
her.
You know, in Sahaja Yoga we
cont'd on page 28
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
15
January-February 2001
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
CABELLA, 20-08-2000
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today, we are here to worship Shri self-realization! It is to know God
Krishna within us. As you know that
you all have been seeking, before
coming to Sahaja Yoga. You went to
different places, read lots of books
and also some of you were lost. And
in that seeking, perhaps you did not
or the Goddess. That is the purpose
of self realization. But after getting
self realization what should happen
to you? Many of you have lost
interest in nonsensical things like
drugs and all those things. You have
lost interest in reading useless books.
know that you were seeking. What
you were seeking was to know You have lost interest in other habits
yourself. In all religions it is said
*Know Thyself, It is a common enough, that's not enough. That
thing, all of them have said. This is could happen in any way. What has
one point which is absolutely there, to happen by knowing God is that,
in every religion, "Know Thyself". why does God wants you to know
Because without knowing yourself him? Because He wants to see his
like drinking and all that. That's not
you will not know God. You will not
reflection in you He wants to see
know spirituality.
His reflection.
That's why He has created you
So the first step was to know yourself
and for that people did all kinds of
and He wants to see his reflection in
tricks with you, they taught you in you. Same with the Goddess. She
the different ways and tried to has given you self-realization,
actually loot you and cheat you. All because She wants to see her
those things have happened and reflection in you. So you have to
finished. So when you come to prepare yourself for that reflection,
Sahaja Yoga and get your self which is so much purer, beautiful,
realization, what is the purpose of loving, compassionate and, above
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 16
January - February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
forces which acted upon him. In his
all, full of wisdom. So this is the
point, one has to reach, where you playfulness only He has done it. In
understand that you have to have his childhood he has done it. How
wisdom. If you are lacking in mature he was as a child you can
wisdom then your are not a see that he killed Putna and there
self-realized person.
are two horrible Rakshas also. He
killed them. At the same time he was
At the level of Shri Krishna you
see, He wants you to become part and playing with the Gopis and teasing
parcel of the Virata or the them, troubling them, making fun of
Viratangana. That you should become them, Why? Because he wanted
part and parcel of the virata, not
because you are realized souls now,
them to be playful and all kinds of
celebrations here in. Once a big rain
came and he lifted a complete big
so you go about thinking; you are
perfectly alright, you don't have to mountain on his finger tip. These
o people should have understood that
do anything about it. What do you do
beyond this is the point; that after it is not possible. It is a miracle, but
self-realization you have to see the He was just standing there with one
reflection that should be within you finger at the mountain. In a very
from the lives of these people like simple unassuming manner he was
doing all that to protect all the boys
Shri Krishna.
who were playing there. Then he
Shri Krishna was first born in a
went and killed Kalia, the one who
very difficult situation as you know
and he was carried from there, to go
was a very big snake, in the water.
In the water, this horrible fellow was
to where he was brought up by creating venom by which many
"Yashoda'. There He started his people were killed. It took him no
playfulness. So you have to be time and he jumped into the waters
playful. You have to create fun of Yamuna, from where he rescued,
and joy. He didn't say that you sit in a way, all the people by killing or
down like a old sage, somewhere in hitting or you can say that winning
the Himalayas but you mix up with over this Kalia.
children, you talk to then, you play
But the wife of this big serpant
with them. Have fun At the same time
He was destroying all the negative asked him that please forgive him and
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 January - February 2001
17
The Divine Cool Breeze
should have a very spontaneous
he forgave. All these things show
that a child of 6-7 years doing all decision, instant decision. What I
these great things without feeling find, the style is very different. They
will go from shop to shop, then make
what he was doing! We can say that
the
list of it, make all
without even thinking about it. But
measurements, then go home and
he achieved it because he was aware
say that we will decide it tomorrow.
that He was Shri Krishna.
That's not the way a Sahaja Yogi
So first thing you have to be behaves. A Sahaja Yogi has to decide
aware that you are self-realized everything absolutely spontaneously,
people. You are not ordinary people, at that moment. You should be like
to behave in an ordinary way. You are this. Now Somebody is getting
special people, made specially to drowned. So the first impulse should
reflect the qualities of God Almighty. be that you have to save, and how
Its not expected that you go and kill do you save? You jump in the water,
Kalia but the situation is such today because you are protected. Nothing
that you are all the time protected. can happen to you. So just jump in
No one can harm you, no ne can the water and save the person.
kill you and you are being looked Minimum of minimum this should
after because you are Sahaja Yogis. be your attitude, this should be your
temperament that you take very
Now what should be the attitude
spontaneous decision. All these
of a Sahaja Yogi towards taking of things change, and all kinds of
decisions, one should understand. It
decision making and having a big
should be a spontaneous decision. conference for decision and all that
You do not have to tally with this, is not with you. In day to day life
go there and find out, immediately
have to be like that. Also in
also you
and spontaneously, like Shri Krishna every political life, economic life or
who jumped inside the river. So in any other life you have to lead you
the same way you should have a have to be very spontaneous.
very spontaneous decision for
become
How
anything. Now you want to buy, say
do
you
spontaneous? What quality I have
got, what is the weapon you have got?
a carpet. Alright, you go in the shop
and you immediately know which is
You have to know what decision to
the one. In every walk of life you
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 January - February 2001
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
take. Do you know you have got who was with me, said Ha!, what a
vibrations, you have the feel of the
place Mother! You cannot buy it.
know
what
vibrations. You
vibrations are. You know what So I told the mayor I am buying it,
vibrations tell you and convey and When? Today, Now. He was amazed.
communicate you. They speak to I said you tell me how can I buy?
He said very easy in this Italy, you
you. So through your vibrations you
have to buy, like this, that you to
pay 1/3 of the price. Alright, and then
should know in a second what should
you do. For example now somebody
told me that Mother when I come
you can оссиру. If you find
something wrong with the place you
to Cabella I feel tremendous
vibrations. It's a fact. But how many
can give it up, but then you will not
of you feel that way. Because your get back your money. But if the
other fellow who is selling you says
sensitivity is not yet developed. You
have to be sensitive about your
no then he has to pay double the
money you have to pay. I said very
vibrations. You should know, looking
at anyone, sitting next of anyone. good bargain. I am buying. I have
Even shaking hands with anyone you told you I am buying. I am buying.
should know what sort of vibrations And Everybody was surprised what
that person has. This kind of Mother was doing? So what decided,
sensitivity, if you develop, then you
was the Vibrations. Vibrations of the
will definitely take very spontaneous place. Just decided and I said I am
decisions. You know, I am very good buying'. That way they took me to
seven castles I think ! I said no.
at it, I bought this Cabella in five
minutes. Really five minutes. When Outside only I could say No. They
were surprised that I didn't even go
inside. I said ask them what was
I came here, they said you cannot
go up because you have a big car.
here? They said nunnery. I said,
So the mayor said alright come
see. Now you should develop that
along. I will take you in my car. So I
kind of a spontaneous decision.
went with him on the car andI
Then you will be amazed how in such
found, it was all dilapidated, no
doubt. It was all absolutely in a
a short time you can really achieve
shamble and looked like a ghostly such a great thing! But it does not
mean that you all should do that way.
place. No doubt, And everybody
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 19
January- February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
First you should have that sensitivity such a nice person, and this will
of vibrations.If you have that happen and that will happen. I said
alright, you show me his photograph.
sensitivity of vibrations, then I would
I said I am sorry I cannot meet him.
say, you are now mature in Sahaja
Yoga. So the maturity has to be They cannot understand. Such a
brought in. You cannot just say, now
alright, I have got self realization. I
great man, will be a minister
tomorrow, I don't want to meet him.
And you find just the next day a big
can do this. First you tally your sense
of sensitivity. So now how do you report about him in the newspaper
know? For example you take a
that he is a very bad man. So you
must tally your experience and your
spontaneous decision to find that you
have got nothing, its all nonsense. understanding of what you have
Possible. But you can see for yourself decided spontaneously. But still I
that your decisions, if spontaneous, would say keep to spontaneous
decisions. Don't think about it. How
if they fail, if they are wrong, if there
are some mistakes that will make you
suffer. Whether economically,
it should work out, what should we
do?
politically, in every way. Then your
whole values system will be judged
It has a very farfatched influence
on your mind also that you see that
well. How far you have gone
very
you know what is right and what is
into Sahaja Yoga? How far you have
wrong. I don't know how many of
achieved your self-realization and
you have seen the house I have built.
where are you. This is what is the way
to test yourself. You should not be
afraid of failures and not get was that he was extremely creative.
The another side of Shri Krishna
enamoured by success, because you In his childhood he did all things,
are self- realized souls. Of course if
these pranks and when He became a
you are sensitive, immediately you
will know what it is. Of course I won't
say that you should have the same as
I have but you should try to.
grown up person, He became the king
of Dwarika, of that area and He used
to dress up like a king also. After all
He was a king. When He was a child,
He used to wear a small little piece
Now I have seen some people who
of feather from the peacock but
praise some man that Mother he is
when He became the king, He was
so good, you must meet him, he is
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
January - February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
know what a solace, what a blessing
wearing all the things and He used
you receive! So now you have got
to sit on a throne and talk to people
in that manner. All that greatness was
there, and he was extremely creative.
your self realization. You got it very
easily, I must say. They all say that
it is the Instant Nirvana.
He built a very very beautiful castle,
or you can say a palace, in Dwarika
out of gold. Can you believe it? Shri
Sahaja Yoga is Instant Nirvana,
its true. But whatever you get so
Krishna did it and it was all then
easily and instantly, you don't
covered with water.
understand the value of that. You
Now the intellectuals in India, all always say for India that they got
trained by Western people, I think, the freedom so easily. They did not
said that its not possible. There is get it that easily that they don't know
the value of it. But its true if you get
anything free and without any
special effort then you don't value
nothing in the water and he never built
his palace there. Its all a story. Just
like a myth. But some people believed
it, you don't understand.
in it and, they went down and found
that there was a big palace. There
You think it is the matter of right.
was gold, little bit left, but not all of
it was there. They were amazed such
a huge big palace he had made. have suffered to get self-realization?
Under the water it had gone, but it
But do you know how much people
They used to go on Himalayas, used
to stand on their legs, sometimes on
was there. Like this all these
their heads for months together, and
incarnations who came
were
they didn't get their self-realization
extremely creative. If you are not
I have heard of some people who
creative what's the use of self-
lived in a room for twenty eight years
realization? What is the greatest
to get self-realization. Why they lived
like that because they thought that by
keeping away from other people or
the bad atmosphere, everything, they
might get realization. They never got
creative thing you can do very easily
is to make others Sahaja Yogis. The
easiest and most joy giving thing is
to make others Sahaja Yogis and
give them the blessings of the Divine
which they have been seeking from it. So one must understand though
the ages. By giving them you don't you have got it so easily, it is
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 January - February 2001
21
The Divine Cool Breeze
something so precious, so great. Its "I like other's children, not mine.
not very easy to get self-realization. Just imagine! How can you be doing
You read about the people who are that? How can you say such a thing,
self realized. Perhaps they didn't even you don't like your own children!
know how they got it. They didn't
First of for all of you all
I would say
that you should never say, I like or
know even about the Kundalini, but
I don't like'. These are Anti-
they got it. Through their Guru, may
Mantras. I like this, this is very
be through their efforts. Buddha,
common. Who are you? I don't like
how much he had to suffer till he
this carpet, I don't like that silver
got his realization! Think of it. How
thing. Who are you? Can you make
he got his realization. I mean you
one like that? To take a decision like
shudder to see his life, ultimately he
that also shows, they think it is very
died of hunger and poverty. But
nothing happened to you. You have
got it without difficulties, in a very
spontaneous, its not. It has come
from your conditionings that you
sweet manner, all of you. Nothing, think I have a right to say I don't
you don't have to pay anything for like, I don't want. But who are you?
it. But that does not mean you If you are the spirit, you will never
use these words because it might
should not value it. Like a seed,
hurt somebody.
which is put in the mother earth
spontaneously sprouts and gives a
life to the primule which grows into
a shrub and then into a tree. But you
You will never say something that
will hurt others. You will never do
anything that will be dangerous for
others. But always say something
that is extremely loving and
have to put water in it and have
to have the care of a gardener or
you
someone. In your case you are the
compassionate and peace giving. You
one who has to do all that.
will emit joy for others. There is the
First of all you have to put
nourishment of compassion and
love. Have you got that compassion
and love? Do you love people? Like
power of spirit that it gives joy to
others. If you are a glummed person
then you are not a self-realized.
You should be able to give joy
today somebody told me and I was
shocked that "I don't like children." I
and love and compassion and
it should happen absolutely
asked "you don't like children"? No,
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
January-February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
generous. Extremely generous. It
never tries to save something or
spontaneously. There is a story
about a saint in India in Maharashtra.
So they all used to take water in a cheat people or steal something. It
is out of question. Because there is
container, call it as 'Kavad' and
would take it all the way to Gujrat no greed left in him. There is no
to a temple of Shri Krishna. That greed at all and that is why such a
was regarded as a great surrendering person who is a realized soul, cannot
to Shri Krishna. So that saint also
be guilty. Has to be extremely
carried the water in the container
generous. I have seen many people
like that who have been extremely
called Kavad'. All the way he
generous and who have been very
understanding about the problems of
carried it, from his village in
Maharashtra and when he reached the
others. While a Sahaja Yogi who has
temple at the foot hill of that temple,
he saw a donkey very thirsty, dying his own problems is not a Sahaja
out of thirst. So he gave that water to Yogi at all. You are there to solve
that donkey. Everybody said, the problems of others and not to
imagine, you have brought this water solve his own problems and go about
from miles together, for days together talking about, this is the problem
to be poured on the deity here and have. Now this is the new word that
has developed in modern times. We
have never used this word 'problem'
now you have given it to this
donkey! He said you don't know
before, I tell you. Only for geometry
we used this word 'problem'. But
God has come all the way down here
to take the water. See the attitude of
now it has started. They say there
that person! So for a self-realized
person the compassion should be there is no problem'. They are all in
like this, of very generous nature.
a problem. Actually they are
If you are not generous, if you are problems I think.
miserely, always worried about your
money and saving of it then firstly, understand that you should not give
you are not a matured Sahaja Yogi. your problems to others. You should
So what you have to do is to
You are not. Apart from that, this
not ask for anything. Please do this
kind of money will never give you for me. Please do that for me. Its very
any happiness. Misereliness is against surprising that people try to take
the spirit. Spirit is extremely
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 January - February 2001
23
The Divine Cool Breeze
can sleep anywhere. You can have
advantage of others. Now some
food. You need not have food
people like to visit some country; so
they will ask me, please call me, I Whatever type of food, you get, its
alright. Because you are so satisfied.
would like to come to your country
and a generous Sahaja Yogi will say On the contrary you like to cook for
alright "Come along". Now who is others. You give them food.
failing here is a person who asked. Whatever possible you try to do as
You should not ask for anything long as you can work it out, you do
whatsoever because you are
it. But there are people who have
complete. Not that you are only their own problems. They are not
satisfied but complete. What can Sahaja Yogis. How can the spirit
anybody give you? All desires just have problems. How can that have.
disapper when you are in complete So just understand that you are now
shape. Like today, when I was coming the Spirit, and beyond everything.
I saw lots of stars had come out. I So your creativity also goes to other
said, as soon as the moon will come dimensions.
they will all disappear. In the same
Of course you start giving
way, when you are complete, you
do not expect anybody to do realization to other people. You create
anything for you. On the contrary
art. You know Baba Mama he was
very bad at literature and he didn't
know any language. He was very
you want to find out what you can
do for others. You become the others
in a way that whatever is the good at Mathematics. Because my
problem of others you take it upon
your head. You jump into it.
mother was a mathematician. But
language he did not. I used to write
his essays. He was so bad. But after
Its a very very interesting realization he wrote such beautiful
growth that should come in you. poems, unbelievable. Nobody could
It should happen to all of you
believe that this Baba could do that.
because you have got self-
realization. You develop a kind of language. I used to write his essays
Because he did not know any
a personality which only lives for as I told you earlier. So amazingly,
others, not for oneself. You will be from where he started writing Urdu
amazed, you can live anywhere, you poetry, Marathi poetry, Hindi poetry
and one of my brothers asked him,
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 January - February 2001
24
The Divine Cool Breeze
How do you get this urdu poetry. Somehow you are above all that and
He said "Shri Mataji has, 'She tells you are there and you just don't
me. Everything he used to say understand why human beings
"Mataji tells me."
behave like that. Why their
So the creativity with in you is behaviour is like that. Even when
just flowers and you are amazed at they came to Sahaja Yoga they have
yourself, How, this creativity has great desire to be leaders or they
come? Now imagine for a person who
have great desire to be a great
organiser of Sahaja Yoga, very well
known in Sahaja Yoga. They want
is a mathematician suddenly becomes
a poet. Its an impossible situation and
to have an international fame as a
you have these capacities. You all
have this capacity that you can
great Sahaja Yogi. But they do not
think what creativity I have shown.
become very creative and you have
to become creative in every way. I am
very creative, I must say. I am all the
What have I created. All these things
are so common in human beings that
time working out something, which they always want others to praise
comes out very well and also I don't them, to have a big exposure. Of
What? If you are a spirit, everybody
have that interest as normally people
have that it should be praised by
knows. What is there to expose, what
is there to show off, what is there to
everyone or it should be sort of in
come forward. Even if you are at
the newspapers. No interest in that.
the back, you know there is light.
You create for creation. For the sake
So you have to get out of your
of creation you create. And you just darkness because you are the light
enjoy that creation and you become and you spread light. Instead of that
very adaptive or you become so if you are in the darkness what light
congenial with all the things people can you spread. So your spirit cannot
say, talk or act with them.
have problems.
They will be offensive, they will
It has no fear. But above all it
be praising you. And all that. You
don't know, that they are praising you. and that is the sign of you, being a
has wisdom, tremendous wisdom
Even sometimes when you say "Shri
very higher personality. As I told you
this is evolution and when you are
Mataji ki Jai" I also say and then I
forget they are talking about me.
transformed, you are evolved above.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
January - February
2001
25
be hit with the Bible and she got such
Very different nature you become
a fright that I was laughing. I was
saying, look at the stupidity, this lady
has came to hit me with the Bible.
mean I can understand stone or
anything else but Bible will never hit
me. All these things have happened
in your presence, and you know about
and you stand up. The Sahaja Yogis
are like other people. What is the
use of taking to Sahaja Yoga. Who
I
was Christ. He was the son of a
carpenter. He never got education.
But what did he do. He was the spirit.
He reflected god within him and
that's why he got himself crucified them. There are negative forces that
also. In Sahaja Yoga you do not have try to harm you. They will harm you
badly, they will harm you mentally.
They might harm you emotionally.
There are no such testing things But when you are above this. Then
for you. But your value system is to no one harms you. At least you never
be checked. You must find out how feel the harm. You are not bothered
to get crucified.
are you working about the harm. But what have you
introspection. Should ask yourself. created. Today I had some ladies and
Now, "Mr Sahaja Yogi, How are some men and all for divorce. After
you?" Are you indulging into all these getting married into Sahaja Yoga, they
things that these people who are not want to have divorce. Can you
self-realized are doing. Just try to imagine? I was shocked and they had
find out. Because the growth of funny ideas that my husband is like
Sahaja Yoga is shown in your my brother. I said, really. All kinds
behaviour, in your styles, on your of stupid ideas coming into their
face. There are no wrinkles on the heads. I mean there is no light of spirit
person like this. He has no worry. in them. If you have the light of spirit
You don't worry then how will you then your understanding is very
out through
get wrinkles.
different. You don't worry about
yourself. You are only worried about
Such a person doesn't get upset
with anyone. I mean, on the contrary others and you try to find out
he laughs at things. Once in a church, solutions for them. You try to help
them. It is very easy for you. What
in Switzerland, one lady come to hit
me with the Bible and I started IS so easy for the light? To burn.
laughing I said what a thing I am, to Once it is enlightened it is burning.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 26
January- February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
at the door said, No, you cann't
Its difficult for it to go out of the
meet Him. He said Alright, you just
light. But human beings, I cannot
understand even after realization, go and tell him that Sudama has
after growing for years together come. He was sitting on the throne,
thing are so stupid, that they don't discussing something. He said,
realize the value of their self- Sudama has come! He Rushed out
realization. It is something the spirit, and went to the door and hugged
you can't kill it. It can't blow off.
him again and again and He said
This light will go off. But the light "Why are you standing here?" He
of spirit will never go off. What is
took him and put him on the throne
the oil that keeps it. It is your that He was supposed to sit and he
compassion, is love, care of others. told his wife, "please come and wash
I know there are people who are
his feet." And then they brought for
him clothes and all that and gave him
very dominating, may
troublesome, but care for them. You
be
a bath. He made him sleep on his
know that they are not like you, they bed. See the love of Shri Krishna.
are not complete. They have He had very dirty feet, all were
problems. So care for them. But cracked. He tried to put on them
instead of that you start thinking that
why should I care for him. How does he could be alright. He tried to do
some sort of a medicine by which
he care for me or something. Then whatever was possible to cure those
you are finished. So this kind of a crackes and he asked him to sleep
reflection or I should say, a reaction
is not that of spirit. A spiritual fan
on his bed. And asked the ladies to
him,
person's reactions are very very
different. In the life of Shri Krishna, compassion of Shri Krishna which
so that he can sleep. See the
he had a friend who was very poor
shows so beautifully. Are we that
and he wanted to meet Shri Krishna compassionate. There was no need
and the wife of the friend gave him for Him to do that, no drama,
some rice.
nothing but His heart took a
As you must take something for spontaneous decision. When He
your friend. He was little-shy and
heard, Sudama is there, he rushed
there. He felt so happy that my old
when he went to Shri Krishna, Shri
friend has come. Then when he went
Krishna was in his palace and people
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 January - February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
27
to Hasthinapur, there Duryodhan, Yogi, it does not mean that you are
the Kaurava's eldest son came and higher than others. But you are
asked him "Why don't you come different. You are above them. You
and stay in my palace?" He said have no superiority. That's why you
Alright I will come and stay but I are different. You are so humble,
will go and have food with Vidur. that's why you are different.
Vidur was the son of a maid. He
You are so joyous, you are so
went and had his food with Vidur.
Vidur being a poor man. I don't peaceful that's why you are different.
know, what food he must have
There are so many things I can tell
you from the life of Shri Krishna,
given him. While Duryodhan would
have given him sumptuous food. So showing he was called Yogeshwara.
for such people the taste, the level He was the lord of Yoga. It is because
of food does not matter. It was the He was Virata but He showed His
respect of Vidur, who was a realized form only to Arjuna and on one else.
soul. Respecting other Sahaja Yogis. Because nobody was like Arjuna.
If a Sahaja Yogi respects somebody Arjuna also got a fright when he saw
who is a governor, I cann't it. So he lived like Shri Krishna,
understand. The spirit is above
like a cow-boy. He was living in
Gokul and He never showed off his
everything and does not respect a
Sahaja Yogi if there is something powers. His powers were within
wrong with him. He should himself which were expressing
understand that a spiritual person is Spontaneously. This power has
higher than all these people who wisdom and discretion, complete
have these all kinds of big names discretion. If he does not have, then
behind them. And that love is shown this is not divine power, this is some
in everybody's life. All the saints, satanic power. Because somebody is
all the incarnations, everyone had nice to you if you are nice to that
that love, which was above person, nothing more, Mostly we had
everything. Without expecting in India people who are called as
Avdhutas. They were the realized
anything. Not doing it just to expect
something. It is a kind of a souls who had gone away from the
personality which really reflects societies from the multitudes and
God's love. That reflection should gone and lived in some small little
come from you. You are a Sahaja
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 28
January - February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
place, or some cave or some place, be literature, may be writing,
hidden from others. Because they whatever it is, you have to create
thought nobody is going to
understand them so what's the use Sahaja Yogis. That is the main
and above all you have to create
creation you have to achieve. That's
of talking to them.
the main thing you have to have is
They were singled out, one
creating Sahaja Yogis all over. I am
person here and one person there.
What could they do? They were not
there, I can go to places, can have
programmes, do everything but you
have to show with your own example
like you, so many of Sahaja Yogis
together. You have so many friends
and so many others with you. They they have achieved that state. You
that this is something great. How
were lonely people and they hid
themselves from the society. They will be the ones who will really
should also achieve that state. So you
would not meet people. Because if
inspire them, who will really make
them follow you and take to a life
they tried anything, they would be
crucified. But not you people
of a Sahaja Yogi. Actually you are
Mahayogis if you become complete.
because you have society. You have
a beautiful enlightened society of
And you have to become. Nothing is
very good friends, of very good
spiritual people. With all this if you
more important them to become a
Mahayogi by which your spirit gives
cann't create, what should I say. You
joy, peace and blessings to every one.
have to create something, may be
May God bless you.
art, may music, may be poetry, may
cont'd from page 14.
not married to an ordinary girl but
don't allow to go along with other
men. It is not allowed at all, in no
way. I think you are all sensible and And you pay all the respect to her.
will understand your responsibility, That's how you will glorify Sahaja
of marrying a Sahaja Yogini. You are Yoga.
you are marrying a Sahaja Yogini.
May God Bless You.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
January - February 2001
29
GUDI PADAWA PUJA
Noida Bhawan, 05-04-2000
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
In India Nava Ratri falls twice in a force was manifested in the centre.
year. Once it is in the month of Chaitra In the form of Durga and her other
as it is today. On this day Devi is forms-manifested in Heart Chakra.
worshiped as Shail Putri, means the She is present there. If some one hurts
daughter of Himalaya. Devi has many you, confuses or disturbs you then this
other names also but first of all She power will protect you and destroy
incarnated as Shail Putri in the cold your enemy. When Kundalini rises
of Himalayas. She incarnated and and reaches the Heart Chakra then it
whatever She was to do. She started
manifests and becomes more
there. Further story is known to you.
powerful and effective because
Kundalini is Jagdamba. In Sahaja
Daksha did not invite Lord Shiva in
the Havana that he performed and
Yoga when Kundalini is awakened it
settles in heart chakra. It protects you
Shail Putri was the consort of Lord
Shiva. She is called Sati because she
and takes care of you nicely. No one
entered the Holy fire of Havana and
could harm you at all, if you keep
oblated herself. But by then Lord the Mother in your heart. The power
Shiva reached there. He lifted her of the Mother always protects the
burnt up body from the fire. Burnt children. Whenever there is some
pieces of the body of Shail Putri fell danger, it is mentioned in medical
at many places. All these places are terminology that the sternum bone
considered to be Shakti Pithas, the starts shaking and antibodies that are
places of worship, as there is in present all around get alarmed. In
Vindhyachala and many other places. Sahaja language these antibodies are
Her power moves there and it is said called Ganas. They get ready to fight
that it Sanctifies everything. Her it out. She is the empress of these
Seventh power is considered to be the
Ganas. They follow her commands
Power of Destruction. Shakti as there is no difference between Shri
manifested itself on the right side as Ganesha and Devi. Both are so
Savitri and Gayitri but the destroying identified. Ganesha is Her Son and
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30
January - February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
She is His Mother. In Sahaja Yoga powers otherwise the work of
she protects all those who have awakening the Kundalini would not
have been possible in this extreme
themselves. She protects them just Kaliyuga. So Devi had to assume the
form of Maha Maya because if the
negative forces recognised that she is
in
awakened Shri Ganesha
like her own children at every step.
She supports them because she is the
Mother and you are the Ganesha. But
Adishakti then they will be after Her
life. Prior to that she never incarnated
the Ganesha within you should be
as Mahamaya. She always incarnated
fully awakened and pure. If there is
in her original and powerful form. In
obstruction in this chakra, it should
be removed.
those days no one could think of
killing the Devi. That was altogether
Thus she performs many duties. But
first of all she incarnated as Shail born in the lap of Himalayas and
Putri. Before that when Adi Shakti married to the most powerful Deity-
different time. Moreover she was
came on this Earth, She incarnated as
Lord Shiva. So, many a times people
a cow. Gokul, the area of parama
are confused about the Navratris.
chaitanya was created. Earlier, Adi
Shakti remained there as cow. Also regarding Devi, they say that she
Whatever is created, its reflection is Mahakali, Maha Saraswati and all.
But they are part and parcel of
Adishakti. They manifested at a
comes in us, as Shiva is the reflection
of Sada Shiva. Devi manifested
herself as Shail Putri. But in the
proper time. The way goddess
Shakambhari manifested in Meerut
kingdom of Parama Chaitanya Adi
District. She increases prodctivity of
crops. When I was in Meerut I also
used to produce vegetables. Such big
Shakti incarnated in the form of a
cow. That is the reason we do not kill
cows. She is the mother. Lot of
difference is there in Indian and size of brinzals, tomatoes and
foreign cows. I remember, my grand
daughter used to say, "Nani why the
cucumbers that one could not
beleive! This is the power of Goddess
Shakambhari. Goddess has different
colour of buffaloes here in the West
is white. Treta and Dwaper Yuga were forms and names and sometimes
not the time for Adishakti to people are confused about them. But
incarnate. She was to come in
she manifests herself according to the
Kaliyuga with all the Devis and need of the particular area. Durga and
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
31
January February 2001
Chamunda and many others are her
should children take birth where there
different forms. The way different is no motherhood?
deities manifest themselves to do
certain thing, similarly the Goddess About India, I think, that men should
love and respect the women. Maybe
manifests herself as their power after sometime India is considered to
Shakti. Without 'the Shakti no deity
could work out things, whether it is be the ultiamte guide for spiritualism.
incarnation of Rama, Krishna, Jesus But the condition of women in India,
Christ or anyone else. All of them had particularly in Northern part of it is
a Goddess as their power (Shakti).
very miserable. Respect of women is
That is the reason so much out of question there. Quite frequently
they are beaten up. And then the
importance and respect is given to dowry system is there to torture the
mother in our country. Indians are
women. Men always try to show
down the women and prove himself
worshippers of Shakti, irrespective of
all the difference and problems. They
superior which he actually is not. The
are the worshippers of Shakti.
countries, where women are insulted,
Those who follow Vishnu or Shiva perish and same is the case of the
are also worshippers of Shakti
country where no respect is given to
COLuntry
because Shakti is the mother and
the mother. So women are not to be
behaved like that. But at the same
mother belongs to all. Mother is a
very significant institution in our time men should not run after the
country. So we should always respect women. Men and women are no
the mother. The women in our doubt equal but they are not similar.
But I have seen in north India. There
is absolutely no respect of women and
they are tortured. They are harassed
country are not so much spoiled. They
know the qualities that earn respect
for the mother and help produce the
nice children. Those ladies who have
in every way. We are trying to change
no respect for motherhood, do not get
the condition of women in India. Lot
children. It is the case in Germany, of work needs to be done in that
America and some other European
direction. If the people of this country
countries. The women there do not develop creativity in them, our Bharat
have motherly love in them. Of Bhumi will flourish and become
they
understanding this factor now. Why
have
started
Shasya Shyamalam. No new
legislations are needed for this. With
course
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 January - February 2001
32
The Divine Cool Breeze
in ourselves we have to realise that develop your powers then you will
understand it immediately. About
women are the shaktis. I am not
talking of the spoiled ladies. every human being you will come to
Otherwise they are like Devis and it know on your vibrations. At once we
is the duty of everyman to respect shall know because our system has
them, protect them and help them in become sensitive now. But for that
every way. But generally men meditation is important. There is
dominate the women. If men have no other way. Big pujas and bhajans
superior brains, the women have
loving hearts. So she should be meditate and introspect. Why am I
understood and respected, as long as doing it? What is the purpose. We
she behaves like Shakti. Spoiled should be ourselves and not others.
women could not be respected. So There will be no use of that. You have
women must have divine qualities. to correct yourself. If you want to
have no significance. We should
correct others then you have to watch
Such women could be denounced but
yourself. What am I doing? Why am
I thinking like that? Why such things
come in my brain? You have to watch
yourself and look at others with love.
sometimes it is seen that dominating
women are worshiped and nice ladies
are harassed. Sahaja Yogis have to
become wonderful consorts. Between
themselves they should have love and
understanding, only then Sahaja Yoga
will grow.
Our heart should be full of love for
others. You have to see that I love
and forgive others.
Many forms of the Devi are described So there are two things, one is
in our scriptures. There is absolutely meditation and the other one is
no error in it. But to understand its introspection. These are the two
depth, one has to grow deep in Sahaja methods of human growth. In
Yoga. On vibrations you will achieve meditation chaitanya makes you
the power of descrimination. You will grow and by introspection you
see that all the forms of the the Devi remove all your negativities.
have different vibrations. This is very Suppose a river is flowing and many
subtle quality. The more you go stones are there to obsruct the flow
deeper in Sahaja Yoga the more you of the water. If the stones are
will understand it. If you are removed, the flow will be normal.
established yourself in meditation and Similarly Kundalini will flow with
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 January-February 2001
33
The Divine Cool Breeze
state comes one gets nourished like
a small child. All these powers help
great speed once the chakras are clear.
You will enjoy this change. I know
you people meditate regularly but you
have to introspect also. You have to
him every moment. The Divine
power provides all the necessities
think about it also. There is no need to such a person and that is the
to criticise. You have to watch reason we worship the Shakti more
yourself as a witness and see, 'do I than any other incarnation.
love others?' Am I pure? Have I
This Divine force makes us recognize
the incarnation. This power is your
controlled my ego? If you see all this
then all these negativities will run
Guru, your Mother and your Guide.
There is no need to follow any other
away from you, the way a thief runs
away if the master is awake, These
power. Once you have accepted this
negativities will run away, if you start
introspecting. This clearance, this Divine force it will make you
purity is essential. Kundalini is doing
understand all other incarnations.
Had you not accepted me, you would
not have reached any where. Christ
its work. She will help you, but all
these negativities will run away if you
said that I shall send you the
just keep your attention there.
Comforter. He said Holy Ghost
would come. If he could do the work
Some people are power oriented.
Even after getting the power they do
then why should He has said this?
not stop. There is no end to this race.
Once you realise that it is foolishness
Mohammed Sahib also said the same
thing because he said that the time has
to run after these things, then it will
be alright. But people keep running,
running and running. They have no
time to enjoy whatever is available.
When Sahaja state comes, all the
not yet come to take the people to
absolute truth. But he told that such a
state is likely to come. A powerful
incarnation will be there on the earth.
You only keep you attention pure and
Divine powers will be at your remember the almighty. But he did
disposal. They will take care of you, not tell about the collective
guide you and bless you. So long as consciousness. You are blessed with
it, and now you have to grow in it.
you keep on saying that I have to
You have to meditate and introspect
and you will achieve the third
dimension that is you will be able to
do this work, I shall do like that and
so on, then you have not yet achieved
that Sahaja state. When Sahaja
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 January - February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
34
see the beauty and goodness of is the daughter of Hiamalaya which
others. Over looking the negativities is the highest mountain. From there
of the people your attention will go
one could view the whole world. So
let Her attention fall on all the human
to their virtues and you will adopt
them. You cannot imagine how much beings. Shail Putri looks at people
you enjoy the state of introspection! with curiosity of small children.
You will enjoy the beauty that is Shailja is her another name.
within you and the beauty of others. According to our scriptures the first
incarnation of the Devi was Shail
When you start searching the
positivity in others then you will be
surprised to find that everyone has
Putri. It is celebrated everywhere in
India. In Bihar they celebrate on Sixth
Day.
some good points. But they are unable
to derive joy out of this goodness.
Without having a nose how could one
smell the fragrance of a flower? So
you should have a heart in you which
Right sided people should not chant
Gayatri Mantra. They should say the
mantra of the left side and left sided
people should chant the mantra of
could understand that love and right side. This will give them
goodness. You should take to that, balance. This is the time to enjoy. It
you are capable of enjoying the is very significant. I was also born at
fragrance of others. Whether that such a time. Navratri starts after 21st
person could enjoy or not. So you
have to learn to enjoy others. This is combination. Indians sing many
the work of the Shakti. Shakti is the Chaitra songs. Indian singers and
giver of joy. When you start enjoying poets could discover joy in Chaitra
then you will understand that now I and rendered there feelings in poetry.
of March. So it is a tremendous
have become Sahaja. So in Sahaja Villagers celebrate in the month of
state, attention will not go to the Chaitra. If you listen to their songs,
negativity. What is the use? You do
not have to go and kill the negative
you will wonder how they are full of
joy, enthusiasm and love! There is
people. That is the job of the Devi.
You don't have to do it. To find out
abundant joy in the songs of village
women. Because of their pure heart
they could achieve this joy. They had
the joy hidden in different things and
enjoy it is inherent in you.
the capacity to receive it. Now we
Today is the day of Shail Putri. She people have become a little right
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 January-February 2001
35
The Divine Cool Breeze
we shall meditate and introspect
sided. Yet Sahaja state is to be
achieved. You could have more joy
daily. We shall introspect about
ourselves, not about others and lead
from this Chaitra Song than what they
our lives very sweetly. We should
express and behave in a very sweet
could have since you are in Sahaja
state. With great joy you can listen to
these songs. King Vikramaditya manner, so that we do not hurt
celebrated the third day of the others. If at all we have to lay
Navratri and named it as Akshaya imphasis on some thing that should
Tritya (Eternal Third Day). He got his also be done very lovingly. You have
calenders start from the Akshaya to think as to how to speak with
Tritya Day. Shalivahana kings started others. Its a routine for me. Such and
Samvatsara (afrom this very such person is coming, how shall I
day. So the new year of both starts talk to him and make him understand?
from this very day. Shalivahana When we see this love all around, it
of fills our heart. Exchange this love
Vikramaditya and defeated them. with others and talk to them sweetly.
Shalivahanas are very truthful. To Sahaja Yogis should not be angry with
celebrate their victory they started this anyone. Meet people very
Shak-Samvat (Hda). First day of new affectionately. You should be pure
kingdom
the
attacked
year is Akshaya Tritya. The Hizri of within and this purity of heart should
Muslims also falls on this very day. be visible. There should be no anger
Persians called it Navroze. All of and hatred. Only then people will
them were inspired by the same appreciate you. Now you are all self-
power. They have attached big realised and I am telling you, how
importance to this day. It is said that your personality should become
any new enterprise which is started magnatic. I hope you follow this
on this day is a roaring succes. So advice and look within with love, not
people start a new enterprises and an
auspicious thing on this day because
this day is very auspicious.
with hatred. You will be able to see
your powers and you will become a
Satvik (pure) person and Sahaja Yoga
will spread all around. Its my vision
Its a great pleasure to me that all of
that the whole world is transformed
and every human being becomes
you came here today. We have known
about the importance of this day.
Sahaja Yogi.
Today we have to be determined that
My blessing to you all.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 36
January - February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
THE IMPORTANCE OF DEDICATION AND DEVOTION
Nirmala Palace, London 6 Aug. 1982
Today I will talk to you about the so stunned. It is beyond you, it's
importance of Dedication in Sahaja fantastic, it is too much. It is really
Yoga, and the Devotion that one beyond you.
should have.
Now think of it. "You have got
Actually when we are close to realisation." Can you believe it that
mountain, we can not see much of it, you can, in your life time you can get
and that's why we don't realise the selfrealization? If somebody had told
volume that is so close to us, the you this, you would never have
greatness that is facing us. This is one believed it, that how can you get your
of the illusions that works out, for realisation in this birth? Of course,
people who do not realise it mentally you were seeking, because people
what they are in for, where are they, were saying you have to seek, also
what have they found, what is self- you felt you have to seek, but you
realisation, what is its magnitude, how never thought that this will materialize
far they have to go, why are they like this, that you will get your
chosen, what is their purpose of life, realization.
how far they have come up, how far
Then after getting realisation, you
they can understand?. All these things
are beyond the grasp, and one gets could not feel "What it was". As if
stunned. One does not know what has you have been dropped into the ocean
happened to him when he gọt and you do not know what is the
realisation actually.
dimension of this ocean, how far you
have gone into it, what is it, where
That's why, to understand this is only
possible if you can understand how
to dedicate yourself, how to devote
are we, what is our purpose?" To add
up to all the mess, we become
thoughtless! So you cannot even find
out as to rationally what it is.
yourself.
If you want to analyse anything on
the basis of your nationality, you are
So the immensity of this experience,
the glory of your Mother's coming,
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 January-February 2001
37
The Divine Cool Breeze
or the precious gift of your self-
realization, nothing can be realised
through your understanding? Can you
understand what has happened? No,
you cannot. Because rationality
granted. You are harassing yourself
by accepting that forgiveness. If you
think all the time "O, Mother you a
so forgiving, please forgive me". You
are already forgiven, as it is. Once you
call me Mother, I have forgiven. But
re
cannot give you the dimensions into
what you have fallen now. The what is the advantage? You do not
have any advantage out of it. You are
a loser. And this point atleast
rationally if you understand, then
you will understand what is Devotion.
rationality is actually broken up.
There is no rationality left now
anymore to even communicate as to
what you have been seeking and
where have you landed.
So, in Devotion of Sahaja Yoga, one
has to realise that the things that are
in Sahaja Yoga, that you have seen in
Sahaja Yoga, are beyond your mind,
first thing. Definitely they are beyond
human conception. So on human
level you do not discuss them, and
So the only method you have got now,
or only way is left to you, for a drop
which has become an ocean, is to
dissolve those in the ocean, so that
you feel the ocean at least. And to
communicate with other drops in such
you do not talk about it. But on the
a way that you know the whole
collective level you can talk.
through all of them.
So first is a complete Devotion, it is
And when you come to the collective
very important. In this incarnation
level, then you have to understand that
relationship with me is more
established, better established, if you
only it is so very important, because
you have got realization. If you did
not have realisation" Alright, establish your' relationship with
murmuring souls, alright. Half baked others, in a very collective and
people, alright. Little
misbehaving, alright. This can be
bit homogeneous way.
forgiven, that can be forgiven. As I told you, the drop becomes the
everybody thinks that Mother is ocean, and the drop has to become
forgiving us. But that is not the point. the ocean by dissolving all its drop-
ness with other drops. And all the
I am forgiving because of my own drops dropping their dropness
nature. But 'you' do not take it for become the ocean ultimately.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 38
January-February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
allow them, they can not be there. No
So we see that Devotion is double
evil person is your enemy, because
he cannot be effective if you are
edged. One is to each other, and one
is to your Mother.
spiritually equipped. So, you are your
own enemy, is decided. The only way
to get rid of that enemy of yours, is
In Sahaja Yoga, whatever I see, you
can not see. This is proved or not, to
you people? Or do you want more that you have to Dedicate.
proofs? Now it is proved that Mother
sees much beyond us, and whatever Supposing you say that I have faith
she sees, happens. So anybody who in Mother, or in God, so you are
tries to play tricks with Mother, is holding on to something, is not it?
actually playing tricks with himself. And you are discarding something.
*Any tricks you try to play with me, But this hold has to be 'very' strong.
or you think that Mother is very Rationally at that time when you are
forgiving. So she will forgive us, - sinking, will you rationalize whether,
'really' you are torturing yourself, you "Ishould hold the hand of this person
are - it is detrimental to you.
11
who is saving, is correct or not." No,
your grip will be very strong. It will
Many people are there who will say
that, 'It is my left Swadhishthana.
Some will say, "I was possessed, there
be extremely strong and you will grip
it with 'full-force, with full faith that
somehow or the other save me.
was bhoot." Somebody will blame
something else. Whatever you are
blaming, actually who is asking you
the explanation? It is only you asking
yourself. You are not facing yourself.
And that kind of a feeling should be
within us, that "I am a person who is
sinking because of myself. And if I
am to be saved. I have to be
Absolutely 'completely' submerged
So the devotion to me means actually
facing yourself. You face your self
first of all, and see for yourself what
in Sahaja Yoga 'Absolutely I have to
be one with it. Then only I can be
saved."
are you doing.
Because at this level, where you are
realized souls of a higher level, now
for a next jump - as I was saying to
you- is Devotion. Anything else has
be secondary, under the
You are your own enemy. No body is
your enemy. Your Mother is not,
definitely. She is not your enemy, by
any chance. And no bhoots are your
enemies, in the way, if you do not
to
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-40.txt 
 39
January-February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
circumstances. If it is primary and psychology. She might be insecure,
Mother." This is typically somewhere
your attention is still on that, then you
cannot have this second jump.
read in the book-" because of
insecurity somebody does that."
Actually now we have seen in Sahaja
First jump you have already had, you
Yoga, that most of the so called
unsecured are the 'most' aggressive
have got your realizatioin. But from
first jump to second jump, you have
to work hard. You have come to the
second jump. In the second jump you
haye to face it up. You should not feel
disgusted with yourself, nor dejected
people. They play tricks with others,
spoil their lives, and enjoy it. They
are the greatest sadists ever born. You
have seen those people. And that is
with yourself, nothing. But treat
yourself as a separate entity.
how they play tricks with themselves.
Now once you understand that you
And Dedication is actually turning
back to yourself and looking forward
towards the Divine personality in you.
are not to play tricks with yourself.
Why do you want to play tricks with
yourself? Why do you want to play
Once there is Divine personality in
you, there is no problem of Devotion.
You will just become one with it, you
tricks with yourself? You have to be
yourself, that's all. We should not be
our own enemies. Are we?
start enjoying it.
So once you start facing yourself, you
will like yourself. You would not feel
But this rationality is the worst thing.
that plays tricks with you, which disgusted. Because that is your self I
deviates you from understanding that
am talking about - is glorious, is
whatever life you have led so far has
beautiful, is "without' any Kalanka
nien (blemish) on that, is absolutely
been a very material, gross life. You
came out of it, you have grown out
detached.
of it. You have come up. Now, to
But first of all your attention has to
accept it, that "This detachment is my
life. I am a different personality.
blossom, to become fragrant, you
have to give up rationality. That is a
binding.
"
Detachment is my nourishment.
Try to avoid rationality, try to avoid
Detach yourself.
arguments. Try to avoid giving
reasons. Even now I find sometimes
Sahaja Yogis give an explanation of
One gentleman came to see me in my
house. I had a very beautiful lamp,
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-41.txt 
 40
January-February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
and he liked it. I said, you (can) have
you, once you are a master, you play
tricks with them.
it." He was so amazed, you see. His
wife telephone to me, "How could it
So many times I have seen. I have said
so many things, and then again after
be? How could you give away such a
nice lamp?" I said, "What is there?
sometime, people start talking about
it. Within scientific proof or things
like that, you have seen that, many a
t
times it has happened.
Am I going to carry it with me when
I die? Is it going to go with me? Just
see rationally. If he has liked it, let
him have it. I have so many lamps in
the house, if he takes one how does it Now when I say something I am sure
matter?" She said, "But you see I about it, what I say, I never say
asked my husband, will you give this
lamp like this, if you have, to her?
He said, no, I would not. I really.
would not, he said. He was very
anything but the Truth. I know that I
am saying only the truth. But I do not
go inside and find out, whether it is
truth or not. I don't read a book to
honest, he said, I would not. But still
find out. I do not ask you. I have faith
in myself, 'full faith' in myself.
Whatever I say is the truth, I know
I cannot understand, why not? So, you
know till the last end we are holding
on to something 'very' little there.
for definite that whatever I say comes
out truth. But that is not your case.
If this, even a little bit is holding the
That is not your case, that whatever
saree, you know that, that can holo
the whole saree. Even a little bit is
you say is the truth. So first is to
establish that state, that whatever I say
attaching to this saree, the saree can
be held back. The whole thing you
will be the truth.
can hold it, with one little pin.
Now how do you do it?
The tongue should be such, that
whatever you say should be the truth.
Ultimately it will come out as truth.
And that is why the Dedication should
All these small pins that are there the
hangs up, are to be denied, to be seen
going further. Look at yourself, "Oh
that's Mr. Ego, alright. Now let me
see how do you go back"- To see all
those things. You see, as a play you
be there.
What Dedication: "Why should I tell
should see yourself. And then play
lies?" - There is no need to tell lies.
tricks with your ego and super ego.
Even if I tell lies, it will come truth,
Actually they are playing tricks with
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-42.txt 
 41
The Divine Cool Breeze
January-February 2001
(faai); tejas, sharpness of light.
That 'tejasvita' is there, sharpness of
light. That is the proof of your truth"
in my case, so called lies. They are
'never' lies. If I say to somebody, he
is a bad man, apparently to you. "Oh
You are not afraid of any Prime
Mother, he is such a fine man! How
can you say such a thing about him?
Minister or any Minister, or any king,
or anyone. But "This is the fact. This
is the thing I know. I am a realized
soul, I am the truth." If you say," I
am the truth," whatever you will say
We had one Mr. Michael like that.
"Oh, he is such a loving person,
Mother "Somebody said, Mother, are
you jealous of him? - upto that extent
you know! But when he showed his
real teeth, you see, then people
will be the truth, no doubt about it.
What ever you will do will be the
truth. But say, "I am the truth.
understood him.
So to develop that kind of But for that a real purification is
understanding about the truth, first of needed about facing yourself fully, in
all you should absolutely fix yourself Dedication means, you are holding on
on the truth. And the truth is "That to your Mother, you are holding on
you are the instrument of God, that to Sahaja Yoga, you are holding on
you have got realization, that you to that truth which you have found
have got a special awareness which out- And here you are facing others.
people do not have," Stand on that.
And proclaim it. You are not to be
afraid of it. You have got realization,
no doubt. You have felt it. Say it, "I
Without that you cannot do it, your
source is that. You are standing on the
truth. And that is such a power, such
a strength.
have got realization. Nothing doing,
All of them, you see -Christ had that
I know I am a realized soul." Firm on
power, Mohammad had that power,
all these great people had that powers
"To say the truth, with full courage
with that assertion that people will
accept it". And they would even suffer
for that, they would not mind. But
whatever is the truth has to be said.
that.
In this expression of truth, you have
to be like the light. The light asserts.
It not only asserts, but it shows others
also that it shines, it shows others, that
"I am the light." That, "you walk in
my light. And if you don't try to do
it, I may burn you." They have that,
what you call, that "tejasvita"
That is the first point one should know
about Dedication That you are
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-43.txt 
 42
January- February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
dedicated fully, that you are not afraid
But at the same time you have to have
complete Dedication.
of anyone. You are not worried about
your losses.
Supposing there is no oil in this
Some people have lost their heads, (lamp), it will all go off. It has to have
also, completely cut their heads. oil. So the Dedication part is the oil
People have tortured them. Some in you, is the attachment. Complete
people had all their money taken attachment to your source. That's the
away, have been tortured in every Dedication. But that Dedication
way, but they thought this was the should not give you any other ideas
truth, they stood by it. Some of them
but of a light which shines, which
were stupid fools, they stood for corrects others, guides the path of
something that was not truth, they did. other people.
If that is not so, then the source that
But 'now' you know that you are
standing on the truth, and for that you
should be willing to sacrifice.
you are tapping is not coming to you
fully, and that your light is not burning
Because you are not sacrificing the properly.
truth. What you are sacrificing is So, into Dedication when you go, you
13
untruth.
must not think that it is any
For that you require people of surrendering, the so called
strength and courage, and not these surrendering, that you become like a
half-baked people you see, morning cabbage. That is the idea people have,
till evening asking for forgiveness that you become like cabbage. But
you become dynamic! You become
from Mother. What is it? What is
there to ask for forgiveness because I real power; not of destruction, but of
am forgiving you every moment. But construction, I mean, for destruction
what are you doing yourself? What
you do not need much power. Only
for construction you need power. For
sort of a person you are?
destruction how much do you need?
You think about it, that you have to - Very little. You can destroy the
stand on the truth. For that you have whole thing in no time. But, for the
to be a strong, courageous person with construction you 'really' require
that sharpness, with that tejasvita "great' power. And that power,
within you of the light of the beacon.
sustained power, flowing power has
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-44.txt 
 January February 2001
43
The Divine Cool Breeze
and comes and says to me, "Mother,
to be there. For that Dedication is
forgive me.", or does something harsh
needed.
just for the whim of the mind:
"Mother, forgive me." But when you
Holding on to your source of power,
you have to stand firm energetically.
*Without' any fear. That is the truth.
That is the truth you have to achieve.
That's very important.
ask for that I would like to know, have
you given compassion to another
person? Even after getting
forgiveness from me, that source of
of
But this is only one side of the thing.
That's not sufficient. Just being the
truth, the aspect of one side is there.
forgiveness, that
compassion, have you given
compassion to others? Have you been
compassionate to others? You see, it
should not be one sided. If you are
taking the advantage of my
compassion, it should not be one
sided that you use it for your own
benefit and forget about it. Then you
will never grow you will never grow.
source
But the other side of it is, that when
this source comes to you, you become
the Compassion. The truth and the
Compassion are one thing. You
would not believe, but it is so. Like,
the wick and the oil combine to form
the light, it is the burning of the oil
gives you the light, in the same way
If you have to grow, then you must
store that compassion within.
the compassion gives you the truth.
There is no difference whatsoever,
Whatever compassion I have given
only the state is different. That you
you, love I have given you, you must
cannot see the light which is oil, and
oil which is burning.
store within you. And give that back
to others. Otherwise you will be
finished, you will be nowhere. Is the
growth which is sustained only - not
only by sucking from one side but by
So compassion is the one which is the
source as well as your store. So from
the source of compassion, you get
giving to others. Otherwise you will
your compassion.
be stagnated. There has to be outflow.
You see, I have seen people who want
to have compassion from me; they
want that I should love them. But
reflect it back; do they love others like
that? I have known people, say for
one person says harsh things to other
But that is a very hard thing, because
people are very good at taking
compassion from Mother. Or even if
they are compassionate, they will be
mostly compassionate to people who
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-45.txt 
 January - February 2001
44
The Divine Cool Breeze
are, say, in Viet Nam, not in the Now the basic thing is, that our
Ashram. They are more worried Compassion, if that is flowing, then
about Viet Nam people, you know. only can we get compassion from
"Oh Mother! We are worried about Mother. I have done t0o much
Viet Nam People, we are collecting compassion business and what I find
money for them, and we are trying to that now unless and until you flow it
send money to Viet Nam.," And here how am I to give you compassion? I
among Ashramites - fighting. This is mean there is no space left for it now.
Better give it away, empty yourself a
little bit, then I can give you more
Sahaja Yogis among themselves are compassion. It's simple business. In
a different race, and they have to this respect one has to understand, that
support each other, all the time, and the source can not flow unless and
look after them. When I find Sahaja until it expands the flow of it.
not compassion by any chance.
Yogis criticizing Sahaja Yogis, I am
amazed! I am really amazed! Because
Like the river Thames. We went to
see the place from where it starts. It
you are part and parcel of the same.
How can you criticiz! One eye is a small little stream, from seven
criticizing another, I just cannot streams, - little-little. 'Very little-little,
we can say trickling down it has
become the river Thames. Supposing
it does not widen, that will stop at the
beginning only. It cannot come out.
understand. I can criticize, alright, but
why should you? Why should you
criticize each other? Only thing you
have to do is to love each other.
It cannot flow. It is not because it is
angry or upset or anything like that,
Christ has said it thrice, I must have
said it 108 times already that, "you
have to love each other, that is the
but because of the nature of its flow
only it cannot flow, what to do?
only way you are expressing
Compassion". If I have given you any So that is what it is, that one has to
love any time, you have to have give compassion to others. It should
patience with others, love for others. not be formal compassion, or the
I sometimes try to coax people, and I affected one, but it should be a natural
find that people immediately come
out with some sort of criticism of feeling' from within. It is not an
one, very natural, spontaneous
expression of your ego, super ego or
others or something like that.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-46.txt 
 45
January-February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
being, means it reaches the source, It
over-sentimentality, but is a kind of
is in this light we have to understand.
an understanding that he is a Sahaja
Yogi, you are a Sahaja Yogi, you are
brothers. Not the way the brothers Exclusiveness, or "We are now
have been, but a different type of married, we should have separate
brothers who are 'spiritual brothers.
. place, we should live separately". - it
is alright, you must have little privacy
as married people, I am not saying
You are spiritual people.
So the compassion has to be there, that. But as far as compassion is
and unless and until you develop concerned, as married people, you
much more
passionate fatherly or motherly have
feeling for others... I mean I am the compassionate. But you will only
be
to
worry about your 'own children,
about your 'own comfort, about your
"own' husband, about your own
mother of a person who is about a
hundred and eight years of age. You
have to really mother others, and have
that feeling of compassion and love wife'. In Sahaja Yoga, there is no
for others. You don't have to think place for such people. It is all
about your own comfort, you don't collective. When you bring sweets for
have to think about your advantages, your own child, bring for other
children in the Ashram. You are one
but you have to think about the
family and all the family has to move
with the same waves. I have told you
before that we cannot have separate
comfort of others. You have to think,
"What you can do to make others
comfortable," than to see what will
food arrangements, separate this and
make you comfortable.
So this flow of compassion when it separate that. In the same way, we
starts, the Dedication is complete. living for different people.
cannot have separate standards of
Because "Whatever we got from you,
Mother, we are giving it to others." We all have to enjoy whatever is
That is the Dedication. So the flow enjoyed by all of us. That should be
of Dedication is not one sided. It is so. And that should be achieved on
double sided. You stick on to material level. On emotional level any
something, you get connected with marriage which is absurd, which
something, to get something out of makes every one unhappy is useless.
it, you give it to others. And But marriages are made to make
ultimately it reaches the collective everyone happy. So before you decide
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-47.txt 
 46
January- February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
doing compassion. There is no other
to marry, think, that you are not
playing tricks. Playing tricks in Sahaja
Yoga is very-very dangerous. You are
not playing tricks with your
marriages, you are trying to involve
somebody else, thinking that Mother
purpose behind it. Only this will give
you something that is of permanent
nature, of a 'sthayi' () nature.
You have seen people as I was telling
in the morning, who have gone to an
would forgive you and all that. I will
organization, made a beautiful
organization out of it. And once they
forgive, but your ascent is difficult.
So do not try to play tricks with
anything that you have been doing Because they do not give anything
before, but change yourself substantial to that organization. And
completely, transform yourself what is to be given, is a large heart of
leave, the organization is finished.
completely.
compassion. If you do not give it that,
Now you change your attitude once you go away from that, the rest
of them are again barren. It is not
towards life. You can, because it is
growth. If you bring water, plant
changed already. If you try to be the
other person, you cannot be. Now you
have become a flower, now you
things and give water to that area then
it becomes very beautiful, and you
can say it is a very lush growth. But
cannot become suddenly the leaf.
as soon as that water source is
Now you are a flower, and you have
removed, it gets again dried up.
to live like a flower. And that is what
you have to remember, that
compassion is such an outflow, is Sahaja Yoga you not only grow as a
But Sahaja Yoga is different. In
such a natural thing for Sahaja Yogi.
It is not natural for anybody else.
Other people who talk of compassion
or this and that are actually not at all
plant, but also, as the source of the
plant. If this plant is removed from
here put somewhere else, it will give
water to other plants. Do you know
this new dimension that you have
within yourself? - That once this plant
is uprooted from here and taken out,
compassionate. They are doing it for
money, they are doing for position,
they are doing for ego satisfaction.
But you are having compassion
because you have to have it, jolly
well. It is flowing, the compassion,
because it has to flow. And you are
it will not die! Not at all. It will grow,
and it will make others grow. This is
another type of a growth that we have.
And it is a very different position we
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-48.txt 
 47
January-February 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze
are in, and that is what now I want,
that all of you, 'even' if you are
is only possible if you know that you
are here for a 'very great' universal
uprooted and put into any other place, task. Not only for England, for India
.. I have seen, when I ask people that or for America but you are here for a
you better shift from here to there, global task which is the epitome of
they just get frightened. "You better our evolution. This is the highest thing
go there and do this, they got we have to do for our creation and
frightened. You are a plant which can for over creator. And you are chosen
not only go and prosper in any place, for that. And so don't divert your
but, you will give the necessary attention to anything that is not
nourishment to other plants. That is fulfilling your own manifestation.
what you are! So do not stick on to Descard all that. Do not waste your
one place. If you stick on, then think energy. And your manifestation is
that there must be something wrong your Compassion, your Love.
with the place. Like a glue if you are
sticking on to one place, it is very
But still it should not remain rational.
Whatever I have said to you is just to
dangerous. And be sure, that you must
run away from such a place which put you into a condition where you
glues you. That does not mean that start sucking the Vibrations as well
as people are here, they never stay in as giving the vibrations. It is an action,
the house, all the time running out. It it is a happening that should take
does not mean that. Again I have to place, within you. It is not rationality,
strike that point. Because otherwise it is not thinking about it. Only by
the people are here, are all the time saying these things, I really stun your
running away from their houses. That thinking. You should allow this to
is not the point. The point is that you happen to you. Just with the Vibratory
should not be glued to anything, and awareness you should judge yourself,
not be afraid of leaving any place, "Am I the one who is giving
because now you are Sahaja Yogis. vibrations to the others? Am I the one
You have joined the ocean, and ocean
who has stored these vibrations or am
can take you anywhere. So just Igetting ruined?
prepare yourself to move into any All this will give you a great meaning,
place, because you have to take this and employment, as I said,
Compassion everywhere and to "employed by God.
prosper. In this kingdom of God you
May God Bless You.
have to serve Him. And this service
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-49.txt 
 14
