NERMALA Volume: XIII Issue: 3 & 4 March-April, 2001 VERSAL PURE The Divine Cool Breeze 00 1. O Mother Divine Thou art residing in secrecy with Thy Lord (the spirit) in the thousand petalled lotus, having pierced through the Earth situated in the Moolodhoro, the Water in the Manipur, the Fire obiding in the Swadisthana, the Air in the Heart (Anahato), the Ether above (the Vishuddhi), ond Manos between the eyebrows (Aganya) and thus broken through the entire Kula path. (Saundarya Lahari p50) VISHWA DHARMA RELICION

 In this issue: 1 Editorial Diwali Puja, 1999-A Report 4. Shri Adi Shakti Puja, 2000 12 Navratri Puja, 2000 25 Diwali Puja, 2000 38 Sahaja Yoga in Tihar Jail 41 Shri Ganesha Puja Published by: V.J. Nalgirkar 162, Munirka Vihar New Delhi - 110067

 EDITORIAL On 21st April 2000, Shri Mataji blessed the Dubai collectivity. She was pleased to see how they had overcome the obstacles to establish a home away from home. She said, "the way you have become collective, in the same way you will build many dwellings because you have recognized Sahaja Yoga from your heart. You have gained the depth of ocean. You appear like sparkling diamonds. To understand Sahaja Yoga you need a large heart. By seeing your depth, others will come to Sahaja Yoga. It will penetrate the environment. This is the last judgement. Either you will be saved or you will perish." These precious pearls of wisdom flowed from Shri Mataji on board a cruise around Dubai on a full moon night. All the yogis were singing very sweet bhajans. The Goddess was immensely "prasanna" and showered a thousand blessings upon all her children. The Goddess is "prasanna" when we worship her from our hearts and not by empty rituals or mental planning. When She is in our heart, She guides everything, removes all obstacles and also fills us with joy. We don't even feel that we are doing anything, yet everything works out spontaneously, in the most unexpected way. Things happen which we never ever dreamt of. Such is Divine benediction, such are her many wonders, such is the flavour of Sahaja. The one who has tasted it, even once, becomes forever drenched in Her joy. There is so much love. Jai Shri Mataji

 March - April 2001 2 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 &- Lord Ganesha Lighting The Road for Shri Mataji's Car Diwali Puja, 7 Nov. 1999 Mother, She said announcement of her arrival, Though it By the blessings of our divine mother, we had Diwali Puja in Greece.. Shri Mataji visited Greece after 5 long years. All of us were very anxious to welcome Her in it was an was the first time that an international Puja was being held in Greece, and we were a small collectivity, yet by the Athens. Mother allowed us to organize the blessings of Shri Mataji, everything Puja at Delphi, which is very significant as Delphi is at the exact center point (Nabhi) of the world and all Greece is Thursday and we came to Delphi. We Devaloka (aa), i.e. Shri Vishnu's abode. This was an opportunity to worship Shri Lakshmi at her own home. mountain. Though it was old, the whole worked out beautifully and effortlessly. Shri Mataji arrived in Athens on had booked an old villa for Shri Mataji's stay, which was located on the top of a Delphi is located on a mountain about collectivity worked hard to decorate it so 3 hours of drive from Athens. Shri Mataji had discovered Shri Ganesha's Swayambhu here when She had visited Deiphi for the first time. The word Delphi and green fields of olive trees. When we is derived from Dolphin, which is the vehicle of Shri Vishnu. Two weeks before place was so silent and meditative that the Puja day, we started organizing the it was tike being in a different world camp at the venue. The same day we saw a big Shri Ganesha's face in the sky and felt He was showering vibrations to start this auspicious event. This gave us our brothers from South Africa, France a lot of joy and energy.Again, one week Switzerland and Greece. South Africans before the Puja, we saw two huge circles with their simplicity and innocence filled of a cloud encircling the sun, the whole everyone's heart with joy and sweetness. day. This gave us a feeling that Especially their dance was so nice, that something tremendous was going to everybody tried to copy their style after happen. When I mentioned this to well that Mother was happy to stay there. The view from there was beautiful. One could see the sea, different mountains arrived there with Mother, the whole altogether. We had very nice music programmes on Friday and Saturday, organized by the Puja. Welcoming of Shri Mataji was

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 done by offering her a silver crown made in the form of leaves of olive tree which is a symbol of peace. A small ship with a veil was also offered. We wanted to welcome Mother in a traditional way because we felt that Shri Athena, appeared at each and every turn guiding us silently. The whale scenario appeared as if we were passing through the land of Gods. Mother told us that this lightening will continue 108 times and will stop when we reach the highway. witnessed We sakshaat Shri Mataji, had started enlightening the world from here and now we had the opportunity of welcoming her back home after her great victory. All the programmes and Puja took place very nicely. About 700 yogis from all over the world attended the programmes. Mother talked about Shri Athena, Devloka the divine orchestration exactly as Mother had said. As soon as we reached the highway, the whole atmosphere changed, with everything dry and no lightening. Mother told us sweetly that the lightening was to compensate for the little fireworks we had, as Diwali is the festival of lights. (tasila) and the relationship betweeen India and Greece. One of the interesting We came to Athens and had a Public things She told was that Shri Athena is the Mother of Shri Lakshmi. programme. The next day we went for shopping with Mother before the public programme. Shri Mataji bought Greek pottery. Shri Athena had taught this great After the Puja, tremendous miracles took place. It rained so heavily that the statisticians told us it was the first time art to Greeks and I feel She wanted to spread this art again all over the world. About 1000 seekers got their Self- Realization at the public programme. This kind of large response was in the last 10 years it had rained so heavily. On Monday we wanted to leave Athens early but it was raining so heavy that we could leave only at night. It was still raining. As soon as we left the village unprecedented. On the day after the at Delphi, we saw two beams of light public programme, Wednesday, Mother coming from the mountain. One shone rested before leaving for Cabela, the next day. During all Her stay, She gave us so much love and blessings which cannot on Shri Mataji's car while another went in the sky. Exactly on this mountain, there is Shri Ganesha's swayambhu as be described in mere words. She well as a temple of Appolo, who is Shri changed the whole atmosphere and has Rama, from where the beams must have given us a much better place to live. been coming. Whenever encountereda turn in our path, there was a big silent lightening which lasted only as long as the curve. The lightening Humble Namaskar we Jai Shri Mataji Vaibhav Khopade Greek Collectivity

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - Xill March - April 2001 Issue 3 & 4 Shri Adi Shakti Puja (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) -Cana Joharie 2.7.2000 problems, arising out of religion. How can it be that religion makes you hate somebody? The religion is there to Thave already told you about the Adi- Shakti, how She helped you, worked out so many things in this world, first to create and then to areate human beings understand love, to imbibe that and through evolutionary process. After that compassion. So the third thing one had to do is the Adi-Shakti's job. That is the to comfort them, then to counsel them. So many people came on this earth just to do the counselling. They told what was wrong and what was right, what should one, kundalini, within us and by Her awakening, we got 'Pure Knowledge', absolute knowledge. Pure knowledge that it can not be challenged. Absolute it is. Whatever you know after realisation is absolute. If you know that then what you have to understand that everything has to be united. You cannot have fights and you can not hate anyone. If that thing starts happning, all the problems of the we do and what we should not do. What is self-respect and what is the duty of a human being as the superior most creature. So many of them came on this earth, one after another, in every country they came and their counselling formed religions. Of course you see them in all religions and that's how their life was wasted, that they tormed religions after world will be finished. So the first thing Redemption, that is religions by which only human beings were divided. Divided to such an extent the quality of the Adi-Shakti, was to redeam people of their all wrong ideas that they hate each other. If somebody is born in an X-religion, he hates the about others. Firstly, as we know that there are six enemies we have got. And unless and until we can conquer those person who follows the Y-religion. Why those who came as counsellors talked six enemies we cannot be a religious about complete unity, complete oneness of human race? Despite that human brain in its freedom did all kinds of wrong person. That's what is said. But actually all the religions are based on prospering those six enemies that we have within things and create a country or we can us. When you see this clearly, you start say the whole world, full of lots of

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII March - April 2001 5 Issue 3 & 4 seeking, seeking earnestly the truth. And the revelation of truth, absolute truth can made lots of money. That is not the criteria of becoming a very good Sahaja- only come through your evolution, yogi. What is great is the satisfaction. through your reformation, that you Satisfaction that you enjoy whatever you become person who knows everything. have. And the second thing that happens For that Adi-Shakti's ascent is important to you, you become abslutely collective. This has to happen. But I find, still people have not understood the meaning of And when this thing takes place, collectivity. For example family is very- automatically you drop all those six very weak here. Family that is based, created by natural relationship is not so beautiful human being, like lotus when it much respected as it should have been. is in the very germinating stage. It looks This is all because it is based on money. like all other small animals or you can So people start quarreling, fighting and say very-very small dirty things that are even killing each others. Now the basis in the pond. And then when it starts of family is love and cómpassion. Those coming out, coming out of that horrible who do not have this cannot have good water it becomes such a beautiful flower, family. I have seen even among Sahaja within you, which is your Kundalini. emenies that you have. You become a rises up and opens out. In the same way a Sahaja Yogi, though lives along with all these horrible things, that are going yogis sometimes, some people who are working for money, who are educated, sometimes look down upon people who are not so well off or may be the house wives working in the house, looking after the children, building up the families are not treated with respect as some on, but flowers like a lotus. It does not have all these insects, all this dirt and filth of that water in which it lives. It sucks only the pure water and the remanents remain there as it is. So what is left within secretaries working in organisation. I do not know why this kind some you is nothing but purity, beauty and fragrance, just like a lotus. Then there is of manliness comes into the women? no more problem of getting attacked by Why should they think they are all these small-small creatures in the something higher than the women who water and all the dirty things that are in are working hard in the household, the water. And this state that you have cooking, looking after children, bearing achieved now, I am very happy to see all the brunt of the society. This is so many people in America have something, I feel, a part which is lacking achieved it, is a very great blessing very much- in America and also in because America is a leading country in Western countries. When money becomes important, then the Lakshmi so many ways, one can say that it has

 March - April 2001 6 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 & 4 Principle is not respected. Very surprising! Money is the part of the blessing of the Lakshmi. But the Grah - respected? World of men? I was really laughing. What makes think that this is the world of men, I can't understand. Can they exist without women? I was amazed at her question because she said that even in the jail, criminals have so much respect for you. How is it possible? How can they have so much respect for a Lakshmi is the one who is a householder is not respected. And with this, I tell you, very-very wrong things can happen. You can work, you can be educated but you should be able to look after your family and look after their comfort and look after woman. I said, I cannot understand. One their unity. Instead of that educated thing that criminals have got mothers or women, I call them manly women, not? All males, don't they have mothers? educated women think that they are something higher than the domestic ones. They are sadly mistaken. In no way a man is higher than a woman. So this kind of disparity that exists and one starts They all have a mother. And they respect the mother. That is the point one should know that a woman is much more important thing than a man is, as far as children are concerned. But I have seen some ladies who think that they are very thinking that we are earning, we are educated, are realy manly women, I must say. But the woman who work very hard in the house hold with love, look after capable, try to control everyone, and create problems. Mother's job is not to control. Her job is to love, to give their children, look after the family, are compassion. And this is the quality of women, which is lost in these Western, so called advanced countries. This is a very dangerous thing, I personally think that if such a thing happens, families will be destroyed. Nobody will have respect for the lady who looks after the family. And she is more than a Prime Minister, would say, in the family, and she is to be respected and to be understood. in no way less than these people, who are working in the office. So such women must be respected by their husbands, by the males of the family. Not only that but all the Sahaja yogis must respect such women who are doing such a difficult task. I have been a housewife and I know what it is, to run the house, to look after the children, to look after the complete organisation and looking after the expenditure of the money if that is limited. This ego has to go. Today I think it is important to say that all of you should understand the value of women who are housewives. It is a tremendous job, to be a housewife. I have gone through it, and I know what it is. The respect to the housewife if its not The other day, one lady came in for my interview and asked me that how is it in this world of men, you are so much

 March - April 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume Xill Issue 3 & 4 7 compassion, not as somebody who is children. Children are tomarrow's trying to become a despot, but as a citizens. Who will groom them, who will person who is a source, source of joy and compassion. In one of my lectures I have talked to you about the emotional intelligence. That is what given, she wouldn't also look after the bring them up.? All these manly women do not have children sometimes. So they do not know what is the problem of children. Atleast those who are solving we should try to imbibe-Emotional the problem of children, must understand Intelligence. That their resposibility. This is a very-very intelligence, that is based on crucial point, I think, on which all the emotions. Unless and until we means the Western societies are callapsing become emotionally intelligent our because in their culture, there is no place society cannot improve. In the emotional intelligence, you care and for the mother. enjoy care. You do everything for others with a great emotional understanding. So the women should not feel in anyway less if they are mothers and looking after the household. They should not feel inferior to anybody who think that Not for one child, not for one son, but for everyone. You have to be emotionally Intelligent. Some children are born like this but some are to be made like that, they are something great. Basically, the family have to be together. This collectivity must first come in the family. that they should be emotionally intelligent. Because, if their mother and The children are to be groomed properly. They are to be brought up in a proper father are money oriented, very selfish, they would not allow their child to give way. As it is, in these days, you know what is happening to the children. When I read about it I am really shocked that and will never do anything to any body, the children are just treated as if they not even for his own country. Why should are some unwanted stuff. They are not he do? Every thing for selfishness. Then given any attention. Ultimately the such people indulge into corruption, children become drug addict, they indulge in all kind of things which are only become vagabonds. They can become selfish in attitude. any thing to others. So such a child will grow into a very funny type of a person anything because there is so much neglect and so much of hatred for Now we are talking of collectivity. In collectivity we do for others. We enjoy doing for others. We love giving things to others. Not for ourselves, because collectivity you must look after your your children will also become the same kind and they will only bother about children. So one has to first remember that for children. Not only that, with love and

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII March April 2001 issue 3 & 4 themselves. This Emotional Intelligence understand about everyone. And all this work has been done because of that has to be brought in our lives, in our quality in my hand. I am not attached to pattern that we have. Are we emotionally intelligent or we are just intelligent or one person or to one style. emotional? Both things are not there. If Whatever you say I can understand you are just intelligent you can become very dry person. You may just have few because I am at a level where I can understand everything that you are friends, may be or you may not have and you will always try to preserve yourself away from the collectivity. If you are emotional, you will be attached to only doing. To achieve that you try to develop emotional intelligence. Here the children won't even give a toy to somebody to play. Even the mother is like that, the father is like that. Extremely selfish. And one person, attached to one child, may be attached to one person, even in the society. For no rhyme and reason. Why we must have our own, everything you are attached to one person? Why to should be of our own. This has to go. bother about one person only? All such This has to go trom Americans specially people fall prey to it. In the politics you because they are the leading nation in have seen how, people try to help their this kind of selfishness. What selfishness own sons, daughters, this and that. We they have I did not count but you know that. You go and ask people of Canada, Maxico, Peru. They will tell. Being selfish they are not ashamed. They are So according to ethics Emotional exploiters, they are not ashamed. Intelligence is the highest quality by Nobody can even tell them because they which you give to others. You care for think they are very rich people. But all this riches will not give them the joy of life. Joy of life is only in the Emotional Intelligence. If you do not have that, it becomes very dry. Life becomes very unbearable, horrible and even the family Indians have suffered a lot with this kind of an emotional attachment. others, for everyone and you become very-very collective. Now exclusiveness is another fashion that is very much there, to exclusive, because you do not want to be one of the multitudes. Want to be exclusive. You should be exclusive in Emotional Intelligence, not in other things. That is the best thing you can have. As I agree, I am just a woman and just a mother. But what I have is really the Emotional Intelligence. Ocean of that. And from that I know about everyone. I gets broken. If there is no Emotional Intelligence then the families will be broken up. I know so many women who have had three marriages, five marriages, I do not know how they can do, but they have done because of this lack of Emotional Intelligence. You

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 should do something with a sense of heart of the people. giving. It is not that you are sacrificing anything. No. That's also another idea that we have to bear this. Nothing of that You may have any amount of property, money every thing, people will abhor you. So you may say what is wrong. What is wrong with this that you are harming the greatest thing, is that human being. As politicians they are horrible. Why? Because they have no Emotional Intelligence. Also as administrators they are very much difficult because they have no Emotional Intelligence. All these people are devoid of that great quality of Emotional much to say but I thought that for this Intelligence. If your country is very special Puja, I should say something progressive, I must say. you must progress in emotional intelligence. That way they are philanthropist, I know, kind. Look at the life of Christ. He gave his life, why? What was the need for Him to do that. Behind it was the Truth. When you have Truth with you, the light of the truth, the force of the Truth the strength of the Truth, you become Emotionally Intelligent. You understand that if you really love something then you have to undergo every kind of problemn. You have to tolerate lot of nonsense. I know its too about the family life. In our Ashrams or in our programmes or wherever we are, we should remember this point that are Americans known be to are we having that Emotional Intelligence, when we are trying to talk about Sahaja- Yoga? Why doI need to be at every place to tell them, what is the need. You philanthropists. But behind that they want to have power. They want to rule people with that money. Is that the Emotional Intelligence if they just want to rule, if they start some sort of a charity? that is just can tell them. If you have that Emotional Intelligence, everybody will listen to you, why not? Not necessarily I should go everywhere, talk to them. In how many to have a big name on the T.V. or to have a very big advertisement. And then he moves like a tycoon all over. Be a part countries I can go. And the reaction to it is so beautiful and so nice. It is very their vision, be a part of their property, work it out. And make such a fuss about surprising. In a country like Benin, all are Muslims there, all black people. They all it because they want to cash everything. have become Sahaja-yogis, nine thousand people. How could I capture You are Sahaja-Yogis. You have to send waves of Emotional Intelligence. you have to send love all over the world, you have to show how you can, with love, that. Just think of that. Nine thousand means something. Also other countries I have seen. This is the power of Emotional Intelligence that captures the win over. It is also possible if you are not so attached. If you are attached, say, to

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 10 your country only, (now this is a bigger fragrance of your love, fragrance of your issue), then you will try to exploit other compassion to others, and you should countries. Take advantage of them.Try feel happy about it. It does not mean that to run them down. But if you are you give up this, you give up that, nothing emotionally attached to your country of that kind, but it means that whatever then you will bring good name to your you have, whatever is your possibility, country by doing real good work. I don't capability you must try to do for others. know why people do not know how to Give it to them. And the more you do it, discriminate. Why are they so selfish, this collectivity, that is what it is very trying to do all the good things for them important, at least for America. Because selves. There is a very great chance for every body is trying to follow America- money making business, this business, that business. But you are Sahaja-Yogis. have become like lotuses. And the lotus So what you have to do is to take all of you to get this within your reach because you are all Sahaja-yogis. You has the fragrance, which spreads all over. And for days together it stays in water, in that dirty water and it spreads the fragrance. And with that fragrance also, you can do a lot of things. That the bees come there and sleep in that advantage of your achievement and give this to others. Give realisation to others. Many people who get realisation do not even bother about it. They just don't go and spread Sahaja-Yoga. They are not bothered about it, which is sometimes beautiful house of the lotus and in the very shocking to me. Because what was night it closes down very carefully. All kinds of things come from the flower, to make the beauty of that flower. We can say because we can extract also the essence of that which has fragrance, you the need for me to go round the whole world with all the mad people living and talking to them about Sahaja Yoga? In the same way you should also feel now that we have to do. We have to change can also get some honey out of that, Whatever is possible, everybody comes to that flower. That doesn't mean that this. We have to get them in Sahaja- Yoga. Why can't we? We are so many people. Christ had only 12 disciples and how much he spread Christianity? What about you people? You are so well equipped, you have so much of knowledge, absolute knowiedge and experience. So if you have the experience and knowledge, you can capture the people. But there is some sort of a lurking ambition which goes against flower is in any way weak but that is its quality. That's its strength. That's its understanding. That's what you are. You are all made into lotuses. You are not made into some sort of creepers or some sort of stupid donkeys. No. You are the people who are to give

 March April 2001 11 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume- XIII Issue 3 & 4 the culture of Sahaja-Yoga. You want to be leader or you want to put down day this America will lead so many completely established, and I know one somebody or you think no end of yourself, that's no good. And also they do Sahaja-Yoga and spread Sahaja- Yoga, because they want to enhance themselves. This is not the way. people, so many people, thousands in Sahaja-yoga. So far whatever was wrong was adopted. Drug addiction, then another thing starts. All kinds of nonsensical things started in this country. Now, the new lotuses that are there, they have to change the atmosphere of this place where all kinds of dirty things are The way is complete surrender, complete surrender to the work of Sahaj-yoga. It is possible. It is not difficult at all, aslam telling you. It is very- coming up, immoral things are coming up ruining the whole world. So in our general attitude also we should try to see, are we really growing? Are we really doing what is to be done? What are we doing for very simple. Önly thing you should understand that you have a special place in the whole universe today. You are not to rot. You are not to waste your life. We have started marriages. And in America, also they said. I said, alright we will also have marriages. But these marriages what is the outcome? If they are like all morality? That is a very important point in Sahaja yoga. How you dress, how you walk, how you talk, everything is very important. And all other things that you have you should try. How to create and other ordinary marriages, what is the use? What are they doing for others? What sort of children they are producing? You have to see to it that when you all these things of different-different chakras, you should try to concentrate on them. See for your self, what are you doing. What are you making out of your life? You are Sahaja Yogis. You are special people. You are not ordinary. want to tell you that you should have - become married couples, in Sahaja Yoga. Your family should be a different type, your love for your family should be of a different type. The whole family of Sahaja Yoga is also your family. So for every one you must have compassion and love. I know some people grow very self esteem. Try to understand, what is your quality, what are you. fastbut some don't because they lack this Thank you very much. balance between Emotion and May God bless you. Intelligence. This balance has to be

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 12 Navratri Puja Cabella, 8-10-2000 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today we are going to worship the Devi. We call her 'Amba' and by many Its a very great comfort to you, that you can sleep and that you can take some other names. She is the last, you should rest. Without Her you can't sleep. Absence of Her, you can't sleep. So say the residual power. When She has done everything She becomes the sleeping is a very important function of the body which is brought forth by the left side. That's why we worship Her Kundalini and settles in the triangular bone of yours. This is the Mooladhara because She should give us rest. chakra. But actually She is expressed more on the left side because that time She is purely The Amba. She is the one who gives you peace. She is the one who gives you also This left side is a very-very important illusions, called as 'Bhranti.' She gives thing for all the human beings. If you you all the artistic talents. She protects have no left side, you can't balance yourself, to begin with. And it is said that you. But this part, that is, She is creating illusions for you, that's very-very She gives you a real personality of a Sahaja Yogi. That is, your left side, if it is weak, then you have to worship Her important. Because those people who are against the divine, who are trying to be away from the reality, She creates illusions for them. So she separates you and request Her that "please enrich our left side". By enriching your left side. what She does, She is a comforter. So from those people, while you know the reality, and all such people who are troubling or trying to destroy her work, She is the one who creates illusions. She what does She give you, first of all She makes you rest. That is, She makes you sleep. If you are too much thinking about future, and you are too much indulging into the futuristic planning, you have is the one who resides as the Kundalini. So we can say that part of her is the Kundalini but another part that She has some problems, But the best thing is if is the one which resides in the left side. you can sleep, then its a great comfort.

 March - April 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 &. 13 a pendulum you can go any far. But there Now there are seven levels on which She resides. Once you start enjoying Her are seven powers on the left- hand side which protect you from getting into these on the first level then She has all these qualities described to you that She is diseases, also reducing their intensity. peace. She in the one who gives you, So at one time She is the one who is love. She is the one who creates all the peace giving, She is the one who looks after you, protects you and She is the one who saves you from psychosomatic diseases. Its a very powerful entity. If She beautiful things for you. She is the Mother and what She expects from you is to enjoy Her protection, enjoy Her love and be always under Her complete was not there I don't know what would have happened! So we should worship protection. So this is a very important part of Her work, and the second one is Her within ourselves. We should respect that She is the Kundalini. Her and understand Her. She is your Mother. As Kundalini, She is your So she also acts on the seven levels. particular Mother, She is the one, Amba, Seven levels She moves, we can say who gives you your second birth and as the left side Goddess She gives you a hoizontally, and seven levels She moves upwards. And all these seven very good support in your ascent. Without her, you could not balance your levels, on both the sides, She does tremendous work for us. How She self. protects us through these seven levels is like this that, when you start going This goes too far sometimes, when towards the left side, there are seven people are too much on the right side. deities which try to throw you back into Then they get diseases which are very funny. They can get heart attack, they normalcy, they are 'shankhini', Dakini. these are the names. And by that you can get paralysis. They also get the right side competely paralysed. They cannot try to come to normal conditions: Now for example many psychosomatic walk. They can't lift themselves. This is diseases which come to us, like cancer too much of right side movement. So and so many others; psychosomatic then She is the one who makes you feel means it is physical as well as it is emotional, so these psychosomatic suggests that you give up your right side bad about it. She is the one who troubles start coming from the left side. Sometimes you are too much on the right side, then suddenly you are thrown to and take more to your left side. So that does not mean that right side if it is cured by the left side is very good. For example, the left side, and then the movement like a person who is very arrogant, egoistical,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 14 absolutely docile, and they are looking after as a kind of a may become a people might think he is cured. No. He is on the left side. Though he has possession for others, Tantrik people possess the spirits of these dead people and use them to entice you. become docile, still he is not normal. Still he is very much wrong because he is on the left side, On the left side one starts So when you start getting into the left side by any means; you can get it by like diseases getting Schizophrenia (lo many worrying too much, you can get it by feeling very sorry for something or crying n). in the upper level of this side these same seven weeping anything; then your right side centres act to give you very serious problems disappear. That's why you do troubles. One of them is that people it. But it goes too far. The right side become Schizophrenic. It can be cured. problems, if they are cured, you get the left side problems which are much more It can be cured if you can move that person to the centre and by Kundalini awakening you can do it. Then people dangerous. I told you, all kinds of psychosomatic diseases, I don't want to also become mad, lunatic. But all the give the list to frighten you, but they all troubles of the right side disappear. Such come from the left side. Now, because people, who have moved to the left side the right side is completely cured, as they say, people think it is a very good idea won't have liver problems. They might have enlarged livers, but over active to get possessed by some spirits. So these false gurus, what they do, they master these dead spirits. How? I mean livers they won't have. They won't have other symptoms like asthma, heart attack. They can't have heart attack. they know how to do it. 1 need not tell They will give heart attack to others. But you, because you are not going to do it. they themselves don't get heart attacks. They master it and they tell you, that you So this sudden movement of your take this name. You start taking the attention to the left side is all the time name of some sort of a, God knows what. They don't tell that you take the guarded by these seven entities or Goddesses who look after you. But still name of some incarnation. But they will tell you take the name of, say Ram. it you go on with it, for example if you go to the false Gurus then what do these Ram's name is not to be taken as is it. false Gurus do? They put you to the left has to be Shri Ram, Shri Krishna, Shri Mataji. So they never put 'Shri'. They just side, they will give you some name, could be the name of the servant or anyone tell you take these names and by these whom they have captured and whom names what happens that you go to the

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 15 left side because these dead spirits, they capture you. There are dead spirits on the left side and there are dead spirits So all these Gurus had mastered this art of astral travel, controlling some dead spirits who were right sided. So right on the right side. If they are on the right sided spirits are very ambitious, and they side they are very ambitious people and do all kinds of healings, and all kinds of they try to capture you. Its a very predictions because they are futuristic. frightening explanation of the whole Some times they know, sometimes they thing. Once they capture you and you don't know. But its all coming from a go to right side, you get all right side wrong source. So getting into that trap qualities. You are not normal. Sometimes you feel, you are going in the is not a very good thing, If somebody is possessed like that, then such a person starts doing all kinds of wrong things. Like he will try to grab your house, to Like two Americans came to see me and grab your money, to deceive you, run air, some where. You have seen some things which you would normally not see, they were journalists. I asked them why away with your wife. All kinds of things are you here? They said, Mother you which are absolutely wrong. Because the make us like Harishchandra. There was influence of the right side increases very one fellow called Harish-Chandra who much. was a journalist. Because he used to travel in the air and he used to get news Also there are some drugs when you take them, like LSD and all that, you go to the right side and you start seeing like he would tell about what is happeing in some part of Bombay like we have a colours and people think that its a very Juhu Beach. So one day, in the great thing to see colours because newspaper it came out what happend at Juhu Beach, and his name was there, normally you don't see colours. They don't know basically what's wrong with them. Basically wrong with them is that the one who was a correspondent, his name was Harishchandra. So how did there is a bhoot, there is some sort of a Harishchandra tell you my name. I cured ghost which is very right sided, which has entered into their being and trying to work him. Why you want to get into his trouble. They said, we want to have this astral travel. For what? Because we are different type. They are sly and they journalists and we know so much about teach you peevish things. They may also it out. But the left side bhoots are of everything, and we want to travel all over. I said, this I don't do. If you are doing try to entice you to such an extent that a person can tell lies to any limit. He tells lies and then he tries to secretly take astral travel, of course I can reduce it.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4 March- April 2001 16 away your money and take away completely drunk and still they were whatever you have. All kinds of singing the praise of Shri Ganesha and plannings, secretive takes place. Nothing is open and you do it without even understanding it. But all these people are saying all kinds of filthy things, unholy things, dirty things, we can call them or lots of abuses they were using, fulfilling more interested in achieving some sort of a material advancement, whether it is on the right side or on the left side. Many that desire to be nasty, to be bad. And suddenly earthquake came there. They were all dancing, they all went inside the things happen like fundamentalism. If Mother Earth, and were finished. We had you are a fundamentalist then these a centre there. Surprisingly that centre was not touched. About 100 yards away bhoots take over and they try to overpower. They try to teach you how to kill people who do not belong to your religion or to your sect. They give ideas and they fight and they quarrel and they there was a round circle created. So nobody could go out. And they were amazed how is it that this centre has not been touched at all. That's the power of kill. But the Mother Earth or the sea, the Goddess. At the same time, when anyone of these elements can work out She sees these negative people are their destruction. In such places you will coming to torture or to trouble, the find big earthquakes taking place and destroying them, or there could be a Goddess saves the right type of people. As you know, normally always if there is hurricane that will come and destroy one good person, there will be 100 bad people getting after him and that person them. Of course some innocent people are also killed with them. It could be feels so lost. But then the Goddess helps anyting that you do wrong, it is corrected that man and saves that one or that by all these five elements. human being from the troubles from the In India, we had a place called as negative forces. So this Mother of "Latur', where people used to drink and drink and drink. Once they went for forces. They can be as I told you drinking when they had immersed the drunkards who drink, so She starts statue of Shri Ganesha. That we do on destroying. At lower level She destroys Ganesh Chaturthi when we put it into the their liver, at even greater level She sea, may be after three days, may be destroys their family, She destroys their seven days or 10 days and they came back from there and they had gone for yours fights all kinds of negative money. I have not heard of anywhere a statue erected of a drunkard. Nowhere. drinking after that and they were Where drinking is a fashion, where

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII March - April 2001 17 Issue 3 & 4 drinking is daily worshiped, in a way, but I have never seen anywhere. How is it She is a 'Bhranti' within us. She creates such an illusion within us that a person that nobody erected any statue of a man who tries to be harmful, to be who was drunk. Would be nice to show troublesome, to be destructive gets that, but no, because the wisdom destroyed. All kinds of things she can put and that's how so many people have survived in this world, otherwise so many prevails, and people understand what is the destructive force. So one can get would have been finished, and there possessed by any such idea, like Hitler. He got the idea that he is the monarch of everything and he has every right to would have been the kingdom of the 'Satan' destroy the Jews and he was destroying. He destroyed so many people but what happened at the end? He was using that she has killed so many demons. "Swastika' which was the symbol of Shri Actually She has. It's not that She has Ganesha, and with that he was fighting, killed them in a symbolic way. There But this Goddess is the one who saves us. Symbolically it has been said but luckily it so happend that the Mother were demons and even today we have entered into his mind. By that he was demonic people, and all of them will lost into bhranti, illusions. He lost, the not only be killed but will be finished forever. I have seen in Russia, I have power of Ganesha, how to use it. He was using stencil and because of the stencil seen in many countries. Those people, once upon a time, were regarded as Gods, were finished. It happens in every the second printing of Swastika was the other way round which was for country. Wherever there are wrong type destruction. So he printed the other kind of a Swastika. As a result he got of people, they are exposed and people donot even want to look at their destroyed. So this is the 'bhranti' part that she enters into your mind and puts you into a bhranti, means into an illusion. You photographs. They have thrown away their statues. All this happens because this Goddess is the one who creates an commit mistakes. If it had not happened, so many people would have been finished by now. So she enters into the mind of such people who are trying to illusion for them. Now supposing there is a person who is very demanding, who is going to destroy everyone, then the people who are wise will understand but destroy human beings, who are trying those who are not will take to him and to destroy anything and puts ideas in such a manner that they die or get self destruction. That's why it is written that get destroyed with him. Like this thousands of people have been

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII issue 3 & 4 March April 2001 18 destroyed because they didn't see the Indians, all over, when they are abroad, right point, they could not understand not in India. So they follow that Babaji. what is right, what is wrong. So this idea of right and wrong also is completely Alright, and this Babaji is the one, who takes money, who steals money, who confused by Her, so that those who are steals ornaments. He does all kinds of wrong type can be destroyed. We don't things but they don't mind. What ever he is doing is alright, and this Babaji is want them on this earth. Those who are troublesome, who are destructive or the one who is to be destroyed. But the argumentative will be all destroyed. But advantage of having this Babajis is this that you have all kinds of stupid people by themselves only they will be on the earth, who have no discrimination destroyed. Its not necessary for the Goddess to do that. So this is the one and they fall a prey to these Babajis and are finished. They wil get heart attacks, they will become blind, they will get cancer. They will get all kinds of troubles which many people ask me, why it is said that 'Bhranti Rupen Sansthita'. Why does she exist as an illusion? This is the and they are destroyed. But it is reason that your discriminating power is challenged. But if you are a Sahaja Yogi, surprising that the human beings are real Sahaja Yogi then you can feel on such that they see a person being destroyed by a Babaji or some Guruji, a lady and still they think that they also go your finger tips that the person whom you are following is a good man or a bad man forward! It is something surprising that and then you can tell others also. So human beings don't see that a person is many seekers are destroyed like that. destroyed, like I have told you many a times of the people who are going to the Wrong type of Gurus came and they just followed them. Stupid they were, pub. They see from the pub people absolutely stupid gurus. And these were coming out and falling on the ground and they queue up to go inside again to come back and fall Very surprising, isn't it. stupid people. I do not know, why they followed them. It was so obvious, that they were after some sort of a Rolls They have no brains. Why do they want Royce or something. And I have seen to go to pub if they had seen already somebody falling down? But they do it. Now this is the last judgement, as I have them so mad, that they can't get out of it. There are people now, who are told you, and at this time you have to see what's happening to the person who has gone by wrong methods or by the following all kinds of wrong Gurus. One of them is now very much liked by the

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII March - April 2001 19 Issue 3 & 4 hell of some Guruji. Its very clear if you sleeveless. They should be always covered. All the chakras we cover except want to see it, very clear. How they are destroying themselves? They say, in any case we have to die; so why not to go to Agya which we also cover with the Kumkum. By that how many diseases can come? You can get sinus, you can the pub? I mean what's this. This kind of argument they give. So stupid, as if they have no brains, no intelligence to get eye-trouble, you can get paralysis of both the hands, you can get also understand a person has gone and he parkinson's. All sorts of diseases can came back from there and has fallen on come because these are two very the ground, and nobody to pick him up and they are doing it! And they say that important chakras. One is Shri Chakra which is on the right side. Another is the Christ did it. He gave wine to people. No. He cannot. He is perfect. He did not give wine. He gave them just an ordinary juice Lalita Chakra which is on the left hand side. You should never never expose these Chakras. Also the knees but it is of the grapes. How can you make wine the fashion now a days to show the in one second, can you? But that's how knees, I do not know. I can't understand they explain. All their bad things are explained by their stupid intelligence, and the logic behind that. What is in the knees. Why do people want to see the they go for destruction. knees of the women. I mean there is no logic, sense- less. FirstI never understood it. Now I have understood And now in Kaliyuga, destruction is working very fast. Why? Because people have lost their discrimination. They are that they want to attract men. If men are attracted by your knees, what sort of men no more discreet and so many people they must be? I don't understand such men also. Men will be fully dressed while have lost. Not few; and it is a fashion to become indiscreet. I said, why are they women will expose their both the Nabhis doing like this? Mother, this is a fashion. Any stupid thing is a fashion. They take to that stupid thing and then they are in trouble, Nowa days of course there is a and both the Chakras which are so important and that is the fashion. Tomorrow the fashion will start that you fashion that women, specially in shave your head, so everybody will America, I have seen, they want to just shave, as if its like a flock of sheep who do not understand. They go by the wear straps over their frocks, what ever you may call it. Just straps and both the collective happening. So there is a chakras are left open. They are very fashion which is actually collective and that's how it finishes off their sense important chakras, should not even wear

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII March - April 2001 20 issue 3 & 4 completely. You see it everyday and you follow them. So he saw many people don't understand. I have seen even going, he followed them. Where does he go, to a funeral. That does not mean you Indian women who are abroad. They don't use your brains. also try to copy the fashions, and they also expose both of their chakras and Also you will see what they do is this, then they get into troubles. Its very say, many people are going to something wrong, they have no brains of their own, no individuality, nothing. They just follow surprising. Atleast in India its not regarded as a good omen to see a woman like that. But when they have come abroad they have learnt this great them. They don't see, what they have achieved, what they have got, what is knowledge, how to expose your body. the use, nothing. Even when you buy something, you want to find out, what is the quality, how the person who has The other side of it could be even more serious; like you cover your face. Mohammed Sahib must have thought purchased is using it, everything you want to find out. But when it comes to about the modern times. He said, cover follow a fashion, nobody thinks about it your face, cover your body, cover and the fashion is created to befool yourself completely, so that, you are people, I think so. It is something very funny creation of the evil force, so that saved as a woman and men are saved because they are not attracted. I mean human being should be destroyed. It is, this is going to the extremes and it was they say the designer's. I say, its nothing designer's or anything but is their aggressive force, the negative force which works on you and who saves you, to be worked out that way. But it does not. I have seen also muslim women are so stupid when they are facing their husbands, the way they behave to attract them and the way the husbands try to is the Mother on the left side. She has dominatel Its too much. So this is the got seven curtains, seven boundaries. bhranti. The bhranti created by the She doesn't want you to cross over, but human beings say, why not, why not me? If they have gone to hell, I will also go to hell. Alright, that's being made for you, Mother Amba. She creates this bhranti and with this bhranti, I have seen, people can go amuck and they don't know that go ahead. So that's why she creates the they are going amuck, because all of bhranti because some people have to them are going that side. Like there is a go out, out of this creation. Out of this story about a father who told his son that evolution process, let them go out. It's whichever way people go, you must

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - Xill March - April 2001 issue 3 21 the last judgement, alright, that's how you will be judged. Then after going out of Sahaja Yoga they will realize and say that Mother we don't want to be out of Sahaja Yoga, Why? By your own stupidity you will be Because they know that now they are judged. I have told so many Sahaja Yogis, something small, that you must completely away from reality, and from put some oil in the night and in the salety. So they want to come back. morning time you wash. They don't do it. By doing that what happens is that you sooth your self. You sleep well, oiling is Those who can come back, can come back. But those who should never come back should not come back. Because they are so mad that they will create a fashion of madness and people can get a very good thing. We need it, all of us, specially in this cold weather, we need it. But they won't put. They neglect influenced by that. So to get influenced by others is not a sign of a Sahaja themselves. Because they think they are Yogi. He can influence others but how Sahaja Yogis, they are protected. Mother can oil them. It's not so. You have to look does he get influenced by others, but for Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga gives you the after yourself as far as your body is discriminating power, and who has given concerned, mind is concerned. You are you this, is the Kundalini. So this responsible for your body. With Sahaja Kundalini, which is your Mother, the one Yoga you will understand what's wrong which is in your triangular bone, also with you, what you are doing wrong. I gives you all the qualities and all the beauties of your being. Of course I have mean I tell you some things which are told you so many things about Kundalini that I need not tell you. But she also can very important. To you may not be but you should try that. As it is you are realized souls, your spirit is there, you correct the left side. can feel the vibrations, and you can Some people have a habit of all the understand what's wrong with the time crying and weeping. Every time you person, Mostly what I have seen, now meet them, they are is tears. What has its much less, that people only inform me happened? Mother, this has happened, about people who are possessed. that has happened. They will write letters Mother such and such person is after letters to me-telling about their possessed, Mother this person has got this possession. I said, throw them out. woes, their troubles, and this and that. You are Sahaja Yogis now. Now you are That's all. Why do you want me to in the garden af Eden. You are in the bother about that. Just throw them out. heavens. Why are you thinking about al

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 XilIl 22 hellish things which are not important, jump in the darkness, and by that you why? Because you have not got your will also unoderstand who is the right person and who is not the right person. Even in Sahaja Yoga this negativity individuality as yet. Now as Sahaja Yogis you have to develop your discrimination of understanding what others are, also can work. It works. One should not about yourself. Why do you hanker after things? Try to understand. What is so get involved into any negative thoughts of others or negative doings of others. Its a warning today I wanted great about it. Why do you want.to do it? Question your self. Is it some possession or is it some fashion or is it your individual to give you all. Because you people are very much there to enjoy. Look after feeling? So I am trying to tell you that your attention, where does it go. There this left side of your's is so protective. At are so many beautiful things. See the flowers are made so beautiful. See these the same time if you are very aggresive about your left side, you are thrown from things, they are so beautiful. It makes one to another to another and into hell my heart jump with joy-while some and then you suffer. So you must people don't even notice. The other day understand. Your wisdom should be lasked somebody who had made these there which you can develop very much, flower arrangement. Which flowers? with the help of left side. Wisdom can be said, the one that was there. Which one? So I told the names of the flowers. We very well developed. Now there is somebody, say, a Sahaja Yogi, so called, and he is absolutely aggressive, money never saw. Where were you looking that you could not see the flowers? Because your eyes are so stupid that they can't see the beauty. They are engulfed with all kinds of negative things. oriented deceitful, and you get into his trap. In Hindi we call it 'Chakkar, into his chakkar and once you get involved into that you go on drifting. Still your left side will protect you, up to a point. But if you So the goddess has to kill all the Rakshas. I don't know how many She are too much of it, then it throws you out. has killed and again they are back and again people are being trapped. This is Now the time has come for all of us to understed that you are all Sahaja Yogi going on. So these Rakshasas are there and you have a very big responsibility: and you have to pin-point them. And tell very very big responsibility that you people where are you going? He is a should do what your enlightened Rakshas. What he has done? What has conscience tells you. Take to your he achieved? Now you should talk like enlightenment, live under thaät light, don't that, openly. So you can save many

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII March - April 2001 Issue 3 & 4 23 people who are going to these own country, they may fight for their Rakshasas, who are coming in such religion or nonsense. But this man is clothes that you can't make them out. really the truth, He is the one who is really They will be destroyed, one by one. But when they are in the hearts of so many an incarnation. Nobody will say so. Yesterday I was stunned to see the people how can you destroy them? drama, they have shown. I mean, I could not face my self, I should say, though its So itis for you people to tell them what these Rakshasas are doing. I know their a truth. Of course I agree, But I could tricks but the worst part is that the human not face my seif. I am too humble to beings fall into their tricks. So you have to be very self understanding. Ask accept such a thing, and its very ingenious, its very great to create such a drama and of all the things, tirst of all, always the question, Why? why am I attracted to this? What is the gain? Ask I should say. that English have such a sense of drama. They had people like after coming to Sahaja-Yoga, you have Shakespeare and all that. And the way gained so much. So now why have this they could produce the drama I could not false idea? Why go after false things. understand. But this one was the last negative things? That's what Sahaja word of perfection, so much so that I Yogis have to do. Because not that they could not say a word about it. I was just yourself this question. You will find that are responsible for others, they are stunned. The truth that they have responsible for themselves also. propounded. But in my life time you will have no doubts, if you have some sense Now the sweetest thing said about in you. Because so many miracles are taking place. Her is that She gives you Shradha (ar). Shradha, we can translate it as 'faith'. You have faith rightly not wrongly. Today only somebody told me that Peaple take full advantage if you have wrong faith. But faith is very important somebody had cancer, ulcer and all that she gives also and that's very joy kinds of things and after Sahaja Yoga she went to the hospital, she had nothing. giving. The faith is very joy giving. But when the incarnations lived, nobody All such miracles are taking place. It never have happened like this. There are believed in them. They had no faith in them. Christ, they crucified. Nobody photographs of mine which are just remarkable. Even the scientists are stood up to say-why are you crucifying him. All of them. Nobody could have that surprised about it. How these faith to stand up. They may fight for their photographs are coming? Actually there

 March - April 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 & 4 24 was Shri Ganesha standing behind me. photographs, you have seen everything, you have known the miracles, it has happend to you, you have the experience of Sahaja Yoga. Despite that Actually. Only in one camera it came. just for you people to have faith. Because when the person is not there, like Christ is no more, now every body is going to church, Shri Rama is not there so they are all singing his praise. Shri Krishna is your faith is so weak, She is the one who gives you faith. So you have to praise Her, you have to fall at Her Feet, you have to worship Her and ask Her, "Oh not there so there are Hare Rama, Hare Krishna. So when there is Sakshat, when that is before you, you do not Mother give us that faith. And with this faith, you will be amazed, any person who has this kind of faith, he accept! Because perhaps you don't tells me, Mother please do this, it happens, it just happens. Such right they have got to ask for anything, it believe that you can deserve it. perhaps. Or may be, I don't know, human beings are very difficult to understand. When you are standing before them they works out. But first your faith should be solid, it should be real. If it's real don't believe, when you are no more then they wilI believe. Its a very funny and if it is deep, you can achieve whatever you want, not wrong but thing, isn't it. good things. So try to develop that faith and faith gives you such joy and All throughout, if you see the history of spirituality, this has been going on. Gyanadeva showed some miracles, nappiness, you get committed, you Still only the wise, only the sensible could understend and believe it. They get involved and don't want to get out of it. So the greatest thing, the blessing ne left side is the faith, faith which is are so few that as a result such people pure. Faith can be translated as Shradha. Shradha means something were crucified, killed or murdered. They have tried that with me. But you know that is within and which has no doubts, in this life I have come in all forms which has no doing, as such. It's just there. So you should now develop and nobody can destroy me unless and untill I want to finish myself, no faith about yourself and about Sahaja Yoga. If your taith is strong you will see one can. The powers are of love. affection and compassion but also there is a power which completely corrects others. So to you people not to have faith many miracles also. But with miracles, with every thing still if you do not understand, then it is your discretion. in Sahaja Yoga shows complete blankness. You have seen the May God bless you.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Vlume March- April 2001 25 XIII Issue 3 & 4 DIWALI PUJA LOS ANGELES, 29-10-2000 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Il's a great day today for the whole world that we are celebrating this Diwali Puja in America, It's very important. Here absolutely blind and they forget what is behind the blessings of the Lakshmi. First of all, as we see how the symbol of Lakshmi represents. I have told you people have been able to earn money, to have lots of money sometimes and before also that are also people who are ruined Lakshmi, should be very generous. completely because of money. When we talk of Diwali, we should understand that person who is miserly with Lakshmi is why on a Diwali day we have all these absolutely against the principles of lights! What is the combination of lights Lakshmi, and such a miserly person, and the Lakshmi who was bom in the never, can enjoy the blessings and water, who stands in the water? Why this gradually he starts becoming poorer and combination is there? She was standing poorer. When you start giving with the in the water, as we know -a symbol of left hand that means you have opened prosperity. That is built in the human awareness that he can prosper. Animals Then comes the grace of Lakshmi, and don't prosper. They all have their this grace of Lakshmi also has another maryadaas, trees have their maryadaas. aspect that you must give protection. Only the human beings can prosper but Those who are people with money if they have no sense of their own maryadaas then this is very ruinous, and Protect the people who are in trouble, a person who has One hand she is giving to others; a the door for your Lakshmi to come in. should protect like this. Protect whom? ruinous for the whole world. people who are having lots of cruelty on them, orphan children who need your help. All this should be looked into and So the lights are there that all the people who have Lakshmi's blessings protection to the people who are must enlighten themselves, must dependant on you should be given, So, have lights and they should enlighten others also. But actually as soon as they this has to be done with the right hand. That's the symbol of Lakshmi. And there get the Lakshmi, so called, they become are two hands up there, which you have

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XII issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 26 seen, with the pink coloured lotus. Pink becomes the more powerful person. coloured lotus suggests that you must Everything becomes power, money is have love in your heart. Pink is the symbol of love and compassion. As I divinity in it, but a power of oppression power, love is power. This power has no have told you before also, a person who has Lakshmi should have a house, and aggression and self importance. ll these symbols of the Lakshmi are very where everybody is invited, like the lotus convincing, like today when we say that invites all the insects,, even the beetles somebody has got money or some who have got lots of thorns and the country or nation they are just the beetle comes and sleeps the whole night opposite of what they should have been. very comfortably and the lotus closes its The reason is, they are not enlightened. petals so that the beetle has no trouble,They have to have lights in their hearts be comfortable. So, these houses must as we see that on Diwalı there has to be accept guests, any kind they are, and lights and without enlightenment these they should be treated very well-just like as if the Gods have come into your become nonsensical. That's why there rich people, so called Lakshmipatis house. I have seen, people who are poor are much more hospitable than the has to be the light because with Lakshmi, one can become absolutely blind. So people who are rich. Same way about the the countries, countries which are called Lakshmi doesn't give you proper understanding as to what it means that you have got money, that you are rich. What does, that mean? That's why one poor are much more hospitable than the countries which are rich. Its very surprising that rich countries have their immigrations, they have all problems of avoiding people, guests in their own countries. So, they are going really in has to have the lights; unless and until you have light of divinity within you, you will not understand the great symbol of Lakshmi. the wrong way, as far as the Lakshmi's But in Sahaja yoga we believe that the Lakshmi must become Mahalakshmi. symbols are concerned. The another very important symbol is A man has to become a greater man that She stands on a lotus. This is all glorified, all beautiful lotuses carrying her That she has to become the but lotus suggests that she throws no Mahalakshmi. Mahalakshmi is a deity 'Mahamaanav. What does that mean? pressures, no imbalances, no power which makes you absolutely satisfied around, but in these countries where with whatever you have, complete people have money they try to throw satisfaction. Not only that but you start power all around. One who has money thinking that whatever I have is not

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII. Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 27 sufficient. I have to have something else, Everyshop will have this. I said, people not money, not more cars, not more have no sense. They have no light within televisions and things but I have to have them. So, next year we will have another style. Whatever is produced is always something else that will give me real satisfaction. You know the law of new and these shoes that were made economics -that you are never satisfied, desires are not satiable. So you go on last year or before that, are put into some sort of a junk: It's a very big business. So, it is the big business that starts in buying from one to another, to another, to another. But when the Mahalakshmi this manner and many people become principle shines in you, then you do not bankrupt, many people competely lose want any more, you want to give it to their dignity and fall into the trap of others and you want to enjoy your immorality. generosity, that is the first sign that you are moving now from Lakshmi to Mahalakshmi. Till the Lakshmi prinicple, you were blind and whatever it was you So, this Lakshmi principle if you forget, in a proper way you cannot go to the Mahalakshmi principle. And in the Mahalakshmi way you can find another kind of personality. Because if you have the light in your heart then you start seeing that this money business is of no satisfaction. You go on changing from one to another. So, then you think what should we do? VWith this light in your heart you find out that you have to follow, now were asking for more things, and more things and more things. After this is over, then you have the light, the enlightenment. When you have done all the four things properly that is generosity, protection, hospitality and compassion, then you get into another mood of movement because you know nothing is satisfying, nothing is satiable, running from one thing to another, from that to another, that to another. And when such people get collective, they start ways and methods of attracting people how they could extract money. There are so many the principle of Mahalakshmi, otherwise, you would be lost. So, when you think of Mahalakshmi you start seeking, seeking the way by which you can really have a real satisfaction of life. I mean, a country like America where people have so much money and every thing, they have also the maximum number of seekers, ways, like in our Italy when I was there, I wanted to buy shoes. I went to the shop and they had only one type of shoes. That kind I don't wear. So says. No, only this year this kind. Only this kind. maximum number. When I first came to America, I was shocked that though there was Mahalakshmi principle, they did not know what to seek and they all followed all kinds of false gurus. They

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 28 had become mad, I think, because they country has been blessed with very-very great people, as you know, very great. couldn't understand what is to be followed. For that they started following all kinds of false gurus who were people. Abraham Lincoln, what sort of a man he was or even say George themselves slaves of Lakshmi tatva. Washington! All these people showed the quality of Mahalakshmi but they didn't think much of them and they started working out a new method of capturing slaves in the sense who were against Lakshmi tatva and that's how they all were lost. So many of them were lost in this country. And I was shocked the way the whole world. Because then the idea they were following wrong type of people. Ijust thought there's something really needed to be done to this country. For of power came into their heads: That with money we can purchase every thing, we can make everybody dance to our tunes, nine years I never came to America,l if we have money. am sorry for that because the seekers were moving in the opposite direction. human beings was absolutely satanic to They were not in the understanding, as to what the seeking is for? What are you started getting ruined. What happened seeking? Somebody came saying that I to the family system? What has am sixteen year old and I can make you happened? Why the family got ruined All this attitude towards money and such an extent that their own country all realised souls, and I am told that he put some vermilion kumkum in a gun and blasted it and people felt they have because of the wrong ideas about the Lakshmi principle. The women got lots of money out of divorce. I met one lady. She had divorced her husbend eight times from this country and now I am already gone to heavens. Such idiotic behaviour! How it came into their heads, I don't know! How did they become so idiotic, I can't imagine. So, I'went back and I said, I can't help these people told she has divorced the ninth time. She has become very rich. But she has no shame and she is telling everybody that get a divorce. That's the best way, that's the advantage of coming to America. So, what is the problem that human beings don't have enlightenment. And if they get money, if they are hankering after things they have to go to hell, no doubt about it and do all kinds of things which was much. Then a kind of another fashion started like if you went into any party or anything they would say. now see, another guru has come, he is much cheaper and also there is a sale on. And would say look at these women and men who are supposed to be the leaders of the world and how can they talk like never done in the history of this world. I need not tell you all the absurd this, It was a very common thing among the rich people to talk like that. This nonsensical things they do.

 The Divine Col Breeze Valume - XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 29 Then started a negative force of drugs, drinking and all kinds of things. I to overcome all such hurdles. So this mean such blindness, such stupidity that Mahalakshmi principle should be you can't understand, as if their brains were completely curtailed by the activity What is the advantage of having of money making. I have seen people Mahalakshmi principle? such a person has his own inner powers established but one would say, why? choosing their suits and clothes, that when they will die, what they are going When the Mahalakshmi principle comes then there are nine Lakshmis which are described navadha, nine which get competely manifested in a human being. One of them as we call as to wear. It sounds funny. Even their dog dies, they make such elaborate arrangements. They choose even their coffin, which one they would like to use for burial. So, with the money a new Grahalakshmi. Grahalakshmi means the family, the wife becomes a very problem started which was the choice. wonderful person. She doesn't object to What choice you have? And people things, She doesn't react but she is very played with that choice. They can befool you and tell you what is the best. I don't know why but moneyed people are sensible and she builds up all her children in a beautiful manner, On the contrary. where she is Grahalakshmi, she takes pride in not a . mostly idiotic, if not very immoral, idiotic- absolutely idiotic, Anybody can befool them. So, God knows what is the speciality that people who are very rich, can be very cunning, can be very immoral, can be self destroying but mostly they are idiotic people. Because the way they talk, you don't know where working out something like men. Means, to her, her job is important, her bank balance is important. But the real bank balance of a Grahalakshmi is her family and her children, If she doesn't have that she will be just thinking that she is very great, she can compete with this man or that man. Women don't understand that to look, what they say about things you don't understand. So, then it becomes their greatest capacity is to love. How is it that Lakshmi is a woman and all the the country of idiots and stupids and you don't know how to deal with them and goddesses are women? What is the how to talk to them about the higher life. This Lakshmi tatva has to become a much bigger principle which we call as the imancipated personality or we can quality of these goddesses is to bestow blessings on people, of their own nature, of their own qualities. So, to think that we are better off than men becasue we have more money is the greatest idiocy. say person endowed with Mahalakshmi principle. Such a person may be cheated by others, may be troubled by others but You may have money but your children

 March - April 2001 30 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 & will be ruined, your family will be ruined. When you make a good family then you create a beautiful, very beautiful universe around, and universes after universes, like this can create a beautiful universe in the whole world. There's nothing to warn the women because they are the ones who will create the great principles, the great symbols of Lakshmi and Mahalakshmi. So, the gossiping is a very common disease, even today, in Sahaja Yoga. I have seen that where sacrifice but to enjoy everything. As I five-six Sahajayoginis meet, they go on said, you enjoy your hospitality, you talking, talking, talking.I do not know enjoy your generosity which you do not feel is a misery or a trouble but you just enjoy. At least I enjoy. If I can give what do they talk. Never about Sahaja Yoga, never. What they talk is what's wrong with another person? Who is a something to someone. that's the wrong type of a person? This is all gossip. This gossip has created big problems for us in the collective. So best greatest blessing for me. So, the idiotic people believe that generosity is stupidity but they are the real stupid people. So to create a proper home for your children is a very great work today and it has to be done, Again their selfishness comes. Human being thing I would advise is to be quiet. Even when they come to my house, they talk. They have no sense that we should keep quiet. Without quietude you cannot enjoy the cool vibrations of the Divine. Just go on gossiping and talking is not a sign of very developed pepole in Sahaja yoga. That's why the first thing is that women have so many such hurdles in life because. I don't know why, he doesn't enjoy everything. So, the selfishness comes in and they will only love their own much become should more compassionate, much more tolerant and children, they will only love their own enjoyable. Because if you meet somebody they will start immediately telling you that is wrong with this person, this is wrong with that person. There's no need. But they will only come and will husbands or they will love only their own wives. This doesn't create a good family. I am talking about the global family. For Us everybody is a realised soul and their family and our family is one. But then they will create problems, talking. give you bad news, all kinds of. They enjoy giving the bad news. They think they are very important and when they think they are important, they can be very dangerous to you, very dangerous. Because, I think, it is the women who gossips. I am surprised even in Sahaja-Yoga we have many women who will just go on gossiping. Their style was gossiping.Because I am talking about Lakshmi and Mahalakshmi, I have to have to work it out much more than men to understand the value of Sahaja Yoga

 1 31 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & March- April 2001 because their own children are a certain gait which is the movement on both the sides. As I have said, I have concerned, their family is one of the units of Sahaja Yoga. I am saying this because now I have been noticing it very often that the women in Sahaja Yoga are not seen people, specially women, who walk like horses, really just walk like horses. Once a dance teacher told me, should I start, Mother, a dance school? I said, upto the point as they should have been. They gossip too much, so they should take to 'mauna' I think, take to complete silence, not to talk. Those who are really very much effective, who are doing the great work are always quiet, they don't talk. I have seen they don't even come better start a dance school, doesn't matter. Are you sure you can teach them to dance or they would be just galloping! She said, why? Becasue what I have seen of women here that they walk like horses, I must say. How can these and see me, just recede back, while the women who think they are something special, they are the ones, most dangerous. women who walk like horses can do dance, Indian dance specially, it's very difficult. So, now we have to see what is the So, the power of Lakshmi that actually gait, how you walk? Do you walk like an elephant or you walk like a horse, first falls on the shoulders of women specially for men. Men should not walk like elephant but should walk like horses, it's alright. But the worst thing that has should be Mahalakshmis and this is a challenge to all the Sahajayoginis to behave themselves and to become greater women than all the rest of the happened is that men dress up like women of the world. We have some very women and women dress up like men. very good, very great sahaja yoginis, no doubt, but their style is different, and they are working out things in such a manner that it's absolutely adorable. They are just working for Sahaja Yoga, they do not bother about their personal Now, what to do? Why this kind of a mad transformation has taken place? Why do they take to such things? What is the advantage of becoming a woman when he is a man and a woman becoming a man? That is the reason which shows relationships or their personal eminence, they just want to help Sahaja Yoga in that they want to have some change. Some change is important, would like to change your dress, like to change your houses, even your sexes you want to Then there is another Lakshmi called change but why not change your every way. as Gajalakshmi, actually Gaja means elephant. What is the quality of an elephant is that the elephant walks with complete being through Self Realisation. That is very important to understand that we are transformed and we must have

 - XIII issue 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume March - April 2001 32 many projects I have started. So, we stopped at thirty five, already thirty five projects have started in India. also in our own dignity of Sahaja Yoga. The way we behave, the way we move about and work out. My experience is that once they come to Sahaja Yoga, mostly, they become very-very beautiful people and they gradually start growing like flowers, fragrant with their compassion and love but also there are people those who do not understand how to grow. They have other countries. And they are only for emancipating human beings. But firstly, as 1 told you, to do a work in Sahaja Yogn you have to be a detached person. That is the quality of Mahalakshmi principle. That such a person is detached. He is not attached to things which are worthless but that doesn't their own small circle into which they move and they get just stagnant, they become dwarf and then such mean that you take a sanyasa and run away from the family, run away from your houseliold. That's not detachment, that's running away. But detachment is that Sahajayogis have to leave Sahaja Yoga. So. it is the responsibility of all the Sahaja Yogis to watch and see how far their mind will go? Where are they going. when you have everything, still you are What are they doing? How are they achieving their status as Sahaja Yogis? detached in the sense you do not feel concerned about your own gain out of So these Lakshmis I would say and this. also the Lakshmipatis in Sahaja Yoga have to be very different than the other Such things can happen very easily if you really introspect, and introspection is the best way of meditation. First introspect and then meditate. Then you people who have the money. Mahalakshmi principle should give you a very sober, balanced, affectionate and loving temperament. If it doesn't give will grow and the real joy of yourself, of your spirit will really give you such enjoyment that you will not take to stupid insignificant things, but you will become very significant people in Sahaja Yoga you, then you should know there's something missing. After all you have come to Sahaja Yoga, not for anything else but for your growth and to keep that growth on, you have to acquire a sense of understanding as to what should be who will do such wonderful work that everybody will be amazed that an ordinary human being- how can he achieve such a thing! How can he work it out? As I have told you before, that after realisation you become extremely We have to achieve a global crealive, creative in everything, specially your personality relative to others, relative to other people who are still seeking, who are still blind. I know that's my vision. in giving realisation to others and also creative in your life of art, music, poetry, emancipation. And the other day we were counting how

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII isue 3 & 4 March April 2001 33 drama, writing, all kinds of things. We you progress. With Mahalakshmi have seen so many cases who have principle only you get your realisation. never been on the stage even, have You know that very well that through the Mahalakshmi channel only, you rise and given very great inspiring lectures. So the creativity comes like an inspiration for others. They see you and they feel you get your realisation. So, to become a great Sahaja Yogi, you have to look after your Mahalakshmi principle. inspired. You are not the one who goes into the shadow and sits back but openly Now there are people, I have seen, you come out with no pride, or no sort of an aggression, but compelete humility. who care for cheap popularity; I have and you give such beautiful feelings to others, such understanding about others, do this, do that but only for yourself and about the others through popularity. They have not understood your collective consciousness. About that whatever you are doing, is for cheap collective consciousness and other popularity? You don't have to fight an things so many people have talked. as known people who will do everything for election in Sahaja Yoga, you don't have to cast your votes in Sahaja Yoga, but what happens really the person who has that dynamism of Sahaja Yoga just the other day you saw it, there were so many people like you, also there were other scientists and also other philosophers who have talked about it. But you have got it. you have the comes up, everybody knows. Not talking, not impressing. not showing off, not going after cheap popularity but growing within For that I cannot say what you experience of collective consciousness. Despite that if you are lacking behind in your progress in Sahaja Yoga, that means there's something wrong, some sort of a load you are carrying on your Sahaja Yoga. So how will you grow head. If you have attachments, there by yourself? By yourself you will have to do. How does a tree grow, by itself? You are living examples of would be loads on your head. In grow, is a promise, that is given to Sahaja Yoga you are involved with you by the Divine but allow it to grow everything, and you are detached and such a miracle happens to you which you know very well I don't have to describe. So, a new personality with a through introspection and meditation and what we call complete dedication and devotion. Mahalakshmi principle comes in. Mahalakshmi principle is the one which The other day I told you about the word - 'Shradha'; it's not just praying, it's not just having faith but 'Shradha' is that fakes you to your seeking and when you have found out the reality, the truth, then

 March April 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 & 4 34 all my life and I am socialistic today. But all these things that I did, you may call it secretly or anything, whatever it is but you have it in your heart, the enjoyment of achievement through your devotion and dedication that should be called as some people knew about it and this was Shradha', With that thing only, it will work to be done and practically most of these out. You have to have faith in yourself places were ready to be donated. The and faith in Sahaja Yoga. You know you have got it; those people were talking about it but you have got it. You know reasonI did not donate it in the beginning because I wanted to see there one people who are honest and who will do the work what is collective consciousness. You know that you are in the collective honestly because in the name of social work people just want to exploit. This is the reason I waited for so many days and consciousness. But how far you have grown into it, is to be seen. Its very though I have given, some of these important. For that I need not, in this already like Ganapatipule, the Hospital, short time, describe to you all the also Dharamshala school; all have been given but now I want to give even more. Like I didn't know that they have bought aland in Cana Joharie is in my name and when I heard about it qualities of the Lakshmi, but try to understand that a person who has Lakshmi principle has to have all these I was surprised special qualities otherwise he is not the because there's no income from it, worshipper of Lakshmi. That's how today I would bless you all with the proper wisdom and a proper understanding of nothing of the kind and I decided there and then that it has to be given to the collective of Life Eternal Trust of America. the Lakshmi principle through the lights which are enlightened within your heart. It's all my desire that things should work out, but according to Sahaja unless and until you have your Ganapati, Ganesha-Mother lands where you start your work, it doesn't do anything. Even in Italy I have got a very good land and also a house which also I want to donate May God bless you all. AsI have suggested to you, you all have to work it out and understand the importance of Mahalakshmi principle, In your lives if people will see that you are very peaceful, good and full collective people, then only Sahaja Yoga will spread, not what I am saying or what I am spreading or what am I working out. It's a fact that I always had a feeling that Sahaja Yogis should take to social work. Ihave been a social worker plus another one called Dalio which I want to donate to the collective of Italy. Italians, Ihave found them to be very good, honest and dedicated. I know they will not exploit it. In the same way everywhere I have purchased, any land or built anything I

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4 anssi March - April 2001 35 would like to donate most of it, but let me miserly. You may not give me the money seeif the things are working out in honest way. So, this is for you now to take interest and I was happy to know that one Sahaja yagini has gone to Madras to start an orphanage It's a very good idea, because think of the orphan children. think of the women who are destitutes. I find think of the people who are suffering from horrible diseases like cancer, others also but you shouldn't have a miserly temperament because what's the use of having money without any advantage? So, you all must learn how to donate, not to me but to this new idea they have- they want to make a foundation. Alright! Once properpeople to run it, I don't mind making the foundation because we shouldn't do what all the rest of the stupid which. we can cure. So, I started a people have done. And solWould request hospital. Now I have another hospital in Delhi. Also good news for you that I have generosity should be towards social side bought a land at the foothills of of our world which is very important to be Himalayas, very big, I think fifty five-fifty attended to. I hope you understand that! six acres of land. Plus I got another land have not changed the way, is the path where you can grow or where you get also which is going now in a smooth way. We very rare vegetables so that we can make had to first climb a very hazardous medicines at a very cheap price for the mountain and now we have come to a use of people who are suffering and who place where we understand. With this can get cured very easily. So many understanding, I just want to tell you, projects have been dane and they have collect some money with you which you all come up. The thing is thatIhave seen, that Sahaja yogis do not donate money this kind of work which is not the Kundalini except in the seminars. And all this is awakening but then we can also do achieved through that money that you kundalini awakening. We have to show have given in the seminar. The rest of the results of kundalini awakening. It's not the expenses of course comes from my only for you, it's not only for you people books and other things. So, it is important who are realised, it's for the whole world. for all of you to understand that whatever That's my vision and according to that money you are giving in the seminar is vision, I have been doing my work and being used absolutely-absolutely for the now as you know I leave this betterment of humanity which may not responsibility to you all. come to Sahaja yoga but which can be benefitted through Sahaja Yogis. all of you, to be little generous. The can donate at the time when we need for I hope you will understand that it's important that you should think of other So I would request you not to be things than your own problems, your own in

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 36 this is happening that is happening, Why can't you solve your problems, all of you put together. It will be very kind of you if you understand that all these problems can be solved by you, I don't have to be there: I am there with you all the time, I am one with you all the time. So there is stupid questions that you have because all the time what I find even the leaders will bring some sort of a people who have done something, you need not tell, if somebody is sick. Why can't you cure, why should you bring that to me? it's a common practice with leaders. So, I would request you not to nonsense from no need for you to come to me for all bring any such problems, and you solve your own problems, try to solve them. Once you solve your problem, you will be amazed, you will know what you have got. But everytime refer to me, is not these things which are absolutely under your control. If not, you give up your leadership, so called. Because leadership means that you should be able to execute Sahaja Yoga. you have necessary, reference to me is not necessary becauseI have so many other things to be done, and everytime if somebody is sick they must refer me, if something happens they must refer me; even after referring all of you will still say - this person has cancer, this one is sick, powers, you can do it, all of you can do it, you don't have to get to me all the time because so many things are to be done and so many things have to be worked out whichlam doing relentlessly. But you should also try to solve your problems of your country, of your region. that one is sick. I don't want to tell you But if you are not grown up then it happens. I have seen it. You will tell, I think they are very important because but there must be some mistake about that person. I don't want to tell about anybody like that, But must be something, must have happened that that person is sick or something has gone wrong with them. Because normally yourself, what you can do, how you can Sahaja Yoga should help, Sahaja yoga help it out and how you can help others. meditation should help. It should work you can tell, that's not they do it yourself. You should find out way, you should Also we are not here all the time just out, it has worked out with so many. Even to look after people who are no good in Sahaja Yoga and mostly I have seen it is only the people who are little bit some people, who were very sick, once came to cabella. I was not there, they got alright. So it's the faith within, which should be so strong that it will be done. So, some people have a habit of very ambitious about their own positions, try to rule. So, I have to again and again request you please, please even if you are leaders or anything don't pestering me, like all the time this one is not alright, that one is not, in my centre

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XII March - April 2001 Issue 3 & 4 37 wrong, nothing. They have solved their problems-out and out, they should be your ideals and that's how you should work it out. That will be very joy giving telephone to me, don't write to me because I have seen everyday, I have such a lot of papers, envelops-everyday and I don't know what to do. How to tell there is no need to write to me. thing for your Mother because now you you that If you cannot solve the problem, it's finished. Take up something that you can are made, you are the ones who have Feel your powers, the powers handle. You need not take to something understand your powers, understand that is difficult which you cannot handle, your responsibilities and you will be it's wisdom behind it. If you have wisdom amazed how things will work out. First you will solve your own problems together specially with your leader and if the leaders are sensible, then you will never- never trouble me.. I must tell you about of all I wish you again and again very Happy Diwali, very happy, prosperous life for next year and all your life. May God bless you Thank you very much. some people who are leaders nevereven once told me that this is wrong, that is

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 38 With the Blessings of The Mother Divine The Maha Yoga enlightens the inmates of Tihar Jail By the grace of Her Holines Mataji faith in the Adi Shakti and he became a sincere Sahaja Yogi there after. The constable was a chronic patient of Migraine but to his surprise, immediately, after experiencing realization the disease subsided miraculously. Now he is always in the forefront in all the Sahaja Shri Nirmala Devi, efforts of Shri B.R. Rawal, a Sahaja Yogi and kind co- operation of Shri R.S. Gupta the then D.G. of Tihar Jail the programme of Sahaja yoga was started for the benefit of inmates and staff of Tihar Jail on 7th February 1998. A Sahaja yogi was programmes. talking about Sahaja yoga to all the Sahaja Yoga programmes were held officers of the jail in the confrence Hall. in all the jails (jail No. 1 to 5), and also in residential complex of the staff. Both, ladies and gents inmates of the prisons, The shoes of all the officers were outside the hall and Constable Shri Rajiv Singh was put on duty to take care of shoes. His attention how ever shifted to what and also the staff members are now the speaker was telling about Sahaja meditating reqularly and recieving the blessings of Parama Chaitanya. Shri Ajay Kumar Singh, superintendent, Jail Yoga and some prisoner took away the shoes of the D.G. in the mnean time. The No. 5, and Shri Daljeet Singh, Deputy poor constable was very upset because this dereliction of duty could get him Superintendent Jail No. 5 were very co- operative and they arranged a well furnished big room for Sahaja Yoga severe punishment from such a senior officer. Some Sahaja yogis however meditation in the administrative block of assured him that The Divine Mother will the jail. protect him and nothing will happen. When the programme was over, the In may 1998, 20 young prisoners between the age of 16 to 21 years were D.G. came out and was told about his shoes. To the surprise of the constable sent to the meditation room for Self- the D.G. ordered a new pair of chappal from the market and went out very Realization. Most of them experienced the bliss of the Divine on their system. Ten of them became very regular and peacefully. The incident established his

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4 March April 2001 39 attended all the Sahaja Yoga Yogendra Kumar s/o Sh. Gyan Chand Upadhyay, programmes during their stay in the U/S 302 prison. में जेल में लगभग दो वर्ष (जब से जेल में Since then Sahaja Yoga meditation सहजयोंग प्रारम्भ हुआ है) से नियमित रूप programme is being conducted in almost all the jails of Tihar, and hard core से सहजयोग कर रहा हूँ। मुझे इससे क्या क्या फायदे हुए है अब तक यह तो गिनतीं कर पाना मुमकिन नहीं है। लेकिन जों भी याद है वो इस प्रकार है; महोदय सहजयोग' criminals are benefitting from it. Delhi Sahaja Yoga centre provided introductory books and bound issues of Chaitanya Lehri to the jail library. से मरा मन शात है। मुझे समाधान (संतोष Seeking prisoners are meditating करना) आ गृया है। कभी किसी वस्तु पर मन Tegularly and deriving peace and good नहीं चिपकता, जा जैसा भी हो रहा है ठीक health as the blessings of the Divine, है अगर कोई बात गलत होती है या समाज Some of them wrote letters to us के लाभ के लिए नहीं होती है तो वो समस्या narrating their experiences and benefits भी मैं ध्यान के समय में श्री माताजी निर्मला occuring to them. Four of these letters देवी जी के फोटो के आगे बैठकर वो समस्या दोहरा लता हैं, की आपसे बिनती है कि कृपया are being reproduced herein. आप ही हम लोगों के लिए कुछ करें और फिर A team of ardent Sahaja Yogis सव टीक हो जाता है। इसमें जो कार्य सबके consisting of Dr. Narender Gupta, Mr. llam Singh Bansal, Col. K.K. Dutt and others have been regularly conducting লাभ के लिए होता है वो अति शीघ्र पूरा हो जाता है। जो कार्य केवल अपने लाभ के लिए होता है उस कार्य में थोड़ा सा समय लगता Sahaja Yoga meditation programmes for the inmates since then. In recognition of T their services for the transiormation of आधारित हैं। जब तक मैं सुबह शाम सहजयोग the hard core criminals the jail authorities awarded them with 'Certificate of जैसे मेरा कुछ खो गया है। और सहजयोग Recognition on 30th November 2000. Dr. Narender Gupta was honourd with a शारीरिक और मानसिक रूप से पूर्ण सन्तुष्ट नहीं कर लेता तब तक ऐसा महसूस होता है में बढ़ने के बाद सब ठीक हो जाता है। मैं shawl by the D.G. (Director General). हूँ। और अब जेल न. 5 के कैदियों को सहजयोग करने में मदद करता हूँ। महोदय हम सभी सहजयोगियों का सहजयोग करने We pray to the Divine Mother that Her light keep enlightening the path of all the Sahaja Yogis to bring about the empire में सहायता और उचित प्रबंध करने का कष्ट करें। of love, peace and joy on this earth and धन्यवाद, we all become Her Divine instruments.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII March - April 2001 Issue 3 & 40 सहजयोग एक महायोग कृष्ण (सन्नी) S/o हवा सिंह FIR No. 14/99, U.S. -307, P.S- प्रशान्त विहार सहज योग महायोग आरिफ जी आपका सहजयोग मुझे बहुत अच्छा गुरु लगा। दिल से करे तो यह सहजयोग ऐसा महायोग है जो हर किसी की समझ में नहीं आता। हर देवी माँ होती है और मा से मार्गग सहजयोग बैरक में सहजयोग करते हुए एक तो इससे अच्छा क्या है और दूसरी बात है हमारा जो ध्यान इधेर-उधर भटकता था अब मेरा नाम कृष्ण So हवा सिंह है। मुझे महीना हुआ है। मैं सहजयोग करके बहुत थोड़ा बहुत अच्छा हो गया है। यह हकीकत सुश हैँ। सहजयोग करने से मुझे अनेक लाभ बात है सहजयोग अपने सही मन से करें और हुए है। उनमें से कुछ लाभ में लिख रहा हूँ। उसका ध्यान रिथर रखते हुए करें। इधर- उधर भटकने ना दे तो कामयाब हो सकता है और दूसरी बात है आपका जो ये सहजयोग है इसमें आप अगर ध्यान लगाकर बैठें तो जिन्दगी 2. सहजयोग करने से पहले मेरे अन्दर में आप हर चीज देख सकते हैं | 1. सहजयोग करने से मुझे व मेरी आत्मा को बहुत शान्ति भिली है। एक अन्दरुनी खुशी मुझे महसूस हुई है। चिड़चिड़ा स्वभाव था जो अब नहीं है। 3. सहजयोग करने से पहले मुझे गुस्सा बहुत आता था. लेकिन अब मैं अपने गुस्से पर सरलता से कायू पा लेता हूँ। 4. सहजयोग करने से पहले मेरा शरीर बहुत आलसी और दर्द करता था लेकिन अब नहीं होता। 5. सहजयोग करने से पहले मेंरे केस (case) में कोई कारवाई नहीं हो रही थी लेकिन अब मेरे केस गवाईयाँ चल पड़ी हैं। सहजयोग करने से पहले मेरे गवाह नहीं आ रहे थे लेकिन अब गवाह आने लगे हैं। फिरोज पिता का नाम श्री जलील अन्सारी U/S 454, 380, 411 (मुस्लिम ) सहज योग करने से हमें मन का शांति मिली है और मन अपने आप को सब कुछ महसूस हुआ। जो भी मन में सोचा था वह भी पूरा हुआ है और जो भी मांगा वह भी हमें मिला है । जय श्री माता जी जय श्री माता जी

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 41 Shri Ganesha Puja U.S.A-7.9.86 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) a child of Her own. There were Angels Today in the land of Shri Krishna we are celebrating the birthday of Shri Ganesha. It's something very unprecedented and of a very significant value that you should be celebrating the birthday of Shri Krishna's son in his own who were dedicated either to Vishnu or to Shiva. Like ganas were dedicated to Shiva alone. So She wanted to have Her own son, who can permeate Her powers on this earth. land. You know that Shri Ganesha So to begin with when the Shakti incarnated on this earth as Mahavishnu created this universe and Sadashiva was and he was the son of Radha who watching Her creation, the first thing she incarnated as Lord Jesus Christ. So by created on this earth was innocence. And celebrating this birthday today you are recognising the greatest truth that Lord Jesus Christ was the son of Shri Krishna. the embodiment of that innocence was Shri Ganesha. The whole universe was covered with innocence which we call as There is a story about it. If you read in the Devi Mahatmaya how this primordial Onkara. This innocence protected all the creation of the world and penetrated into child took a form of an egg and half of it all that is matter. Matter is innocent. If remained as Shri Ganesha and half of it became Mahavishnu. In the evolutionary you hit the matter, it will hit you back because it is built like that. It doesn't want to harm you by any method except that if you try to hit it, hits you back it in its process all these happenings of the antiquities have been recorded but today I feel so gratified that on the human level, own nature. So it was called as 'Jada', the one that acts according to the built people have understood. in nature. Innocence in the animals is of Christ is the incarnation of lord another kind where the animals do not Ganesha. He is the eternal child but in know that they are committing crimes. the form when he came as Christ, he came as the son of shri Krishna, but Animals, when they kill another animal or trespass your properties, create nuisance all over, they don't know they when Parvati made Shri Ganesha he was the son of Parvati alone. There was are committing a sin or they are no father. Parvati herself wanted to have

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII issue 3 & March April 2001 42 Animals' heads are on the ground. So disobeying some laws. They live with the laws that are built within them. That's the energy flows downward into Mother why they are called as 'Pashus' means Earth. But when man raised his head above. against the energy of gravity, then bondage 'the Pasha'. 'Pasha' means the bondage. They are under the bondage of the laws of Shri Shiva. Shri Shiva is called as Pashupati. a new complication started in the energy flow: And that is how at the Vishuddhi, a problem started where kundalini could not nourish or look after that problematic Vishuddhi. The reason is when you raise Upto that stage the innocence remains intact because there is no your head from the Mother Earth, you development of ego in them. So they are innocent. A tiger may eat a cow, still he remove yourself away, from the natural power of Mother Earth. When you take your Vishuddhi upward like that, you see IS innocent or an elephant may trample over a human body, still he is innocent. the result of that in this country, which is But when going to a higher state, the Mother Shakti, the Primordial Mother thought of creating a personality, who will protect the innocence of human beings. the country of Vishuddhi chakra. That you started going to machines which are against nature, extracting the nature, disturbing the nature by creating atomic Above the matter, above the animals. bombs, by changing the atom, breaking it That means you went against the She created Shri Ganesha and you know the story of Shri Ganesha, how He got nature itself by raising your head. But if the head of an elephant, symbolising that Shri Ganesha, though He is a human it was done in complete surrender to God, with your bent head towards the being, He is like an animal as for as His Mother Earth, it would not have harmed head is concerned that too of Shri you. But when you completely cut off Gajanana, in the sense that he has got yourself from that nature which is so the head of an elephant, which is the bountiful, which is so gracious, yesterday you saw the beautiful pictures of the nature that surrounds you in this country. wisest animal in the animal kingdom. So in such a head, which is innocent, ego cannot develop. There is no ego. It is an Such a rich country like America without any gratitude towards its creator raised its head upwards! That's how the Vishuddhi problem started coming up. egoless state. But human beings were created in a different manner and when carbon was placed to create the amino In every walk of life, the whole social structure was built up to fight the nature, acids. it also set in them inmotion a new type of evolution in human beings that at the Vishuddhi level, Human beings not to go along with the nature. So the first attack came.on the innocence itself, raised their heads like this.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XiII 1 43 issue 3 & 4 March April 2001 on the Mooladhara itself. So the natural ways of Mooladhara were given up. wrong, what's wrong in this, what's wrong in this'? Now the whole country is facing a great crisis because of arrogant enterprises. Still they make a martyrdom out of all that is destructive. It's a very Marriage system has been here much belore Christ, much before Abraham. much before Moses and a sanctified marriage which was blessed by the SOciety, was acceptable since long. But man in his arrogance raised his voice against marriage, against natural way of Shri Krishna, the responsibility is leading a life of sanity If it was natural absolutely on your neck and you can't to be the way people lead their private get out of it Tife, why do they get all kinds of diseases? If you are a natural person you great responsibity on the Sahaja Yogis who live on the land of Shri Ganesha. But for the people who live in the land of . Unless and until you understand the importance of innocence in your life, you cannot save this country don't get any diseases. Because you are anti-nature, that's why you get diseases. In this country how many men and whatever I may try to do for you. It's only you who are going to save it. It's only you who are going to make it. women were murdered for jealousy? If When the Kundalini rises, Shri Ganesha is awakened in you. The Ganesha whom you never respected, it was natural to be in love with ten men and ten women then why jealousy. You should be happy, it's very natural. Because the head was raised at siowly cómes up from his slumber out of Vishuddhi chakra, without surrendering to Shri Krishna, anti-life, anti-biotic the hurt and the injuries inflicted on him. Still he stands up, but still weak. How aré we going to nourish it, how are we atmosphere started growing and this kind of life has taken this great country now to the brink of complete destruction. going to look after it's growth? The responsibility of Sahaja Yogis of America IS very great. They cannot cheat themselves anymore. They cannot be satisfied with their arrogance. The mistakes have been grievious. So you have to take it up as a crusade against those mistakes and to establish your Shri Freud was worshipped and they forgot Ganesha in a full form., so that he gives The attack of innocence is the greatest weekness of this country. Not to value its power. Then you get drifted into anything stupid, anything new that comes up. So much so that a person like Christ, who said, Thou shall not have you the necessary balance and the roots to nourish yourself. It is shocking first, I adulterous eyes'. Ganesha to that level that even the eyes have to be innocent. There should be no lust in your eyes. mean you just can't understand. It is impossible to see how you could accept such absurd ideas. How you could take But arrogance made them feel 'what's

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 44 to such funny things which are obviously adulterous mind? What is your expectation about Sahaja Yoga? So many things, that in Sahaja Yoga, God blesses you, you must get a good amount of health, money and position, power. The first thing you must ask for is the pure Ganesha, Nirmal Ganesha within you. O Mother please give us the blessings of establishment of purity in our Ganesha principle, in relationships, in horrid. Are we not aware of certain words like prostitution and all other dirty words which I don't want to say just now or they have lost their meanings? We were all w aware of it. We all knew about it. Have we lost all wisdom from our minds that we cannot see? What we have done to ourselves? We have no self respect. Arrogance to that limit is very dangerous, attitudes, in behaviour. extremely unpredictable. God knows what can come throughwith all these ventures we have gone into, I would say for Sahaja yogis I have given some against him may be tolerated but instructions, how they should respect nothing against the Adi Shakti. But I their privacy of lives, especially the must tell you as your Mother, it's not women of America. If they have to be true, May be against me, some things the Shaktis, they have to respect may be tolerated but nothing against themselves, their chastity. What's so surprising that when we see outside all these things happening, even after against him after realisation will tell coming to Sahaja Yoga, some of us try upon you and you will be thrown out to be one of them, who are going to hell. If you have to save them then try to fix degraded people. That is one thing that your positions properly. Try to judge yourself, are you innocent? Christ has said, anything Christ, The Lord, nothing against Lord Ganesha. Everything that is done of the realm of God as absolutely will not be tolerated, will not be forgiven, will never be accepted. Whatever you have done in the past is finished now, Shri Ganesha has four hands and the hand that carries the destructive weapon because you are a new bird. But after of Parsha is the one you have to be careful about. That is his job and if you neglect him, that force will act, and act so vhemently that despite your becoming this if you try to take to these wrong ideas, or to indulge in them, I cannot help you at all. After all, Shri Ganesha is my son because he is pure. Now he is not the only son I have, as so realisation you may not be able to save yourself. Do not take your realisation for granted. Unless and untill your Ganesha is settled, your realisation has no many sons and daughters, and I have made you in the same way as Shri Ganesha, without the father, on my own. meaning at all. Watch yourself. Have you got adulterous eyes? Have you got an To your Mother nothing but purity of heart

 Morch April 2001 45 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XII Issue 3 & 4 and West. Close my eyes, still I will tell you. You know there are so many birds who fly out all the way to Australia, to Siberia because they have that magnet with them, they have that innocence with them. There are so many fishes which have got actual magnet placed in them. Scientists should find out. In the same and purity of your body. is going to please. Anything that is impure has to be thrown away. My name itself means purity. You can do it. You are empowered to do it. You have a kundalini to do it, but the first thing you have to do is to cleanse that and the rest you don't have to worry, Shri Ganesha will look after that. One way, Shri Ganesha within us is magnetic. chakra you keep clear, the rest is looked after. All your incurable diseases, right So a person who has Shri Ganesha awakened within himself becomes from all muscular troubles like melitis and all that; all incurable diseases right from magnetic and magnet attracts the steel, not dried leaves, And steel is like the Cancer onwards, all your psycho-so- matic problems right from Schizophrenia and everything, come because of the Guru tattwa, a man with the steel, say, man of steel. A person who has character, conviction and who cannot be disturbance in Mooladhara. When the dominated by temptations, is a man of roots are not all-right, how can you cure the tree. If the roots are all right, any steel. So this magnet attracts the steel. Steel has only one bad thing about it, that it is not pliable, its rather dry. But medicine can reach any centre, any area, any fruit. But if the roots are not all right how can you work it out? the magnet attracts, means it creates that special quality in the steel that it moves towards the magnet. In the same Today you have called me here to worship Shri Ganesha within me. Shri Ganesha within me is a powerful identity. While worshipping him, you have to know that such a powerful thing you have to of people running away from your establish within yourself and by that ashrams, they will be running towards establishment, you have to manifest the way when this magnet is awakened within you, you will be amazed, instead you. I find it impossible. I go to any house, if they come to know I am there, God save me, any where, anyplace. So what is this magnet? Its pure love, it is powers of Shri Ganesha. And the power of Shri Ganesha's greatness is auspiciousness. It's a coefficient, it's a formula, we can say, in scientific pure love and the concept of pure love is that it doesn't depend on anything language, that emits auspiciouness. It's a magnet in the Mother earth. The same magnet is within you, which is Shri Ganesha. You leave me alone and I can whatsoever, but on itself. It is the support of itself. It's like light that spreads just by its own nature. Doesn't want anything, doesn't expect anything. Just spreads all tell you which is the North, South, East

 March - April 2001 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XII 46 Issue 3 & 4 Russian, American or an Arab, over and enlightens other people's hearts. That's why they get attracted. Those who have not even seen me, child, what's happening to the child. They everybody would be worried about the will not think it's an Arab child or an those who have not even known me, just American child. No, unless and untill it's with my name they came. I have seen, places like Calcutta, we had such a problem, such crowds! They. said we will have to call the police. I said, there is no need to call the police, we will manage some how. In Puna we had such crowds that the fellow who gave us the hall got a fright. He said, Mother I will give you very big area where you can sit down, in a big open place but I am sorry my hall, all will be finished. I said, you don't worry. a devil. Why this attraction for children? Because their magnets are intact. Their ego has not ye! developed. Our ego developed. had tp develop because we had to decide in our own freedom what is right and what is wrong. So the ego developed was alright. Upto a point we should have developed our ego but we overdeveloped it and over developed it, over lapped the superego also. No conditioning, nothing. We will do whatever we like. Today we are wearing a half pant, tomorrow we will wear a long Everything will be in proper place. We had such crowds that people were sitting on the ground, on the staircase, everywhere and till I spoke nobody moved an inch, see, like a picture. And I pant, all.right. Then we will cut our hair or we will do this or we will do that. No spoke for one and a half hour. Just like conditioning of any kind. All superego a picture, no movement of hand, feet, was also covered. This ego would have been all right if you had kept your Ganesha tattwa, and what is that, is the eyes, nothing! Just sitting like a picture! And the gentleman, who owned that hall, wisdom power of Ganesha. The second power of Ganesha is that he gives you wisdom. If you see a farmer and a big had never seen such a thing before. Throughout for one and half hour, no movement of any kind. VWhat is it that worked is the magnet. Even if you are professor or a very well educated man and talk to both of them, you will find the the steel it will attract you. But if you are farmer has much more wisdom than this a magnet then it will attract in such a way that it will never leave this magnet. MAD PHD. Why? Because he deals with Mother earth everyday. He knows the So for Yoga, it is important that you living process He knows about the fix up your magnets of Shri Ganesha who innocence of the Mother Earth. is the childlike personality. It there is a So an innocent person is the wisest child, every body is attracted towards the child. One child gets stuck up somne among all. A child who is innocent is much wiser than ten ego oriented people. where in the air, whether you are a

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII issue 3 & 4 March April 2001 47 So the second capacity of Shri Ganesha is that you become a wise person. When you speak, people start looking at you. You speak like Kabira, you speak like Kundalini cannot rise. But then when it sleeps out, Kundalini is sucked by him. Now we think we have lost our innocence. That's not easy to be lost. It is not destructible. Only thing what you have done, is to cover it with something that cannot allow Shri Ganesha's Nanaka, you speak like somthing that makes people feel their spirit. This is what I call is a Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi who does not have wisdom is good for nothing. He comes to Sahaja Yoga principle to manifest in us. You have pushed it down, You have brought and he is like a bull in a china shop. Goes pressure on it. You have brought loads and loads of nonsense on it. That's all, but if never dies. It is an eternal principle on hitting this person, hitting that person & hitting that person and when you ask these three wounded persons they say that bull, the same bull. Everybody of the whole universe. The another quality of a person who is endowed with reports about the same bull, Oh, that's the one, all right. So it grants you Shri Ganesha's powers is that he removes all the hurdles. If one person wisdom. of this nature is in some place, all the rest of the people who are nearby will be saved if there is an accident, or if there is any problem which is destructive, all When you have the power of Shri Ganesha, your eyes are radiant. You get a spark in you eyes, a light in your eyes. When he is enlightened in you then you happening too. He being the Ganapati, cannot look at anyone with lust and he is now the master of all the ganas. greed but this glance is so powerful that He guides you. Sahaja Yoga cannot even one glance is suficient to purify work out without Shri Ganesha. He is the thousands of people. Just the opening one who is Sahaja. He is the one who of them will be saved. You will find this of the eyes are necessary and you find whole thing changes into a beautiful is the one who takes you to the right path. morning, from a complete dark night. He is the one who gives you everything Glance can awaken the Kundalini. The easily. He is the one who creates all the creates all spontaniety of the world. He Mother Kundalini cannot move unless chamatkaras, all the magic, all the miracles of the world. He is the ganapati, he is the one who is sitting on ganas, in the sense that he is like the king of all and until Shri Ganesha gives the permission. He is like the Vice Chancellor sitting on all the chakras. He has to certify, all right, pass, move. On every the ganas. The one who has pleased Shri Ganesha has pleased all the Gods chakra, And when the Kundalini rises, Shri Ganesha is awakened, otherwise and Godesses because all the Gods and

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume- XIII Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2001 48 is going to drop a present for you and then the child gets up and sees there is no bird. It's only Ganesha who has given the idea. We can say he is the Santa Claus. He gives you ways and methods Godesses are pleasing Shri Ganasha so what is the need? Shri Ganesha is very clever, He knows pleasing his Mother is the only simple thing he has to do. To have all the powers of the world, just keep the Mother pleased. and he tells you how to delicately build There are so many qualities of Shri up relationships, pure relationships. How Ganesha which can be described, He is you hide, how you wrap a little present. Just put it there, and a person who has to take it says, 'O God', and then you see that flowers which you suddenly the one, who gives us the joy of eating. Il you eat something, you may like it, you may not like it. But He is the one who will tell you, it is made by Sahaja Yogis, bring out and put there. It is all Shri is made by your Mother. That means, He gives you the tast of love in the food, suggestions. Among the creation, that is cooked for you, because He is Ganesha's efforts. his ways, his flowers are expressing Shri Ganesha's essence and the essence of Shri love. He gives you the ideas, how to Ganesha comes from the Mother Earth. express your love. Once they asked me to sing a song. I used to sing very well once upon a time but then after lecturing so many times, you see, I lost my voice. I couldn't sing well, I thought so. One day they asked me to sing a song, and His essence is the fragrance. So a person who is endowed with Shri Ganesha's blessings has fragrance, sometimes chandan, sometimes roses sometimes this gardenia. You just don't know from where this fragrance is theught of some song, and sang to them, and after a year or so in a programme they said Mother we want to sing you a song. This was a song unknown to everyone. I don't know from where they got if. from where they made the tune, they started singing the same song, and such joy, I mean it all became waves of coming! The fragrance is coming from Shri Ganesha and that is what is the magnet within you. Such a person is fragrant, absolutely fragrant all the time. Shri Ganesha emits all kinds of fragrance from such a person, and that you can feel only when your Shri Ganesha is al toars in my eyes. I couldn't control my joy Now all these feeling of joy comes from the devices produced by Shri Ganesha. He is busy creating in the mud. You just help it out by relatonships beautiful. How? In a respecting it and he will be there fragrant right. He just settles down there. He is all the time there waiting to be clensed for him to raise his head out like a lotus within you. So imortant for this country child's birthday. what do we birthday, a say All right, tommorrow morning a bird, where we have raised our head without

 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume - XIII Issue 3 &4 March - April 2001 49 so simple to establish Shri Ganesh within you. But understand that it is vital that you people who are Sahaja Yogis should establish Shri Ganesha which is a silent surrendering it to Virata, to the collectivity, to Shri Krishna. We have raised our head. With Shri Ganesha we bow down our head. For all the bounties power within you. Doesn't talk. It is a sitent power which acts, just a power that is dynamic, without any noise, without any show and that is what I would say that today, when I have said all these that God has bestowed upon us. All arrogance will disappear at the lotus feet of Shri Ganesha. He will give us wisdom. He will give us sense to understand, He wil give us power to overcome our arrogance that is within us. He is the one things from my heart, you the Sahaja who is the giver of knowledge. He is the Yogis should establish Shri Ganesha one who gives us light. Many people in India also worship Shri Ganesha. They such powers that others will be able to go on, Shri Ganesha, Shri Ganesha... and do all kinds of tunny things. That's country. within you, and from you, you will emit establish their Shri Ganesha in this May God bless you all. like cheating yourself unnecessarily. It's

 First of all you have to become wise enough to understand that you are a part and parcel of Paramchaitanya. Everything wil! work out by that.. and it works out so beautifully. Ofcourse some people have a hard time, I don't say they don't have. But it is not hard because if you are one with Paramchaitanya and you know that it is doing the job, you are not feeling that hardness, or that sickness. All the people who write to me about their problems, I don't know what to say. I have to just say that. Do you believe in Paramchaitanya? Alright, It knows. It knows what has to be done, it knows what has to be corrected, it knows what has to be said. See it can create poetry, it can create music, it can create everything. But do you leave everything to the Paramchaitanya? This is the second point of wisdom. Do you have wisdom to leave everything to Paramchaitnya?....



----------------------

2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 NERMALA
Volume: XIII Issue: 3 & 4
March-April, 2001
VERSAL
PURE
The Divine Cool Breeze
00
1.
O Mother Divine
Thou art residing in secrecy with Thy Lord (the spirit) in the thousand petalled lotus, having
pierced through the Earth situated in the Moolodhoro, the Water in the Manipur, the Fire obiding
in the Swadisthana, the Air in the Heart (Anahato), the Ether above (the Vishuddhi), ond Manos
between the eyebrows (Aganya) and thus broken through the entire Kula path.
(Saundarya Lahari p50)
VISHWA
DHARMA
RELICION
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In this issue:
1
Editorial
Diwali Puja, 1999-A Report
4.
Shri Adi Shakti Puja, 2000
12
Navratri Puja, 2000
25
Diwali Puja, 2000
38
Sahaja Yoga in Tihar Jail
41
Shri Ganesha Puja
Published by: V.J. Nalgirkar
162, Munirka Vihar
New Delhi - 110067
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 EDITORIAL
On 21st April 2000, Shri Mataji blessed the Dubai collectivity. She was pleased
to see how they had overcome the obstacles to establish a home away from home.
She said, "the way you have become collective, in the same way you will build
many dwellings because you have recognized Sahaja Yoga from your heart. You
have gained the depth of ocean. You appear like sparkling diamonds. To understand
Sahaja Yoga you need a large heart. By seeing your depth, others will come to
Sahaja Yoga. It will penetrate the environment. This is the last judgement. Either
you will be saved or you will perish."
These precious pearls of wisdom flowed from Shri Mataji on board a cruise
around Dubai on a full moon night. All the yogis were singing very sweet bhajans.
The Goddess was immensely "prasanna" and showered a thousand blessings upon
all her children.
The Goddess is "prasanna" when we worship her from our hearts and not by
empty rituals or mental planning. When She is in our heart, She guides everything,
removes all obstacles and also fills us with joy. We don't even feel that we are doing
anything, yet everything works out spontaneously, in the most unexpected way.
Things happen which we never ever dreamt of. Such is Divine benediction, such
are her many wonders, such is the flavour of Sahaja. The one who has tasted it,
even once, becomes forever drenched in Her joy. There is so much love.
Jai Shri Mataji
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 March - April 2001 2
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
Issue 3 &-
Lord Ganesha
Lighting The Road for Shri Mataji's Car
Diwali Puja, 7 Nov. 1999
Mother, She said
announcement of her arrival, Though it
By the blessings of our divine mother,
we had Diwali Puja in Greece.. Shri Mataji
visited Greece after 5 long years. All of
us were very anxious to welcome Her in
it
was
an
was the first time that an international
Puja was being held in Greece, and we
were a small collectivity, yet by the
Athens.
Mother allowed us to organize the blessings of Shri Mataji, everything
Puja at Delphi, which is very significant
as Delphi is at the exact center point
(Nabhi) of the world and all Greece is Thursday and we came to Delphi. We
Devaloka (aa), i.e. Shri Vishnu's
abode. This was an opportunity to
worship Shri Lakshmi at her own home. mountain. Though it was old, the whole
worked out beautifully and effortlessly.
Shri Mataji arrived in Athens on
had booked an old villa for Shri Mataji's
stay, which was located on the top of a
Delphi is located on a mountain about collectivity worked hard to decorate it so
3 hours of drive from Athens. Shri
Mataji had discovered Shri Ganesha's
Swayambhu here when She had visited
Deiphi for the first time. The word Delphi and green fields of olive trees. When we
is derived from Dolphin, which is the
vehicle of Shri Vishnu. Two weeks before place was so silent and meditative that
the Puja day, we started organizing the it was tike being in a different world
camp at the venue. The same day we
saw a big Shri Ganesha's face in the sky
and felt He was showering vibrations to
start this auspicious event. This gave us our brothers from South Africa, France
a lot of joy and energy.Again, one week Switzerland and Greece. South Africans
before the Puja, we saw two huge circles with their simplicity and innocence filled
of a cloud encircling the sun, the whole everyone's heart with joy and sweetness.
day. This gave us a feeling that Especially their dance was so nice, that
something tremendous was going to everybody tried to copy their style after
happen. When I mentioned this to
well that Mother was happy to stay there.
The view from there was beautiful. One
could see the sea, different mountains
arrived there with Mother, the whole
altogether.
We had very nice music programmes
on Friday and Saturday, organized by
the Puja. Welcoming of Shri Mataji was
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
done by offering her a silver crown made
in the form of leaves of olive tree which
is a symbol of peace. A small ship with a
veil was also offered. We wanted to
welcome Mother in a traditional way
because we felt that Shri Athena,
appeared at each and every turn guiding
us silently. The whale scenario appeared
as if we were passing through the land
of Gods. Mother told us that this
lightening will continue 108 times and
will stop when we reach the highway.
witnessed
We
sakshaat Shri Mataji, had started
enlightening the world from here and now
we had the opportunity of welcoming her
back home after her great victory. All the
programmes and Puja took place very
nicely. About 700 yogis from all over the
world attended the programmes. Mother
talked about Shri Athena, Devloka
the
divine
orchestration exactly as Mother had
said. As soon as we reached the
highway, the whole atmosphere
changed, with everything dry and no
lightening. Mother told us sweetly that
the lightening was to compensate for the
little fireworks we had, as Diwali is the
festival of lights.
(tasila) and the relationship betweeen
India and Greece. One of the interesting
We came to Athens and had a Public
things She told was that Shri Athena is
the Mother of Shri Lakshmi.
programme. The next day we went for
shopping with Mother before the public
programme. Shri Mataji bought Greek
pottery. Shri Athena had taught this great
After the Puja, tremendous miracles
took place. It rained so heavily that the
statisticians told us it was the first time
art to Greeks and I feel She wanted to
spread this art again all over the world.
About 1000 seekers got their Self-
Realization at the public programme.
This kind of large response was
in the last 10 years it had rained so
heavily. On Monday we wanted to leave
Athens early but it was raining so heavy
that we could leave only at night. It was
still raining. As soon as we left the village unprecedented. On the day after the
at Delphi, we saw two beams of light public programme, Wednesday, Mother
coming from the mountain. One shone
rested before leaving for Cabela, the next
day. During all Her stay, She gave us so
much love and blessings which cannot
on Shri Mataji's car while another went
in the sky. Exactly on this mountain,
there is Shri Ganesha's swayambhu as
be described in mere words. She
well as a temple of Appolo, who is Shri changed the whole atmosphere and has
Rama, from where the beams must have given us a much better place to live.
been coming. Whenever
encountereda turn in our path, there was
a big silent lightening which lasted only
as long as the curve. The lightening
Humble Namaskar
we
Jai Shri Mataji
Vaibhav Khopade
Greek Collectivity
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - Xill
March - April 2001
Issue 3 & 4
Shri Adi Shakti Puja
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
-Cana Joharie
2.7.2000
problems, arising out of religion. How can
it be that religion makes you hate
somebody? The religion is there to
Thave already told you about the Adi-
Shakti, how She helped you, worked out
so many things in this world, first to
create and then to areate human beings
understand love, to imbibe that and
through evolutionary process. After that
compassion. So the third thing one had
to do is the Adi-Shakti's job. That is the
to comfort them, then to counsel them.
So many people came on this earth just
to do the counselling. They told what was
wrong and what was right, what should
one, kundalini, within us and by Her
awakening, we got 'Pure Knowledge',
absolute knowledge. Pure knowledge
that it can not be challenged. Absolute it
is. Whatever you know after realisation
is absolute. If you know that then what
you have to understand that everything
has to be united. You cannot have fights
and you can not hate anyone. If that thing
starts happning, all the problems of the
we do and what we should not do. What
is self-respect and what is the duty of a
human being as the superior most
creature. So many of them came on this
earth, one after another, in every country
they came and their counselling formed
religions. Of course you see them in all
religions and that's how their life was
wasted, that they tormed religions after
world will be finished.
So the first thing Redemption, that is
religions by which only human beings
were divided. Divided to such an extent the quality of the Adi-Shakti, was to
redeam people of their all wrong ideas
that they hate each other. If somebody
is born in an X-religion, he hates the about others. Firstly, as we know that
there are six enemies we have got. And
unless and until we can conquer those
person who follows the Y-religion. Why
those who came as counsellors talked
six enemies we cannot be a religious
about complete unity, complete oneness
of human race? Despite that human
brain in its freedom did all kinds of wrong
person. That's what is said. But actually
all the religions are based on prospering
those six enemies that we have within
things and create a country or we can
us. When you see this clearly, you start
say the whole world, full of lots of
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
March - April 2001 5
Issue 3 & 4
seeking, seeking earnestly the truth. And
the revelation of truth, absolute truth can
made lots of money. That is not the
criteria of becoming a very good Sahaja-
only come through your evolution, yogi. What is great is the satisfaction.
through your reformation, that you Satisfaction that you enjoy whatever you
become person who knows everything. have. And the second thing that happens
For that Adi-Shakti's ascent is important to you, you become abslutely collective.
This has to happen. But I find, still people
have not understood the meaning of
And when this thing takes place, collectivity. For example family is very-
automatically you drop all those six very weak here. Family that is based,
created by natural relationship is not so
beautiful human being, like lotus when it much respected as it should have been.
is in the very germinating stage. It looks This is all because it is based on money.
like all other small animals or you can So people start quarreling, fighting and
say very-very small dirty things that are even killing each others. Now the basis
in the pond. And then when it starts of family is love and cómpassion. Those
coming out, coming out of that horrible who do not have this cannot have good
water it becomes such a beautiful flower, family. I have seen even among Sahaja
within you, which is your Kundalini.
emenies that you have. You become a
rises up and opens out. In the same way
a Sahaja Yogi, though lives along with
all these horrible things, that are going
yogis sometimes, some people who are
working for money, who are educated,
sometimes look down upon people who
are not so well off or may be the house
wives working in the house, looking after
the children, building up the families are
not treated with respect as some
on, but flowers like a lotus. It does not
have all these insects, all this dirt and
filth of that water in which it lives. It sucks
only the pure water and the remanents
remain there as it is. So what is left within
secretaries working in
organisation. I do not know why this kind
some
you is nothing but purity, beauty and
fragrance, just like a lotus. Then there is of manliness comes into the women?
no more problem of getting attacked by Why should they think they are
all these small-small creatures in the something higher than the women who
water and all the dirty things that are in are working hard in the household,
the water. And this state that you have cooking, looking after children, bearing
achieved now, I am very happy to see all the brunt of the society. This is
so many people in America have something, I feel, a part which is lacking
achieved it, is a very great blessing very much- in America and also in
because America is a leading country in Western countries. When money
becomes important, then the Lakshmi
so many ways, one can say that it has
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 March - April 2001 6
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
Issue 3 & 4
Principle is not respected. Very
surprising! Money is the part of the
blessing of the Lakshmi. But the Grah -
respected? World of men? I was really
laughing. What makes think that this is
the world of men, I can't understand. Can
they exist without women? I was amazed
at her question because she said that
even in the jail, criminals have so much
respect for you. How is it possible? How
can they have so much respect for a
Lakshmi is the one who is a householder
is not respected. And with this, I tell you,
very-very wrong things can happen. You
can work, you can be educated but you
should be able to look after your family
and look after their comfort and look after
woman. I said, I cannot understand. One
their unity. Instead of that educated thing that criminals have got mothers or
women, I call them manly women,
not? All males, don't they have mothers?
educated women think that they are
something higher than the domestic
ones. They are sadly mistaken. In no way
a man is higher than a woman. So this
kind of disparity that exists and one starts
They all have a mother. And they respect
the mother. That is the point one should
know that a woman is much more
important thing than a man is, as far as
children are concerned. But I have seen
some ladies who think that they are very
thinking that we are earning, we are
educated, are realy manly women, I must
say. But the woman who work very hard
in the house hold with love, look after
capable, try to control everyone, and
create problems. Mother's job is not to
control. Her job is to love, to give
their children, look after the family, are
compassion. And this is the quality of
women, which is lost in these Western,
so called advanced countries. This is a
very dangerous thing, I personally think
that if such a thing happens, families will
be destroyed. Nobody will have respect
for the lady who looks after the family.
And she is more than a Prime Minister,
would say, in the family, and she is to be
respected and to be understood.
in no way less than these people, who
are working in the office. So such women
must be respected by their husbands,
by the males of the family. Not only that
but all the Sahaja yogis must respect
such women who are doing such a
difficult task. I have been a housewife
and I know what it is, to run the house,
to look after the children, to look after
the complete organisation and looking
after the expenditure of the money if that
is limited. This ego has to go.
Today I think it is important to say that
all of you should understand the value
of women who are housewives. It is a
tremendous job, to be a housewife. I
have gone through it, and I know what it
is. The respect to the housewife if its not
The other day, one lady came in for
my interview and asked me that how is
it in this world of men, you are so much
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 March - April 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume Xill
Issue 3 & 4
7
compassion, not as somebody who is
children. Children are tomarrow's trying to become a despot, but as a
citizens. Who will groom them, who will person who is a source, source of joy
and compassion. In one of my lectures
I have talked to you about the
emotional intelligence. That is what
given, she wouldn't also look after the
bring them up.? All these manly women
do not have children sometimes. So they
do not know what is the problem of
children. Atleast those who are solving we should try to imbibe-Emotional
the problem of children, must understand Intelligence. That
their resposibility. This is a very-very intelligence, that is based on
crucial point, I think, on which all the emotions. Unless and until we
means the
Western societies are callapsing become emotionally intelligent our
because in their culture, there is no place society cannot improve. In the
emotional intelligence, you care and
for the mother.
enjoy care. You do everything for others
with a great emotional understanding.
So the women should not feel in
anyway less if they are mothers and
looking after the household. They should
not feel inferior to anybody who think that
Not for one child, not for one son, but for
everyone. You have to be emotionally
Intelligent. Some children are born like
this but some are to be made like that,
they are something great. Basically, the
family have to be together. This
collectivity must first come in the family.
that they should be emotionally
intelligent. Because, if their mother and
The children are to be groomed properly.
They are to be brought up in a proper
father are money oriented, very selfish,
they would not allow their child to give
way. As it is, in these days, you know
what is happening to the children. When
I read about it I am really shocked that and will never do anything to any body,
the children are just treated as if they not even for his own country. Why should
are some unwanted stuff. They are not he do? Every thing for selfishness. Then
given any attention. Ultimately the such people indulge into corruption,
children become drug addict, they indulge in all kind of things which are only
become vagabonds. They can become selfish in attitude.
any thing to others. So such a child will
grow into a very funny type of a person
anything because there is so much
neglect and so much of hatred for
Now we are talking of collectivity. In
collectivity we do for others. We enjoy
doing for others. We love giving things
to others. Not for ourselves, because
collectivity you must look after your your children will also become the same
kind and they will only bother about
children.
So one has to first remember that for
children. Not only that, with love and
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
March April 2001
issue 3 & 4
themselves. This Emotional Intelligence
understand about everyone. And all this
work has been done because of that
has to be brought in our lives, in our
quality in my hand. I am not attached to
pattern that we have. Are we emotionally
intelligent or we are just intelligent or
one person or to one style.
emotional? Both things are not there. If
Whatever you say I can understand
you are just intelligent you can become
very dry person. You may just have few
because I am at a level where I can
understand everything that you are
friends, may be or you may not have and
you will always try to preserve yourself
away from the collectivity. If you are
emotional, you will be attached to only
doing. To achieve that you try to develop
emotional intelligence. Here the children
won't even give a toy to somebody to
play. Even the mother is like that, the
father is like that. Extremely selfish. And
one person, attached to one child, may
be attached to one person, even in the
society. For no rhyme and reason. Why we must have our own, everything
you are attached to one person? Why to should be of our own. This has to go.
bother about one person only? All such This has to go trom Americans specially
people fall prey to it. In the politics you because they are the leading nation in
have seen how, people try to help their this kind of selfishness. What selfishness
own sons, daughters, this and that. We they have I did not count but you know
that. You go and ask people of Canada,
Maxico, Peru. They will tell. Being selfish
they are not ashamed. They are
So according to ethics Emotional exploiters, they are not ashamed.
Intelligence is the highest quality by Nobody can even tell them because they
which you give to others. You care for think they are very rich people. But all
this riches will not give them the joy of
life. Joy of life is only in the Emotional
Intelligence. If you do not have that, it
becomes very dry. Life becomes very
unbearable, horrible and even the family
Indians have suffered a lot with this kind
of an emotional attachment.
others, for everyone and you become
very-very collective. Now exclusiveness
is another fashion that is very much
there, to exclusive, because you do not
want to be one of the multitudes. Want
to be exclusive. You should be exclusive
in Emotional Intelligence, not in other
things. That is the best thing you can
have. As I agree, I am just a woman and
just a mother. But what I have is really
the Emotional Intelligence. Ocean of that.
And from that I know about everyone. I
gets broken. If there is no Emotional
Intelligence then the families will be
broken up. I know so many women who
have had three marriages, five
marriages, I do not know how they can
do, but they have done because of this
lack of Emotional Intelligence. You
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
should do something with a sense of heart of the people.
giving. It is not that you are sacrificing
anything. No. That's also another idea
that we have to bear this. Nothing of that
You may have any amount of
property, money every thing, people will
abhor you. So you may say what is
wrong. What is wrong with this that you
are harming the greatest thing, is that
human being. As politicians they are
horrible. Why? Because they have no
Emotional Intelligence. Also as
administrators they are very much
difficult because they have no Emotional
Intelligence. All these people are devoid
of that great quality of Emotional
much to say but I thought that for this Intelligence. If your country is very
special Puja, I should say something progressive, I must say. you must
progress in emotional intelligence. That
way they are philanthropist, I know,
kind. Look at the life of Christ. He gave
his life, why? What was the need for Him
to do that. Behind it was the Truth. When
you have Truth with you, the light of the
truth, the force of the Truth the strength
of the Truth, you become Emotionally
Intelligent. You understand that if you
really love something then you have to
undergo every kind of problemn. You have
to tolerate lot of nonsense. I know its too
about the family life. In our Ashrams or
in our programmes or wherever we are,
we should remember this point that are
Americans
known
be
to
are
we having that Emotional Intelligence,
when we are trying to talk about Sahaja-
Yoga? Why doI need to be at every
place to tell them, what is the need. You
philanthropists. But behind that they want
to have power. They want to rule people
with that money. Is that the Emotional
Intelligence if they just want to rule, if they
start some sort of a charity? that is just
can tell them. If you have that Emotional
Intelligence, everybody will listen to you,
why not? Not necessarily I should go
everywhere, talk to them. In how many
to have a big name on the T.V. or to have
a very big advertisement. And then he
moves like a tycoon all over. Be a part
countries I can go. And the reaction to it
is so beautiful and so nice. It is very
their vision, be a part of their property,
work it out. And make such a fuss about
surprising. In a country like Benin, all are
Muslims there, all black people. They all
it because they want to cash everything.
have become Sahaja-yogis, nine
thousand people. How could I capture
You are Sahaja-Yogis. You have to
send waves of Emotional Intelligence.
you have to send love all over the world,
you have to show how you can, with love,
that. Just think of that. Nine thousand
means something. Also other countries
I have seen. This is the power of
Emotional Intelligence that captures the
win over. It is also possible if you are not
so attached. If you are attached, say, to
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
10
your country only, (now this is a bigger fragrance of your love, fragrance of your
issue), then you will try to exploit other compassion to others, and you should
countries. Take advantage of them.Try feel happy about it. It does not mean that
to run them down. But if you are you give up this, you give up that, nothing
emotionally attached to your country of that kind, but it means that whatever
then you will bring good name to your you have, whatever is your possibility,
country by doing real good work. I don't capability you must try to do for others.
know why people do not know how to Give it to them. And the more you do it,
discriminate. Why are they so selfish, this collectivity, that is what it is very
trying to do all the good things for them important, at least for America. Because
selves. There is a very great chance for
every body is trying to follow America-
money making business, this business,
that business. But you are Sahaja-Yogis.
have become like lotuses. And the lotus So what you have to do is to take
all of you to get this within your reach
because you are all Sahaja-yogis. You
has the fragrance, which spreads all
over. And for days together it stays in
water, in that dirty water and it spreads
the fragrance. And with that fragrance
also, you can do a lot of things. That the
bees come there and sleep in that
advantage of your achievement and give
this to others. Give realisation to others.
Many people who get realisation do not
even bother about it. They just don't go
and spread Sahaja-Yoga. They are not
bothered about it, which is sometimes
beautiful house of the lotus and in the
very shocking to me. Because what was
night it closes down very carefully. All
kinds of things come from the flower, to
make the beauty of that flower. We can
say because we can extract also the
essence of that which has fragrance, you
the need for me to go round the whole
world with all the mad people living and
talking to them about Sahaja Yoga? In
the same way you should also feel now
that we have to do. We have to change
can also get some honey out of that,
Whatever is possible, everybody comes
to that flower. That doesn't mean that
this. We have to get them in Sahaja-
Yoga. Why can't we? We are so many
people. Christ had only 12 disciples and
how much he spread Christianity? What
about you people? You are so well
equipped, you have so much of
knowledge, absolute knowiedge and
experience. So if you have the
experience and knowledge, you can
capture the people. But there is some sort
of a lurking ambition which goes against
flower is in any way weak but that is its
quality. That's its strength. That's its
understanding. That's what you are. You
are all made into lotuses. You are not
made into some sort of creepers or some
sort of stupid donkeys. No.
You are the people who are to give
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 March April 2001 11
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume- XIII
Issue 3 & 4
the culture of Sahaja-Yoga. You want to
be leader or you want to put down day this America will lead so many
completely established, and I know one
somebody or you think no end of
yourself, that's no good. And also they
do Sahaja-Yoga and spread Sahaja-
Yoga, because they want to enhance
themselves. This is not the way.
people, so many people, thousands in
Sahaja-yoga. So far whatever was wrong
was adopted. Drug addiction, then
another thing starts. All kinds of
nonsensical things started in this country.
Now, the new lotuses that are there, they
have to change the atmosphere of this
place where all kinds of dirty things are
The way is complete surrender,
complete surrender to the work of
Sahaj-yoga. It is possible. It is not
difficult at all, aslam telling you. It is very-
coming up, immoral things are coming up
ruining the whole world. So in our general
attitude also we should try to see, are we
really growing? Are we really doing what
is to be done? What are we doing for
very simple. Önly thing you should
understand that you have a special place
in the whole universe today. You are not
to rot. You are not to waste your life. We
have started marriages. And in America,
also they said. I said, alright we will also
have marriages. But these marriages
what is the outcome? If they are like all
morality? That is a very important point
in Sahaja yoga. How you dress, how you
walk, how you talk, everything is very
important. And all other things that you
have you should try. How to create and
other ordinary marriages, what is the
use? What are they doing for others?
What sort of children they are producing?
You have to see to it that when you
all these things of different-different
chakras, you should try to concentrate on
them. See for your self, what are you
doing. What are you making out of your
life? You are Sahaja Yogis. You are
special people. You are not ordinary.
want to tell you that you should have -
become married couples, in Sahaja
Yoga. Your family should be a different
type, your love for your family should be
of a different type. The whole family of
Sahaja Yoga is also your family. So for
every one you must have compassion
and love. I know some people grow very
self esteem.
Try to understand, what is your quality,
what are you.
fastbut some don't because they lack this
Thank you very much.
balance between Emotion and
May God bless you.
Intelligence. This balance has to be
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001 12
Navratri Puja
Cabella, 8-10-2000
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today we are going to worship the
Devi. We call her 'Amba' and by many
Its a very great comfort to you, that you
can sleep and that you can take some
other names. She is the last, you should rest. Without Her you can't sleep.
Absence of Her, you can't sleep. So
say the residual power. When She has
done everything She becomes the sleeping is a very important function of
the body which is brought forth by the
left side. That's why we worship Her
Kundalini and settles in the triangular
bone of yours. This is the Mooladhara
because She should give us rest.
chakra. But actually She is expressed
more on the left side because that time
She is purely The Amba.
She is the one who gives you peace.
She is the one who gives you also
This left side is a very-very important illusions, called as 'Bhranti.' She gives
thing for all the human beings. If you
you all the artistic talents. She protects
have no left side, you can't balance
yourself, to begin with. And it is said that
you. But this part, that is, She is creating
illusions for you, that's very-very
She gives you a real personality of a
Sahaja Yogi. That is, your left side, if it
is weak, then you have to worship Her
important. Because those people who
are against the divine, who are trying to
be away from the reality, She creates
illusions for them. So she separates you
and request Her that "please enrich our
left side". By enriching your left side.
what She does, She is a comforter. So
from those people, while you know the
reality, and all such people who are
troubling or trying to destroy her work,
She is the one who creates illusions. She
what does She give you, first of all She
makes you rest. That is, She makes you
sleep. If you are too much thinking about
future, and you are too much indulging
into the futuristic planning, you have
is the one who resides as the Kundalini.
So we can say that part of her is the
Kundalini but another part that She has
some problems, But the best thing is if
is the one which resides in the left side.
you can sleep, then its a great comfort.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 March - April 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
Issue 3 &.
13
a pendulum you can go any far. But there
Now there are seven levels on which
She resides. Once you start enjoying Her
are seven powers on the left- hand side
which protect you from getting into these
on the first level then She has all these
qualities described to you that She is diseases, also reducing their intensity.
peace. She in the one who gives you,
So at one time She is the one who is
love. She is the one who creates all the
peace giving, She is the one who looks
after you, protects you and She is the
one who saves you from psychosomatic
diseases. Its a very powerful entity. If She
beautiful things for you. She is the
Mother and what She expects from you
is to enjoy Her protection, enjoy Her love
and be always under Her complete
was not there I don't know what would
have happened! So we should worship
protection. So this is a very important
part of Her work, and the second one is
Her within ourselves. We should respect
that She is the Kundalini.
Her and understand Her. She is your
Mother. As Kundalini, She is your
So she also acts on the seven levels.
particular Mother, She is the one, Amba,
Seven levels She moves, we can say
who gives you your second birth and as
the left side Goddess She gives you a
hoizontally, and seven levels She
moves upwards. And all these seven
very good support in your ascent.
Without her, you could not balance your
levels, on both the sides, She does
tremendous work for us. How She
self.
protects us through these seven levels
is like this that, when you start going
This goes too far sometimes, when
towards the left side, there are seven
people are too much on the right side.
deities which try to throw you back into
Then they get diseases which are very
funny. They can get heart attack, they
normalcy, they are 'shankhini', Dakini.
these are the names. And by that you
can get paralysis. They also get the right
side competely paralysed. They cannot
try to come to normal conditions: Now
for example many psychosomatic
walk. They can't lift themselves. This is
diseases which come to us, like cancer
too much of right side movement. So
and so many others; psychosomatic then She is the one who makes you feel
means it is physical as well as it is
emotional, so these psychosomatic suggests that you give up your right side
bad about it. She is the one who
troubles start coming from the left side.
Sometimes you are too much on the right
side, then suddenly you are thrown to
and take more to your left side. So that
does not mean that right side if it is cured
by the left side is very good. For example,
the left side, and then the movement like
a person who is very arrogant, egoistical,
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
14
absolutely docile, and they are looking after as a kind of a
may become a
people might think he is cured. No. He
is on the left side. Though he has
possession for others, Tantrik people
possess the spirits of these dead people
and use them to entice you.
become docile, still he is not normal. Still
he is very much wrong because he is on
the left side, On the left side one starts
So when you start getting into the left
side by any means; you can get it by
like
diseases
getting
Schizophrenia (lo
many
worrying too much, you can get it by
feeling very sorry for something or crying
n). in the upper
level of this side these same seven
weeping anything; then your right side
centres act to give you very serious problems disappear. That's why you do
troubles. One of them is that people it. But it goes too far. The right side
become Schizophrenic. It can be cured.
problems, if they are cured, you get the
left side problems which are much more
It can be cured if you can move that
person to the centre and by Kundalini
awakening you can do it. Then people
dangerous. I told you, all kinds of
psychosomatic diseases, I don't want to
also become mad, lunatic. But all the
give the list to frighten you, but they all
troubles of the right side disappear. Such
come from the left side. Now, because
people, who have moved to the left side
the right side is completely cured, as they
say, people think it is a very good idea
won't have liver problems. They might
have enlarged livers, but over active
to get possessed by some spirits. So
these false gurus, what they do, they
master these dead spirits. How? I mean
livers they won't have. They won't have
other symptoms like asthma, heart
attack. They can't have heart attack.
they know how to do it. 1 need not tell
They will give heart attack to others. But
you, because you are not going to do it.
they themselves don't get heart attacks.
They master it and they tell you, that you
So this sudden movement of your
take this name. You start taking the
attention to the left side is all the time
name of some sort of a, God knows
what. They don't tell that you take the
guarded by these seven entities or
Goddesses who look after you. But still
name of some incarnation. But they will
tell you take the name of, say Ram.
it you go on with it, for example if you go
to the false Gurus then what do these
Ram's name is not to be taken as is it.
false Gurus do? They put you to the left
has to be Shri Ram, Shri Krishna, Shri
Mataji. So they never put 'Shri'. They just
side, they will give you some name, could
be the name of the servant or anyone
tell you take these names and by these
whom they have captured and whom
names what happens that you go to the
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001 15
left side because these dead spirits, they
capture you. There are dead spirits on
the left side and there are dead spirits
So all these Gurus had mastered this art
of astral travel, controlling some dead
spirits who were right sided. So right
on the right side. If they are on the right
sided spirits are very ambitious, and they
side they are very ambitious people and
do all kinds of healings, and all kinds of
they try to capture you. Its a very predictions because they are futuristic.
frightening explanation of the whole Some times they know, sometimes they
thing. Once they capture you and you don't know. But its all coming from a
go to right side, you get all right side wrong source. So getting into that trap
qualities. You are not normal.
Sometimes you feel, you are going in the
is not a very good thing, If somebody is
possessed like that, then such a person
starts doing all kinds of wrong things.
Like he will try to grab your house, to
Like two Americans came to see me and grab your money, to deceive you, run
air, some where. You have seen some
things which you would normally not see,
they were journalists. I asked them why
away with your wife. All kinds of things
are you here? They said, Mother you which are absolutely wrong. Because the
make us like Harishchandra. There was
influence of the right side increases very
one fellow called Harish-Chandra who
much.
was a journalist. Because he used to
travel in the air and he used to get news
Also there are some drugs when you
take them, like LSD and all that, you go
to the right side and you start seeing
like he would tell about what is happeing
in some part of Bombay like we have a
colours and people think that its a very
Juhu Beach. So one day, in the great thing to see colours because
newspaper it came out what happend at
Juhu Beach, and his name was there,
normally you don't see colours. They
don't know basically what's wrong with
them. Basically wrong with them is that
the one who was a correspondent, his
name was Harishchandra. So how did
there is a bhoot, there is some sort of a
Harishchandra tell you my name. I cured
ghost which is very right sided, which has
entered into their being and trying to work
him. Why you want to get into his trouble.
They said, we want to have this astral
travel. For what? Because we are different type. They are sly and they
journalists and we know so much about teach you peevish things. They may also
it out. But the left side bhoots are of
everything, and we want to travel all over.
I said, this I don't do. If you are doing
try to entice you to such an extent that a
person can tell lies to any limit. He tells
lies and then he tries to secretly take
astral travel, of course I can reduce it.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
Issue 3 & 4
March- April 2001
16
away your money and take away completely drunk and still they were
whatever you have. All kinds of singing the praise of Shri Ganesha and
plannings, secretive takes place. Nothing
is open and you do it without even
understanding it. But all these people are
saying all kinds of filthy things, unholy
things, dirty things, we can call them or
lots of abuses they were using, fulfilling
more interested in achieving some sort
of a material advancement, whether it is
on the right side or on the left side. Many
that desire to be nasty, to be bad. And
suddenly earthquake came there. They
were all dancing, they all went inside the
things happen like fundamentalism. If
Mother Earth, and were finished. We had
you are a fundamentalist then these
a centre there. Surprisingly that centre
was not touched. About 100 yards away
bhoots take over and they try to
overpower. They try to teach you how to
kill people who do not belong to your
religion or to your sect. They give ideas
and they fight and they quarrel and they
there was a round circle created. So
nobody could go out. And they were
amazed how is it that this centre has not
been touched at all. That's the power of
kill. But the Mother Earth or the sea,
the Goddess. At the same time, when
anyone of these elements can work out
She sees these negative people are
their destruction. In such places you will coming to torture or to trouble, the
find big earthquakes taking place and
destroying them, or there could be a
Goddess saves the right type of people.
As you know, normally always if there is
hurricane that will come and destroy
one good person, there will be 100 bad
people getting after him and that person
them. Of course some innocent people
are also killed with them. It could be
feels so lost. But then the Goddess helps
anyting that you do wrong, it is corrected
that man and saves that one or that
by all these five elements.
human being from the troubles from the
In India, we had a place called as negative forces. So this Mother of
"Latur', where people used to drink and
drink and drink. Once they went for forces. They can be as I told you
drinking when they had immersed the drunkards who drink, so She starts
statue of Shri Ganesha. That we do on destroying. At lower level She destroys
Ganesh Chaturthi when we put it into the their liver, at even greater level She
sea, may be after three days, may be destroys their family, She destroys their
seven days or 10 days and they came
back from there and they had gone for
yours fights all kinds of negative
money. I have not heard of anywhere a
statue erected of a drunkard. Nowhere.
drinking after that and they were
Where drinking is a fashion, where
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
March - April 2001 17
Issue 3 & 4
drinking is daily worshiped, in a way, but
I have never seen anywhere. How is it
She is a 'Bhranti' within us. She creates
such an illusion within us that a person
that nobody erected any statue of a man
who tries to be harmful, to be
who was drunk. Would be nice to show
troublesome, to be destructive gets
that, but no, because the wisdom
destroyed. All kinds of things she can
put and that's how so many people have
survived in this world, otherwise so many
prevails, and people understand what is
the destructive force. So one can get
would have been finished, and there
possessed by any such idea, like Hitler.
He got the idea that he is the monarch
of everything and he has every right to
would have been the kingdom of the
'Satan'
destroy the Jews and he was destroying.
He destroyed so many people but what
happened at the end? He was using that she has killed so many demons.
"Swastika' which was the symbol of Shri Actually She has. It's not that She has
Ganesha, and with that he was fighting, killed them in a symbolic way. There
But this Goddess is the one who
saves us. Symbolically it has been said
but luckily it so happend that the Mother
were demons and even today we have
entered into his mind. By that he was
demonic people, and all of them will
lost into bhranti, illusions. He lost, the
not only be killed but will be finished
forever. I have seen in Russia, I have
power of Ganesha, how to use it. He was
using stencil and because of the stencil
seen in many countries. Those people,
once upon a time, were regarded as
Gods, were finished. It happens in every
the second printing of Swastika was the
other way round which was for
country. Wherever there are wrong type
destruction. So he printed the other kind
of a Swastika. As a result he got
of people, they are exposed and people
donot even want to look at their
destroyed. So this is the 'bhranti' part that
she enters into your mind and puts you
into a bhranti, means into an illusion. You
photographs. They have thrown away
their statues. All this happens because
this Goddess is the one who creates an
commit mistakes. If it had not happened,
so many people would have been
finished by now. So she enters into the
mind of such people who are trying to
illusion for them. Now supposing there
is a person who is very demanding, who
is going to destroy everyone, then the
people who are wise will understand but
destroy human beings, who are trying
those who are not will take to him and
to destroy anything and puts ideas in
such a manner that they die or get self
destruction. That's why it is written that
get destroyed with him. Like this
thousands of people have been
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
issue 3 & 4
March April 2001
18
destroyed because they didn't see the
Indians, all over, when they are abroad,
right point, they could not understand not in India. So they follow that Babaji.
what is right, what is wrong. So this idea
of right and wrong also is completely
Alright, and this Babaji is the one, who
takes money, who steals money, who
confused by Her, so that those who are
steals ornaments. He does all kinds of
wrong type can be destroyed. We don't
things but they don't mind. What ever
he is doing is alright, and this Babaji is
want them on this earth. Those who are
troublesome, who are destructive or
the one who is to be destroyed. But the
argumentative will be all destroyed. But
advantage of having this Babajis is this
that you have all kinds of stupid people
by themselves only they will be
on the earth, who have no discrimination
destroyed. Its not necessary for the
Goddess to do that. So this is the one
and they fall a prey to these Babajis and
are finished. They wil get heart attacks,
they will become blind, they will get
cancer. They will get all kinds of troubles
which many people ask me, why it is
said that 'Bhranti Rupen Sansthita'. Why
does she exist as an illusion? This is the
and they are destroyed. But it is
reason that your discriminating power is
challenged. But if you are a Sahaja Yogi, surprising that the human beings are
real Sahaja Yogi then you can feel on
such that they see a person being
destroyed by a Babaji or some Guruji, a
lady and still they think that they also go
your finger tips that the person whom you
are following is a good man or a bad man
forward! It is something surprising that
and then you can tell others also. So
human beings don't see that a person is
many seekers are destroyed like that.
destroyed, like I have told you many a
times of the people who are going to the
Wrong type of Gurus came and they just
followed them. Stupid they were,
pub. They see from the pub people
absolutely stupid gurus. And these were
coming out and falling on the ground and
they queue up to go inside again to come
back and fall Very surprising, isn't it.
stupid people. I do not know, why they
followed them. It was so obvious, that
they were after some sort of a Rolls
They have no brains. Why do they want
Royce or something. And I have seen
to go to pub if they had seen already
somebody falling down? But they do it.
Now this is the last judgement, as I have
them so mad, that they can't get out of
it.
There are people now, who are
told you, and at this time you have to
see what's happening to the person who
has gone by wrong methods or by the
following all kinds of wrong Gurus. One
of them is now very much liked by the
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
March - April 2001 19
Issue 3 & 4
hell of some Guruji. Its very clear if you
sleeveless. They should be always
covered. All the chakras we cover except
want to see it, very clear. How they are
destroying themselves? They say, in any
case we have to die; so why not to go to
Agya which we also cover with the
Kumkum. By that how many diseases
can come? You can get sinus, you can
the pub? I mean what's this. This kind of
argument they give. So stupid, as if they
have no brains, no intelligence to
get eye-trouble, you can get paralysis of
both the hands, you can get also
understand a person has gone and he
parkinson's. All sorts of diseases can
came back from there and has fallen on
come because these are two very
the ground, and nobody to pick him up
and they are doing it! And they say that
important chakras. One is Shri Chakra
which is on the right side. Another is the
Christ did it. He gave wine to people. No.
He cannot. He is perfect. He did not give
wine. He gave them just an ordinary juice
Lalita Chakra which is on the left hand
side. You should never never expose
these Chakras. Also the knees but it is
of the grapes. How can you make wine
the fashion now a days to show the
in one second, can you? But that's how
knees, I do not know. I can't understand
they explain. All their bad things are
explained by their stupid intelligence, and
the logic behind that. What is in the
knees. Why do people want to see the
they go for destruction.
knees of the women. I mean there is no
logic, sense- less. FirstI never
understood it. Now I have understood
And now in Kaliyuga, destruction is
working very fast. Why? Because people
have lost their discrimination. They are
that they want to attract men. If men are
attracted by your knees, what sort of men
no more discreet and so many people
they must be? I don't understand such
men also. Men will be fully dressed while
have lost. Not few; and it is a fashion to
become indiscreet. I said, why are they
women will expose their both the Nabhis
doing like this? Mother, this is a fashion.
Any stupid thing is a fashion. They take
to that stupid thing and then they are in
trouble, Nowa days of course there is a
and both the Chakras which are so
important and that is the fashion.
Tomorrow the fashion will start that you
fashion that women, specially in shave your head, so everybody will
America, I have seen, they want to just
shave, as if its like a flock of sheep who
do not understand. They go by the
wear straps over their frocks, what ever
you may call it. Just straps and both the collective happening. So there is a
chakras are left open. They are very
fashion which is actually collective and
that's how it finishes off their sense
important chakras, should not even wear
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
March - April 2001
20
issue 3 & 4
completely. You see it everyday and you follow them. So he saw many people
don't understand. I have seen even
going, he followed them. Where does he
go, to a funeral. That does not mean you
Indian women who are abroad. They
don't use your brains.
also try to copy the fashions, and they
also expose both of their chakras and
Also you will see what they do is this,
then they get into troubles. Its very
say, many people are going to something
wrong, they have no brains of their own,
no individuality, nothing. They just follow
surprising. Atleast in India its not
regarded as a good omen to see a
woman like that. But when they have
come abroad they have learnt this great
them. They don't see, what they have
achieved, what they have got, what is
knowledge, how to expose your body.
the use, nothing. Even when you buy
something, you want to find out, what is
the quality, how the person who has
The other side of it could be even
more serious; like you cover your face.
Mohammed Sahib must have thought purchased is using it, everything you
want to find out. But when it comes to
about the modern times. He said, cover
follow a fashion, nobody thinks about it
your face, cover your body, cover
and the fashion is created to befool
yourself completely, so that, you are
people, I think so. It is something very
funny creation of the evil force, so that
saved as a woman and men are saved
because they are not attracted. I mean
human being should be destroyed. It is,
this is going to the extremes and it was
they say the designer's. I say, its nothing
designer's or anything but is their
aggressive force, the negative force
which works on you and who saves you,
to be worked out that way. But it does
not. I have seen also muslim women are
so stupid when they are facing their
husbands, the way they behave to attract
them and the way the husbands try to is the Mother on the left side. She has
dominatel Its too much. So this is the got seven curtains, seven boundaries.
bhranti. The bhranti created by the
She doesn't want you to cross over, but
human beings say, why not, why not me?
If they have gone to hell, I will also go to
hell. Alright, that's being made for you,
Mother Amba. She creates this bhranti
and with this bhranti, I have seen, people
can go amuck and they don't know that
go ahead. So that's why she creates the
they are going amuck, because all of
bhranti because some people have to
them are going that side. Like there is a
go out, out of this creation. Out of this
story about a father who told his son that
evolution process, let them go out. It's
whichever way people go, you must
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - Xill
March - April 2001
issue 3
21
the last judgement, alright, that's how you
will be judged.
Then after going out of Sahaja Yoga they
will realize and say that Mother we don't
want to be out of Sahaja Yoga, Why?
By your own stupidity you will be Because they know that now they are
judged. I have told so many Sahaja
Yogis, something small, that you must
completely away from reality, and from
put some oil in the night and in the salety. So they want to come back.
morning time you wash. They don't do
it. By doing that what happens is that you
sooth your self. You sleep well, oiling is
Those who can come back, can come
back. But those who should never come
back should not come back. Because
they are so mad that they will create a
fashion of madness and people can get
a very good thing. We need it, all of us,
specially in this cold weather, we need
it. But they won't put. They neglect
influenced by that. So to get influenced
by others is not a sign of a Sahaja
themselves. Because they think they are
Yogi. He can influence others but how
Sahaja Yogis, they are protected. Mother
can oil them. It's not so. You have to look
does he get influenced by others, but for
Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga gives you the
after yourself as far as your body is discriminating power, and who has given
concerned, mind is concerned. You are
you this, is the Kundalini. So this
responsible for your body. With Sahaja
Kundalini, which is your Mother, the one
Yoga you will understand what's wrong
which is in your triangular bone, also
with you, what you are doing wrong. I gives you all the qualities and all the
beauties of your being. Of course I have
mean I tell you some things which are
told you so many things about Kundalini
that I need not tell you. But she also can
very important. To you may not be but
you should try that. As it is you are
realized souls, your spirit is there, you
correct the left side.
can feel the vibrations, and you can
Some people have a habit of all the
understand what's wrong with the
time crying and weeping. Every time you
person, Mostly what I have seen, now
meet them, they are is tears. What has
its much less, that people only inform me
happened? Mother, this has happened,
about people who are possessed.
that has happened. They will write letters
Mother such and such person is after letters to me-telling about their
possessed, Mother this person has got
this possession. I said, throw them out.
woes, their troubles, and this and that.
You are Sahaja Yogis now. Now you are
That's all. Why do you want me to in the garden af Eden. You are in the
bother about that. Just throw them out.
heavens. Why are you thinking about al
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume
Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
XilIl
22
hellish things which are not important,
jump in the darkness, and by that you
why? Because you have not got your
will also unoderstand who is the right
person and who is not the right person.
Even in Sahaja Yoga this negativity
individuality as yet. Now as Sahaja Yogis
you have to develop your discrimination
of understanding what others are, also
can work. It works. One should not
about yourself. Why do you hanker after
things? Try to understand. What is so
get involved into any negative
thoughts of others or negative doings
of others. Its a warning today I wanted
great about it. Why do you want.to do it?
Question your self. Is it some possession
or is it some fashion or is it your individual
to give you all. Because you people are
very much there to enjoy. Look after
feeling? So I am trying to tell you that
your attention, where does it go. There
this left side of your's is so protective. At
are so many beautiful things. See the
flowers are made so beautiful. See these
the same time if you are very aggresive
about your left side, you are thrown from
things, they are so beautiful. It makes
one to another to another and into hell
my heart jump with joy-while some
and then you suffer. So you must
people don't even notice. The other day
understand. Your wisdom should be
lasked somebody who had made these
there which you can develop very much,
flower arrangement. Which flowers?
with the help of left side. Wisdom can be
said, the one that was there. Which one?
So I told the names of the flowers. We
very well developed. Now there is
somebody, say, a Sahaja Yogi, so called,
and he is absolutely aggressive, money
never saw. Where were you looking that
you could not see the flowers? Because
your eyes are so stupid that they can't
see the beauty. They are engulfed with
all kinds of negative things.
oriented deceitful, and you get into his
trap. In Hindi we call it 'Chakkar, into his
chakkar and once you get involved into
that you go on drifting. Still your left side
will protect you, up to a point. But if you
So the goddess has to kill all the
Rakshas. I don't know how many She
are too much of it, then it throws you out.
has killed and again they are back and
again people are being trapped. This is
Now the time has come for all of us to
understed that you are all Sahaja Yogi
going on. So these Rakshasas are there
and you have a very big responsibility:
and you have to pin-point them. And tell
very very big responsibility that you people where are you going? He is a
should do what your enlightened Rakshas. What he has done? What has
conscience tells you. Take to your he achieved? Now you should talk like
enlightenment, live under thaät light, don't
that, openly. So you can save many
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
March - April 2001
Issue 3 & 4
23
people who are going to these
own country, they may fight for their
Rakshasas, who are coming in such religion or nonsense. But this man is
clothes that you can't make them out.
really the truth, He is the one who is really
They will be destroyed, one by one. But
when they are in the hearts of so many
an incarnation. Nobody will say so.
Yesterday I was stunned to see the
people how can you destroy them?
drama, they have shown. I mean, I could
not face my self, I should say, though its
So itis for you people to tell them what
these Rakshasas are doing. I know their
a truth. Of course I agree, But I could
tricks but the worst part is that the human
not face my seif. I am too humble to
beings fall into their tricks. So you have
to be very self understanding. Ask
accept such a thing, and its very
ingenious, its very great to create such
a drama and of all the things, tirst of all,
always the question, Why? why am I
attracted to this? What is the gain? Ask
I should say. that English have such a
sense of drama. They had people like
after coming to Sahaja-Yoga, you have Shakespeare and all that. And the way
gained so much. So now why have this they could produce the drama I could not
false idea? Why go after false things. understand. But this one was the last
negative things? That's what Sahaja word of perfection, so much so that I
Yogis have to do. Because not that they could not say a word about it. I was just
yourself this question. You will find that
are responsible for others, they are
stunned. The truth that they have
responsible for themselves also.
propounded. But in my life time you will
have no doubts, if you have some sense
Now the sweetest thing said about
in you. Because so many miracles are
taking place.
Her is that She gives you Shradha (ar).
Shradha, we can translate it as 'faith'.
You have faith rightly not wrongly.
Today only somebody told me that
Peaple take full advantage if you have
wrong faith. But faith is very important somebody had cancer, ulcer and all
that she gives also and that's very joy kinds of things and after Sahaja Yoga
she went to the hospital, she had nothing.
giving. The faith is very joy giving. But
when the incarnations lived, nobody All such miracles are taking place. It
never have happened like this. There are
believed in them. They had no faith in
them. Christ, they crucified. Nobody photographs of mine which are just
remarkable. Even the scientists are
stood up to say-why are you crucifying
him. All of them. Nobody could have that
surprised about it. How these
faith to stand up. They may fight for their
photographs are coming? Actually there
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 March - April 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
Issue 3 & 4
24
was Shri Ganesha standing behind me.
photographs, you have seen everything,
you have known the miracles, it has
happend to you, you have the
experience of Sahaja Yoga. Despite that
Actually. Only in one camera it came.
just for you people to have faith. Because
when the person is not there, like Christ
is no more, now every body is going to
church, Shri Rama is not there so they
are all singing his praise. Shri Krishna is
your faith is so weak, She is the one who
gives you faith. So you have to praise
Her, you have to fall at Her Feet, you
have to worship Her and ask Her, "Oh
not there so there are Hare Rama, Hare
Krishna. So when there is Sakshat,
when that is before you, you do not
Mother give us that faith. And with
this faith, you will be amazed, any
person who has this kind of faith, he
accept! Because perhaps you don't
tells me, Mother please do this, it
happens, it just happens. Such right
they have got to ask for anything, it
believe that you can deserve it. perhaps.
Or may be, I don't know, human beings
are very difficult to understand. When
you are standing before them they works out. But first your faith should
be solid, it should be real. If it's real
don't believe, when you are no more
then they wilI believe. Its a very funny and if it is deep, you can achieve
whatever you want, not wrong but
thing, isn't it.
good things. So try to develop that
faith and faith gives you such joy and
All throughout, if you see the history
of spirituality, this has been going on.
Gyanadeva showed some miracles, nappiness, you get committed, you
Still only the wise, only the sensible
could understend and believe it. They
get involved and don't want to get out
of it. So the greatest thing, the blessing
ne left side is the faith, faith which is
are so few that as a result such people
pure. Faith can be translated as
Shradha. Shradha means something
were crucified, killed or murdered. They
have tried that with me. But you know
that is within and which has no doubts,
in this life I have come in all forms
which has no doing, as such. It's just
there. So you should now develop
and nobody can destroy me unless
and untill I want to finish myself, no
faith about yourself and about Sahaja
Yoga. If your taith is strong you will see
one can. The powers are of love.
affection and compassion but also there
is a power which completely corrects
others. So to you people not to have faith
many miracles also. But with miracles,
with every thing still if you do not
understand, then it is your discretion.
in Sahaja Yoga shows complete
blankness. You have seen the
May God bless you.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Vlume
March- April 2001 25
XIII
Issue 3 & 4
DIWALI PUJA
LOS ANGELES, 29-10-2000
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Il's a great day today for the whole
world that we are celebrating this Diwali
Puja in America, It's very important. Here
absolutely blind and they forget what is
behind the blessings of the Lakshmi.
First of all, as we see how the symbol of
Lakshmi represents. I have told you
people have been able to earn money,
to have lots of money sometimes and before also that
are also people who are ruined Lakshmi, should be very generous.
completely because of money. When we
talk of Diwali, we should understand that person who is miserly with Lakshmi is
why on a Diwali day we have all these absolutely against the principles of
lights! What is the combination of lights Lakshmi, and such a miserly person,
and the Lakshmi who was bom in the never, can enjoy the blessings and
water, who stands in the water? Why this gradually he starts becoming poorer and
combination is there? She was standing poorer. When you start giving with the
in the water, as we know -a symbol of left hand that means you have opened
prosperity. That is built in the human
awareness that he can prosper. Animals Then comes the grace of Lakshmi, and
don't prosper. They all have their this grace of Lakshmi also has another
maryadaas, trees have their maryadaas. aspect that you must give protection.
Only the human beings can prosper but Those who are people with money
if they have no sense of their own
maryadaas then this is very ruinous, and Protect the people who are in trouble,
a person who has
One hand she is giving to others; a
the door for your Lakshmi to come in.
should protect like this. Protect whom?
ruinous for the whole world.
people who are having lots of cruelty on
them, orphan children who need your
help. All this should be looked into and
So the lights are there that all the
people who have Lakshmi's blessings
protection to the people who are
must enlighten themselves, must
dependant on you should be given, So,
have lights and they should enlighten
others also. But actually as soon as they
this has to be done with the right hand.
That's the symbol of Lakshmi. And there
get the Lakshmi, so called, they become
are two hands up there, which you have
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XII
issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
26
seen, with the pink coloured lotus. Pink becomes the more powerful person.
coloured lotus suggests that you must Everything becomes power, money is
have love in your heart. Pink is the
symbol of love and compassion. As I divinity in it, but a power of oppression
power, love is power. This power has no
have told you before also, a person who
has Lakshmi should have a house,
and aggression and self importance. ll
these symbols of the Lakshmi are very
where everybody is invited, like the lotus
convincing, like today when we say that
invites all the insects,, even the beetles
somebody has got money or some
who have got lots of thorns and the
country or nation they are just the
beetle comes and sleeps the whole night opposite of what they should have been.
very comfortably and the lotus closes its The reason is, they are not enlightened.
petals so that the beetle has no trouble,They have to have lights in their hearts
be comfortable. So, these houses must
as we see that on Diwalı there has to be
accept guests, any kind they are, and lights and without enlightenment these
they should be treated very well-just like
as if the Gods have come into your become nonsensical. That's why there
rich people, so called Lakshmipatis
house. I have seen, people who are poor
are much more hospitable than the
has to be the light because with Lakshmi,
one can become absolutely blind. So
people who are rich. Same way about
the the countries, countries which are
called Lakshmi doesn't give you proper
understanding as to what it means that
you have got money, that you are rich.
What does, that mean? That's why one
poor are much more hospitable than the
countries which are rich. Its very
surprising that rich countries have their
immigrations, they have all problems of
avoiding people, guests in their own
countries. So, they are going really in
has to have the lights; unless and until
you have light of divinity within you, you
will not understand the great symbol of
Lakshmi.
the wrong way, as far as the Lakshmi's
But in Sahaja yoga we believe that
the Lakshmi must become Mahalakshmi.
symbols are concerned.
The another very important symbol is A man has to become a greater man
that She stands on a lotus. This is all
glorified, all beautiful lotuses carrying her That she has to become the
but lotus suggests that she throws no Mahalakshmi. Mahalakshmi is a deity
'Mahamaanav. What does that mean?
pressures, no imbalances, no power which makes you absolutely satisfied
around, but in these countries where with whatever you have, complete
people have money they try to throw satisfaction. Not only that but you start
power all around. One who has money thinking that whatever I have is not
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII. Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
27
sufficient. I have to have something else,
Everyshop will have this. I said, people
not money, not more cars, not more
have no sense. They have no light within
televisions and things but I have to have
them. So, next year we will have another
style. Whatever is produced is always
something else that will give me real
satisfaction. You know the law of
new and these shoes that were made
economics -that you are never satisfied,
desires are not satiable. So you go on
last year or before that, are put into some
sort of a junk: It's a very big business.
So, it is the big business that starts in
buying from one to another, to another,
to another. But when the Mahalakshmi
this manner and many people become
principle shines in you, then you do not bankrupt, many people competely lose
want any more, you want to give it to their dignity and fall into the trap of
others and you want to enjoy your immorality.
generosity, that is the first sign that you
are moving now from Lakshmi to
Mahalakshmi. Till the Lakshmi prinicple,
you were blind and whatever it was you
So, this Lakshmi principle if you
forget, in a proper way you cannot go to
the Mahalakshmi principle. And in the
Mahalakshmi way you can find another
kind of personality. Because if you have
the light in your heart then you start
seeing that this money business is of no
satisfaction. You go on changing from
one to another. So, then you think what
should we do? VWith this light in your heart
you find out that you have to follow, now
were asking for more things, and more
things and more things. After this is over,
then you have the light, the
enlightenment.
When you have done all the four
things properly that is generosity,
protection, hospitality and compassion,
then you get into another mood of
movement because you know nothing
is satisfying, nothing is satiable, running
from one thing to another, from that to
another, that to another. And when such
people get collective, they start ways and
methods of attracting people how they
could extract money. There are so many
the principle of Mahalakshmi, otherwise,
you would be lost. So, when you think of
Mahalakshmi you start seeking, seeking
the way by which you can really have a
real satisfaction of life. I mean, a country
like America where people have so much
money and every thing, they have also
the maximum number of seekers,
ways, like in our Italy when I was there, I
wanted to buy shoes. I went to the shop
and they had only one type of shoes.
That kind I don't wear. So says. No, only
this year this kind. Only this kind.
maximum number. When I first came to
America, I was shocked that though
there was Mahalakshmi principle, they
did not know what to seek and they all
followed all kinds of false gurus. They
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
28
had become mad, I think, because they
country has been blessed with very-very
great people, as you know, very great.
couldn't understand what is to be
followed. For that they started following
all kinds of false gurus who were
people. Abraham Lincoln, what sort of a
man he was or even say George
themselves slaves of Lakshmi tatva.
Washington! All these people showed
the quality of Mahalakshmi but they didn't
think much of them and they started
working out a new method of capturing
slaves in the sense who were against
Lakshmi tatva and that's how they all
were lost. So many of them were lost in
this country. And I was shocked the way
the whole world. Because then the idea
they were following wrong type of people.
Ijust thought there's something really
needed to be done to this country. For
of power came into their heads: That with
money we can purchase every thing, we
can make everybody dance to our tunes,
nine years I never came to America,l if we have money.
am sorry for that because the seekers
were moving in the opposite direction. human beings was absolutely satanic to
They were not in the understanding, as
to what the seeking is for? What are you started getting ruined. What happened
seeking? Somebody came saying that I to the family system? What has
am sixteen year old and I can make you happened? Why the family got ruined
All this attitude towards money and
such an extent that their own country
all realised souls, and I am told that he
put some vermilion kumkum in a gun
and blasted it and people felt they have
because of the wrong ideas about the
Lakshmi principle. The women got lots
of money out of divorce. I met one lady.
She had divorced her husbend eight
times from this country and now I am
already gone to heavens. Such idiotic
behaviour! How it came into their heads,
I don't know! How did they become so
idiotic, I can't imagine. So, I'went back
and I said, I can't help these people
told she has divorced the ninth time. She
has become very rich. But she has no
shame and she is telling everybody that
get a divorce. That's the best way, that's
the advantage of coming to America. So,
what is the problem that human beings
don't have enlightenment. And if they get
money, if they are hankering after things
they have to go to hell, no doubt about it
and do all kinds of things which was
much. Then a kind of another fashion
started like if you went into any party or
anything they would say. now see,
another guru has come, he is much
cheaper and also there is a sale on. And
would say look at these women and
men who are supposed to be the leaders
of the world and how can they talk like
never done in the history of this world. I
need not tell you all the absurd
this, It was a very common thing among
the rich people to talk like that. This
nonsensical things they do.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Divine Col Breeze Valume - XIII
Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
29
Then started a negative force of
drugs, drinking and all kinds of things. I to overcome all such hurdles. So this
mean such blindness, such stupidity that Mahalakshmi principle should be
you can't understand, as if their brains
were completely curtailed by the activity What is the advantage of having
of money making. I have seen people Mahalakshmi principle?
such a person has his own inner powers
established but one would say, why?
choosing their suits and clothes, that
when they will die, what they are going
When the Mahalakshmi principle
comes then there are nine Lakshmis
which are described navadha, nine
which get competely manifested in a
human being. One of them as we call as
to wear. It sounds funny. Even their dog
dies, they make such elaborate
arrangements. They choose even their
coffin, which one they would like to use
for burial. So, with the money a new
Grahalakshmi. Grahalakshmi means the
family, the wife becomes a very
problem started which was the choice.
wonderful person. She doesn't object to
What choice you have? And people
things, She doesn't react but she is very
played with that choice. They can befool
you and tell you what is the best. I don't
know why but moneyed people are
sensible and she builds up all her
children in a beautiful manner, On the
contrary. where she is
Grahalakshmi, she takes pride in
not a
.
mostly idiotic, if not very immoral, idiotic-
absolutely idiotic, Anybody can befool
them. So, God knows what is the
speciality that people who are very rich,
can be very cunning, can be very
immoral, can be self destroying but
mostly they are idiotic people. Because
the way they talk, you don't know where
working out something like men. Means,
to her, her job is important, her bank
balance is important. But the real bank
balance of a Grahalakshmi is her family
and her children, If she doesn't have that
she will be just thinking that she is very
great, she can compete with this man or
that man. Women don't understand that
to look, what they say about things you
don't understand. So, then it becomes
their greatest capacity is to love. How is
it that Lakshmi is a woman and all the
the country of idiots and stupids and you
don't know how to deal with them and
goddesses are women? What is the
how to talk to them about the higher life.
This Lakshmi tatva has to become a
much bigger principle which we call as
the imancipated personality or we can
quality of these goddesses is to bestow
blessings on people, of their own nature,
of their own qualities. So, to think that
we are better off than men becasue we
have more money is the greatest idiocy.
say person endowed with Mahalakshmi
principle. Such a person may be cheated
by others, may be troubled by others but
You may have money but your children
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 March - April 2001 30
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
Issue 3 &
will be ruined, your family will be ruined.
When you make a good family then you
create a beautiful, very beautiful universe
around, and universes after universes,
like this can create a beautiful universe
in the whole world. There's nothing to
warn the women because they are the
ones who will create the great principles,
the great symbols of Lakshmi and
Mahalakshmi. So, the gossiping is a
very common disease, even today, in
Sahaja Yoga. I have seen that where
sacrifice but to enjoy everything. As I
five-six Sahajayoginis meet, they go on
said, you enjoy your hospitality, you talking, talking, talking.I do not know
enjoy your generosity which you do not
feel is a misery or a trouble but you just
enjoy. At least I enjoy. If I can give
what do they talk. Never about Sahaja
Yoga, never. What they talk is what's
wrong with another person? Who is a
something to someone. that's the
wrong type of a person? This is all
gossip. This gossip has created big
problems for us in the collective. So best
greatest blessing for me.
So, the idiotic people believe that
generosity is stupidity but they are the
real stupid people. So to create a proper
home for your children is a very great
work today and it has to be done, Again
their selfishness comes. Human being
thing I would advise is to be quiet. Even
when they come to my house, they talk.
They have no sense that we should keep
quiet. Without quietude you cannot enjoy
the cool vibrations of the Divine. Just go
on gossiping and talking is not a sign of
very developed pepole in Sahaja yoga.
That's why the first thing is that women
have so many such hurdles in life
because. I don't know why, he doesn't
enjoy everything. So, the selfishness
comes in and they will only love their own
much
become
should
more
compassionate, much more tolerant and
children, they will only love their own
enjoyable. Because if you meet
somebody they will start immediately
telling you that is wrong with this person,
this is wrong with that person. There's
no need. But they will only come and will
husbands or they will love only their own
wives. This doesn't create a good family.
I am talking about the global family. For
Us everybody is a realised soul and their
family and our family is one. But then
they will create problems, talking. give you bad news, all kinds of. They
enjoy giving the bad news. They think
they are very important and when they
think they are important, they can be very
dangerous to you, very dangerous.
Because, I think, it is the women who
gossips.
I am surprised even in Sahaja-Yoga
we have many women who will just go
on gossiping. Their style was
gossiping.Because I am talking about
Lakshmi and Mahalakshmi, I have to
have to work it out much more than men
to understand the value of Sahaja Yoga
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 1 31
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
Issue 3 &
March- April 2001
because their own children are
a certain gait which is the movement on
both the sides. As I have said, I have
concerned, their family is one of the units
of Sahaja Yoga. I am saying this because
now I have been noticing it very often
that the women in Sahaja Yoga are not
seen people, specially women, who walk
like horses, really just walk like horses.
Once a dance teacher told me, should I
start, Mother, a dance school? I said,
upto the point as they should have been.
They gossip too much, so they should
take to 'mauna' I think, take to complete
silence, not to talk. Those who are really
very much effective, who are doing the
great work are always quiet, they don't
talk. I have seen they don't even come
better start a dance school, doesn't
matter. Are you sure you can teach them
to dance or they would be just galloping!
She said, why? Becasue what I have
seen of women here that they walk like
horses, I must say. How can these
and see me, just recede back, while the
women who think they are something
special, they are the ones, most
dangerous.
women who walk like horses can do
dance, Indian dance specially, it's very
difficult.
So, now we have to see what is the
So, the power of Lakshmi that actually
gait, how you walk? Do you walk like an
elephant or you walk like a horse,
first falls on the shoulders of women
specially for men. Men should not walk
like elephant but should walk like horses,
it's alright. But the worst thing that has
should be Mahalakshmis and this is a
challenge to all the Sahajayoginis to
behave themselves and to become
greater women than all the rest of the happened is that men dress up like
women of the world. We have some very
women and women dress up like men.
very good, very great sahaja yoginis, no
doubt, but their style is different, and they
are working out things in such a manner
that it's absolutely adorable. They are
just working for Sahaja Yoga, they do
not bother about their personal
Now, what to do? Why this kind of a mad
transformation has taken place? Why do
they take to such things? What is the
advantage of becoming a woman when
he is a man and a woman becoming a
man? That is the reason which shows
relationships or their personal eminence,
they just want to help Sahaja Yoga in
that they want to have some change.
Some change is important, would like to
change your dress, like to change your
houses, even your sexes you want to
Then there is another Lakshmi called change but why not change your
every way.
as Gajalakshmi, actually Gaja means
elephant. What is the quality of an
elephant is that the elephant walks with
complete being through Self Realisation.
That is very important to understand that
we are transformed and we must have
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 - XIII
issue 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze Valume
March - April 2001 32
many projects I have started. So, we
stopped at thirty five, already thirty five
projects have started in India. also in
our own dignity of Sahaja Yoga. The way
we behave, the way we move about and
work out. My experience is that once they
come to Sahaja Yoga, mostly, they
become very-very beautiful people and
they gradually start growing like flowers,
fragrant with their compassion and love
but also there are people those who do
not understand how to grow. They have
other countries. And they are only for
emancipating human beings. But firstly,
as 1 told you, to do a work in Sahaja
Yogn you have to be a detached person.
That is the quality of Mahalakshmi
principle. That such a person is
detached. He is not attached to things
which are worthless but that doesn't
their own small circle into which they
move and they get just stagnant, they
become dwarf and then such
mean that you take a sanyasa and run
away from the family, run away from your
houseliold. That's not detachment, that's
running away. But detachment is that
Sahajayogis have to leave Sahaja Yoga.
So. it is the responsibility of all the Sahaja
Yogis to watch and see how far their
mind will go? Where are they going.
when you have everything, still you are
What are they doing? How are they
achieving their status as Sahaja Yogis?
detached in the sense you do not feel
concerned about your own gain out of
So these Lakshmis I would say and
this.
also the Lakshmipatis in Sahaja Yoga
have to be very different than the other
Such things can happen very easily if
you really introspect, and introspection
is the best way of meditation. First
introspect and then meditate. Then you
people who have the money.
Mahalakshmi principle should give you
a very sober, balanced, affectionate and
loving temperament. If it doesn't give
will grow and the real joy of yourself, of
your spirit will really give you such
enjoyment that you will not take to stupid
insignificant things, but you will become
very significant people in Sahaja Yoga
you, then you should know there's
something missing. After all you have
come to Sahaja Yoga, not for anything
else but for your growth and to keep that
growth on, you have to acquire a sense
of understanding as to what should be
who will do such wonderful work that
everybody will be amazed that an
ordinary human being- how can he
achieve such a thing! How can he work
it out? As I have told you before, that
after realisation you become extremely
We have to achieve a global crealive, creative in everything, specially
your personality relative to others,
relative to other people who are still
seeking, who are still blind.
I know that's my vision.
in giving realisation to others and also
creative in your life of art, music, poetry,
emancipation.
And the other day we were counting how
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
isue 3 & 4
March April 2001
33
drama, writing, all kinds of things. We you progress. With Mahalakshmi
have seen so many cases who have principle only you get your realisation.
never been on the stage even, have
You know that very well that through the
Mahalakshmi channel only, you rise and
given very great inspiring lectures. So
the creativity comes like an inspiration
for others. They see you and they feel
you get your realisation. So, to become
a great Sahaja Yogi, you have to look
after your Mahalakshmi principle.
inspired. You are not the one who goes
into the shadow and sits back but openly
Now there are people, I have seen,
you come out with no pride, or no sort of
an aggression, but compelete humility. who care for cheap popularity; I have
and you give such beautiful feelings to
others, such understanding about others, do this, do that but only for
yourself and about the others through popularity. They have not understood
your collective consciousness. About that whatever you are doing, is for cheap
collective consciousness and other popularity? You don't have to fight an
things so many people have talked. as
known people who will do everything for
election in Sahaja Yoga, you don't have
to cast your votes in Sahaja Yoga, but
what happens really the person who has
that dynamism of Sahaja Yoga just
the other day you saw it, there were so
many people like you, also there were
other scientists and also other
philosophers who have talked about it.
But you have got it. you have the
comes up, everybody knows. Not talking,
not impressing. not showing off, not
going after cheap popularity but growing
within For that I cannot say what you
experience of collective consciousness.
Despite that if you are lacking behind in
your progress in Sahaja Yoga, that
means there's something wrong, some
sort of a load you are carrying on your Sahaja Yoga. So how will you grow
head. If you have attachments, there by yourself? By yourself you will
have to do. How does a tree grow, by
itself? You are living examples of
would be loads on your head. In
grow, is a promise, that is given to
Sahaja Yoga you are involved with
you by the Divine but allow it to grow
everything, and you are detached and
such a miracle happens to you which
you know very well I don't have to
describe. So, a new personality with a
through introspection and meditation
and what we call complete dedication
and devotion.
Mahalakshmi principle comes in.
Mahalakshmi principle is the one which
The other day I told you about the
word - 'Shradha'; it's not just praying, it's
not just having faith but 'Shradha' is that
fakes you to your seeking and when you
have found out the reality, the truth, then
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 March April 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
Issue 3 & 4
34
all my life and I am socialistic today. But
all these things that I did, you may call it
secretly or anything, whatever it is but
you have it in your heart, the enjoyment
of achievement through your devotion
and dedication that should be called as
some people knew about it and this was
Shradha', With that thing only, it will work
to be done and practically most of these
out. You have to have faith in yourself
places were ready to be donated. The
and faith in Sahaja Yoga. You know you
have got it; those people were talking
about it but you have got it. You know
reasonI did not donate it in the beginning
because I wanted to see there one people
who are honest and who will do the work
what is collective consciousness. You
know that you are in the collective honestly because in the name of social
work people just want to exploit. This is
the reason I waited for so many days and
consciousness. But how far you have
grown into it, is to be seen. Its very though I have given, some of these
important. For that I need not, in this already like Ganapatipule, the Hospital,
short time, describe to you all the
also Dharamshala school; all have been
given but now I want to give even more.
Like I didn't know that they have bought
aland in Cana Joharie is in my name and
when I heard about it
qualities of the Lakshmi, but try to
understand that a person who has
Lakshmi principle has to have all these
I was surprised
special qualities otherwise he is not the
because there's no income from it,
worshipper of Lakshmi. That's how today
I would bless you all with the proper
wisdom and a proper understanding of
nothing of the kind and I decided there
and then that it has to be given to the
collective of Life Eternal Trust of America.
the Lakshmi principle through the lights
which are enlightened within your heart.
It's all my desire that things should
work out, but according to Sahaja unless
and until you have your Ganapati,
Ganesha-Mother lands where you start
your work, it doesn't do anything. Even
in Italy I have got a very good land and
also a house which also I want to donate
May God bless you all.
AsI have suggested to you, you all
have to work it out and understand the
importance of Mahalakshmi principle,
In your lives if people will see that you
are very peaceful, good and full
collective people, then only Sahaja
Yoga will spread, not what I am saying
or what I am spreading or what am I
working out. It's a fact that I always had
a feeling that Sahaja Yogis should take
to social work. Ihave been a social worker
plus another one called Dalio which I want
to donate to the collective of Italy. Italians,
Ihave found them to be very good, honest
and dedicated. I know they will not exploit
it. In the same way everywhere I have
purchased, any land or built anything I
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
Issue 3 & 4
anssi
March - April 2001
35
would like to donate most of it, but let me
miserly. You may not give me the money
seeif the things are working out in honest
way. So, this is for you now to take
interest and I was happy to know that one
Sahaja yagini has gone to Madras to start
an orphanage It's a very good idea,
because think of the orphan children.
think of the women who are destitutes. I find
think of the people who are suffering from
horrible diseases like cancer, others also
but you shouldn't have a miserly
temperament because what's the use of
having money without any advantage?
So, you all must learn how to donate, not
to me but to this new idea they have- they
want to make a foundation. Alright! Once
properpeople to run it, I don't mind
making the foundation because we
shouldn't do what all the rest of the stupid
which. we can cure. So, I started a
people have done. And solWould request
hospital. Now I have another hospital in
Delhi. Also good news for you that I have generosity should be towards social side
bought a land at the foothills of of our world which is very important to be
Himalayas, very big, I think fifty five-fifty attended to. I hope you understand that!
six acres of land. Plus I got another land have not changed the way, is the path
where you can grow or where you get also which is going now in a smooth way. We
very rare vegetables so that we can make had to first climb a very hazardous
medicines at a very cheap price for the mountain and now we have come to a
use of people who are suffering and who place where we understand. With this
can get cured very easily. So many understanding, I just want to tell you,
projects have been dane and they have collect some money with you which you
all come up. The thing is thatIhave seen,
that Sahaja yogis do not donate money this kind of work which is not the Kundalini
except in the seminars. And all this is awakening but then we can also do
achieved through that money that you kundalini awakening. We have to show
have given in the seminar. The rest of the results of kundalini awakening. It's not
the expenses of course comes from my only for you, it's not only for you people
books and other things. So, it is important who are realised, it's for the whole world.
for all of you to understand that whatever That's my vision and according to that
money you are giving in the seminar is vision, I have been doing my work and
being used absolutely-absolutely for the now as you know I leave this
betterment of humanity which may not responsibility to you all.
come to Sahaja yoga but which can be
benefitted through Sahaja Yogis.
all of you, to be little generous. The
can donate at the time when we need for
I hope you will understand that it's
important that you should think of other
So I would request you not to be
things than your own problems, your own
in
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
36
this is happening that is happening, Why
can't you solve your problems, all of you
put together. It will be very kind of you if
you understand that all these problems
can be solved by you, I don't have to be
there: I am there with you all the time, I
am one with you all the time. So there is
stupid questions that you have because
all the time what I find even the leaders
will bring some sort of a
people who have done something, you
need not tell, if somebody is sick. Why
can't you cure, why should you bring that
to me? it's a common practice with
leaders. So, I would request you not to
nonsense from
no need for you to come to me for all
bring any such problems, and you solve
your own problems, try to solve them.
Once you solve your problem, you will
be amazed, you will know what you have
got. But everytime refer to me, is not
these things which are absolutely
under your control. If not, you give up
your leadership, so called. Because
leadership means that you should be
able to execute Sahaja Yoga. you have
necessary, reference to me is not
necessary becauseI have so many other
things to be done, and everytime if
somebody is sick they must refer me, if
something happens they must refer me;
even after referring all of you will still say
- this person has cancer, this one is sick,
powers, you can do it, all of you can
do it, you don't have to get to me all
the time because so many things are to
be done and so many things have to be
worked out whichlam doing relentlessly.
But you should also try to solve your
problems of your country, of your region.
that one is sick. I don't want to tell you
But if you are not grown up then it
happens. I have seen it. You will tell, I
think they are very important because
but there must be some mistake about
that person. I don't want to tell about
anybody like that, But must be
something, must have happened that that
person is sick or something has gone
wrong with them. Because normally yourself, what you can do, how you can
Sahaja Yoga should help, Sahaja yoga help it out and how you can help others.
meditation should help. It should work
you can tell, that's not they
do it yourself. You should find out
way, you should
Also we are not here all the time just
out, it has worked out with so many. Even
to look after people who are no good
in Sahaja Yoga and mostly I have seen
it is only the people who are little bit
some people, who were very sick, once
came to cabella. I was not there, they got
alright. So it's the faith within, which
should be so strong that it will be done.
So, some people have a habit of
very ambitious about their own
positions, try to rule. So, I have to again
and again request you please, please
even if you are leaders or anything don't
pestering me, like all the time this one is
not alright, that one is not, in my centre
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XII
March - April 2001
Issue 3 & 4
37
wrong, nothing. They have solved their
problems-out and out, they should be
your ideals and that's how you should
work it out. That will be very joy giving
telephone to me, don't write to me
because I have seen everyday, I have
such a lot of papers, envelops-everyday
and I don't know what to do. How to tell
there is no need to write to me.
thing for your Mother because now you
you that
If you cannot solve the problem, it's
finished. Take up something that you can
are made, you are the ones who have
Feel your powers,
the powers
handle. You need not take to something
understand your powers, understand
that is difficult which you cannot handle,
your responsibilities and you will be
it's wisdom behind it. If you have wisdom
amazed how things will work out. First
you will solve your own problems together
specially with your leader and if the
leaders are sensible, then you will never-
never trouble me.. I must tell you about
of all I wish you again and again very
Happy Diwali, very happy, prosperous life
for next year and all your life.
May God bless you
Thank you very much.
some people who are leaders nevereven
once told me that this is wrong, that is
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
38
With the Blessings of
The Mother Divine
The Maha Yoga enlightens the inmates of Tihar Jail
By the grace of Her Holines Mataji
faith in the Adi Shakti and he became a
sincere Sahaja Yogi there after. The
constable was a chronic patient of
Migraine but to his surprise, immediately,
after experiencing realization the disease
subsided miraculously. Now he is always
in the forefront in all the Sahaja
Shri Nirmala Devi, efforts of Shri B.R.
Rawal, a Sahaja Yogi and kind co-
operation of Shri R.S. Gupta the then
D.G. of Tihar Jail the programme of
Sahaja yoga was started for the benefit
of inmates and staff of Tihar Jail on 7th
February 1998. A Sahaja yogi was programmes.
talking about Sahaja yoga to all the
Sahaja Yoga programmes were held
officers of the jail in the confrence Hall.
in all the jails (jail No. 1 to 5), and also in
residential complex of the staff. Both,
ladies and gents inmates of the prisons,
The shoes of all the officers were outside
the hall and Constable Shri Rajiv Singh
was put on duty to take care of shoes.
His attention how ever shifted to what
and also the staff members are now
the speaker was telling about Sahaja meditating reqularly and recieving the
blessings of Parama Chaitanya. Shri
Ajay Kumar Singh, superintendent, Jail
Yoga and some prisoner took away the
shoes of the D.G. in the mnean time. The
No. 5, and Shri Daljeet Singh, Deputy
poor constable was very upset because
this dereliction of duty could get him
Superintendent Jail No. 5 were very co-
operative and they arranged a well
furnished big room for Sahaja Yoga
severe punishment from such a senior
officer. Some Sahaja yogis however
meditation in the administrative block of
assured him that The Divine Mother will
the jail.
protect him and nothing will happen.
When the programme was over, the
In may 1998, 20 young prisoners
between the age of 16 to 21 years were
D.G. came out and was told about his
shoes. To the surprise of the constable
sent to the meditation room for Self-
the D.G. ordered a new pair of chappal
from the market and went out very
Realization. Most of them experienced
the bliss of the Divine on their system.
Ten of them became very regular and
peacefully. The incident established his
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
Issue 3 & 4
March April 2001
39
attended all the Sahaja Yoga
Yogendra Kumar
s/o Sh. Gyan Chand Upadhyay,
programmes during their stay in the
U/S 302
prison.
में जेल में लगभग दो वर्ष (जब से जेल में
Since then Sahaja Yoga meditation सहजयोंग प्रारम्भ हुआ है) से नियमित रूप
programme is being conducted in almost
all the jails of Tihar, and hard core
से सहजयोग कर रहा हूँ। मुझे इससे क्या
क्या फायदे हुए है अब तक यह तो गिनतीं
कर पाना मुमकिन नहीं है। लेकिन जों भी
याद है वो इस प्रकार है; महोदय सहजयोग'
criminals are benefitting from it. Delhi
Sahaja Yoga centre provided
introductory books and bound issues of
Chaitanya Lehri to the jail library. से मरा मन शात है। मुझे समाधान (संतोष
Seeking prisoners are meditating करना) आ गृया है। कभी किसी वस्तु पर मन
Tegularly and deriving peace and good नहीं चिपकता, जा जैसा भी हो रहा है ठीक
health as the blessings of the Divine, है अगर कोई बात गलत होती है या समाज
Some of them wrote letters to us के लाभ के लिए नहीं होती है तो वो समस्या
narrating their experiences and benefits भी मैं ध्यान के समय में श्री माताजी निर्मला
occuring to them. Four of these letters देवी जी के फोटो के आगे बैठकर
वो समस्या
दोहरा लता हैं, की आपसे बिनती है कि कृपया
are being reproduced herein.
आप ही हम लोगों के लिए कुछ करें और फिर
A team of ardent Sahaja Yogis सव टीक हो जाता है। इसमें जो कार्य सबके
consisting of Dr. Narender Gupta, Mr.
llam Singh Bansal, Col. K.K. Dutt and
others have been regularly conducting
লাभ के लिए होता है वो अति शीघ्र पूरा हो
जाता है। जो कार्य केवल अपने लाभ के लिए
होता है उस कार्य में थोड़ा सा समय लगता
Sahaja Yoga meditation programmes for
the inmates since then. In recognition of T
their services for the transiormation of आधारित हैं। जब तक मैं सुबह शाम सहजयोग
the hard core criminals the jail authorities
awarded them with 'Certificate of जैसे मेरा कुछ खो गया है। और सहजयोग
Recognition on 30th November 2000.
Dr. Narender Gupta was honourd with a शारीरिक और मानसिक रूप से पूर्ण सन्तुष्ट
नहीं कर लेता तब तक ऐसा महसूस होता है
में बढ़ने के बाद सब ठीक हो जाता है। मैं
shawl by the D.G. (Director General).
हूँ। और अब जेल न. 5 के कैदियों को
सहजयोग करने में मदद करता हूँ। महोदय
हम सभी सहजयोगियों का सहजयोग करने
We pray to the Divine Mother that Her
light keep enlightening the path of all the
Sahaja Yogis to bring about the empire
में सहायता और उचित प्रबंध करने का कष्ट
करें।
of love, peace and joy on this earth and
धन्यवाद,
we all become Her Divine instruments.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
March - April 2001
Issue 3 &
40
सहजयोग एक महायोग
कृष्ण (सन्नी) S/o हवा सिंह
FIR No. 14/99, U.S. -307,
P.S- प्रशान्त विहार
सहज योग महायोग
आरिफ
जी आपका सहजयोग मुझे बहुत अच्छा
गुरु
लगा। दिल से करे तो यह सहजयोग ऐसा
महायोग है जो हर किसी की समझ में नहीं
आता। हर देवी माँ होती है और मा से मार्गग सहजयोग बैरक में सहजयोग करते हुए एक
तो इससे अच्छा क्या है और दूसरी बात है
हमारा जो ध्यान इधेर-उधर भटकता था अब
मेरा नाम कृष्ण So हवा सिंह है। मुझे
महीना हुआ है। मैं सहजयोग करके बहुत
थोड़ा बहुत अच्छा हो गया है। यह हकीकत सुश हैँ। सहजयोग करने से मुझे अनेक लाभ
बात है सहजयोग अपने सही मन से करें और हुए है। उनमें से कुछ लाभ में लिख रहा हूँ।
उसका ध्यान रिथर रखते हुए करें। इधर-
उधर भटकने ना दे तो कामयाब हो सकता है
और दूसरी बात है आपका जो ये सहजयोग है
इसमें आप अगर ध्यान लगाकर बैठें तो जिन्दगी 2. सहजयोग करने से पहले मेरे अन्दर
में आप हर चीज देख सकते हैं |
1. सहजयोग करने से मुझे व मेरी आत्मा को
बहुत शान्ति भिली है। एक अन्दरुनी खुशी
मुझे महसूस हुई है।
चिड़चिड़ा स्वभाव था जो अब नहीं है।
3. सहजयोग करने से पहले मुझे गुस्सा बहुत
आता था. लेकिन अब मैं अपने गुस्से पर
सरलता से कायू पा लेता हूँ।
4. सहजयोग करने से पहले मेरा शरीर बहुत
आलसी और दर्द करता था लेकिन अब
नहीं होता।
5. सहजयोग करने से पहले मेंरे केस (case) में
कोई कारवाई नहीं हो रही थी लेकिन अब
मेरे केस गवाईयाँ चल पड़ी हैं। सहजयोग
करने से पहले मेरे गवाह नहीं आ रहे थे
लेकिन अब गवाह आने लगे हैं।
फिरोज
पिता का नाम श्री जलील अन्सारी
U/S 454, 380, 411
(मुस्लिम )
सहज योग करने से हमें मन का शांति मिली
है और मन अपने आप को सब कुछ महसूस
हुआ। जो भी मन में सोचा था वह भी
पूरा
हुआ है और जो भी मांगा वह भी हमें मिला है ।
जय श्री माता जी
जय श्री माता जी
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
41
Shri Ganesha Puja
U.S.A-7.9.86
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
a child of Her own. There were Angels
Today in the land of Shri Krishna we
are celebrating the birthday of Shri
Ganesha. It's something very
unprecedented and of a very significant
value that you should be celebrating the
birthday of Shri Krishna's son in his own
who were dedicated either to Vishnu or
to Shiva. Like ganas were dedicated to
Shiva alone. So She wanted to have Her
own son, who can permeate Her powers
on this earth.
land. You know that Shri Ganesha
So to begin with when the Shakti
incarnated on this earth as Mahavishnu created this universe and Sadashiva was
and he was the son of Radha who watching Her creation, the first thing she
incarnated as Lord Jesus Christ. So by created on this earth was innocence. And
celebrating this birthday today you are
recognising the greatest truth that Lord
Jesus Christ was the son of Shri Krishna.
the embodiment of that innocence was
Shri Ganesha. The whole universe was
covered with innocence which we call as
There is a story about it. If you read in
the Devi Mahatmaya how this primordial
Onkara. This innocence protected all the
creation of the world and penetrated into
child took a form of an egg and half of it
all that is matter. Matter is innocent. If
remained as Shri Ganesha and half of it
became Mahavishnu. In the evolutionary
you hit the matter, it will hit you back
because it is built like that. It doesn't want
to harm you by any method except that
if you try to hit it, hits you back it in its
process all these happenings of the
antiquities have been recorded but today
I feel so gratified that on the human level,
own nature. So it was called as 'Jada',
the one that acts according to the built
people have understood.
in nature. Innocence in the animals is of
Christ is the incarnation of lord
another kind where the animals do not
Ganesha. He is the eternal child but in
know that they are committing crimes.
the form when he came as Christ, he
came as the son of shri Krishna, but Animals, when they kill another animal
or trespass your properties, create
nuisance all over, they don't know they
when Parvati made Shri Ganesha he
was the son of Parvati alone. There was
are committing a sin or they are
no father. Parvati herself wanted to have
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-43.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XIII
issue 3 &
March April 2001
42
Animals' heads are on the ground. So
disobeying some laws. They live with the
laws that are built within them. That's
the energy flows downward into Mother
why they are called as 'Pashus' means
Earth. But when man raised his head
above. against the energy of gravity, then
bondage 'the Pasha'. 'Pasha' means the
bondage. They are under the bondage
of the laws of Shri Shiva. Shri Shiva is
called as Pashupati.
a new complication started in the energy
flow: And that is how at the Vishuddhi, a
problem started where kundalini could
not nourish or look after that problematic
Vishuddhi. The reason is when you raise
Upto that stage the innocence
remains intact because there is no
your head from the Mother Earth, you
development of ego in them. So they are
innocent. A tiger may eat a cow, still he
remove yourself away, from the natural
power of Mother Earth. When you take
your Vishuddhi upward like that, you see
IS innocent or an elephant may trample
over a human body, still he is innocent.
the result of that in this country, which is
But when going to a higher state, the
Mother Shakti, the Primordial Mother
thought of creating a personality, who will
protect the innocence of human beings.
the country of Vishuddhi chakra. That
you started going to machines which are
against nature, extracting the nature,
disturbing the nature by creating atomic
Above the matter, above the animals.
bombs, by changing the atom, breaking
it That means you went against the
She created Shri Ganesha and you know
the story of Shri Ganesha, how He got
nature itself by raising your head. But if
the head of an elephant, symbolising that
Shri Ganesha, though He is a human
it was done in complete surrender to
God, with your bent head towards the
being, He is like an animal as for as His
Mother Earth, it would not have harmed
head is concerned that too of Shri
you. But when you completely cut off
Gajanana, in the sense that he has got yourself from that nature which is so
the head of an elephant, which is the
bountiful, which is so gracious, yesterday
you saw the beautiful pictures of the
nature that surrounds you in this country.
wisest animal in the animal kingdom. So
in such a head, which is innocent, ego
cannot develop. There is no ego. It is an
Such a rich country like America without
any gratitude towards its creator raised
its head upwards! That's how the
Vishuddhi problem started coming up.
egoless state. But human beings were
created in a different manner and when
carbon was placed to create the amino
In every walk of life, the whole social
structure was built up to fight the nature,
acids. it also set in them inmotion a new
type of evolution in human beings that
at the Vishuddhi level, Human beings
not to go along with the nature. So the
first attack came.on the innocence itself,
raised their heads like this.
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XiII
1 43
issue 3 & 4
March April 2001
on the Mooladhara itself. So the natural
ways of Mooladhara were given up.
wrong, what's wrong in this, what's wrong
in this'? Now the whole country is facing
a great crisis because of arrogant
enterprises. Still they make a martyrdom
out of all that is destructive. It's a very
Marriage system has been here much
belore Christ, much before Abraham.
much before Moses and a sanctified
marriage which was blessed by the
SOciety, was acceptable since long. But
man in his arrogance raised his voice
against marriage, against natural way of Shri Krishna, the responsibility is
leading a life of sanity If it was natural absolutely on your neck and you can't
to be the way people lead their private get out of it
Tife, why do they get all kinds of
diseases? If you are a natural person you
great responsibity on the Sahaja Yogis
who live on the land of Shri Ganesha.
But for the people who live in the land of
. Unless and until you
understand the importance of innocence
in your life, you cannot save this country
don't get any diseases. Because you are
anti-nature, that's why you get diseases.
In this country how many men and
whatever I may try to do for you. It's only
you who are going to save it. It's only
you who are going to make it.
women were murdered for jealousy? If
When the Kundalini rises, Shri
Ganesha is awakened in you. The
Ganesha whom you never respected,
it was natural to be in love with ten men
and ten women then why jealousy. You
should be happy, it's very natural.
Because the head was raised at siowly cómes up from his slumber out of
Vishuddhi chakra, without surrendering
to Shri Krishna, anti-life, anti-biotic
the hurt and the injuries inflicted on him.
Still he stands up, but still weak. How
aré we going to nourish it, how are we
atmosphere started growing and this
kind of life has taken this great country
now to the brink of complete destruction.
going to look after it's growth? The
responsibility of Sahaja Yogis of America
IS very great. They cannot cheat
themselves anymore. They cannot be
satisfied with their arrogance. The
mistakes have been grievious. So you
have to take it up as a crusade against
those mistakes and to establish your Shri
Freud was worshipped and they forgot Ganesha in a full form., so that he gives
The attack of innocence is the
greatest weekness of this country. Not
to value its power. Then you get drifted
into anything stupid, anything new that
comes up. So much so that a person like
Christ, who said, Thou shall not have
you the necessary balance and the roots
to nourish yourself. It is shocking first, I
adulterous eyes'. Ganesha to that level
that even the eyes have to be innocent.
There should be no lust in your eyes.
mean you just can't understand. It is
impossible to see how you could accept
such absurd ideas. How you could take
But arrogance made them feel 'what's
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-45.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001
44
to such funny things which are obviously
adulterous mind? What is your
expectation about Sahaja Yoga? So
many things, that in Sahaja Yoga, God
blesses you, you must get a good
amount of health, money and position,
power. The first thing you must ask for
is the pure Ganesha, Nirmal Ganesha
within you. O Mother please give us the
blessings of establishment of purity in our
Ganesha principle, in relationships, in
horrid. Are we not aware of certain words
like prostitution and all other dirty words
which I don't want to say just now or they
have lost their meanings? We were all
w
aware of it. We all knew about it. Have
we lost all wisdom from our minds that
we cannot see? What we have done to
ourselves? We have no self respect.
Arrogance to that limit is very dangerous,
attitudes, in behaviour.
extremely unpredictable. God knows
what can come throughwith all these
ventures we have gone into, I would say
for Sahaja yogis I have given some against him may be tolerated but
instructions, how they should respect nothing against the Adi Shakti. But I
their privacy of lives, especially the must tell you as your Mother, it's not
women of America. If they have to be true, May be against me, some things
the Shaktis, they have to respect may be tolerated but nothing against
themselves, their chastity. What's so
surprising that when we see outside all
these things happening, even after against him after realisation will tell
coming to Sahaja Yoga, some of us try upon you and you will be thrown out
to be one of them, who are going to hell.
If you have to save them then try to fix degraded people. That is one thing that
your positions properly.
Try to judge yourself, are you
innocent? Christ has said, anything
Christ, The Lord, nothing against Lord
Ganesha. Everything that is done
of the realm of God as absolutely
will not be tolerated, will not be forgiven,
will never be accepted. Whatever you
have done in the past is finished now,
Shri Ganesha has four hands and the
hand that carries the destructive weapon
because you are a new bird. But after
of Parsha is the one you have to be
careful about. That is his job and if you
neglect him, that force will act, and act
so vhemently that despite your
becoming this if you try to take to these
wrong ideas, or to indulge in them, I
cannot help you at all. After all, Shri
Ganesha is my son because he is pure.
Now he is not the only son I have, as so
realisation you may not be able to save
yourself. Do not take your realisation for
granted. Unless and untill your Ganesha
is settled, your realisation has no
many sons and daughters, and I have
made you in the same way as Shri
Ganesha, without the father, on my own.
meaning at all. Watch yourself. Have you
got adulterous eyes? Have you got an
To your Mother nothing but purity of heart
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Morch April 2001 45
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XII
Issue 3 & 4
and West. Close my eyes, still I will tell
you. You know there are so many birds
who fly out all the way to Australia, to
Siberia because they have that magnet
with them, they have that innocence with
them. There are so many fishes which
have got actual magnet placed in them.
Scientists should find out. In the same
and purity of your body. is going to
please. Anything that is impure has to
be thrown away. My name itself means
purity. You can do it. You are empowered
to do it. You have a kundalini to do it, but
the first thing you have to do is to cleanse
that and the rest you don't have to worry,
Shri Ganesha will look after that. One
way, Shri Ganesha within us is magnetic.
chakra you keep clear, the rest is looked
after. All your incurable diseases, right So a person who has Shri Ganesha
awakened within himself becomes
from all muscular troubles like melitis and
all that; all incurable diseases right from
magnetic and magnet attracts the steel,
not dried leaves, And steel is like the
Cancer onwards, all your psycho-so-
matic problems right from Schizophrenia
and everything, come because of the
Guru tattwa, a man with the steel, say,
man of steel. A person who has
character, conviction and who cannot be
disturbance in Mooladhara. When the
dominated by temptations, is a man of
roots are not all-right, how can you cure
the tree. If the roots are all right, any steel. So this magnet attracts the steel.
Steel has only one bad thing about it,
that it is not pliable, its rather dry. But
medicine can reach any centre, any
area, any fruit. But if the roots are not all
right how can you work it out?
the magnet attracts, means it creates
that special quality in the steel that it
moves towards the magnet. In the same
Today you have called me here to
worship Shri Ganesha within me. Shri
Ganesha within me is a powerful identity.
While worshipping him, you have to know
that such a powerful thing you have to of people running away from your
establish within yourself and by that ashrams, they will be running towards
establishment, you have to manifest the
way when this magnet is awakened
within you, you will be amazed, instead
you. I find it impossible. I go to any
house, if they come to know I am there,
God save me, any where, anyplace. So
what is this magnet? Its pure love, it is
powers of Shri Ganesha. And the power
of Shri Ganesha's greatness is
auspiciousness. It's a coefficient, it's a
formula, we can say, in scientific pure love and the concept of pure love
is that it doesn't depend on anything
language, that emits auspiciouness. It's
a magnet in the Mother earth. The same
magnet is within you, which is Shri
Ganesha. You leave me alone and I can
whatsoever, but on itself. It is the support
of itself. It's like light that spreads just by
its own nature. Doesn't want anything,
doesn't expect anything. Just spreads all
tell you which is the North, South, East
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-47.txt 
 March - April 2001
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume - XII
46
Issue 3 & 4
Russian, American or an Arab,
over and enlightens other people's
hearts. That's why they get attracted.
Those who have not even seen me, child, what's happening to the child. They
everybody would be worried about the
will not think it's an Arab child or an
those who have not even known me, just
American child. No, unless and untill it's
with my name they came. I have seen,
places like Calcutta, we had such a
problem, such crowds! They. said we will
have to call the police. I said, there is no
need to call the police, we will manage
some how. In Puna we had such crowds
that the fellow who gave us the hall got
a fright. He said, Mother I will give you
very big area where you can sit down, in
a big open place but I am sorry my hall,
all will be finished. I said, you don't worry.
a devil. Why this attraction for children?
Because their magnets are intact. Their
ego has not ye! developed. Our ego
developed. had tp develop because we
had to decide in our own freedom what
is right and what is wrong. So the ego
developed was alright. Upto a point we
should have developed our ego but we
overdeveloped it and over developed it,
over lapped the superego also. No
conditioning, nothing. We will do
whatever we like. Today we are wearing
a half pant, tomorrow we will wear a long
Everything will be in proper place. We
had such crowds that people were sitting
on the ground, on the staircase,
everywhere and till I spoke nobody
moved an inch, see, like a picture. And I
pant, all.right. Then we will cut our hair
or we will do this or we will do that. No
spoke for one and a half hour. Just like conditioning of any kind. All superego
a picture, no movement of hand, feet,
was also covered. This ego would have
been all right if you had kept your
Ganesha tattwa, and what is that, is the
eyes, nothing! Just sitting like a picture!
And the gentleman, who owned that hall,
wisdom power of Ganesha. The second
power of Ganesha is that he gives you
wisdom. If you see a farmer and a big
had never seen such a thing before.
Throughout for one and half hour, no
movement of any kind. VWhat is it that
worked is the magnet. Even if you are
professor or a very well educated man
and talk to both of them, you will find the
the steel it will attract you. But if you are
farmer has much more wisdom than this
a magnet then it will attract in such a way
that it will never leave this magnet.
MAD PHD. Why? Because he deals with
Mother earth everyday. He knows the
So for Yoga, it is important that you living process He knows about the
fix
up your magnets of Shri Ganesha who
innocence of the Mother Earth.
is the childlike personality. It there is a
So an innocent person is the wisest
child, every body is attracted towards the
child. One child gets stuck up somne
among all. A child who is innocent is
much wiser than ten ego oriented people.
where in the air, whether you are a
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-48.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIII
issue 3 & 4
March April 2001 47
So the second capacity of Shri Ganesha
is that you become a wise person. When
you speak, people start looking at you.
You speak like Kabira, you speak like
Kundalini cannot rise. But then when it
sleeps out, Kundalini is sucked by him.
Now we think we have lost our
innocence. That's not easy to be lost. It
is not destructible. Only thing what you
have done, is to cover it with something
that cannot allow Shri Ganesha's
Nanaka, you speak like somthing that
makes people feel their spirit. This is
what I call is a Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja
Yogi who does not have wisdom is good
for nothing. He comes to Sahaja Yoga
principle to manifest in us. You have
pushed it down, You have brought
and he is like a bull in a china shop. Goes
pressure on it. You have brought loads
and loads of nonsense on it. That's all,
but if never dies. It is an eternal principle
on hitting this person, hitting that person
& hitting that person and when you ask
these three wounded persons they say
that bull, the same bull. Everybody
of the whole universe. The another
quality of a person who is endowed with
reports about the same bull, Oh, that's
the one, all right. So it grants you
Shri Ganesha's powers is that he
removes all the hurdles. If one person
wisdom.
of this nature is in some place, all the
rest of the people who are nearby will
be saved if there is an accident, or if there
is any problem which is destructive, all
When you have the power of Shri
Ganesha, your eyes are radiant. You get
a spark in you eyes, a light in your eyes.
When he is enlightened in you then you happening too. He being the Ganapati,
cannot look at anyone with lust and he is now the master of all the ganas.
greed but this glance is so powerful that He guides you. Sahaja Yoga cannot
even one glance is suficient to purify work out without Shri Ganesha. He is the
thousands of people. Just the opening one who is Sahaja. He is the one who
of them will be saved. You will find this
of the eyes are necessary and you find
whole thing changes into a beautiful is the one who takes you to the right path.
morning, from a complete dark night. He is the one who gives you everything
Glance can awaken the Kundalini. The easily. He is the one who creates all the
creates all spontaniety of the world. He
Mother Kundalini cannot move unless
chamatkaras, all the magic, all the
miracles of the world. He is the ganapati,
he is the one who is sitting on ganas, in
the sense that he is like the king of all
and until Shri Ganesha gives the
permission. He is like the Vice Chancellor
sitting on all the chakras. He has to
certify, all right, pass, move. On every
the ganas. The one who has pleased
Shri Ganesha has pleased all the Gods
chakra, And when the Kundalini rises,
Shri Ganesha is awakened, otherwise
and Godesses because all the Gods and
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-49.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume- XIII
Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2001 48
is going to drop a present for you and
then the child gets up and sees there is
no bird. It's only Ganesha who has given
the idea. We can say he is the Santa
Claus. He gives you ways and methods
Godesses are pleasing Shri Ganasha so
what is the need? Shri Ganesha is very
clever, He knows pleasing his Mother is
the only simple thing he has to do. To
have all the powers of the world, just
keep the Mother pleased.
and he tells you how to delicately build
There are so many qualities of Shri up relationships, pure relationships. How
Ganesha which can be described, He is you hide, how you wrap a little present.
Just put it there, and a person who has
to take it says, 'O God', and then you
see that flowers which you suddenly
the one, who gives us the joy of eating.
Il you eat something, you may like it, you
may not like it. But He is the one who
will tell you, it is made by Sahaja Yogis, bring out and put there. It is all Shri
is made by your Mother. That means,
He gives you the tast of love in the food, suggestions. Among the creation,
that is cooked for you, because He is
Ganesha's efforts. his ways, his
flowers are expressing Shri Ganesha's
essence and the essence of Shri
love. He gives you the ideas, how to
Ganesha comes from the Mother Earth.
express your love. Once they asked me
to sing a song. I used to sing very well
once upon a time but then after lecturing
so many times, you see, I lost my voice.
I couldn't sing well, I thought so. One day
they asked me to sing a song, and
His essence is the fragrance. So a
person who is endowed with Shri
Ganesha's blessings has fragrance,
sometimes chandan, sometimes roses
sometimes this gardenia. You just don't
know from where this fragrance is
theught of some song, and sang to them,
and after a year or so in a programme
they said Mother we want to sing you a
song. This was a song unknown to
everyone. I don't know from where they
got if. from where they made the tune,
they started singing the same song, and
such joy, I mean it all became waves of
coming! The fragrance is coming from
Shri Ganesha and that is what is the
magnet within you. Such a person is
fragrant, absolutely fragrant all the time.
Shri Ganesha emits all kinds of fragrance
from such a person, and that you can
feel only when your Shri Ganesha is al
toars in my eyes. I couldn't control my
joy Now all these feeling of joy comes
from the devices produced by Shri
Ganesha. He is busy creating in the mud. You just help it out by
relatonships beautiful. How? In a respecting it and he will be there fragrant
right. He just settles down there. He is
all the time there waiting to be clensed
for him to raise his head out like a lotus
within you. So imortant for this country
child's birthday. what do we
birthday, a
say All right, tommorrow morning a bird,
where we have raised our head without
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-50.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume - XIII Issue 3 &4
March - April 2001 49
so simple to establish Shri Ganesh within
you. But understand that it is vital that
you people who are Sahaja Yogis should
establish Shri Ganesha which is a silent
surrendering it to Virata, to the
collectivity, to Shri Krishna. We have
raised our head. With Shri Ganesha we
bow down our head. For all the bounties
power within you. Doesn't talk. It is a
sitent power which acts, just a power that
is dynamic, without any noise, without
any show and that is what I would say
that today, when I have said all these
that God has bestowed upon us. All
arrogance will disappear at the lotus feet
of Shri Ganesha. He will give us wisdom.
He will give us sense to understand, He
wil give us power to overcome our
arrogance that is within us. He is the one things from my heart, you the Sahaja
who is the giver of knowledge. He is the Yogis should establish Shri Ganesha
one who gives us light. Many people in
India also worship Shri Ganesha. They such powers that others will be able to
go on, Shri Ganesha, Shri Ganesha...
and do all kinds of tunny things. That's country.
within you, and from you, you will emit
establish their Shri Ganesha in this
May God bless you all.
like cheating yourself unnecessarily. It's
 2001_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-51.txt 
 First of all you have to become wise enough to
understand that you are a part and parcel of
Paramchaitanya. Everything wil! work out by that.. and
it works out so beautifully. Ofcourse some people have
a hard time, I don't say they don't have. But it is not
hard because if you are one with Paramchaitanya and
you know that it is doing the job, you are not feeling
that hardness, or that sickness. All the people who
write to me about their problems, I don't know what to
say. I have to just say that.
Do you believe in Paramchaitanya? Alright, It knows.
It knows what has to be done, it knows what has to be
corrected, it knows what has to be said. See it can
create poetry, it can create music, it can create
everything.
But do you leave everything to the Paramchaitanya?
This is the second point of wisdom. Do you have
wisdom to leave everything to Paramchaitnya?....
