NIRMALA Volume : XIV Issue :9 & 10 AX September- October. 2002 RELIGION PURE The Divine Cool Breeze 00 "Many people think that coming nearer me, I feel pleased. I am not. That is not recognition. You should never do that. On the contrary when you grow really, I will know myself. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi DHARMA VMHSIN UNIVERSAL

 XIV 9 & 1o September The Divine Cool Breeze Volume October 2002 1 BIRTHDAY PUJA, Nirmal Dham, Delhi, 21-3-2002 3 BIRTHDAY FELICITATIONS, Nirmal Dham, Delhi, 23-03-2002 11 PUBLIC PROGRAMME, Ram Lila Maidan, Delhi, 24-3-2002 22 HOLI PUJA, Gurgaon, India, 29-3-2002 24 GUDI PADWA PUJA, Gurgaon, India, 13-4-2002 28 SHRI HANUMANA PUJA, May 1989 39 SAHASRARA PUJA, Cabella, Italy, 6-5-89

 DIVINE COOL BREE ZE BRE E ZE THE Published by V.J. Nalgirkar 162 - A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067 Printed at Print-O-Graphics New Delhi For subscription please write to Mr. O.P. Chandna N-463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi - 110034 Ph.: (011) 7013464 Please send your experience, miracle photographs and artwork to: THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple C- 17, Qutub Institutional Area New Delhi - 110016

 BIRTHDAY PUJA Nirmal Dham, Delhi, 21-3-2002 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) (Translated from Hindi) I am seeing the magnitude of love. quarrel with them. You are Sahaja How it has spread all over! To how Yogis. There should be no other feeling many people? No one knows. But I in your heart but love. When we look problems of our have understood the at its Philosophy. Could there be country, we fail to understand as to any Philosophy of love? Love has why man has no Philosophy. Like a huge created all this turmoil in the expanse love spreads all over. name of religion! What was the necessit y? Something begins, then it has a We are not aware of it, we do not know it. But the reaction which is love of God is all pervading, pervades all over the universe. You feeling in your heart but love could experience it only after getting Self-Realization. is reduced by such activities. We have Only then you could know that this to try to understand as to how to Love alone is the power of God. Then encourage love. How could we express much more than There should be no other the action. The sensitivity and experience of God power of love works out. However, we don't understand it. our love and make it flourish. First of all we should take care of It is very mean to hate someone, our children. What are we teaching them? If someone slaps our child, do to be malicious towards others and to

 2002 September - October The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9& 10 we tell the child to go and hit him? If The poor child cannot understand all we tell our child that it is alright, the these things. He thinks I am like all one who has slapped you is not wise other people-my features are the same. enough. He will be alright and be Then why are they telling me like this? friendly with you. The heart of the child So this Greed and Hatred are our evil is very innocent. He will immediately tendencies. These tendencies could be understand if he is told that slapping is destroyed by Sahaja Yoga. The evil bad, of course, but it will be worse if tendencies should be eradicated you also do the same. Child will know completely. Only then we could know that fighting with each other is bad. This about God and ourselves. quality is to be developed from very childhood. In childhood the children are May God Bless You. told that you are Muslims, Hindus, etc. HI

 BIRTHDAY FELICITATIONS Nirmal Dham, Delhi, 23-03-2002 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) You cannot artificially say that I am joyous. It should be some sort of an innate, spontaneous feeling within. This felicitation function is a little embarrassing for Me because I was born as a very simple person and I have been an extremely simple person. I don't understand money. I don't understand hatred. I don't understand greed. I'm so simple about it. Despite that, you people came and got your Realization. It's your own achievement. It's your own desires that you have achieved. I find so many children nowadays born as realized souls. So I think the time is also there, that in My life itself, this was to happen. It is everybody's lot. I think, like Shri Rama, then came Shri Krishna, then came

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September October 2002 Jesus, then other people. It was their or anything. It's very difficult. But if time. And My time it is to give you all you love that person, then immediately Realization, But, I must say, you all you know what's wrong with that have taken it very heartily, sweetly and person, what's right with that person. are using your powers to give love to But because of your love, you others and to transform others. encompass the whole atmosphere between you and him or between you and others. You don't see the bad points easily - very difficult. The other day, I was talking about love. Now the love, as it is understood, is in your heart as this, but do you know the ocean of love is your Sahasrara? get, cheated by others. I agree, but I When your Sahasrara is filled with love, have no sense of what cheating means, then the life is changed. You don't how people cheat you. Many a times, I've seen many a times, people become a very intelligent man, very people say that they are talking ill about dynamic personality, but you are Me. Yes, they are. I can see they are nothing but love and this love is so self- talking doesn't matter. Makes makes no difference to Me. If they're talking satisfying. You are not bothered if others of Me, it's all right. But this felicitation embarrasses Me definitely don't love you or they love you. You because I've not done anything so don't see to that part. What you see extraordinary, as they think. is the enjoyment from that love. It's Extraordinary is that whatever capacity a tremendous ocean of love. You all have got it. And once you have entered into Sahaja Yoga, you know that you you have, if it acts, then it is there, like love. I have tremendous love, I don't know what to say. And it acts. It works. have entered into Sahasrara and And every human being cares for love. Sahasrara is the - I tell you - the source You may be very great, you might of all the truth. Truth is there - the be very intelligent, you may be earning lots of money, whatever it is. It's not complete truth. Truth is the knowledge and also the truth is love. so important. What is the most important thing is that you are loved. If you love somebody, you know the truth about that person. You find This is I have not made a theory out of it or I am not going to say that you out whether the person is good or bad

 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 So for every Sahaja Yogi, love should be very, very natural thing absolutely. For example, I know all should learn it, but it's so basic and that's the only thing that helps. So residing in the Sahasrara, if you see the waves of love flowing, sometimes people are very rude. They maybe some people might take have certain rules and regulations and advantage of it, it doesn't matter, makes then they get very angry with the other no difference. Some people can also people or whatever it is. Some people mislead you. It's all right. All kinds of have positions and they use their things they do; but when there is love, position to get angry with others and even to get after that person and torture you see, you are satisfied, you are not bothered, because you love everyone. another person, they do, go on doing like this. But they have missed the point. So you are satisfied. You are not bothered as to what others are doing They have missed the point. If you just have love, that pure love, then you see to you, what advantage they're taking of you, what they are troubling you or all these facilities, how they have done the point. You see it, that "Yes, yes, that's what he is doing, that's why he's doing.' You know that. But you are not also all the facilities that you have bothered, Why he is doing like this," from your own being - are automatic. why is he troubling me and gradually, This felicitations and all that, of everything nullifies. Everything finishes course, reflects you, no doubt, but to off by itself. Me, it is nothing great. I don't think it is a very great achievement for Me talking ill about Me, doing all kinds of because I have no vision, as such, I must things against Me. So what? Let them tell you. I've heard this word, that do. That's their job. Let them do; but Mother has a vision. No, no, no, no, I to Me, it doesn't disturb, you know. I have no vision, I must tell you. My think they are indulging into something simple thing is that everybody must love of their own style, but what do you get? I've seen many people who are - and it will change the whole world, no doubt about it. It should come to you natural love will change your lives, Joy comes only out of pure love. If you pure have no pure love, you cannot have joy. Talking that we are very joyous and all that - I know who are joyous really and because now you have pierced through who are not. You cannot artificially say your Sahasrara.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9& 10 September - October 2002 that "I am joyous.' It should be some sort of an innate, spontaneous feeling no, it's no miracle. It's simple thing that love has acted in its own way. Love is not a dead thing. It's not a dead sea. It not only thinks, but it acts and acts so beautifully. Sometimes I'm amazed at within. So you are the ocean of feelings. ocean of beautiful feelings. And when you are enriched by that ocean, you are least bothered about anything. its working. We call it a miracle, this, that. Nothing - it's love. Now, because the Divine loves You know very well that I am very you, it gives you miracles, so called. It can do anything because the Divine wants that you should get to Sahaja bad at money. I don't understand. I cannot count money. So what? I mean, that's My handicap, I should say, but it doesn't matter. What is so needed is Can you feel the love of others? Can you feel the sweetness of others?" As you see a little child, how nice you feel. Yoga and you should become a real yogi. So whatever this love does, you think it's miracle. It is not. Why people In the same way, 'Do you feel that for others?' Or Are they like children? Are they innocent like children?' And now, I would suggest that innocence is the say, 'Mother, that's your style. It's not the question. It's a question of love. Say, I love everyone very much, I trust everyone very much. I never doubt, to begin with, and they are sinking, sinking, but still I have faith that they'll sign of love. Anybody who has innocence would know the technique of love. If come round, that they'll be all right. you are very clever, intelligent, you can Give them a chance. But supposing they answer back, you can correct people. try some tricks, you'll be amazed how do that. No. That's not the way. If you they get exposed! How they get have love, you can correct people exposed, it's very surprising! We have a Sahaja Yogi in Dubai. without saying anything to them, because love is a supreme intelligence. He told Me, 'Mother, no use giving It gives you all the correct method. It Realization to these big people.' I say, works out that. The whole thing works Why?' So he gave Me the name ofvery out that and then people say, "Mother, highly spiritual people accepted by it's a miracle how it has happened?' No, society. I gave him Realization and he

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 7. got exposed. I don't know, I never said anything got exposed.' Another fact. Though he's protected - that's one person whom he gave Realization, also thing about Sahaja Yoga - you may be had a very big thing, having lots of the worst Sahaja Yogi, you are awards and this and that, he got protected, no doubt, but if you go on not that sick, gets much worse. It's a exposed. And he gave Realization to like that, if you all the time trying to go one fellow who had peace award. He against Sahaja and become asahaja, also got exposed. And then it was in then you suffer very badly. the newspaper all about him. It's very simple that if you are Now what is happening is that this man, out of love for the other one, gives standing in a place, you are established in a place, which is very peaceful, very joy-giving, but you want to get out of them Realization, but that same love acts in such a manner that he gets it, so you face whatever is outside, its automatic. If you stand in the place which is so peaceful, which is joyous, which is full of love, you are all right, you'll grow in spirituality. But if you want to get out of it, then you have it. You can't help it. It's like a fortress or exposed. You don't want to expose people. You want that somehow they'll come to Sahaja Yoga all right, it's all right working out. So he said, 'Mother, I don't think I'll give Realization to anyone.' I said, 'See, you go on giving. If the Divine wants that the person we can call a very secluded place, which is very comfort giving and very much should be exposed, he will be exposed.' If there is anything wrong with that full of attention and all that and then you want to go out of the attention. So, person, he'll be exposed. you're gone. That's how some Sahaja Yogis don't understand why they are Somebody who gets Realization, supposing, and he meets with an accident, of course he'll be not yet getting into Sahaja Yoga. saved, but he might meet with an So no use using your intelligence accident. So what is the reason why? because this intelligence, human Why did he meet with the accident? intelligence, is not a very high quality Because he doesn't do anything for function. What is best is to fall in love Sahaja Yoga. He's very ambitious. with your Self - love which is divine, Somebody who's very sick, he's all right love which is nourishing, love that looks with Sahaja Yoga and somebody who's after you. But we don't know how to

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 look after ourselves. We don't know complete knowledge about the person. how to love ourselves. We love this You know the person, what he's up to, person, love that person, but what what he's doing, but you don't mind about yourself? Then they think it is because you love that person. So you selfishness - no, not at all. To know the don't mind. 'All right, go ahead.' It's Self is love. If you know the Self, you'll like a little child. It's going on the know love, you'll fall into the ocean of wrong way. Let it go. that love. But that is what is My experience, I'm telling this, and you all whatever you wear, you are very lucky Now with all these things, should experience the same love. Just watch yourself. It's very simple to introspect, 'Do I have love within me, Sahaja Yoga. But without practising people who have reached Sahasrara and that you all know everything about fully?' Partly it is love, partly no. Sahaja Yoga, you cannot work it out Now love can be very much because then, by practising it, you know about your Self. When you meditate, country', say India. If we love our you know your Self and then you get bounded also like we love our country, so we may think all Indian just filled with love. But now, while sitting, you just start thinking, 'He's a very bad man. I hate him' - this thing. All such stupid ideas come into your head - or 'I must buy this ornament' or things are good. We'll never talk ill about our country. Anybody says anything about India, against, we'll hate that person. 'I must buy this particular car' and all It's with everyone. You love your country. Also you love, say, your that, then you are not loving. But if you parents, love anybody. But (this) is a love, then what happens is that whatever you need, you get. Whatever limited love. It's a bounded love. Love you want, you get. should be just open. Then you will see You have to first love yourself, but where do you stand as far as your country is concerned, as far as your that love should be pure love. As a relationships are concerned. You will result of that, you'll cleanse yourself. know everything. You need not harm, Sometimes you are so much identified you need not say anything, you need not with your temperaments, with your quarrel, fight, but you will know because love gives you knowledge, it is, but then you realize, in that love, nature, with your personality, whatever

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September- October 2002 9. that This is not love. This is blind. grandchild may do, whatever the Love gives you a complete idea grandmother may de, it's all right. It's a kind of a tremendous experience of about yourself. "What am I? What elevation. You feel elevated and you problems I have? Why do I create enjoy that love. If there is no purity in Why do I get into problems? love, you can never, never enjoy love. problems?' You'll be amazed that love has such a powerful light in it, that it is the truth and it is the knowledge. So I would request you to find out that ocean in your head in the Sahasrara, which is being filled by your heart. Do you know Heart and Though I don't know if I could blame anyone in this world who is not a realized soul, I will not - until they Sahasrara are very much in relationship with each other? Their style is such that are fully realized souls, I will not because there is no light in their life. if somebody's head is not all right, the They can't see themselves and they heart won't be all right. If the heart is can't see others. So what's the use of not all right, his head won't be all right. blaming them, blaming this community, But there is more reflection from the that community or this country or that head to the heart. country? What is the use? They say that there's genes are bad or this - nothing of the kind. After And this love is universal. It has nothing to do with any particular type or particular style. It's universal. That is why Sahaja Yoga is universal. It is spreading Sahaja Yoga, your genes are changed you are changed; everything is changed now. So your brain is filled with nothing but light. Your heart is filled with light and you are just bouncing with love, all the time with humour, with loving care. everywhere. I want you to enjoy that love. Every day, I mean, it's so different. But a that you have achieved now. Now Only example I'll give you grandmother and a grandchild. They have got it. So just enjoy that. you have a relationship at least in India, I know - of tremendous love. For them, Then the caste system and the the grandchild is everything and the fundamentalism, that, the greed and grandmother is everything. They just jealousies and competitions and all, they love each other. Whatever the all drop useless things. But if you

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 10 have the jungle of nonsense in your such a nice thing to say. There should be no greed in it, no any plan behind it, just it's a feeling of an ocean which touches every shore and there it makes mind, then all kinds of animals can creep in. To purify yourself with love, cleanse yourself with love. Look at every position, everything, with love and you will be amazed how you will find it easier not to dominate, not a sound, beautiful sound of love. And then the waves return back. Continuously it is flowing and continuously it is working out never control, not to despise, not to say things which are not good. It's such a tired. correcting thing, love is, extremely correcting and extremely joy-giving born and to do this work is a very that you will be amazed at yourself, how difficult task, but, to Me, it was not. I know in the Kali Yuga, to be you are managing things. Whatever happened, whatever people knew of many like that. There troubled Me, howsoever, I was was a Sahaja Yogi who never used to working it out, out of this flow of talk to his own uncle, never. And he love. Went round every place, said, "Somehow, I hate him.' But wherever is possible, whenever it is why?" I don't know why, I hate him.' possible, whatever may be My And then he went to a race-course and health or anything, I was least there he saw his uncle coming. He bothered and I have enjoyed all of rushed and he just hugged him. Uncle you very much. I have enjoyed. There started looking, 'Now what does he have been one or two horrible people- want? Why is he doing? What is it?' In doesn't matter. his mind. 'Why is he wanting to love me like this?" He couldn't understand. these things about Me, only tears come When it happened, you know, that he into My eyes. I don't know what else So when you have saying all couldn't explain that he'd become a Sahaja Yogi or anything. So the uncle asked, What do you want now?' He to say. I mean, it is something I would like you to do, you to get it, this kind of life where you just flow with your said, 'Nothing. I love you, that's all." love. It's such a nice thing to do it. It's May God Bless You

 PUBLIC PROGRAMME Ram Lila Maidan, Delhi, 24-3-2002 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) (Translated from Hindi) see our mother, we experience it. But it is momentary and sometimes it is out of selfishness. But the love about which I am talking is the expression of the spirit, the light of the spirit. It exists in every human being, it is established in everyone, irrespective of one's cast, creed and colour. It is present in all the human beings. It exists in animals too. You will be surprised that animals understand love; they understand love more than human beings! So if we are ascending, if we are evolving, there should be a great light of love within us. If our hearts get enlightened by this love then all the gigantic problems, facing us, will at once I bow to all the seekers of truth. come to an end. Love is the quality which is scarce We have defined love in many everywhere now-a-days. Only this love ways, but actually no fixed definition is the devotion (Bhakti) of the Divine, People take it for a word, but it is not a 'word' only. could be given to it because it is an ocean. Love is the great surging ocean within us and we are the ones Love is power, its storehouse destined to enjoy ourselves with it. exists within us. At times it abounds Only human beings could know the in all of us. We experience it, when we waves of this ocean. These are meant

 12 September-October 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 for us.. Any one else may makes one great. I have not seen even or may not understand but it is a tremendous one rich person who is happy! The power for us. When we talk of Shakti, faces of all the wealthy people, who people take it for Devastating Force! come to me, narrate the tale of their Actually it is Peace and Joy-giving anguished heart! They are the most Force. It comforts us and solves all the unhappy people. Despite the fact that problems of the world provided we get they have millions of rupees, why are they so unhappy? I am told that they suffered unlimited difficulties and saturated with it. This love which is hidden in us and losing luster, has many coverings problems! It is not understood as to around it. The foremost is that we how they were put to so many think no end of ourselves. You are problems, when they had so much yourself the embodiment of love, what money! So now-a-days there are different problems. These were not else could you be more than this? What greater force you could become? You there in the past. are love and love only, and nothing else! Such a power you have got that no one knows, how many thugs, If you have abundant money, then you can love everyone, purify everyone thieves and murderers will run after and fill them with joy. What are the you with their knives in hands! No one causes behind the problems of the knows which problems you will be world? The demons of Jealousy, exposed to! So money cannot make Anger, Ego etc. are the causes. No one one happy. Possession of wealth does knows what pleasure human beings not put an end to one's Greed. Human draw out of these negativities and how desires are always on an increase. one gets encouraged by these! Why? Because money does not have Human being, however, is unable the power to give contentment. If you to understand that when I have the have money in excess, then treasure of it, why should I go contentment lies in giving it away to abegging in the streets? When the poor and needy and reduce their ocean of joy is overflowing in me, why difficulties. Only then you will achieve should I run after the stupidities? 111 contentment, otherwise possession of money has no meaning at all. Money that you cannot give away to needy, thinking and wrong notions are the causes. Often people think that money

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 13 2002 There are people who spend could not be Lakshmi. In Lakshmi principle, I have told money to get popular. Although It has you, one hand gives and the other no special significance yet it is better supports (Aashraya). So you could than not spending at all. have the joy only if you extend Some people want to gain power. Why to gain power? What is there in support to others with your money. But if always you save your money, power? Over yourself, you have no make a mountain and sit upon it, then control and you wish to control the there will be no glow of joy on your whole world! You want to wield face. People laugh at such miserly power over the whole world! I should fellows. Everyone sees, what such a have a great position, great power! man is heading towards! But what to Everyone should salute me! What is do? Until he realizes himself, no one the joy in it? When such people are thrown out of power, no one cares for them. When they think of the past, they can make him understand. He will not come round and enjoy himself. He could get addicted to some bad habit. make themselves the most miserable There might be the some negative beings. What is use of running after outcome of money that a rich person such power? often gets caught in bad habits, drinking and licentiousness. What is there in money that the person goes on falling, falling and falling! Either he cause, give help to those who need it! lands in jail or gets ruined! Wealth, While in power, why do you do these which could be the cause of human wrong deeds? Why are you plundering I asked one person, 'why do you take bribe? If at all you have collected so much money, use it for some noble glory becomes the instrument of money? Why do you tell lies? He replied, "I invested so much money to In the music of love, you think get this position; I have to recover it as to what to give and to whom. How now," "Why did you invest at all, "I destruction! to glorify someone? How to express asked? Because you could not have won without it. Had you not spent so your love to someone? And there are beautiful ways of giving. The joy that much, nobody would have voted for you. You had no choice. So long as flows from this act could not be bought with millions of rupees. you give money or do some illegal

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September-October 2002 14 favour to them, the people are happy. It is a fact. I am not telling anything new. We see it in day-to-day life. As wrong things? For whom are you doing it? One could say, 'for the well being of our children.' Tomorrow these same soon as the person is out of power, no children will beat you with shoes! Why should they respect you? You have no character, who will respect you? Who will look after you? You must one bothers for him, no one cares for him and no one recognizes him. No one is friend to him. What is the use? Whole life you were in the understand that these are all useless clutches of this power, in the ego of aspirations and they keep you away power, now where are you? And from your-self. Understand your love. what did you achieve? The of Lifelong you cannot forgive those who love helps every one to the end. The showered love on you, although they the power help comes only to those who love; to never gave money to you. You will always remember their love; remember those who use the shade of this love: that they gave me a loving glance and extended the hand of love to me! Such things we come across daily, It is nothing new, it is not History written in books. To know about it, there is to those who have visualized it, seen its glory. Such people are remembered generation after generation. They are not only remembered, but also they inspire others and these people no need to read Bible or Koran. It is a endeavour to do better than him. Such matter of routine. people have attained immortality. Who cares for those who, while in power, When we have realized it then troubled people and did all sorts of why have we drawn swords? Our wrong things? People raise fingers on negativities find vent this way. I am them in no time. Such nobel people, telling you very honestly that a large are very few in this world, I accept. number of our officials take money, as We regard ourselves very cunning and ifit were a possession. Every one takes clever. (eats) money. Do they not eat food, Third type are those who are they eat money? You will witness the thieves, cheats and those who make fate of these people! Once we were money by these activities. What going somewhere. There were some happens to these liers, I need not tell. simple people who covered their nose So what is the need to do all these with cloth. When I asked the reason,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 15 it was told that the man going along they have taken the example of Shri was a cheat and he had devoured a Hanumana, and Mahavira? Once huge amount of national money. When Mahavira was meditating in the I asked the reason as to why they have orchard of the palace. Shri Krishna covered their mouth and nose, they wanted to test his generosity. Shri replied, 'lest his smell makes us like Mahavira had worn only one loin- him.' How abhorable it is! It is cloth. Half of it was already torn in a abominable according to our culture. thorny bush. Shri Krishna asked for Such an abominable deed has no place that half loin-cloth. Mahavira was in meditation. He gave away that piece in our culture. Indian culture is very high. One of cloth to him, covered himself with day it might guide the whole world. leaves and went to his bedroom in the But we ourselves have departed from palace and put on other.clothes. Shri it! We have to be modest. It is said that Krishna had appeared before him as a small child. Now you see, these women should be modest. But under the impact of West, they dress shameless people! How they are themselves in such a way, as if they had making the nude statues of Shri bidden good-bye to modesty! Modesty Mahavira! They are so shameless! carries no significance to them. It is 1hey are insulting Shri Mahavira! Our said about the Goddess (Devi). religions often follow wrong things. People take to these things and respect them 100 times. Have some discretion, 'Lajja Rupen Samsthita' If there is divinity within you, I say. Is it worth doing? then you are bound to be modest. A modest person can neither dress nor there were Adam and Eve. The serpent move in an immodest manner. If you came to them and asked them to eat are modest, then you are Divine. Some the Fruit of knowledge. This serpent In the beginning of the creation, one said Hanumana never wore was none else but Kundalini Herself. clothes. Are you Hanumana? Why As soon as Adam and Eve ate the fruit Hanumana needed clothes for? You are of knowledge, the first awareness that dawned upon them was that they were human beings, citizens of this country, why should not you dress properly? Since every one else wears clothes, naked like animals. They immediately thought of covering themselves and

 September- October 2002 16 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 to talk about it. Some other time I will dressed themselves with leaves. talk in details. However it doesn't Firstly we should have the knowledge that we are human beings, not animals. Though some animals are better than human beings, I agree. apply to men. Their both these chakras are fully opened. But woman, being the shakti, it is essential for her to keep these chakras covered. There is no They have a sense of shame. But superstition about it. It is foolish to be shameless human beings regard superstitious but it is good to be themselves to be modern and think no careful. In love, one is always alert. He knows and understands everything the Goddess (Devi Tatva) is absent in and gets concerned about all the end of themselves. Actually element of them. Devi Tatva is Lajja Rupen happenings. Poor women sometimes Samsthita.' They violate this tatva commit suicide. A girl came to me. I (Principle) sometimes. It should not be asked her, why are you so disturbed? done. Also there is no need of veils and She said, "why did she commit suicide? too much covering of the face and And she was only 10 year old girl! Who body. It is unnecessary. Shame and told you? I read it in the newspaper. modesty is in the eyes. Showing-off Now what is this attraction towards an and formalities are not required. But unknown person? It abounds in small somehow man violates this tatva. small children. Because children are Something in man makes him insane. It could not be explained. It will be very innocent. Their innocence pricks them that this should not have nice if the women are modest. Modesty is their inborn quality. This Tatva is happened. Sometimes children get annoyed or feel shy. However they are present in all men and women but men full of love. Love is their life and the take it to extreme and force women to essence of their life. They are not put up veils etc. But this modesty concerned with other material objects. (Lajja) is inborn quality of the women. These are not significant to them. What is special in them? The absence of their Many secrets are hidden in it. There are two chakra's in your shoulders-on mother or grandmother disturbs them the right is Shri Chakra and on the left a lot. Why does it happen? How does is Lalita Chakra. We can prove it. If a small child know all this and why we you keep this chakra uncovered then adults do not understand it? Why do you will be harmed. Now I do not want not we understand that this quality of

 September- October 2002 17 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 love is so much developed in small ocean of joy, ocean of love. You are amazed at yourself that 'I was never children and we elders, who think no end of ourselves, are devoid of this like this! How have I changed? divine quality of love? Our intelligence pushs us to darkness. We do not know Actually you were like that, but you were not aware of it. Kundalini has given this connection. Now you see for yourself that you have got connection what moves us and fills us with delight, what comforts us and also other people? We do not understand what is beneficial for the society. We have made our own styles that by wearing a particular type of dress we shall be with the all pervading Power of Divine Love. It appears very insignificant but the awakening has enlightened the power within you. The Kundalini Awakening works it out. Those Sahaja comfortable. Now in this old age why to wear beads around your neck and Yogis who have attained it, have done so very easily (Sahaj). What have to get into all this stupidity? But we think that we have become so great they attained? The ocean of love that is in our brain, in our that the whole world will worship us. Sahasrara. It was dormant, now it has This is self-deception and deceiving the other people. If you want to been awakened. We are connected to deceive yourself, it is your sweet will, it and flowing in its stream. The ups but you have to face the consequences and downs of the world will go like ultimately. The world will gauge your that. We have to look to the source of joy. When you experience this joy you depth. will be inundated by it. It is the matter So first and foremost is to attain of experience, not of words. It reflects on the person. Your life gets the wealth of love, the ocean of which lies within you. This is the goal of Sahaja Yoga. It awakens vour enlightened and thousands of seekers Kundalini. Kundalini is the blueprint of get enlightenment and joy from you. your life. By the awakening of the Kundalini and establishing it in Yoga programme, you have also got Sahasrara, the Sahasrara gets activated the connection. Now keep it awakened and enlightened. You experience the and enjoy yourself with it. All other ocean of joy. You feel that have achievements are insignificant. Today you have come to Sahaja you been transformed and have become the There are people who say, 'Shri

 September - October The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 2002 18 Mataji, I have got the awakening but I When ultimately one realizes the am not happy." It shows that your baselessness of ego then one is aghast. connection is loose. Some will say, 'I Both, money and power, encourage %3D have got realization, but I have not got ego. Under the impact of ego one takes money so far. It means you are not yet to self destructive things. Then what awakened. I do not read the letters of is the use of this destructive ego? Such such useless people and ask them to a person thinks himself an exclusive take Sahaja Yoga more seriously. After personality. He is friend of none. He realization everything changes. One's is not part of the collective. 'I do not worldly love gets transformed into like this person, I don't like that divine love. One becomes altogether a person.' He does not listen to anyone. different personality. Their faces The life of such a person is worse than death. I know one gentleman. He was change. It is a joy to see them! a big gun, but very egoistical. Perhaps he was in parliament. When he died, Recently, someone came to see me. He appeared to be very diseased and fallen health. I could not recognize even four persons were not available him. 'Have you recognized me? he to carry his coffin. They hired people asked. No, I have not, who are you? 'I to carry the dead body. What is the use am such and such,' and he fell on my of such ego that no one likes to come feet. I was in tears. The person who to cremate you after your death! Even his dog ran away. I was amazed! I said, 'what sins he might have committed?" The disease of ego is horrible. It His ego pushed him to such an abyss is madness. It is such a killing monster that there was none to carry his dead was counting his days, got alright. which devours human beings. But you body! go on justifying your ego! You give reasons for it! Ego is the worst enemy May God Bless You. of man. One thinks no end of oneself. (English part of the speach) I have already spoken a lot about this, about love, and sorry I have to speak in Hindi language but the thing is, it is better expressed in Hindi language. Because you see the loving capacity is very much in India. People live with their love. They understand each other with their love. Ofcourse

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 19 2002 Indians. extremely loving. That's why we are Westernized Indians even don't love surviving after 300 years of domination their own country. There are many of British and still we are having our people who love their own country. We culture intact. It is only because of this have many like that, but on the whole loving nature of this country. You Indians are loving people. They love won't find such loving people you, you go to their house, they will anywhere. You go to a village or serve you food and they will be very anywhere, they will try to help you happy. If they don't have anything, they everywhere because you are will get it from outside. They will ask foreigner, they will respect you. I mean their friends, they will telephone if I call you a foreigner that means you are respectful. They will have not in westernized people. They will look after you. respectable way of calling you, of Nowhere in the world you will find, inviting you. It is respectability. If I say nowhere. People don't believe in they are foreigners. But abroad if you entertaining people. Every where are a foreigner you are discarded. You entertainment has a calculative value. are a low level. If you are a foreigner,. By entertainment what would you get? Oh foreigner, alright. Not here. If you In India if you go to even a poor man's are a foreigner, they will appreçiate house, he will ask you to sit down, give you, they will understand you and they some milk to drink. It is the heart will love you. They will express it. I which is large. агe have not even once seen anybody insulted or troubled, any of our Sahaja Ofcourse we are also now Yogis from abroad. No one. They just becoming money oriented but as it is don't do it. Once it happened, there is not much money in this surprisingly, that there was a theft and country. So people have still maintained their capacity to love. You must have noticed. All of you are here, how Indians are loving and kind! But not modern ones. Modern ones you see they took all the cameras and this and that. So I told them if they are foreigners, don't do such a thing, otherwise what they will think of it. They were small children. They gave it back each and every piece. So to us foreigners have something to be are competing with you. So I can't say about them. But the people who are traditional, who are old and who believe in the culture of India, they are looked after, to be loved. To be loved. But I have not seen this anywhere in

 Sahaja Yogis must develop a kind of tremendous love for people who don't have what we have.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September- October 2002 21 the west. Ofcourse Sahaja Yogis are a lady from Austria who wanted to different. But in the west, they doubt start an orphanage. She said, 'Shri everyone if he is a foreigners. Its very Mataji we must also do something. I surprising why this kind of nature was very happy I said, 'Don't worry, I prevails or the culture came in the will give you everything. I will give land, I will get you the building built. country of Jesus Christ. You have only to run it. She said, 'Shri Mataji, we have already collected Rs. Eighty Lacs for this project. Oh God! His main theme of life was love and why this kind of culture prospered in these western countries who follow Jesus Christ? I can't understand. How could you collect so much Because I have not seen there in the money? We have collected it from expression of relationships. Loving everyone. I was so very happy. somebody to them is sin. Now you Otherwise people give money only to have come here and you have come in spread Christianity. The basic thing Sahaja Yoga. So now you teach this. should be that you should help people They should be kind and loving and not only because they require it. Might be not only that but to appreciate for coming that you require this help in your next life! So, better take to this kind of from other countries, look after them who are coming from the countries generosity to love and understanding which are not rich. All this should of human problems. I tell you that all spread so much to this extent that we should help those people who are not our problems, all worldly problems could be solved with genuine love. It very rich and also we should love all can be solved, whether it is the such people who are in trouble. This problem of India or the problems of is something that should come into all some other country. Only thing missing the foreign people specially in the is love. So take your realization. With Sahaja Yogis that they must develop a realization, whether you like it or not, kind of tremendous love for people you will fall into the ocean of love. who don't have what we have. I must May God Bless You. tell you that I was very happy to meet

 HOLI PUJA Palam Vihar Home, Gurgaon, India, 29-3-2002 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) (Translated from Hindi) Shri Rama incarnated before Shri Kashyapa wanted to kill Prahlada. was Maryada Holika had the boon that fire won't Purshottama and as such lived a very burn her. Hirnaya Kashyapa asked austere life. As a result of the Holika to take the boy Prahlada in her austerities practiced by the King lap and sit on the burning pyre, himself, the whole society turned sober thinking that she could not be burnt. and serious. The element of joy and But to his surprise Holika was burnt gaiety was completely missing. In to ashes and no harm done to the child Dwapar Yuga, when Shri Krishna devotee of Shri Vishnu! It was a incarnated, He wanted to put an end significant incident which proved that Krishna. He to this extreme seriousness prevalent it is sin to be cruel, arrogant and in the society, He thought of having a aggressive. Despite her boon, Holika festival in which everyone could laugh was burnt down and no harm done to heartily and have fun and joy. So the the innocent child-devotee! festival of colour-Holi, was started Such is the myth and traditionally we burn Holi every year. There lies a with this purpose. People, however, took undue liberties and misused the lot of truthfulness in all our traditions. We have to understand that misdeeds. festival to the extent of defaming it.I had also to tell that "I do not play Holi cruelties and troubling others are evil- at all." tendencies. Right sided people develop The myth behind it is that there these devilish traits in them. We should was a demoness named Holika. She not allow such thoughts to dominate was the sister of Hirnya Kashyapa- our brains and should give no the father of Prahlada. Since Prahlada significance to them. We should love was the devotee of Lord Vishnu, his all. It is very important to understand father-the demon King-used to otherwise we shall all be demonic like harass and trouble him. Hiranya Holika. Now right sided people

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 23 develop this problem. It is a big lesson You are powerful enough. You for them. No harm was done to the have such powers within you that if innocent child Prahlada. God almighty someone endeavours to trouble you, saved him, but this demonic woman, you will be protected like Prahlada. No who got boon as a result of her severe one could destroy you. You are so penance was reduced to ashes. One much protected! No such thing could should understand that all these destroy you. So there should be no demonic tendencies are destructive. hatred or anger towards anyone. You We should give them up and be should have a feeling of compassion generous and loving towards all. towards those who are victims of evil Quarrelling and fighting with each tendencies. Think of transforming other are not virtues. These are them. If you become forgiving then it demonic tendencies. could workout. Small child Prahlada is a big traits, we are Sahaja Yogis. We are example. He challenged his father who special people, we have incarnated to was a demon! But Prahlada was saved change this world, to transform it and his father got killed! Death is not We should not take to these evil- completely, We should put our attention on that. We are very highly placed, higher than all others. We have the main point. The person falls too low. People with evil thoughts fall in the abyss. So do not give place to the feelings of hatred and jealousy. Cleanse to save this world from falling to these tendencies. These are much in vogue yourself immediately. these days. It is unworthy to say these May God Bless You. abhorable things and to be cruel and dominate others. It is unnecessary in Sahaja Yoga.

 GUDI PADWA PUJA Palam Vihar Home, Gurgaon, India, 13-4-2002 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) (Translated from Hindi) go according to the Moon and fix the Gudi Padwa is celebrated in different parts of our country. The way dates of our festivals. we celebrate it here, it is celebrated in Only one of our festivals is fixed South too. Every where this festival is celebrated. The beginning of the by the position of the Sun. The day Vikrami Samvata and that of the when the journey of the Sun starts Sahlivahan Shaka also fall on the towards equator (Uttarayana). On that same day. Today is that day. All our fixed day we celebrate one of our dates and festivals are decided festival-'Makar Sankranti. Throughout the country this festival is celebrated on the same day. This date never changes. All our astrology and according to it, particularly our festivals. We follow the Moon calendar whereas foreigners follow the Sun calendar. That is the reason that the astronomy go with the position of the dates of their festivals never get 'Moon'. The state of the Moon is changed. But all our festivals depend considered in astrology and astronomy on the position of the Moon. That is and the whole astrology is made why their dates keep changing and all accordingly. So our first calendar, our festivals are celebrated on different Shalivahan Shaka is based on Moon. All the dates also go according to Moon. Those who have no knowledge dates. We give much significance to of these facts cannot understand the Moon and decide all our dates and reason behind these festivals falling on festivals according to it, the reason different dates. So we have to think being that the effect of the moon on that the significance we have attached to the Moon is because it has a great human being is much more than that impact on human beings. We should be of the Sun. Other planets also have their effects on human beings. So we careful about it.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 25 The greatest effect of the Moon is that our left side (left sympathetic) depends on it. Very few people know So we are very sensitive to the position of the Moon. Very subtle calculations have been done about it. In our country about it. The reason of giving so much importance to this left side is that it affects our Psyche. That is why so much significance is attached to it. The we know, much before, the dates and times of Moon eclipses. Much thought has been given to it and we have acquired lot of knowledge about it. It effect on left side is Psychic, it doesn't shows that lot of attention has been belong to our brain. It cannot be given to the effects of Moon. So much controlled, Psychic problems cannot be controlled. Nor the effect of the Moon. So the dates of the Moon are to be has been written about it. In modern times everything is being calculated on the position of the considered. Sun but it is For example on Amavasya not proper. Position of the (No Moon Moon must be Night) Poornim a or into taken consideration. (Full Moon should We Night) the know what is problems of going to be epileptic or Psychic patients get the effect of the Moon today. It is a aggravated. very subtle On such subject. We should have occasions we could see that knowledge the person is affected by about it and it should be Moon No discussed in (Amavasya) our country. or Full Moon Today is (Poornima).

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 26 Year like that. In the New year they new year day and the beginning of the Moon, That is why this day is given so much significance. It is known as Gudi Padwa. A flag is put on a stick and on made their symbol in the form of a small pitcher and the flag put on the stick. But here in this part people do not know about it nor do they celebrate this festival. This Samvat or Vikrami it is put a small pitcher. This pitcher represents Kundalini. It is taken as a symbol. The Shalivahanas were the devotees of the Devi (Goddess) and it calendar was also started from this very date. The years of their beginning is told that they used to offer shawl to the Goddess. In the beginning they might be different but the date is the same. Both of them follow this were called Saatvahans because they Amavasya and that is how the worshipped Seven Plexuses and this followers of Vikrami and Shalivahana Saatvahana was ultimately changed Samvata celebrate Gudi Padwa. into Shalivahana. But the symbol of Actually it is not Amavasya (the first Shalivahana is the same. They put up day of the Moon), today is that day. ä 'Gudi' means a flag and a small There is no Moon in the Sky. It is pitcher is put on it as a symbol. This complete dark. pitcher has a particular shape which We should know why it is represents Kundalini. So they were the worshippers of Kundalini and followed celebrated in our country? What is it. That is the reason they made this particular about it? Without knowing symbol in this way, All those who about the customs and festivals of the follow Kundalini put up a Gudi in their country we could neither love it no houses and also put a flag on it and respect it. These things are very deep thus it is indicated that they welcome rooted but we have no knowledge of Kundalini and exhibit it in a special them. People say it is Kaliyuga. Why way. But all these people are moving has this Kaliyuga set-in? What is its in the rut. They are doing all these meaning? Mostly people do not know. rituals without knowing the cause of They know about it from different it. One should know the reason for people and talk about it. It has an doing certain things. What is it? important myth behind it, of the time Because Saatvahanas were the of King Parikshita. No one knows worshippers and protectors of the about it. No one reads it. People read Kundalini and they started their New only stupid books, at the most they

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September- October 2002 27 read Ramayana but they have no knowledge of its message or its philosophy. No one knows about it. the best? Socially we might not be the But we Sahaja Yogis must acquire this best but culturally we are considered knowledge. We must know from where the best. Many knowledgeable things the culture of our country dawned and have been written in these books, such the roots of India. Why we Indians are considered how it reached at this level. Without as, what is Dharma and how to this knowledge our approach will establish it? I wish you people study become like the foreigner's and ego them. The study of these scriptures will and other negativities will have hold give you a new direction, because foreign language and books of knowledge are very superficial. There on us. So it will be better to understand from where these qualities have come and what is their significance. Why do is a publishing firm named Sasta Sahitya Mandal. I got many books we do certain things? Or we do it because other people also do it. It is from there. It is a beautiful shop. not proper. We must have thorough Books are very cheap there. You don't knowledge of it. I desire that all the have to spend much money. Ofcourse, Sahaja Yogis should know about it, time is needed. We read unnecessary understand it. If I had time enough, I things, watch useless films and read would have written about all these unnecessary news. Our study should things but I have no time. You people be very deep and about our old-old could read and know about it, all the books are available. There are so many treasures. Today is very auspicious. I was books in Hindi language in India but no one reads them. All these books are not feeling well, yet I thought that I available in Delhi. I got them here. We must go for Puja on this auspicious must know about them. Whatever is occasion. mythical contains a lot of useful things. May God Bless You. By understanding them we could know

 SHRI HANUMANA PUJA May 1989 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) It is such a joy today and the any Indian language as Devdoots whole atmosphere seems to be bubbling with it as if the angels are means they are the ambassadors of God. singing and the speciality of Hanumana So, now you are the same, you are all angels, Now only thing you are born like angels, they are angels and not aware that you are angels while they are not human beings. They are they were aware from their childhood. born with the angelic qualities but now If you know that you are angels all was that He was an angel, Angels are you all have become angels from the human beings. It is a very great and vou will be amazed that the quality your qualities will start shining through you achievement of Sahaja Yoga. of standing by the truth at any cost is The qualities that are born with so easily managed for you, because the angels are seen from their very you have been given the right, you childhood. Firstly, they are not afraid have been given the special blessings. of untruth, falsehood. They are not the special protection from the Divine worried as to what people will say to that if you stand for the right and if them and what they will lose in life. you stand for the righteous and if To them truth is their life, they breath you stand for the truth, all kinds of truth and nothing else matters with help to protect you will be given. them. This is the first great quality of Angels are aware of this, they are sure an angel. They will go to any extent to of it, they are certain, there's a establish truth, to protect and to certainty about it but you are not. Still protect the people who are in truth. sometimes think may be-may not be, It's such a wide range of these angels same style goes on. Believe me-you are angels, you have all the powers and what rights you have Human beings all over. So in the left side we have Ganas, on the right side we have angels and translated in Sanskrit language or can not get over you. That's the

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 29 speciality of angels, not of saints. amusingly. Like He burnt the whole Saints could be manoeuvred, they of Lanka and He was laughing at it, could be tortured, they could be then He extended His tail and put it troubled. Incarnations may do the round the necks of many rakshasas and same. Incarnations accept it, they want He was just playing with them and then to have all these penances done to them so that they create an event in dangling in the air. So, their life to express themselves in a playfulness of the angels also because more dynamic way. If there was no they are so confident, they are Ravana there would have been no absolutely aware, absolutely identified flew in the air and they all were It's a Ramayana, if there was no Kansa, with their personality, with their there would have been no Krishna. So, powers, with themselves. the incarnations take upon themselves Here the Sahaja Yogis sometimes the problems and also they fight with the evil. So it looks sometimes that we feel that they suffer but they don't. But don't understand that I have made you into angels. I have not made you into the angels have a special category. saints but angels and you are always They don't take up any problems upon protected. I can only make angels I themselves, they just solve them. If Can't make saints, saints are made by there's a problem, it's the angels who their own efforts, the effortlessness solve for the saints as well as for the doing is like Ganesha, like Kartikeya, incarnations and they are to be told like Hanumana. In the same way you are all made, with the same style. So, sometimes that don't jump in just now, try to understand that what I say about you is the truth. Kinds of conditionings Work even through you people, though you are saints and you don't know how you are working out on the stage now, you will jump when we will ask you. They are ready, standing at the door just to jump in, so anxious! And they to spread your wings, Still sometimes I feel that the rebirth has taken place and they have all become like angels with wings but as little birds they still have to learn how to fly. But you must are fixed quantities, you can rely on them, completely. For example, Shri Hanumana, as you know Him an angel has great capacities, great powers and it is His right to use them, and He is very aware of it. He does everything gain your confidence by your very amusingly, uses His power very experiences which you have in Sahaja

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 30 2002 Yoga. As you were singing yesterday them and to talk about it, to use them. 'miracles everyday, miracles around you', these are done by the angels and whole of England should get they try to convince you that you are realisation in no time but we are still Imagine with so many angels the one of us, just join our company. trying to learn what we are! Hanumana had no problem because from His So we have so many angels now childhood he knew that He was an sitting here and why should not we think of transforming this world? And angel and He has to do the job of an there's one more thing that have angel. Because we were born as human other than the angels because angels beings and now we have become do not raise the Kundalini, they cannot. angels. We find it difficult to be you dynamic like other angels that they were. Even your thought, collective they are not bothered about it, they are there to kill, to burn, to suppress, to remove all the evil people around but thought, even your individual thought they cannot transform, angels cannot is powerful and your attention is transform. So you have a greater right powerful because of this fear or may than they have in the realm of God that be the conditioning as you can call it you can raise the Kundalini of people or may be the ego part which is still and you can give realisation. But sticking on to you. You still hang human conditionings are still sticking around false things and that force, that on. For example-I wore a ring the dynamism is not expressed. We can other day and then my daughter started blame any thing, like we can blame lethargy to some country, ego to some teasing me that now you must only show this finger all the time to people country but now you have lost your so that they see your ring. So, in the countries completely. Now you have mundane human life whatever we have, entered into the Kingdom of God. You are in a country which has no bounds, possessions may be powers, you see for example somebody is a mad with which has no limitations and then all some position immediately you can these conditionings that are still lingering in you shouldn't bother you make it out with his nose and lips, the way they are turned upward but the powers that you have in your at all and shouldn't upset you or deter you from doing whatever is your job. Now imagine, Hanumana, as possession, you are afraid to manifest

 September - October 2002 31 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 what we have gained, what we have Gabriel, had to go and tell Maria that there's a child which is the incarnation, the Saviour is going to be born to you. She was a young virgin-to break such news which was horrible compared to the conditionings of those days. He did it - "I have to do it, so I will do it, if that's the order I will do it" - because got. See the people who say you have done so much for Sahaja Yoga and what Sahaja Yoga has given us? It has given you self realisation, it has given you the angel status. I mean you try anything else, can you get the status of an angel? You cannot, Sahaja Yoga he knew that the carrying out of the has given you that status, so what more do you want? It was never possible before, believe me, impossible situation. If it was possible in any way then Gyaneshwara would not have order is His nature, is built within Him and He is not going to doubt it, He is not going to weigh it but just told and He does it. taken Samadhi at such a young age and Kabira would not have said, "Oh God! What am I to do, this world is blind." So, a great understanding has to be within us that we are growing within ourselves but if we do not manifest, if we do not show our So, you have that subtle power within you that you can work out on people's Kundalini without even their knowing qualities and if we do not it in our life, in our doing, in our object, in express about it. But in meditation when you nOA the meaning of our life, then Sahaja Yoga is not going to spread nor is it sit down you must admit yourself I am an angel and as being an angel I have no attachments with going to help you much. The kind of work you have to do has no problems with it. I have problems, not you. You anything else but with God's work. don't have to face problems, you go and talk to anyone, whatever you feel Sahaja Yoga, I have seen it, people Attachments are so many, still in like. They will jolly well have to listen to you, I should say, but if they don't they can't harm you. They can't do any have like attachments to, now because they are married, so they are attached to wives and so many have fallen out harm to you. This is a very great because of their wives attachments. protection you have. They cannot hinder your work. Then they have attachments to their children and so many will fall out if Coming to Sahaja Yoga is not they have attachments to their

 32 2002 September - October The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 children. As I told you yesterday that describe is the feeling of tremendous ocean of joy within you, just flowing all the children of the world who are Sahaja Yogis are your children, you are out. the parents of all the children. It's not that if your child is sleeping you will cover that child, no, you cover all the children you have to look after, all the The attachments do not give you capacity to enjoy that ocean. If you are standing on the shore how will you enjoy the ocean? You have to jump into children which are lying down. Can it but you have got your anchorage on think of Hanumana if He was here you to different things, so you can't jump and when the children were sieeping in And you are so safe you know how He would just cover the body of one child because He is a universal being. to swim, you know how to kill a shark, even one sight of yours is sufficient, So, every child has to be loved the but because you are not aware it is not same way cared for by you. acting. Absolutely this is the case. I have seen people who get small positions in life and they start boasting Then there are other attachments like possession, positions, jobs. I have none so I don't know what others about it I met this and this man. I met except for when I see you so much that and that man and this happened, and that happened, so you feel like lovingly coming to the station then the laughing at the person. I mean but you have met Sahaja Yoga by which you have grown, you have been nourished, whole heart becomes like an ocean I think and just starts like a big swell of a tide like that, if you see that and then you have become so great. With all this when I have to leave you again it recedes back like a sea which is now we have to follow the line of receding. It's something like you see Hanumana. He thought the Sun is very the moon and the sea starts reacting egoistical. Tries to burn people sometimes. It gives too much heat and to the beauty of the moon, the joy of the Sun worshippers also are the moon, the love of the moon. Then I see the love - the love that is you see egoistical. They have so much ego in them. Any word, if you say wrong in in a nest where a bird is feeding it's young ones and you see this love in their language or in their customs say, the sky, then you see this love in your you hold the fork in a wrong hand- heart-and only thing that you can finished. You are the worst person in

 September - October 33 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 the whole world, committed the something absolutely absurd grows without any subtle expression, is to be appreciated. greatest sin. All such small stupid ideas come This is because of our ego which out of a very depraved ego. Ego is so depraved when you start thinking no has suppressed every proper end of yourself that I am everything spontaneous living growth of our and I know everything and this custom thought, of our art and of our life. is the best or that carpet is the best. I, think it's worst than all the contamination we talk about or I don't like it. But who are you? Who ecological problems. This is the human asked you to like it or not to like it, I don't like this, I don't like that. On the mind which has produced these suffocating areas where nobody can express anything and the one who has a greater ego, dominates. This book has been written by such and such other side the egoist always becomes slave also. I must say that after going through the countries which are following certain norms, which are the dictations of the ego like an artist now, person, you meet that person you feel likejumping in the sea. So everything written is not a Bible and those mostly for example, an artist produces something for his joy but he must be eriticised by everyone, the criticism should be, I don't like this, this colour is not good, that is not and you have professionals who do this! They don't know how to even draw one pencil line who write are people whom you should never meet without a barge pole. So, anything that is expressed, you see, say in a dress or in a relationship with your children, in relationship with your teacher, relationship with anyone has to be so and so and so. You must say thank you properly. Leave alone painting anything. But immediately they will say I think this-this is you see- they have made books out of it, thesis and many-a-times, you may say sorry theories! I mean, art has something to many-a-times, so we are so much do with your heart and not with your curbed into artificial expression that I brain. That's how you have killed so think after sometime there will be no many artists and everybody who is art produced. There's no exuberance, painting has to think what people will they cannot, they are afraid. I don't know if you have noticed this or not say about this! But as a result of that

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 34 but those who go to see any museums fall. So the another trend has started I or go to see any exhibition, anything, think, all of them, to be great, some feel in Sahaja Yoga that better be on the safer side. Between these two Divine personalities that they can Sahaja Yoga will be lost. So if you judge everyone. Through the Agnya that we judge, that is what Hanumana know you are angels you will have no ego. Anybody who knows that this is his nature to do something. wanted to eat once and for all. The movement of agnya which goes right Like today my husband was and left you see which makes us praising me, saying that it is you who has done all. I said, not me, It's not express our so called nonsensical personality of ego is the one that he tried to control and eat it off. As I eat bhoots, perhaps He was eating this in them. See, if it is planted in the Sun. But for an angel it is important mother earth, then it sprouts. In the me. He said, how do you say, It's not you. Because, I said, it is innately built to know that there is no ego within same way, they have innately built you. There are some Sahaja Yogis who within them, their Kundalini-it sprouts. So, how's it I have done? But he said, Mother Earth has done it. I said, No. It's the quality in the Mother Earth say MotherI didn't want to do too much of Sahaja Yoga work because my ego will come up, I don't want my ego to express it. But why do you want which is built in, has done it. So, he your ego to be destroyed, for what? For Sahaja Yoga work, isn't it! What a vicious circle it is that we say that said then who has done all this? So, I said, It's done by Adishakti, agreed, but Sahaja Yoga is not done by we want to keep our ourselves in the Adishakti. She has created these background because our ego should powers in everyone which works out but Sahaja Yoga is not. Sahaja Yoga not develop. You are just thinking about works through the innate qualities that yourself, what about Sahaja Yoga? So, are in the Mother Earth and that are in now-a-days the trend is oh! Better be the seed. So, I am here as, not as on the safe side because they have seen Adishakti, I am here as their Mother, some people who were very egoistical, as their Holy Mother, and as Holy who were very dashing about Sahaja Mother I have guided them, you can Yoga, who tried to show off, had to say I am like the Mother Earth who

 September - Octaber 2002 35 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 you are the instrument, and you have sprouts seeds. So then another detachment can come in into you that to work, you have to do the job. these are your powers, within you, which have been just enlightened by Hanumana was that He was very alert your innate nature of Kundalini and and that He was beyond time. When that you are empowered yourself and vou eat off the Sun, where is the time! all this power that is within you is only He was beyond time because of that told by me that it is within you. You everything He did very fast. For Another great quality of see for yourself, only like a mirror I example-now we are preparing, say book of Sahaja Yoga, for the last am telling you are this, you see for yourself. So, how can I take any credit sixteen years is going on, is working is working on, then we are trying for it? on, So, you can even have to make some arrangements about having the recording of the sick people and be cured with Sahaja Yoga, that's happening. Very good, happening, then we are going to go to Russia to spread Sahaja Yoga working. All the devils have reached there but the angles are still working it out. Very patient, very patient angels! So, one of the qualities detachment to understand that the power that we have is for Sahaja Yoga as Mother has powers to work for Sahaja Yoga. We too have powers to work for Sahaja Yoga and as she works we also have to work. But there is attachment like this-Mother is doing everything what can we do! No, you have to do it. This is a very of Shri Hanumana was that He was a important detachment which I am fast person. He would do the work trying to say that you have to do this yourself. It's not that Mother will before anybody could do it, He was outbeat. It's alright to fight in and win do, after alI Mother is doing and defeat Napoleon but in the field everything. It's correct that is of dharma, in the field of Sahaja Yoga correct in a way but you are the I find people don't understand the instrument. Electricity is doing importance of time. We are delay everything here but this instrument has masters and delaying habits we have- to work. So, the source may be there alright I will telephone, I will find out, but the instrument is the one which it will happen. This is one of the delivers the goods and like Hanumana greatest defects we have which we

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - COctober 2002 36 have to learn from Hanumana that up they had such a nice drama, play- all that I enjoyed very much it was very Rama wanted to send word, so He sent His ring with Hanumana, Rama could good for everybody's enjoyment but not do that fast, so Hanumana went job is there we have to do. You have and did it. Then Rama wanted to have to do the job. So, attention should be this 'Sanjivini', this kind of a herb, so on the job, and that's what what are He sent him to get from a particular we doing about it? I was happy that a mountain. He said, now why to waste suggestion has come from America time finding it out better take the about making a video film and things whole thing. So, He carried the whole like that and then there are mountain there. Better do it quickly, obstructions how are we going to get immediately, this is the time to do it; money? What is going to happen? You but next year we will see Mother, you just start it, you will get it, you have know after Ganapati Pule we can powers everything will be consider. We will have discussions and synchronized properly you just then we will have arguments and this start doing it, but if you behave like human beings-first think, then plan it out and then cancel it, it's not and that. This is one thing about His going to work out. character one has to know that today Though Hanumana is running on when we are worshipping Hanumana we should have that quick-wittedness the Pingla Nadi all the time, what He within us. It is to be done now, we does is to spoil our plans. Because cannot postpone it anymore, already instead of Him we run on the pingla, we are very much delayed. I saw the girls who were wearing frocks, small you right. So He sidetracks all our little things, have grown into big girls plans all the time, that's how all our now, about to be married. So, I think planning fails. We are particular about all my life I will be marrying Sahaja timings, about things of no importance Yogis. To see the results you have to but we are not particular about timings become quick people, not to linger and of our progress in Sahaja Yoga. We be satisfied with other things but must have targets, we must have fixed this is alright you running it.I will put positive things what are we doing. For example It's nice, children have grown times, alright by this time we have to achieve, but do it little faster is better.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 37 September - October 2002 All other things can be managed but do this and nothing else is important. this is your job, nobody is going to do Ihope by today's puja that enthusiasm, it, nobody is going to do it, this is your that venturesome nature will vibrate job. I mean your are not going to run the train, you are not going to fly aeroplanes and you don't have to run any administration and stupid politics, your pingla and without feeling any ego about it in the most humble manner as Hanumana was, you will do the jobs. Hanumana, imagine, was given a beautiful necklace of gold with big-big balls for Him to wear by Sita and He opened all of them one by one. He said, there's no Rama in this what will I do have to do Sahaja Yoga, you have to spread it, you have to bring it to a level where people can see it. Now but you eighteen years have passed, this is the nineteenth year. with this ball. So, She said, where is Rama? He opened His heart and So today is first day of Hanumana's puja. I must say you have to venture, you have to venture showed it, see Rama is here. If Rama is there you cannot have ego. So much of dynamism and so much of humility what a combination it was! And that's what you have to, you have to just without any fear collectively and individually forgetting as to what wil happen. I mean you won't go to jails. you will not be crucified, be sure on manifest. The more you will work, the that. I mean if you lose your job, you more you will assert yourself. You will can get another and if you don't find that humility is the only thing that get a job you can get a dole, alright. So you helps. Obedience is the only thing that don't have to worry about all useless helps to carry out your work and you things which human beings sit down will become humbler and humbler. But and worry but despite that they achieve if you think oh! I am doing this then work, they do their jobs and how much finished. But if you know it's done by they are wedded to it, I am surprised! the Divine, Param Chaitnya is doing I have seen it in my family, how much everything, I am just an instrument, the they are wedded, they have do this humility will be there and you will be work they have to do it. They will get an effective instrument. I hope in this country today it up in the morning do this, do that but you are not aware that you are angels was very necessary and it was so timely and this is your work, so you have to it's all organised by angels that we

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 38 September - October 2002 should have this puja here but it's good the west, why people have so much for all of you. You have to really go and see media people, go and see these ministers, go and see, say, Prince of Wales, go and see another person, ego than Indian people have? One of the things is that the right side is, as I have told you on many-a-times, is like an accelerator but left side is like the meet them, make committees, see what break. So. If the mooladhara is not in you can do. Put your mind to it what control, if the break is not alright are we to do but here only my Mother náturally the accelerator can not be is sick, my child is sick, my this thing controlled. So, basically is sick, my friend is sick, my-still going mooladhara should be brought down on with it! If you start doing God's and must be put right. You should work your worries are taken over. work very hard to do that if your break You don't have to worry about is established then what ever work you anything, just taken over. But it's not self propagation it's not, it's the into ego practices and ego cannot propagation of the collective. I hope anymore control you. So that is very today you have understood the subtle important specially in the West where side of your being which is there, it is being really dangerously which is exhibiting which I can see destroyed, the idea of auspiciousness clearly and that you will all of you will and of holiness. So that is the power in your meditation become aware of of any angel and that has to be fully our do for Sahaja Yoga you will not get what you have within yourself. That's greatest thing that will please the Divine and Divine will look after you fully. With the same confidence as the established within us and then on that power we will work out, which gives you discretion, which gives you egolessness. I hope today both these the things will work out within us in such angels like Hanumana you have to go further and work it out. a manner that we will really become absolutely self confident realised souls whom I call as angels of modern times. May God Bless you All I have to say about the ego part May God Bless You. is this, which is really the problem in

 SAHASRARA PUJA Cabella, Italy, 6-5-89 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Last night was the night of the worst, that they are trying to make complete darkness that they call it as the limbic area very insensitive. Very 'Amavasya' and just now only the first depressive novels, very depressive phase of the Moon has started. Today thoughts and very depressive music you we are here to celebrate the day when can say like Greek tragedy, nonsense. Sahasrara was opened out. Also you All these things came from the medieval have seen in the photograph, it was period till you should say this new age actually the photograph of my brain has started. That one itself was no good for our limbic area that made us very which showed how the Sahasrara was opened out. The light of the brain now could be photographed. Its something great this modern times have done. So depressive. We took to alcoholism to escape from the so called miseries. But then came this modern age in which people became overactive, Overactivity the modern times have brought a lot of things which can prove the existence of started. With that the brain also became the Divine. Alse it can prove about Me. overactive in addition to the dullness It can convince you what I am. This is before its gone to the other extreme of very important because in the modern over activity. So to dull it again they times this Advent has to be took to drugs, they took to very recognised. Has to be fully horrible music. That's how they make recognised. This is one of the this limbic area very very insensitive. conditions for all the Sahaja Yogis. So a drug which was just a stimulus to begin with, was to be taken in greater quantity and later on they had to take Now let's see what is happening in the modern times in the brains of the drugs which were of much more severe people. In the brains of the people today nature. Went on like that and now we if you see, there is an attack on the know that this drug is the only way Sahasrara. There has been an attack people think they can survive. Why? Because of the tension they talk of. In since long but in the modern times it is

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September- October 2002 40 the modern times we have something opened out so many years back, still we called tension. It was never there have some things to be done is to clear before. People never talked of their tensions. Now everybody says I am in tension. You give me a tension. What is this tension. This is because of my advent. The limbic are wants to out our Sahasrara first of all. So first is the breaking of the Sahasrara, then once it is opened out, the Brahmarandhra opened out, then we start feeling the grace and it moves on to our Ida and know about me. And the Kundalini Pingala, the grace, not the Kundalini also as Sahaja Yoga is increasing, is trying to rise in people., Because you become the channels. Wherever and the grace, which is Chaitanaya all round, soothes down our left and right side, by which our Chakras open, more you go, you generate vibrations and and more threads of the Kundalini start these vibrations give a challenge to piercing through. So I always tell the Kundalini or a message and in Sahaja Yogis that its important that you various people it rises. It may not must meditate. If your Sahasrara is all rise up to the Sahasrara or it may right, all your Chakras will be even rise up to Sahasrara but it falls alright. Because as you know that the no Pithas or the controlling centres of all back because there is recognition. So every time they do something, this Kundalini comes up and gives them a pressure because clear, everything works out in a very their Sahasrara is not opened. Its a these Chakras are in the brain, around the limbic area. So if your Sahasrara is different way.- closed door. Because of the closed door this gives them kind of a How to keep the Sahasrara alright is the big problem, always people ask pressure in the head, which they don't understand and they call it as tension. Actually Kundalini is trying me. You know that I reside in the Sahasrara, I have incarnated on the lotus of 1000 petals. That's why I could to push itself out but it cannot. And those also who get their realization, if they do not make their Sahasrara break it also. As I am today as you see me of-course. They say 'Sahasrare Mahamaya'. So this is the illusion alright, they go on getting into which is all the time there for you, tension. which is very illusive. It had to be that So though Sahasrara has been way because you could not have faced

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September- October 2002 41 me otherwise with all the lights coming just you open your heart. out of me or the way you saw yesterday, Sahasrara some sort of abstract colours Now what stops it? We should examine that. Firstly the conditioning. thrown on all sides and the lights In the west to express your love is thrown outside. regarded sinful actually. It takes some Now this Sahasrara is to be time to say I love you. But I hate you, looked after by you. Its the temple of even a child could go on saying,a I hate your Mother. When you say you put me you, I hate you, I hate you. But to hate in the heart, actually you put me in the someone is sinful. To anyone, to hate Sahasrara. Because as you know the is sinful. So to say that I hate you, I Brahmarandhra here, is the fontanelle hate you, is a sinful act. So what one bone area has got the Pitha, the centre has to do is to say, go on saying I love which controls the heart, which is the you. After all you must love a person seat of the Sada Shiva or you can say of Shiva. So when you put me in the who is so dear to you. Anyone who has done something good for you, you love heart actually you put me there so to raise it from heart to there or to bring it from there to the heart is problem that person. But if Adi Shakti herself has given you the rebirth, It should be the easiest thing to love. And if she says of two types of people. Some people that they are all within my body, so it who are sensitive in their heart, I would should be even easier to love each other. say, we can see Italians are very So the whole cleansing of the sensitive in their heart. The first thing Sahasrara is done through this love. they do as soon as they see me, they This love which is not put their hands to their heart. And that conditioned, which is not inhibited. is what it is, that if you try to feel me in Which doesn't want any respite, which your heart, to begin with it is much doesn't want any return, Nirvajya easier. To feel me in your heart. (frafour). But the conditionings are too Now you might say, how to do it? You have to love me, as I love you. much. First the problem ofconditioning comes to you where you think that this You have to love each one of yourself condition makes me hate someone or because you are all within me and can't teach someone how to love. Love is within. And love manifests if can't love someone because this is the condition. But actually the conditioning itself is so absurd, if you see it one by you

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 42 one. To make it simple, I would like you Then we go further to see a person. to understand the conditioning part. I How intelligent he is? How smart he read one article, interesting one. 'Who is? How charismatic he is? How Killed the Romance?' So he said that charming? These are also kind of the hair dressers. I was wondering how conditions of the mind that you think is he connecting romance with the hair that a particular style of a person is dressers! Because people used to go to loveable person. That you love that hair dressers and a hair dressing was person is so much outside or some liked by a person. So he would way that people actually do not love but show I love that hair dressing. Now they love because somebody has more supposing his fiancee or his wife wore money. As the money is not going to another type of hair-dressing because part with, no doubt. But you love that everyday new things are coming. Then person because he has more money. Or immediately the husband would say, he has a better car, or he is better "oh, I hate you because of your hair- dressing." Because he loves one type of hair-dress, that's why he loves. dressed or what ever it is. So this kind of an idea one has also is a killer of love. If love is killed joy is lost. You cannot Otherwise if you have another hair- have joy without love. I say joy and dress you hate it. I don't like it. To say love, both are just the same. Then it gets that I don't like it and I like it, itself is a even subtler and subtler and subtler. sign that the conditioning is too much. Then you start say loving our own You make a proper hair dress and you children. That's very common. I mean dress up properly and you come out and suddenly people say, "oh, I hate." Who are you? What right we have got to say that to any one. You are not a judge appointed by any law-courts. So why do we say to hurt someone to say I hate it. On the contrary you must say that alright, I like this but you could be better. That's the sign of love, where of-course also some people don't even love their children, I mean there are, all kinds. But then they go on, "this is my child, this is my child, this is my child". That's again the death of love. As I told you before the sap of the tree rises, goes to every fruit, goes to every leaf, goes to every part and comes back. It's not attached. If you are attached to you want a person to be dressed up in a way that is appealing. But this is on very-very baser level we see people. one part or to one flower, because it is more beautiful then the tree will die and the flower will also die. So that's the

 September- October 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 1D 43 written by Rabindra Nath Tagore and an Englishman had given a very beautiful preface to that, an death of the love. So you have to have love which doesn't get entangled or attached. Every time I tell like this, they say, how to do introduction. And he said, "that the it? The love of the spirit is of that kind. creativity is killed in the West", so he Love of conditioned mind is different. asked a gentleman who was an Indian A conditioned mind can love in a limited critic. He said, "Don't you criticise your poets? You don't have people who are critics?" "Yes, yes we have, they Then the greatest enemy of love criticise." "So what do they criticise?" is ego within us, which is like a balloon "Oh they can criticise that this time way because it is conditioned. on top of our head and this ego gives us a very big tension. The conditioning of-course like they see, say for example, there was no rain, so we had problems and things. He said, "No No No No, we are they see a carpet. Not it is according to their conditioning is not good. So they say what a carpet it is! Or something. This kind of conditioning of very low level and the higher level at the most is thinking about the poets? Do they criticise an artist." Is it meant for criticism. It is created ,what ever he felt he has created but supposing he has put something very vulgar then of-course we don't like it. But if it is created by a beautiful mind, has to be beautiful, then that you lave your own country. So my country is the best whether it is killing people, whether it is destroying the world peace. Its all right, because I you don't criticise" He said "No. belong to a particular country, so it is because we cannot create like that. So what business have we got to criticise?" the best. We can never criticise our country and countrymen. It goes on This is how intelligently what we have subtler and subtler but on the done. We have norms about everything, intelligence side it is even worst. about art, about every creation. We Because intelligently if you have don't like this carpet, Why? Because it understood that something is good then does not appeal to our intellectual nobody can say anything.. Because understanding of the norms we have through your brain you have reached and in that frame it doesn't get understood. Actually it is very fitted. So we don't like it Can you even surprising. I was reading the book create one inch of that. So this ego gives

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 44 you an unauthorised action. It is to see." I saw, it was beautiful, very unauthorised Unadhikar Chestha beautiful. I said, "why don't you (3aaaaa a). Unauthorised. You He said, "no use, people will just have no authority to criticise. You criticise, I do it for my own pleasure. cannot do anything. So why should you They will just spoil the whole joy of my criticise? Better appreciate and see for creation." So one of the basic things we show?" yourself that you are not in authority. should avoid is to criticise others. You are not worthy of it to criticise. If Better to criticise yourself. Criticise you are not worthy of it, then why yourself, your brothers and sisters. should you criticise anything? And Criticise your country. Criticise all the otherwise also you must know that you habits you have and laugh at yourself. are a slave of your ego. What ever your ego dictates and your intelligence, so called intelligence brings you to a point, to some norm and then it becomes a This is the best way. If you know how to laugh at yourself, then you will not object or will not stand in the of way any creativity of another person. So with ego you become so unauthorised. You can criticise anything. You think you have a right, Who has given you this right to criticise is the question one collective ego of a particular community bf a particular country, of a particular ideology. It is collectively. So then we think this is no art, that is the reason we cannot have masters any should ask to oneself. How can we criticise anyone.. As saints as you are more in art. now, of-course, you can make out who We cannot have Rambrant. Though Rambrant must have himself is caught up, who has bad vibrations, suffered a lot. You know they have who has the problem. You know that. You know it. Its not conditioning. Its suffered a lot. All these artists suffered not just you are doing because there is a lot. Even Micheal Angelo suffered a some ego but you are feeling it on your lot. Not only monitarily but otherwise,. Criticise, Criticise, Criticise. finger tips. Its an actual feeling within you. Its the bodha, which you know, So I think people have given up I then what should you do. In your love met on artist, who has done a lot of art you have to tell the person if possible work. I said, "why don't you show me." He said "No, I don't want to show. It is that this is wrong with you. Better be corrected. But in a way that he does it. created for myself. I said, "I would like On the contrary if you tell him in a way

 45 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10 September - October 2002 improve. I have seen they tremendously that the becomes even worst that what it is. You have not loved that person at all. Allow everybody to grow. There are many people in Sahaja Yoga who are very-very good, excellent, no doubt. But also there are some people whom we call as very very difficult. They have sort of crack in their head or something, that part is missing sometimes. Some screws are loose, I think. Sometimes improve. But when they are inside the Sahaja Yoga community, they become a nuisance and they want to become more nuisance. Because their ego plays the part, may be their conditioning plays the part, whatever it is. They want to be a nuisance. So we have to ask them that please now depart for a while. Now if that nuisance value is lost in a person, they behave like clowns. We have then he has to be a straight-forward. He known some people just can't be helped. They could be very intelligent otherwise. They could be very sharp otherwise. But in Sahaja Yoga they can't be anymore a nuisance and logically it can appeal to a person if you tell that person that it is the reason why we want you to be out. But that is taken can't come down to that level where you as very disgustingly troublesome, I can say now the growth is possible. Supposing the Mother Earth was very know that. But you have to show complete patience and complete understanding and you must talk like a hot like Sun, there would have been no growth or it was cold like Moon, there person who loves. Love has such would have been no growth. It had to power that nobody wants to do come to the centre where it had both something that will suggest that they don't love. Very powerful thing it is. It binds people in such a beautiful manner a the things in proper proportion to grow. In the same way human being has to that one wants to do something for work out that you keep a moderation and a balance and understand not to go example you want to give me flowers to extremes of anything. That balance because you know I love flowers. So you learn when you love someone. In you want to give me flowers to suggest Sahaja Yoga as you know that we have that Mother, we love you. Just to to ask some people to leave Sahaja suggest. I know you love me but just want to sort of reinforce it, the thought Yoga. in me. So you want to give me a flower This is out of love for them. to show your love and expression of Because once they go out, they your inner feelings for me. So all those

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9& 10 September - October 2002 46 material things can be used to express of the Mother, finished. So once you your love. They can be very easily reach that point, you can say now you expressed in such a manner that another are in 'Nirvikalpa' because there is no person knows what is love. But the Vikalpa, there is no doubt in your head. whole power of Sahasrara is love. So if Because you love. In love you don't you see that this brain has to doubt. doubt. No question. Only when you Brain has to doubt. After now.verifying think you doubt. But when you love you the powers of Sahaja Yoga through your brain and intelligence if you reach a point where you understand that no, its no use of analysing, synthesizing. doing all these things. don't doubt. You just love. Because you enjoy love and that's why love is and joy is love. joy So after so many days the Sahasrara has been opened out. We Its just love. Its simple love. So have to open out our Sahasrara again the same Sahasrara which has been used through our meditative processes, before its brain for analysing, for through understanding ourselves and criticising, for doing all kinds of others. May be logically reaching that nonsensical things, now wants to love point. There is no way out now. We and enjoy the love. And there is the have reached to the end of if now. The culmination. Where the brain just loves whole logic has ended up now. that is the situation one has to reach. It Jump in the ocean of love. Finished. Once you jump in the ocean just loves. It knows only love because it has seen the power of love. You reach of love, there is nothing to be done. Just a certain logical conclusion and then you see the point like Adi Shankra hue of it, every touch of it. That's what wrote so many things like Vivek one has to learn by reasoning, that Chudamani, this, that and all those Sahaja Yoga is nothing but love. to be enjoyed, every wave of it, every treatises and then he gave that. He said May God Bless You. no, nothing. He just writes of the praise

 131 900 999 9900



----------------------

2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 NIRMALA
Volume : XIV Issue :9 & 10
AX
September- October. 2002
RELIGION
PURE
The Divine Cool Breeze
00
"Many people think that coming nearer me, I feel pleased. I am not. That is
not recognition. You should never do that. On the contrary when you grow
really, I will know myself.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
DHARMA
VMHSIN
UNIVERSAL
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 XIV 9 & 1o September
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume
October 2002
1 BIRTHDAY PUJA, Nirmal Dham, Delhi, 21-3-2002
3 BIRTHDAY FELICITATIONS, Nirmal Dham, Delhi, 23-03-2002
11 PUBLIC PROGRAMME, Ram Lila Maidan, Delhi, 24-3-2002
22 HOLI PUJA, Gurgaon, India, 29-3-2002
24 GUDI PADWA PUJA, Gurgaon, India, 13-4-2002
28 SHRI HANUMANA PUJA, May 1989
39 SAHASRARA PUJA, Cabella, Italy, 6-5-89
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREE ZE
BRE E ZE
THE
Published by
V.J. Nalgirkar
162 - A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067
Printed at
Print-O-Graphics
New Delhi
For subscription please write to
Mr. O.P. Chandna
N-463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi - 110034
Ph.: (011) 7013464
Please send your experience, miracle photographs and artwork to:
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple
C- 17, Qutub Institutional Area
New Delhi - 110016
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 BIRTHDAY PUJA
Nirmal Dham, Delhi, 21-3-2002
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
(Translated from Hindi)
I am seeing the magnitude of love. quarrel with them. You are Sahaja
How it has spread all over! To how Yogis. There should be no other feeling
many people? No
one knows. But I
in your heart but
love. When we
look
problems of our
have understood
the
at
its Philosophy.
Could there be
country, we fail to
understand as to
any Philosophy
of love? Love has
why man has
no Philosophy.
Like a huge
created all this
turmoil in the
expanse love
spreads all over.
name of religion!
What was the
necessit y?
Something begins,
then it has a
We are not aware
of it, we do not
know it. But the
reaction which is
love of God is all
pervading,
pervades all over
the universe. You feeling in your heart but love
could experience
it only after getting Self-Realization. is reduced by such activities. We have
Only then you could know that this to try to understand as to how to
Love alone is the power of God. Then encourage love. How could we express
much more than
There should be no other
the action. The
sensitivity and
experience of God
power of love works out. However, we
don't understand it.
our love and make it flourish.
First of all we should take care of
It is very mean to hate someone,
our children. What are we teaching
them? If someone slaps our child, do
to be malicious towards others and to
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 2002
September - October
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9& 10
we tell the child to go and hit him? If The poor child cannot understand all
we tell our child that it is alright, the these things. He thinks I am like all
one who has slapped you is not wise other people-my features are the same.
enough. He will be alright and be Then why are they telling me like this?
friendly with you. The heart of the child So this Greed and Hatred are our evil
is very innocent. He will immediately tendencies. These tendencies could be
understand if he is told that slapping is destroyed by Sahaja Yoga. The evil
bad, of course, but it will be worse if tendencies should be eradicated
you also do the same. Child will know completely. Only then we could know
that fighting with each other is bad. This about God and ourselves.
quality is to be developed from very
childhood. In childhood the children are
May God Bless You.
told that you are Muslims, Hindus, etc.
HI
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 BIRTHDAY FELICITATIONS
Nirmal Dham, Delhi, 23-03-2002
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
You cannot artificially say that I am joyous. It should be some
sort of an innate, spontaneous feeling within.
This felicitation function is a little embarrassing for Me because I was born
as a very simple person and I have been an extremely simple person. I don't
understand money. I don't understand hatred. I don't understand greed. I'm so
simple about it. Despite that, you people came and got your Realization. It's
your own achievement. It's your own desires that you have achieved. I find so
many children nowadays born as realized souls.
So I think the time is also there, that in My life itself, this was to happen. It
is everybody's lot. I think, like Shri Rama, then came Shri Krishna, then came
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September October 2002
Jesus, then other people. It was their or anything. It's very difficult. But if
time. And My time it is to give you all you love that person, then immediately
Realization, But, I must say, you all you know what's wrong with that
have taken it very heartily, sweetly and person, what's right with that person.
are using your powers to give love to But because of your love, you
others and to transform others.
encompass the whole atmosphere
between you and him or between you
and others. You don't see the bad points
easily - very difficult.
The other day, I was talking about
love. Now the love, as it is understood,
is in your heart as this, but do you know
the ocean of love is your Sahasrara? get, cheated by others. I agree, but I
When your Sahasrara is filled with love, have no sense of what cheating means,
then the life is changed. You don't how people cheat you. Many a times,
I've seen many a times, people
become a very intelligent man, very people say that they are talking ill about
dynamic personality, but you are Me. Yes, they are. I can see they are
nothing but love and this love is so self-
talking doesn't matter. Makes makes
no difference to Me. If they're talking
satisfying.
You are not bothered if others of Me, it's all right. But this
felicitation embarrasses Me definitely
don't love you or they love you. You
because I've not done anything so
don't see to that part. What you see
extraordinary, as they think.
is the enjoyment from that love. It's
Extraordinary is that whatever capacity
a tremendous ocean of love. You all
have got it. And once you have entered
into Sahaja Yoga, you know that you
you have, if it acts, then it is there, like
love. I have tremendous love, I don't
know what to say. And it acts. It works.
have entered into Sahasrara and
And every human being cares for love.
Sahasrara is the - I tell you - the source
You may be very great, you might
of all the truth. Truth is there - the
be very intelligent, you may be earning
lots of money, whatever it is. It's not
complete truth. Truth is the knowledge
and also the truth is love.
so important. What is the most
important thing is that you are loved.
If you love somebody, you know
the truth about that person. You find
This is I have not made a theory out
of it or I am not going to say that you
out whether the person is good or bad
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
So for every Sahaja Yogi, love
should be very, very natural thing
absolutely. For example, I know
all should learn it, but it's so basic and
that's the only thing that helps.
So residing in the Sahasrara, if
you see the waves of love flowing, sometimes people are very rude. They
maybe some people might take have certain rules and regulations and
advantage of it, it doesn't matter, makes then they get very angry with the other
no difference. Some people can also people or whatever it is. Some people
mislead you. It's all right. All kinds of have positions and they use their
things they do; but when there is love, position to get angry with others and
even to get after that person and torture
you see, you are satisfied, you are not
bothered, because you love everyone.
another person, they do, go on doing
like this. But they have missed the point.
So you are satisfied. You are not
bothered as to what others are doing
They have missed the point. If you just
have love, that pure love, then you see
to you, what advantage they're taking
of you, what they are troubling you or
all these facilities, how they have done
the point. You see it, that "Yes, yes,
that's what he is doing, that's why he's
doing.' You know that. But you are not
also all the facilities that you have bothered, Why he is doing like this,"
from your own being - are automatic.
why is he troubling me and gradually,
This felicitations and all that, of everything nullifies. Everything finishes
course, reflects you, no doubt, but to off by itself.
Me, it is nothing great. I don't think it
is a very great achievement for Me talking ill about Me, doing all kinds of
because I have no vision, as such, I must things against Me. So what? Let them
tell you. I've heard this word, that do. That's their job. Let them do; but
Mother has a vision. No, no, no, no, I to Me, it doesn't disturb, you know. I
have no vision, I must tell you. My think they are indulging into something
simple thing is that everybody must love of their own style, but what do you get?
I've seen many people who are
- and
it will change the whole world, no doubt
about it. It should come to you natural
love will change your lives,
Joy comes only out of pure love. If you
pure
have no pure love, you cannot have joy.
Talking that we are very joyous and all
that - I know who are joyous really and
because now you have pierced through
who are not. You cannot artificially say
your Sahasrara.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9& 10
September - October 2002
that "I am joyous.' It should be some
sort of an innate, spontaneous feeling
no, it's no miracle. It's simple thing that
love has acted in its own way. Love is
not a dead thing. It's not a dead sea. It
not only thinks, but it acts and acts so
beautifully. Sometimes I'm amazed at
within.
So you are the ocean of feelings.
ocean of beautiful feelings. And when
you are enriched by that ocean, you are
least bothered about anything.
its working. We call it a miracle, this,
that. Nothing - it's love.
Now, because the Divine loves
You know very well that I am very
you, it gives you miracles, so called. It
can do anything because the Divine
wants that you should get to Sahaja
bad at money. I don't understand. I
cannot count money. So what? I mean,
that's My handicap, I should say, but it
doesn't matter. What is so needed is
Can you feel the love of others? Can
you feel the sweetness of others?" As
you see a little child, how nice you feel.
Yoga and you should become a real
yogi.
So whatever this love does, you
think it's miracle. It is not. Why people
In the same way, 'Do you feel that for
others?' Or Are they like children? Are
they innocent like children?' And now,
I would suggest that innocence is the
say, 'Mother, that's your style. It's not
the question. It's a question of love.
Say, I love everyone very much, I trust
everyone very much. I never doubt, to
begin with, and they are sinking,
sinking, but still I have faith that they'll
sign of love.
Anybody who has innocence
would know the technique of love. If come round, that they'll be all right.
you are very clever, intelligent, you can
Give them a chance. But supposing they
answer back, you can correct people. try some tricks, you'll be amazed how
do that. No. That's not the way. If you they get exposed! How they get
have love, you can correct people
exposed, it's very surprising!
We have a Sahaja Yogi in Dubai.
without saying anything to them,
because love is a supreme intelligence. He told Me, 'Mother, no use giving
It gives you all the correct method. It Realization to these big people.' I say,
works out that. The whole thing works Why?' So he gave Me the name ofvery
out that and then people say, "Mother, highly spiritual people accepted by
it's a miracle how it has happened?' No, society. I gave him Realization and he
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
7.
got exposed. I don't know, I never said
anything got exposed.' Another fact. Though he's protected - that's one
person whom he gave Realization, also thing about Sahaja Yoga - you may be
had a very big thing, having lots of the worst Sahaja Yogi, you are
awards and this and that, he got protected, no doubt, but if you go on
not that sick, gets much worse. It's a
exposed. And he gave Realization to like that, if you all the time trying to go
one fellow who had peace award. He against Sahaja and become asahaja,
also got exposed. And then it was in then you suffer very badly.
the newspaper all about him.
It's very simple that if you are
Now what is happening is that this
man, out of love for the other one, gives
standing in a place, you are established
in a place, which is very peaceful, very
joy-giving, but you want to get out of
them Realization, but that same love
acts in such a manner that he gets it, so you face whatever is outside, its
automatic. If you stand in the place
which is so peaceful, which is joyous,
which is full of love, you are all right,
you'll grow in spirituality. But if you
want to get out of it, then you have it.
You can't help it. It's like a fortress or
exposed. You don't want to expose
people. You want that somehow they'll
come to Sahaja Yoga all right, it's all
right working out. So he said, 'Mother,
I don't think I'll give Realization to
anyone.' I said, 'See, you go on giving.
If the Divine wants that the person
we can call a very secluded place, which
is very comfort giving and very much
should be exposed, he will be exposed.'
If there is anything wrong with that
full of attention and all that and then
you want to go out of the attention. So,
person, he'll be exposed.
you're gone. That's how some Sahaja
Yogis don't understand why they are
Somebody
who
gets
Realization, supposing, and he meets
with an accident, of course he'll be not yet getting into Sahaja Yoga.
saved, but he might meet with an
So no use using your intelligence
accident. So what is the reason why? because this intelligence, human
Why did he meet with the accident? intelligence, is not a very high quality
Because he doesn't do anything for function. What is best is to fall in love
Sahaja Yoga. He's very ambitious. with your Self - love which is divine,
Somebody who's very sick, he's all right love which is nourishing, love that looks
with Sahaja Yoga and somebody who's after you. But we don't know how to
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
look after ourselves. We don't know complete knowledge about the person.
how to love ourselves. We love this
You know the person, what he's up to,
person, love that person, but what what he's doing, but you don't mind
about yourself? Then they think it is because you love that person. So you
selfishness - no, not at all. To know the don't mind. 'All right, go ahead.' It's
Self is love. If you know the Self, you'll like a little child. It's going on the
know love, you'll fall into the ocean of wrong way. Let it go.
that love. But that is what is My
experience, I'm telling this, and you all whatever you wear, you are very lucky
Now with all these things,
should experience the same love. Just
watch yourself. It's very simple to
introspect, 'Do I have love within me, Sahaja Yoga. But without practising
people who have reached Sahasrara and
that you all know everything about
fully?' Partly it is love, partly no.
Sahaja Yoga, you cannot work it out
Now love can be very much because then, by practising it, you know
about your Self. When you meditate,
country', say India. If we love our you know your Self and then you get
bounded also like we love our
country, so we may think all Indian just filled with love. But now, while
sitting, you just start thinking, 'He's a
very bad man. I hate him' - this thing.
All such stupid ideas come into your
head - or 'I must buy this ornament' or
things are good. We'll never talk ill
about our country. Anybody says
anything about India, against, we'll hate
that person.
'I must buy this particular car' and all
It's with everyone. You love your
country. Also you love, say, your that, then you are not loving. But if you
parents, love anybody. But (this) is a
love, then what happens is that
whatever you need, you get. Whatever
limited love. It's a bounded love. Love
you want, you get.
should be just open. Then you will see
You have to first love yourself, but
where do you stand as far as your
country is concerned, as far as your that love should be pure love. As a
relationships are concerned. You will result of that, you'll cleanse yourself.
know everything. You need not harm,
Sometimes you are so much identified
you need not say anything, you need not
with your temperaments, with your
quarrel, fight, but you will know
because love gives you knowledge, it is, but then you realize, in that love,
nature, with your personality, whatever
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September- October 2002
9.
that This is not love. This is blind.
grandchild may do, whatever the
Love gives you a complete idea grandmother may de, it's all right. It's
a kind of a tremendous experience of
about yourself. "What am I? What
elevation. You feel elevated and you
problems I have? Why do I create
enjoy that love. If there is no purity in
Why do I get into
problems?
love, you can never, never enjoy love.
problems?' You'll be amazed that love
has such a powerful light in it, that it is
the truth and it is the knowledge.
So I would request you to find
out that ocean in your head in the
Sahasrara, which is being filled by your
heart. Do you know Heart and
Though I don't know if I could
blame anyone in this world who is not
a realized soul, I will not - until they
Sahasrara are very much in relationship
with each other? Their style is such that
are fully realized souls, I will not
because there is no light in their life. if somebody's head is not all right, the
They can't see themselves and they heart won't be all right. If the heart is
can't see others. So what's the use of not all right, his head won't be all right.
blaming them, blaming this community, But there is more reflection from the
that community or this country or that head to the heart.
country? What is the use?
They say that there's genes are
bad or this - nothing of the kind. After
And this love is universal. It
has
nothing to do with any
particular type or particular style.
It's universal. That is why Sahaja
Yoga is universal. It is spreading
Sahaja Yoga, your genes are changed
you are changed; everything is changed
now. So your brain is filled with nothing
but light. Your heart is filled with light
and you are just bouncing with love, all
the time with humour, with loving care.
everywhere. I want you to enjoy that
love.
Every day, I mean, it's so different. But
a
that you have achieved now. Now
Only example I'll give you
grandmother and a grandchild. They have got it. So just enjoy that.
you
have a relationship at least in India, I
know - of tremendous love. For them,
Then the caste system and the
the grandchild is everything and the fundamentalism, that, the greed and
grandmother is everything. They just jealousies and competitions and all, they
love each other. Whatever the
all drop useless things. But if you
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
10
have the jungle of nonsense in your
such a nice thing to say. There should
be no greed in it, no any plan behind
it, just it's a feeling of an ocean which
touches every shore and there it makes
mind, then all kinds of animals can
creep in. To purify yourself with love,
cleanse yourself with love. Look at
every position, everything, with love
and you will be amazed how you will
find it easier not to dominate, not
a sound, beautiful sound of love. And
then the waves return back.
Continuously it is flowing and
continuously it is working out never
control, not to despise, not to say things
which are not good. It's such a
tired.
correcting thing, love is, extremely
correcting and extremely joy-giving born and to do this work is a very
that you will be amazed at yourself, how difficult task, but, to Me, it was not.
I know in the Kali Yuga, to be
you are managing things.
Whatever happened, whatever people
knew of many like that. There troubled Me, howsoever, I was
was a Sahaja Yogi who never used to working it out, out of this flow of
talk to his own uncle, never. And he love. Went round every place,
said, "Somehow, I hate him.' But wherever is possible, whenever it is
why?" I don't know why, I hate him.' possible, whatever may be My
And then he went to a race-course and health or anything, I was least
there he saw his uncle coming. He bothered and I have enjoyed all of
rushed and he just hugged him. Uncle you very much. I have enjoyed. There
started looking, 'Now what does he have been one or two horrible people-
want? Why is he doing? What is it?' In doesn't matter.
his mind. 'Why is he wanting to love
me like this?" He couldn't understand. these things about Me, only tears come
When it happened, you know, that he into My eyes. I don't know what else
So when you have saying all
couldn't explain that he'd become a
Sahaja Yogi or anything. So the uncle
asked, What do you want now?' He
to say. I mean, it is something I would
like you to do, you to get it, this kind
of life where you just flow with your
said, 'Nothing. I love you, that's all."
love.
It's such a nice thing to do it. It's
May God Bless You
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 PUBLIC PROGRAMME
Ram Lila Maidan, Delhi, 24-3-2002
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
(Translated from Hindi)
see our mother, we experience it. But
it is momentary and sometimes it is out
of selfishness. But the love about
which I am talking is the expression
of the spirit, the light of the spirit. It
exists in every human being, it is
established in everyone, irrespective of
one's cast, creed and colour. It is
present in all the human beings. It
exists in animals too. You will be
surprised that animals understand
love; they understand love more
than human beings! So if we are
ascending, if we are evolving, there
should be a great light of love within
us. If our hearts get enlightened by
this love then all the gigantic
problems, facing us, will at once
I bow to all the seekers of truth.
come to an end.
Love is the quality which is scarce
We have defined love in many
everywhere now-a-days. Only this love
ways, but actually no fixed definition
is the devotion (Bhakti) of the Divine,
People take it for a word, but it is not
a 'word' only.
could be given to it because it is an
ocean. Love is the great surging
ocean within us and we are the ones
Love is power, its storehouse destined to enjoy ourselves with it.
exists within us. At times it abounds Only human beings could know the
in all of us. We experience it, when we
waves of this ocean. These are meant
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 12
September-October 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
for us.. Any one else may
makes one great. I have not seen even
or may not
understand but it is a tremendous one rich person who is happy! The
power for us. When we talk of Shakti, faces of all the wealthy people, who
people take it for Devastating Force! come to me, narrate the tale of their
Actually it is Peace and Joy-giving anguished heart! They are the most
Force. It comforts us and solves all the unhappy people. Despite the fact that
problems of the world provided we get they have millions of rupees, why are
they so unhappy? I am told that they
suffered unlimited difficulties and
saturated with it.
This love which is hidden in us
and losing luster, has many coverings problems! It is not understood as to
around it. The foremost is that we
how they were put to so many
think no end of ourselves. You are problems, when they had so much
yourself the embodiment of love, what money! So now-a-days there are
different problems. These were not
else could you be more than this? What
greater force you could become? You there in the past.
are love and love only, and nothing
else! Such a power you have got that no one knows, how many thugs,
If you have abundant money, then
you can love everyone, purify everyone thieves and murderers will run after
and fill them with joy. What are the you with their knives in hands! No one
causes behind the problems of the knows which problems you will be
world? The demons of Jealousy, exposed to! So money cannot make
Anger, Ego etc. are the causes. No one one happy. Possession of wealth does
knows what pleasure human beings not put an end to one's Greed. Human
draw out of these negativities and how desires are always on an increase.
one gets encouraged by these!
Why? Because money does not have
Human being, however, is unable the power to give contentment. If you
to understand that when I have the have money in excess, then
treasure of it, why should I go contentment lies in giving it away to
abegging in the streets? When the poor and needy and reduce their
ocean of joy is overflowing in me, why difficulties. Only then you will achieve
should I run after the stupidities? 111 contentment, otherwise possession of
money has no meaning at all. Money
that you cannot give away to needy,
thinking and wrong notions are the
causes. Often people think that money
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
13
2002
There are people who spend
could not be Lakshmi.
In Lakshmi principle, I have told money to get popular. Although It has
you, one hand gives and the other no special significance yet it is better
supports (Aashraya). So you could than not spending at all.
have the joy only if you extend
Some people want to gain power.
Why to gain power? What is there in
support to others with your money.
But if always you save your money, power? Over yourself, you have no
make a mountain and sit upon it, then control and you wish to control the
there will be no glow of joy on your whole world! You want to wield
face. People laugh at such miserly power over the whole world! I should
fellows. Everyone sees, what such a have a great position, great power!
man is heading towards! But what to Everyone should salute me! What is
do? Until he realizes himself, no one
the joy in it? When such people are
thrown out of power, no one cares for
them. When they think of the past, they
can make him understand. He will not
come round and enjoy himself. He
could get addicted to some bad habit.
make themselves the most miserable
There might be the some negative beings. What is use of running after
outcome of money that a rich person such power?
often gets caught in bad habits,
drinking and licentiousness. What is
there in money that the person goes
on falling, falling and falling! Either he cause, give help to those who need it!
lands in jail or gets ruined! Wealth, While in power, why do you do these
which could be the cause of human wrong deeds? Why are you plundering
I asked one person, 'why do you
take bribe? If at all you have collected
so much
money, use it for some noble
glory becomes the instrument of
money? Why do you tell lies? He
replied, "I invested so much money to
In the music of love, you think get this position; I have to recover it
as to what to give and to whom. How now," "Why did you invest at all, "I
destruction!
to glorify someone? How to express asked? Because you could not have
won without it. Had you not spent so
your love to someone? And there are
beautiful ways of giving. The joy that
much, nobody would have voted for
you. You had no choice. So long as
flows from this act could not be bought
with millions of rupees.
you give money or do some illegal
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September-October 2002
14
favour to them, the people are happy.
It is a fact. I am not telling anything
new. We see it in day-to-day life. As
wrong things? For whom are you doing
it? One could say, 'for the well being
of our children.' Tomorrow these same
soon as the person is out of power, no
children will beat you with shoes! Why
should they respect you? You have no
character, who will respect you? Who
will look after you? You must
one bothers for him, no one cares for
him and no one recognizes him. No one
is friend to him. What is the use?
Whole life you were in the understand that these are all useless
clutches of this power, in the ego of aspirations and they keep you away
power, now where are you? And from your-self. Understand your love.
what did you achieve? The of Lifelong you cannot forgive those who
love helps every one to the end. The showered love on you, although they
the
power
help comes only to those who love; to never gave money to you. You will
always remember their love; remember
those who use the shade of this love:
that they gave me a loving glance and
extended the hand of love to me! Such
things we come across daily, It is
nothing new, it is not History written
in books. To know about it, there is
to those who have visualized it, seen
its glory. Such people are remembered
generation after generation. They are
not only remembered, but also they
inspire others and these people
no need to read Bible or Koran. It is a
endeavour to do better than him. Such
matter of routine.
people have attained immortality. Who
cares for those who, while in power,
When we have realized it then
troubled people and did all sorts of why have we drawn swords? Our
wrong things? People raise fingers on negativities find vent this way. I am
them in no time. Such nobel people, telling you very honestly that a large
are very few in this world, I accept.
number of our officials take money, as
We regard ourselves very cunning and
ifit were a possession. Every one takes
clever.
(eats) money. Do they not eat food,
Third type are those who are they eat money? You will witness the
thieves, cheats and those who make fate of these people! Once we were
money by these activities. What going somewhere. There were some
happens to these liers, I need not tell. simple people who covered their nose
So what is the need to do all these with cloth. When I asked the reason,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
15
it was told that the man going along they have taken the example of Shri
was a cheat and he had devoured a
Hanumana, and Mahavira? Once
huge amount of national money. When
Mahavira was meditating in the
I asked the reason as to why they have
orchard of the palace. Shri Krishna
covered their mouth and nose, they wanted to test his generosity. Shri
replied, 'lest his smell makes us like Mahavira had worn only one loin-
him.' How abhorable it is! It is cloth. Half of it was already torn in a
abominable according to our culture. thorny bush. Shri Krishna asked for
Such an abominable deed has no place
that half loin-cloth. Mahavira was in
meditation. He gave away that piece
in our culture.
Indian culture is very high. One of cloth to him, covered himself with
day it might guide the whole world. leaves and went to his bedroom in the
But we ourselves have departed from palace and put on other.clothes. Shri
it! We have to be modest. It is said that Krishna had appeared before him as a
small child. Now you see, these
women should be modest. But under
the impact of West, they dress shameless people! How they are
themselves in such a way, as if they had making the nude statues of Shri
bidden good-bye to modesty! Modesty Mahavira! They are so shameless!
carries no significance to them. It is 1hey are insulting Shri Mahavira! Our
said about the Goddess (Devi).
religions often follow wrong things.
People take to these things and respect
them 100 times. Have some discretion,
'Lajja Rupen Samsthita'
If there is divinity within you, I say. Is it worth doing?
then you are bound to be modest. A
modest person can neither dress nor there were Adam and Eve. The serpent
move in an immodest manner. If you came to them and asked them to eat
are modest, then you are Divine. Some the Fruit of knowledge. This serpent
In the beginning of the creation,
one said Hanumana never wore was none else but Kundalini Herself.
clothes. Are you Hanumana? Why
As soon as Adam and Eve ate the fruit
Hanumana needed clothes for? You are
of knowledge, the first awareness that
dawned upon them was that they were
human beings, citizens of this country,
why should not you dress properly?
Since every one else wears clothes,
naked like animals. They immediately
thought of covering themselves and
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 September- October 2002
16
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
to talk about it. Some other time I will
dressed themselves with leaves.
talk in details. However it doesn't
Firstly we should have the
knowledge that we are human beings,
not animals. Though some animals are
better than human beings, I agree.
apply to men. Their both these chakras
are fully opened. But woman, being the
shakti, it is essential for her to keep
these chakras covered. There is no
They have a sense of shame. But superstition about it. It is foolish to be
shameless human beings regard superstitious but it is good to be
themselves to be modern and think no
careful. In love, one is always alert.
He knows and understands everything
the Goddess (Devi Tatva) is absent in and gets concerned about all the
end of themselves. Actually element of
them. Devi Tatva is Lajja Rupen happenings. Poor women sometimes
Samsthita.' They violate this tatva commit suicide. A girl came to me. I
(Principle) sometimes. It should not be asked her, why are you so disturbed?
done. Also there is no need of veils and She said, "why did she commit suicide?
too much covering of the face and And she was only 10 year old girl! Who
body. It is unnecessary. Shame and told you? I read it in the newspaper.
modesty is in the eyes. Showing-off Now what is this attraction towards an
and formalities are not required. But unknown person? It abounds in small
somehow man violates this tatva. small children. Because children are
Something in man makes him insane.
It could not be explained. It will be
very innocent. Their innocence pricks
them that this should not have
nice if the women are modest. Modesty
is their inborn quality. This Tatva is
happened. Sometimes children get
annoyed or feel shy. However they are
present in all men and women but men
full of love. Love is their life and the
take it to extreme and force women to
essence of their life. They are not
put up veils etc. But this modesty concerned with other material objects.
(Lajja) is inborn quality of the women.
These are not significant to them. What
is special in them? The absence of their
Many secrets are hidden in it. There
are two chakra's in your shoulders-on
mother or grandmother disturbs them
the right is Shri Chakra and on the left a lot. Why does it happen? How does
is Lalita Chakra. We can prove it. If a small child know all this and why we
you keep this chakra uncovered then adults do not understand it? Why do
you will be harmed. Now I do not want
not we understand that this quality of
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 September- October 2002
17
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
love is so much developed in small
ocean of joy, ocean of love. You are
amazed at yourself that 'I was never
children and we elders, who think no
end of ourselves, are devoid of this like this! How have I changed?
divine quality of love? Our intelligence
pushs us to darkness. We do not know
Actually you were like that, but you
were not aware of it. Kundalini has
given this connection. Now you see for
yourself that you have got connection
what moves us and fills us with delight,
what comforts us and also other
people? We do not understand what is
beneficial for the society. We have
made our own styles that by wearing a
particular type of dress we shall be
with the all pervading Power of Divine
Love. It appears very insignificant but
the awakening has enlightened the
power within you. The Kundalini
Awakening works it out. Those Sahaja
comfortable. Now in this old age why
to wear beads around your neck and Yogis who have attained it, have done
so very easily (Sahaj). What have
to get into all this stupidity? But we
think that we have become so great they attained? The ocean of love
that is in our brain, in our
that the whole world will worship us.
Sahasrara. It was dormant, now it has
This is self-deception and deceiving
the other people. If you want to been awakened. We are connected to
deceive yourself, it is your sweet will, it and flowing in its stream. The ups
but you have to face the consequences and downs of the world will go like
ultimately. The world will gauge your
that. We have to look to the source of
joy. When you experience this joy you
depth.
will be inundated by it. It is the matter
So first and foremost is to attain
of experience, not of words. It reflects
on the person. Your life gets
the wealth of love, the ocean of which
lies within you. This is the goal of
Sahaja Yoga. It awakens vour enlightened and thousands of seekers
Kundalini. Kundalini is the blueprint of get enlightenment and joy from you.
your life. By the awakening of the
Kundalini and establishing it in Yoga programme, you have also got
Sahasrara, the Sahasrara gets activated the connection. Now keep it awakened
and enlightened. You experience the and enjoy yourself with it. All other
ocean of joy. You feel that have achievements are insignificant.
Today you have come to Sahaja
you
been transformed and have become the
There are people who say, 'Shri
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 September - October
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
2002
18
Mataji, I have got the awakening but I When ultimately one realizes the
am not happy." It shows that your baselessness of ego then one is aghast.
connection is loose. Some will say, 'I Both, money and power, encourage
%3D
have got realization, but I have not got
ego. Under the impact of ego one takes
money so far. It means you are not yet
to self destructive things. Then what
awakened. I do not read the letters of
is the use of this destructive ego? Such
such useless people and ask them to
a person thinks himself an exclusive
take Sahaja Yoga more seriously. After personality. He is friend of none. He
realization everything changes. One's is not part of the collective. 'I do not
worldly love gets transformed into like this person, I don't like that
divine love. One becomes altogether a person.' He does not listen to anyone.
different personality. Their faces
The life of such a person is worse than
death. I know one gentleman. He was
change. It is a joy to see them!
a big gun, but very egoistical. Perhaps
he was in parliament. When he died,
Recently, someone came to see
me. He appeared to be very diseased
and fallen health. I could not recognize
even four persons were not available
him. 'Have you recognized me? he to carry his coffin. They hired people
asked. No, I have not, who are you? 'I to carry the dead body. What is the use
am such and such,' and he fell on my of such ego that no one likes to come
feet. I was in tears. The person who
to cremate you after your death! Even
his dog ran away. I was amazed! I said,
'what sins he might have committed?"
The disease of ego is horrible. It His ego pushed him to such an abyss
is madness. It is such a killing monster that there was none to carry his dead
was counting his days, got alright.
which devours human beings. But you
body!
go on justifying your ego! You give
reasons for it! Ego is the worst enemy
May God Bless You.
of man. One thinks no end of oneself.
(English part of the speach)
I have already spoken a lot about
this, about love, and sorry I have to
speak in Hindi language but the thing
is, it is better expressed in Hindi
language. Because you see the loving
capacity is very much in India. People
live with their love. They understand
each other with their love. Ofcourse
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
19
2002
Indians. extremely loving. That's why we are
Westernized Indians even don't love surviving after 300 years of domination
their own country. There are many of British and still we are having our
people who love their own country. We culture intact. It is only because of this
have many like that, but on the whole loving nature of this country. You
Indians are loving people. They love won't find such loving people
you, you go to their house, they will anywhere. You go to a village or
serve you food and they will be very anywhere, they will try to help you
happy. If they don't have anything, they everywhere because you are
will get it from outside. They will ask foreigner, they will respect you. I mean
their friends, they will telephone if I call you a foreigner that means you
are respectful. They will have
not in westernized
people.
They will look after you. respectable way of calling you, of
Nowhere in the world you will find, inviting you. It is respectability. If I say
nowhere. People don't believe in they are foreigners. But abroad if you
entertaining people. Every where are a foreigner you are discarded. You
entertainment has a calculative value. are a low level. If you are a foreigner,.
By entertainment what would you get? Oh foreigner, alright. Not here. If you
In India if you go to even a poor man's are a foreigner, they will appreçiate
house, he will ask you to sit down, give you, they will understand you and they
some milk to drink. It is the heart will love you. They will express it. I
which is large.
агe
have not even once seen anybody
insulted or troubled, any of our Sahaja
Ofcourse we are also now Yogis from abroad. No one. They just
becoming money oriented but as it is don't do it. Once it happened,
there is not much money in this surprisingly, that there was a theft and
country. So people have still
maintained their capacity to love. You
must have noticed. All of you are here,
how Indians are loving and kind! But
not modern ones. Modern ones you see
they took all the cameras and this and
that. So I told them if they are
foreigners, don't do such a thing,
otherwise what they will think of it.
They were small children. They gave
it back each and every piece. So to us
foreigners have something to be
are competing with you. So I can't say
about them. But the people who are
traditional, who are old and who
believe in the culture of India, they are
looked after, to be loved. To be loved.
But I have not seen this anywhere in
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Sahaja Yogis must develop a kind of tremendous
love for people who don't have what we have.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September- October 2002
21
the west. Ofcourse Sahaja Yogis are
a lady from Austria who wanted to
different. But in the west, they doubt start an orphanage. She said, 'Shri
everyone if he is a foreigners. Its very Mataji we must also do something. I
surprising why this kind of nature was very happy I said, 'Don't worry, I
prevails or the culture came in the will give you everything. I will give
land, I will get you the building built.
country of Jesus Christ.
You have only to run it. She said, 'Shri
Mataji, we have already collected Rs.
Eighty Lacs for this project. Oh God!
His main theme of life was love
and why this kind of culture prospered
in these western countries who follow
Jesus Christ? I can't understand.
How could you collect so much
Because I have not seen there in the money? We have collected it from
expression of relationships. Loving everyone. I was so very happy.
somebody to them is sin. Now you Otherwise people give money only to
have come here and you have come in spread Christianity. The basic thing
Sahaja Yoga. So now you teach this. should be that you should help people
They should be kind and loving and not only because they require it. Might be
not
only that but to appreciate for coming
that you require this help in your next
life! So, better take to this kind of
from other countries, look after them
who are coming from the countries generosity to love and understanding
which are not rich. All this should of human problems. I tell you that all
spread so much to this extent that we
should help those people who are not
our problems, all worldly problems
could be solved with genuine love. It
very rich and also we should love all can be solved, whether it is the
such people who are in trouble. This problem of India or the problems of
is something that should come into all some other country. Only thing missing
the foreign people specially in the is love. So take your realization. With
Sahaja Yogis that they must develop a realization, whether you like it or not,
kind of tremendous love for people you will fall into the ocean of love.
who don't have what we have. I must
May God Bless You.
tell you that I was very happy to meet
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 HOLI PUJA
Palam Vihar Home, Gurgaon, India, 29-3-2002
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
(Translated from Hindi)
Shri Rama incarnated before Shri Kashyapa wanted to kill Prahlada.
was Maryada Holika had the boon that fire won't
Purshottama and as such lived a very burn her. Hirnaya Kashyapa asked
austere life. As a result of the Holika to take the boy Prahlada in her
austerities practiced by the King lap and sit on the burning pyre,
himself, the whole society turned sober thinking that she could not be burnt.
and serious. The element of joy and But to his surprise Holika was burnt
gaiety was completely missing. In to ashes and no harm done to the child
Dwapar Yuga, when Shri Krishna devotee of Shri Vishnu! It was a
incarnated, He wanted to put an end significant incident which proved that
Krishna.
He
to this extreme seriousness prevalent it is sin to be cruel, arrogant and
in the society, He thought of having a
aggressive. Despite her boon, Holika
festival in which everyone could laugh
was burnt down and no harm done to
heartily and have fun and joy. So the
the innocent child-devotee!
festival of colour-Holi, was started
Such is the myth and traditionally
we burn Holi every year. There lies a
with this purpose. People, however,
took undue liberties and misused the
lot of truthfulness in all our traditions.
We have to understand that misdeeds.
festival to the extent of defaming it.I
had also to tell that "I do not play Holi
cruelties and troubling others are evil-
at all."
tendencies. Right sided people develop
The myth behind it is that there
these devilish traits in them. We should
was a demoness named Holika. She not allow such thoughts to dominate
was the sister of Hirnya Kashyapa- our brains and should give no
the father of Prahlada. Since Prahlada significance to them. We should love
was the devotee of Lord Vishnu, his all. It is very important to understand
father-the demon King-used to otherwise we shall all be demonic like
harass and trouble him. Hiranya Holika. Now right sided people
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
23
develop this problem. It is a big lesson
You are powerful enough. You
for them. No harm was done to the have such powers within you that if
innocent child Prahlada. God almighty someone endeavours to trouble you,
saved him, but this demonic woman,
you will be protected like Prahlada. No
who got boon as a result of her severe
one could destroy you. You are so
penance was reduced to ashes. One much protected! No such thing could
should understand that all these destroy you. So there should be no
demonic tendencies are destructive. hatred or anger towards anyone. You
We should give them up and be should have a feeling of compassion
generous and loving towards all. towards those who are victims of evil
Quarrelling and fighting with each tendencies. Think of transforming
other are not virtues. These are them. If you become forgiving then it
demonic tendencies.
could workout.
Small child Prahlada is a big
traits, we are Sahaja Yogis. We are example. He challenged his father who
special people, we have incarnated to was a demon! But Prahlada was saved
change this world, to transform it and his father got killed! Death is not
We should not take to these evil-
completely, We should put our
attention on that. We are very highly
placed, higher than all others. We have
the main point. The person falls too
low. People with evil thoughts fall in
the abyss. So do not give place to the
feelings of hatred and jealousy. Cleanse
to save this world from falling to these
tendencies. These are much in vogue yourself immediately.
these days. It is unworthy to say these
May God Bless You.
abhorable things and to be cruel and
dominate others. It is unnecessary in
Sahaja Yoga.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 GUDI PADWA PUJA
Palam Vihar Home, Gurgaon, India, 13-4-2002
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
(Translated from Hindi)
go according to the Moon and fix the
Gudi Padwa is celebrated in
different parts of our country. The way
dates of our festivals.
we celebrate it here, it is celebrated in
Only one of our festivals is fixed
South too. Every where this festival is
celebrated. The beginning of the by the position of the Sun. The day
Vikrami Samvata and that of the when the journey of the Sun starts
Sahlivahan Shaka also fall on the towards equator (Uttarayana). On that
same day. Today is that day. All our fixed day we celebrate one of our
dates and festivals are decided festival-'Makar
Sankranti.
Throughout the country this festival is
celebrated on the same day. This date
never changes. All our astrology and
according to it, particularly our
festivals. We follow the Moon calendar
whereas foreigners follow the Sun
calendar. That is the reason that the astronomy go with the position of the
dates of their festivals never get 'Moon'. The state of the Moon is
changed. But all our festivals depend considered in astrology and astronomy
on the position of the Moon. That is and the whole astrology is made
why their dates keep changing and all accordingly. So our first calendar,
our festivals are celebrated on different Shalivahan Shaka is based on Moon.
All the dates also go according to
Moon. Those who have no knowledge
dates.
We give much significance to of these facts cannot understand the
Moon and decide all our dates and reason behind these festivals falling on
festivals according to it, the reason different dates. So we have to think
being that the effect of the moon on that the significance we have attached
to the Moon is because it has a great
human being is much more than that
impact on human beings. We should be
of the Sun. Other planets also have
their effects on human beings. So we
careful about it.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October 2002
25
The greatest effect of the Moon
is that our left side (left sympathetic)
depends on it. Very few people know
So we are very sensitive to the position
of the Moon. Very subtle calculations
have been done about it. In our country
about it. The reason of giving so much
importance to this left side is that it
affects our Psyche. That is why so
much significance is attached to it. The
we know, much before, the dates and
times of Moon eclipses. Much thought
has been given to it and we have
acquired lot of knowledge about it. It
effect on left side is Psychic, it doesn't
shows that lot of attention has been
belong to our brain. It cannot be given to the effects of Moon. So much
controlled, Psychic problems cannot be
controlled. Nor the effect of the Moon.
So the dates of the Moon are to be
has been written about it.
In modern times everything is
being calculated on the position of the
considered.
Sun but it is
For example
on Amavasya
not proper.
Position of the
(No Moon
Moon must be
Night)
Poornim a
or
into
taken
consideration.
(Full Moon
should
We
Night) the
know what is
problems of
going to be
epileptic or
Psychic
patients get
the effect of
the
Moon
today. It is a
aggravated.
very subtle
On
such
subject. We
should have
occasions we
could see that
knowledge
the person is
affected by
about it and it
should
be
Moon
No
discussed in
(Amavasya)
our country.
or Full Moon
Today is
(Poornima).
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
26
Year like that. In the New year they
new year day and the beginning of the
Moon, That is why this day is given so
much significance. It is known as Gudi
Padwa. A flag is put on a stick and on
made their symbol in the form of a
small pitcher and the flag put on the
stick. But here in this part people do
not know about it nor do they celebrate
this festival. This Samvat or Vikrami
it is put a small pitcher. This pitcher
represents Kundalini. It is taken as a
symbol. The Shalivahanas were the
devotees of the Devi (Goddess) and it
calendar was also started from this
very date. The years of their beginning
is told that they used to offer shawl to
the Goddess. In the beginning they
might be different but the date is the
same. Both of them follow this
were called Saatvahans because they Amavasya and that is how the
worshipped Seven Plexuses and this followers of Vikrami and Shalivahana
Saatvahana was ultimately changed Samvata celebrate Gudi Padwa.
into Shalivahana. But the symbol of Actually it is not Amavasya (the first
Shalivahana is the same. They put up day of the Moon), today is that day.
ä 'Gudi' means a flag and a small There is no Moon in the Sky. It is
pitcher is put on it as a symbol. This complete dark.
pitcher has a particular shape which
We should know why it is
represents Kundalini. So they were the
worshippers of Kundalini and followed celebrated in our country? What is
it. That is the reason they made this particular about it? Without knowing
symbol in this way, All those who about the customs and festivals of the
follow Kundalini put up a Gudi in their country we could neither love it no
houses and also put a flag on it and respect it. These things are very deep
thus it is indicated that they welcome rooted but we have no knowledge of
Kundalini and exhibit it in a special them. People say it is Kaliyuga. Why
way. But all these people are moving has this Kaliyuga set-in? What is its
in the rut. They are doing all these meaning? Mostly people do not know.
rituals without knowing the cause of They know about it from different
it. One should know the reason for people and talk about it. It has an
doing certain things. What is it? important myth behind it, of the time
Because Saatvahanas were the of King Parikshita. No one knows
worshippers and protectors of the about it. No one reads it. People read
Kundalini and they started their New only stupid books, at the most they
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September- October 2002
27
read Ramayana but they have no
knowledge of its message or its
philosophy. No one knows about it. the best? Socially we might not be the
But we Sahaja Yogis must acquire this best but culturally we are considered
knowledge. We must know from where the best. Many knowledgeable things
the culture of our country dawned and have been written in these books, such
the roots of India.
Why we Indians are considered
how it reached at this level. Without
as, what is Dharma and how to
this knowledge our approach will
establish it? I wish you people study
become like the foreigner's and ego them. The study of these scriptures will
and other negativities will have hold
give you a new direction, because
foreign language and books of
knowledge are very superficial. There
on us. So it will be better to understand
from where these qualities have come
and what is their significance. Why do
is a publishing firm named Sasta
Sahitya Mandal. I got many books
we do certain things? Or we do it
because other people also do it. It is from there. It is a beautiful shop.
not proper. We must have thorough Books are very cheap there. You don't
knowledge of it. I desire that all the have to spend much money. Ofcourse,
Sahaja Yogis should know about it, time is needed. We read unnecessary
understand it. If I had time enough, I
things, watch useless films and read
would have written about all these
unnecessary news. Our study should
things but I have no time. You people be very deep and about our old-old
could read and know about it, all the
books are available. There are so many
treasures.
Today is very auspicious. I was
books in Hindi language in India but
no one reads them. All these books are not feeling well, yet I thought that I
available in Delhi. I got them here. We must go for Puja on this auspicious
must know about them. Whatever is occasion.
mythical contains a lot of useful things.
May God Bless You.
By understanding them we could know
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 SHRI HANUMANA PUJA
May 1989
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
It is such a joy today and the any Indian language as Devdoots
whole atmosphere seems to be
bubbling with it as if the angels are
means they are the ambassadors of
God.
singing and the speciality of Hanumana
So, now you are the same, you
are all angels, Now only thing you are
born like angels, they are angels and not aware that you are angels while
they are not human beings. They are they were aware from their childhood.
born with the angelic qualities but now If you know that you are angels all
was that He was an angel, Angels are
you all have become angels from the
human beings. It is a very great and vou will be amazed that the quality
your qualities will start shining through
you
achievement of Sahaja Yoga.
of standing by the truth at any cost is
The qualities that are born with so easily managed for you, because
the angels are seen from their very you have been given the right, you
childhood. Firstly, they are not afraid have been given the special blessings.
of untruth, falsehood. They are not the special protection from the Divine
worried as to what people will say to that if you stand for the right and if
them and what they will lose in life. you stand for the righteous and if
To them truth is their life, they breath you stand for the truth, all kinds of
truth and nothing else matters with help to protect you will be given.
them. This is the first great quality of
Angels are aware of this, they are sure
an angel. They will go to any extent to of it, they are certain, there's a
establish truth, to protect and to certainty about it but you are not. Still
protect the people who are in truth. sometimes think may be-may not be,
It's such a wide range of these angels
same style goes on. Believe me-you are
angels, you have all the powers and
what rights you have Human beings
all over. So in the left side we have
Ganas, on the right side we have angels
and translated in Sanskrit language or
can not get over you. That's the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
29
speciality of angels, not of saints. amusingly. Like He burnt the whole
Saints could be manoeuvred, they of Lanka and He was laughing at it,
could be tortured, they could be then He extended His tail and put it
troubled. Incarnations may do the round the necks of many rakshasas and
same. Incarnations accept it, they want He was just playing with them and then
to have all these penances done to
them so that they create an event in dangling in the air. So,
their life to express themselves in a playfulness of the angels also because
more dynamic way. If there was no they are so confident, they are
Ravana there would have been no absolutely aware, absolutely identified
flew in the air and they all were
It's a
Ramayana, if there was no Kansa, with their personality, with their
there would have been no Krishna. So, powers, with themselves.
the incarnations take upon themselves
Here the Sahaja Yogis sometimes
the problems and also they fight with
the evil. So it looks sometimes that we
feel that they suffer but they don't. But
don't understand that I have made you
into angels. I have not made you into
the angels have a special category. saints but angels and you are always
They don't take up any problems upon protected. I can only make angels I
themselves, they just solve them. If Can't make saints, saints are made by
there's a problem, it's the angels who their own efforts, the effortlessness
solve for the saints as well as for the doing is like Ganesha, like Kartikeya,
incarnations and they are to be told like Hanumana. In the same way you
are all made, with the same style. So,
sometimes that don't jump in just now,
try to understand that what I say about
you is the truth. Kinds of conditionings
Work even through you people, though
you are saints and you don't know how
you are working out on the stage now,
you will jump when we will ask you.
They are ready, standing at the door
just to jump in, so anxious! And they
to spread your wings, Still sometimes
I feel that the rebirth has taken place
and they have all become like angels
with wings but as little birds they still
have to learn how to fly. But you must
are fixed quantities, you can rely on
them, completely. For example, Shri
Hanumana, as you know Him an angel
has great capacities, great powers and
it is His right to use them, and He is
very aware of it. He does everything gain your confidence by your
very amusingly, uses His power very experiences which you have in Sahaja
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
30
2002
Yoga. As you were singing yesterday them and to talk about it, to use them.
'miracles everyday, miracles around
you', these are done by the angels and whole of England should get
they try to convince you that you are realisation in no time but we are still
Imagine with so many angels the
one of us, just join our company.
trying to learn what we are! Hanumana
had no problem because from His
So we have so many angels now
childhood he knew that He was an
sitting here and why should not we
think of transforming this world? And angel and He has to do the job of an
there's one more thing that have angel. Because we were born as human
other than the angels because angels beings and now we have become
do not raise the Kundalini, they cannot. angels. We find it difficult to be
you
dynamic like other angels that they
were. Even your thought, collective
they are not bothered about it, they are
there to kill, to burn, to suppress, to
remove all the evil people around but thought, even your individual thought
they cannot transform, angels cannot is powerful and your attention is
transform. So you have a greater right powerful because of this fear or may
than they have in the realm of God that be the conditioning as you can call it
you can raise the Kundalini of people or may be the ego part which is still
and you can give realisation. But sticking on to you. You still hang
human conditionings are still sticking around false things and that force, that
on. For example-I wore a ring the dynamism is not expressed. We can
other day and then my daughter started
blame any thing, like we can blame
lethargy to some country, ego to some
teasing me that now you must only
show this finger all the time to people country but now you have lost your
so that they see your ring. So, in the countries completely. Now you have
mundane human life whatever we have,
entered into the Kingdom of God. You
are in a country which has no bounds,
possessions may be powers, you see
for example somebody is a mad with which has no limitations and then all
some position immediately you can
these conditionings that are still
lingering in you shouldn't bother you
make it out with his nose and lips, the
way they are turned upward but the
powers that you have in your
at all and shouldn't upset you or deter
you from doing whatever is your job.
Now imagine, Hanumana, as
possession, you are afraid to manifest
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 September - October
2002
31
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
what we have gained, what we have
Gabriel, had to go and tell Maria that
there's a child which is the incarnation,
the Saviour is going to be born to you.
She was a young virgin-to break such
news which was horrible compared
to the conditionings of those days. He
did it - "I have to do it, so I will do it,
if that's the order I will do it" - because
got. See the people who say you have
done so much for Sahaja Yoga and
what Sahaja Yoga has given us? It has
given you self realisation, it has given
you the angel status. I mean you try
anything else, can you get the status
of an angel? You cannot, Sahaja Yoga
he knew that the carrying out of the
has given you that status, so what more
do you want? It was never possible
before, believe me, impossible
situation. If it was possible in any way
then Gyaneshwara would not have
order is His nature, is built within Him
and He is not going to doubt it, He is
not going to weigh it but just told and
He does it.
taken Samadhi at such a young age and
Kabira would not have said, "Oh God!
What am I to do, this world is blind."
So, a great understanding has to
be within us that we are growing
within ourselves but if we do not
manifest, if we do not show our So, you have that subtle power within
you that you can work out on people's
Kundalini without even their knowing
qualities and if we do not it in
our life, in our doing, in our object, in
express
about it. But in meditation when you
nOA
the meaning of our life, then Sahaja
Yoga is not going to spread nor is it
sit down you must admit yourself I
am an angel and as being an angel
I have no attachments with
going to help you much. The kind of
work you have to do has no problems
with it. I have problems, not you. You anything else but with God's work.
don't have to face problems, you go
and talk to anyone, whatever you feel Sahaja Yoga, I have seen it, people
Attachments are so many, still in
like. They will jolly well have to listen
to you, I should say, but if they don't
they can't harm you. They can't do any
have like attachments to, now because
they are married, so they are attached
to wives and so many have fallen out
harm to you. This is a very great because of their wives attachments.
protection you have. They cannot
hinder your work.
Then they have attachments to their
children and so many will fall out if
Coming to Sahaja Yoga is not they have attachments to their
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 32
2002
September - October
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
children. As I told you yesterday that
describe is the feeling of tremendous
ocean of joy within you, just flowing
all the children of the world who are
Sahaja Yogis are your children, you are
out.
the parents of all the children. It's not
that if your child is sleeping you will
cover that child, no, you cover all the
children you have to look after, all the
The attachments do not give you
capacity to enjoy that ocean. If you are
standing on the shore how will you
enjoy the ocean? You have to jump into
children which are lying down. Can
it but you have got your anchorage on
think of Hanumana if He was here
you
to different things, so you can't jump
and when the children were sieeping in And you are so safe you know how
He would just cover the body of one
child because He is a universal being.
to swim, you know how to kill a shark,
even one sight of yours is sufficient,
So, every child has to be loved the
but because you are not aware it is not
same way cared for by you.
acting. Absolutely this is the case. I
have seen people who get small
positions in life and they start boasting
Then there are other attachments
like possession, positions, jobs. I have
none so I don't know what others about it I met this and this man. I met
except for when I see you so much that and that man and this happened,
and that happened, so you feel like
lovingly coming to the station then the
laughing at the person. I mean but you
have met Sahaja Yoga by which you
have grown, you have been nourished,
whole heart becomes like an ocean I
think and just starts like a big swell of
a tide like that, if you see that and then
you have become so great. With all this
when I have to leave you again it
recedes back like a sea which is now we have to follow the line of
receding. It's something like you see Hanumana. He thought the Sun is very
the moon and the sea starts reacting egoistical. Tries to burn people
sometimes. It gives too much heat and
to the beauty of the moon, the joy of
the Sun worshippers also are
the moon, the love of the moon. Then
I see the love - the love that is you see
egoistical. They have so much ego in
them. Any word, if you say wrong in
in a nest where a bird is feeding it's
young ones and you see this love in their language or in their customs say,
the sky, then you see this love in your you hold the fork in a wrong hand-
heart-and only thing that you can
finished. You are the worst person in
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-36.txt 
 September - October
33
2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
the whole world, committed the something absolutely absurd grows
without any subtle expression, is to be
appreciated.
greatest sin.
All such small stupid ideas come
This is because of our ego which
out of a very depraved ego. Ego is so
depraved when you start thinking no has suppressed every proper
end of yourself that I am everything spontaneous living growth of our
and I know everything and this custom thought, of our art and of our life.
is the best or that carpet is the best. I, think it's worst than all the
contamination we talk about or
I don't like it. But who are you? Who
ecological problems. This is the human
asked you to like it or not to like it, I
don't like this, I don't like that. On the
mind which has produced these
suffocating areas where nobody can
express anything and the one who has
a greater ego, dominates. This book
has been written by such and such
other side the egoist always becomes
slave also. I must say that after going
through the countries which are
following certain norms, which are the
dictations of the ego like an artist now,
person, you meet that person you feel
likejumping in the sea. So everything
written is not a Bible and those mostly
for example, an artist produces
something for his joy but he must be
eriticised by everyone, the criticism
should be, I don't like this, this colour
is not good, that is not and you have
professionals who do this! They don't
know how to even draw one pencil line
who write are people whom you
should never meet without a barge
pole. So, anything that is expressed,
you see, say in a dress or in a
relationship with your children, in
relationship with your teacher,
relationship with anyone has to be so
and so and so. You must say thank you
properly. Leave alone painting
anything. But immediately they will say
I think this-this is you see- they have
made books out of it, thesis and many-a-times, you may say sorry
theories! I mean, art has something to many-a-times, so we are so much
do with your heart and not with your curbed into artificial expression that I
brain. That's how you have killed so think after sometime there will be no
many artists and everybody who is art produced. There's no exuberance,
painting has to think what people will they cannot, they are afraid. I don't
know if you have noticed this or not
say about this! But as a result of that
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
34
but those who go to see any museums
fall. So the another trend has started I
or go to see any exhibition, anything,
think, all of them, to be great, some
feel in Sahaja Yoga that better be on
the safer side. Between these two
Divine personalities that they can Sahaja Yoga will be lost. So if you
judge everyone. Through the Agnya
that we judge, that is what Hanumana
know you are angels you will have no
ego. Anybody who knows that this is
his nature to do something.
wanted to eat once and for all. The
movement of agnya which goes right
Like today my husband was
and left you see which makes us
praising me, saying that it is you who
has done all. I said, not me, It's not
express our so called nonsensical
personality of ego is the one that he
tried to control and eat it off. As I eat
bhoots, perhaps He was eating this in them. See, if it is planted in the
Sun. But for an angel it is important mother earth, then it sprouts. In the
me. He said, how do you say, It's not
you. Because, I said, it is innately built
to know that there is no ego within
same way, they have innately built
you. There are some Sahaja Yogis who
within them, their Kundalini-it sprouts.
So, how's it I have done? But he said,
Mother Earth has done it. I said, No.
It's the quality in the Mother Earth
say MotherI didn't want to do too
much of Sahaja Yoga work because my
ego will come up, I don't want my ego
to express it. But why do you want
which is built in, has done it. So, he
your ego to be destroyed, for what?
For Sahaja Yoga work, isn't it! What
a vicious circle it is that we say that
said then who has done all this? So, I
said, It's done by Adishakti, agreed,
but Sahaja Yoga is not done by
we want to keep our ourselves in the
Adishakti. She has created these
background because our ego should
powers in everyone which works out
but Sahaja Yoga is not. Sahaja Yoga
not develop.
You are just thinking about works through the innate qualities that
yourself, what about Sahaja Yoga? So,
are in the Mother Earth and that are in
now-a-days the trend is oh! Better be the seed. So, I am here as, not as
on the safe side because they have seen Adishakti, I am here as their Mother,
some people who were very egoistical, as their Holy Mother, and as Holy
who were very dashing about Sahaja Mother I have guided them, you can
Yoga, who tried to show off, had to say I am like the Mother Earth who
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-38.txt 
 September - Octaber
2002
35
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
you are the instrument, and you have
sprouts seeds. So then another
detachment can come in into you that
to work, you have to do the job.
these are your powers, within you,
which have been just enlightened by Hanumana was that He was very alert
your innate nature of Kundalini and and that He was beyond time. When
that you are empowered yourself and vou eat off the Sun, where is the time!
all this power that is within you is only He was beyond time because of that
told by me that it is within you. You everything He did very fast. For
Another great quality of
see for yourself, only like a mirror I
example-now we are preparing, say
book of Sahaja Yoga, for the last
am telling you are this, you see for
yourself. So, how can I take any credit
sixteen years is going on, is working
is working on, then we are trying
for it?
on,
So, you can even have
to make some arrangements about
having the recording of the sick people
and be cured with Sahaja Yoga, that's
happening. Very good, happening, then
we are going to go to Russia to spread
Sahaja Yoga working. All the devils
have reached there but the angles are
still working it out. Very patient, very
patient angels! So, one of the qualities
detachment to understand that the
power that we have is for Sahaja Yoga
as Mother has powers to work for
Sahaja Yoga. We too have powers to
work for Sahaja Yoga and as she works
we also have to work. But there is
attachment like this-Mother is doing
everything what can we do! No, you
have to do it. This is a very
of Shri Hanumana was that He was a
important detachment which I am fast person. He would do the work
trying to say that you have to do this
yourself. It's not that Mother will
before anybody could do it, He was
outbeat. It's alright to fight in and win
do, after alI Mother is doing and defeat Napoleon but in the field
everything. It's correct that is of dharma, in the field of Sahaja Yoga
correct in a way but you are the I find people don't understand the
instrument. Electricity is doing importance of time. We are delay
everything here but this instrument has masters and delaying habits we have-
to work. So, the source may be there alright I will telephone, I will find out,
but the instrument is the one which it will happen. This is one of the
delivers the goods and like Hanumana greatest defects we have which we
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-39.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - COctober
2002
36
have to learn from Hanumana that up they had such a nice drama, play-
all that I enjoyed very much it was very
Rama wanted to send word, so He sent
His ring with Hanumana, Rama could
good for everybody's enjoyment but
not do that fast, so Hanumana went job is there we have to do. You have
and did it. Then Rama wanted to have to do the job. So, attention should be
this 'Sanjivini', this kind of a herb, so on the job, and that's what what are
He sent him to get from a particular we doing about it? I was happy that a
mountain. He said, now why to waste suggestion has come from America
time finding it out better take the about making a video film and things
whole thing. So, He carried the whole like that and then there are
mountain there. Better do it quickly, obstructions how are we going to get
immediately, this is the time to do it; money? What is going to happen? You
but next year we will see Mother, you just start it, you will get it, you have
know after Ganapati Pule we can powers everything will be
consider. We will have discussions and synchronized properly you just
then we will have arguments and this start doing it, but if you behave like
human beings-first think, then plan
it out and then cancel it, it's not
and that.
This is one thing about His
going to work out.
character one has to know that today
Though Hanumana is running on
when we are worshipping Hanumana
we should have that quick-wittedness the Pingla Nadi all the time, what He
within us. It is to be done now, we does is to spoil our plans. Because
cannot postpone it anymore, already instead of Him we run on the pingla,
we are very much delayed. I saw the
girls who were wearing frocks, small you right. So He sidetracks all our
little things, have grown into big girls plans all the time, that's how all our
now, about to be married. So, I think planning fails. We are particular about
all my life I will be marrying Sahaja timings, about things of no importance
Yogis. To see the results you have to but we are not particular about timings
become quick people, not to linger and of our progress in Sahaja Yoga. We
be satisfied with other things but must have targets, we must have fixed
this is alright you running it.I will put
positive things what are we doing. For
example It's nice, children have grown
times, alright by this time we have to
achieve, but do it little faster is better.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-40.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
37
September - October
2002
All other things can be managed but
do this and nothing else is important.
this is your job, nobody is going to do
Ihope by today's puja that enthusiasm,
it, nobody is going to do it, this is your
that venturesome nature will vibrate
job. I mean your are not going to run
the train, you are not going to fly
aeroplanes and you don't have to run
any administration and stupid politics,
your pingla and without feeling any
ego about it in the most humble manner
as Hanumana was, you will do the jobs.
Hanumana, imagine, was given a
beautiful necklace of gold with big-big
balls for Him to wear by Sita and He
opened all of them one by one. He said,
there's no Rama in this what will I do
have to do Sahaja Yoga, you
have to spread it, you have to bring it
to a level where people can see it. Now
but you
eighteen years have passed, this is the
nineteenth year.
with this ball. So, She said, where is
Rama? He opened His heart and
So today is first day of
Hanumana's puja. I must say you have
to venture, you have to venture
showed it, see Rama is here. If Rama
is there you cannot have ego. So much
of dynamism and so much of humility
what a combination it was! And that's
what you have to, you have to just
without any fear collectively and
individually forgetting as to what wil
happen. I mean you won't go to jails.
you will not be crucified, be sure on
manifest. The more you will work, the
that. I mean if you lose your job, you more you will assert yourself. You will
can get another and if you don't
find that humility is the only thing that
get a
job you can get a dole, alright. So you helps. Obedience is the only thing that
don't have to worry about all useless helps to carry out your work and you
things which human beings sit down will become humbler and humbler. But
and worry but despite that they achieve if you think oh! I am doing this then
work, they do their jobs and how much finished. But if you know it's done by
they are wedded to it, I am surprised! the Divine, Param Chaitnya is doing
I have seen it in my family, how much everything, I am just an instrument, the
they are wedded, they have do this humility will be there and you will be
work they have to do it. They will get
an effective instrument.
I hope in this country today it
up in the morning do this, do that but
you are not aware that you are angels
was very necessary and it was so timely
and this is your work, so you have to
it's all organised by angels that we
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
38
September - October
2002
should have this puja here but it's good the west, why people have so much
for all of you. You have to really go
and see media people, go and see these
ministers, go and see, say, Prince of
Wales, go and see another person,
ego than Indian people have? One of
the things is that the right side is, as I
have told you on many-a-times, is like
an accelerator but left side is like the
meet them, make committees, see what
break. So. If the mooladhara is not in
you can do. Put your mind to it what control, if the break is not alright
are we to do but here only my Mother
náturally the accelerator can not be
is sick, my child is sick, my this thing controlled. So, basically
is sick, my friend is sick, my-still going mooladhara should be brought down
on with it! If you start doing God's and must be put right. You should
work your worries are taken over. work very hard to do that if your break
You don't have to worry about is established then what ever work you
anything, just taken over. But it's
not self propagation it's not, it's the into ego practices and ego cannot
propagation of the collective. I hope anymore control you. So that is very
today you have understood the subtle important specially in the West where
side of your being which is there, it is being really dangerously
which is exhibiting which I can see destroyed, the idea of auspiciousness
clearly and that you will all of you will and of holiness. So that is the power
in your meditation become aware of of any angel and that has to be fully
our
do for Sahaja Yoga you will not get
what you have within yourself. That's
greatest thing that will please the
Divine and Divine will look after you
fully. With the same confidence as the
established within us and then on that
power we will work out, which gives
you discretion, which gives you
egolessness. I hope today both these
the
things will work out within us in such
angels like Hanumana you have to go
further and work it out.
a manner that we will really become
absolutely self confident realised souls
whom I call as angels of modern times.
May God Bless you All
I have to say about the ego part
May God Bless You.
is this, which is really the problem in
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-42.txt 
 SAHASRARA PUJA
Cabella, Italy, 6-5-89
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Last night was the night of the worst, that they are trying to make
complete darkness that they call it as the limbic area very insensitive. Very
'Amavasya' and just now only the first depressive novels, very depressive
phase of the Moon has started. Today thoughts and very depressive music you
we are here to celebrate the day when can say like Greek tragedy, nonsense.
Sahasrara was opened out. Also you All these things came from the medieval
have seen in the photograph, it was period till you should say this new age
actually the photograph of my brain has started. That one itself was no good
for our limbic area that made us very
which showed how the Sahasrara was
opened out. The light of the brain now
could be photographed. Its something
great this modern times have done. So
depressive. We took to alcoholism to
escape from the so called miseries. But
then came this modern age in which
people became overactive, Overactivity
the modern times have brought a lot of
things which can prove the existence of started. With that the brain also became
the Divine. Alse it can prove about Me. overactive in addition to the dullness
It can convince you what I am. This is before its gone to the other extreme of
very important because in the modern over activity. So to dull it again they
times this Advent has to be took to drugs, they took to very
recognised. Has to be fully horrible music. That's how they make
recognised. This is one of the this limbic area very very insensitive.
conditions for all the Sahaja Yogis. So a drug which was just a stimulus to
begin with, was to be taken in greater
quantity and later on they had to take
Now let's see what is happening
in the modern times in the brains of the
drugs which were of much more severe
people. In the brains of the people today nature. Went on like that and now we
if you see, there is an attack on the know that this drug is the only way
Sahasrara. There has been an attack people think they can survive. Why?
Because of the tension they talk of. In
since long but in the modern times it is
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-43.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September- October 2002
40
the modern times we have something
opened out so many years back, still we
called tension. It was never there
have some things to be done is to clear
before. People never talked of their
tensions. Now everybody says I am in
tension. You give me a tension. What
is this tension. This is because of my
advent. The limbic are wants to
out our Sahasrara first of all. So first is
the breaking of the Sahasrara, then once
it is opened out, the Brahmarandhra
opened out, then we start feeling the
grace and it moves on to our Ida and
know about me. And the Kundalini Pingala, the grace, not the Kundalini
also as Sahaja Yoga is increasing,
is trying to rise in people., Because
you become the channels. Wherever
and the grace, which is Chaitanaya all
round, soothes down our left and right
side, by which our Chakras open, more
you go, you generate vibrations and and more threads of the Kundalini start
these vibrations give a challenge to piercing through. So I always tell
the Kundalini or a message and in Sahaja Yogis that its important that you
various people it rises. It may not must meditate. If your Sahasrara is all
rise up to the Sahasrara or it may right, all your Chakras will be
even rise up to Sahasrara but it falls alright. Because as you know that the
no Pithas or the controlling centres of all
back because there
is
recognition. So every time they do
something, this Kundalini comes up
and gives them a pressure because clear, everything works out in a very
their Sahasrara is not opened. Its a
these Chakras are in the brain, around
the limbic area. So if your Sahasrara is
different way.-
closed door. Because of the closed
door this gives them kind of a
How to keep the Sahasrara alright
is the big problem, always people ask
pressure in the head, which they
don't understand and they call it as
tension. Actually Kundalini is trying
me. You know that I reside in the
Sahasrara, I have incarnated on the
lotus of 1000 petals. That's why I could
to push itself out but it cannot. And
those also who get their realization,
if they do not make their Sahasrara
break it also. As I am today as you see
me of-course. They say 'Sahasrare
Mahamaya'. So this is the illusion
alright, they go on getting into
which is all the time there for you,
tension.
which is very illusive. It had to be that
So though Sahasrara has been
way because you could not have faced
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September- October 2002
41
me otherwise with all the lights coming
just you open your heart.
out of me or the way you saw yesterday,
Sahasrara some sort of abstract colours
Now what stops it? We should
examine that. Firstly the conditioning.
thrown on all sides and the lights
In the west to express your love is
thrown outside.
regarded sinful actually. It takes some
Now this Sahasrara is to be time to say I love you. But I hate you,
looked after by you. Its the temple of even a child could go on saying,a I hate
your Mother. When you say you put me you, I hate you, I hate you. But to hate
in the heart, actually you put me in the someone is sinful. To anyone, to hate
Sahasrara. Because as you know the is sinful. So to say that I hate you, I
Brahmarandhra here, is the fontanelle hate you, is a sinful act. So what one
bone area has got the Pitha, the centre has to do is to say, go on saying I love
which controls the heart, which is the you. After all you must love a person
seat of the Sada Shiva or you can say
of Shiva. So when you put me in the
who is so dear to you. Anyone who has
done something good for you, you love
heart actually you put me there so to
raise it from heart to there or to bring
it from there to the heart is problem
that person. But if Adi Shakti herself
has given you the rebirth, It should be
the easiest thing to love. And if she says
of two types of people. Some people
that they are all within my body, so it
who are sensitive in their heart, I would
should be even easier to love each other.
say, we can see Italians are very So the whole cleansing of the
sensitive in their heart. The first thing Sahasrara is done through this love.
they do as soon as they see me, they
This love which is not
put their hands to their heart. And that
conditioned, which is not inhibited.
is what it is, that if you try to feel me in
Which doesn't want any respite, which
your heart, to begin with it is much doesn't want any return, Nirvajya
easier. To feel me in your heart.
(frafour). But the conditionings are too
Now you might say, how to do it?
You have to love me, as I love you.
much. First the problem ofconditioning
comes to you where you think that this
You have to love each one of yourself
condition makes me hate someone or
because you are all within me and
can't teach someone how to love.
Love is within. And love manifests if
can't love someone because this is the
condition. But actually the conditioning
itself is so absurd, if you see it one by
you
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-45.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
42
one. To make it simple, I would like you Then we go further to see a person.
to understand the conditioning part. I
How intelligent he is? How smart he
read one article, interesting one. 'Who is? How charismatic he is? How
Killed the Romance?' So he said that charming? These are also kind of
the hair dressers. I was wondering how
conditions of the mind that you think
is he connecting romance with the hair
that a particular style of a person is
dressers! Because people used to go to loveable person. That you love that
hair dressers and a hair dressing was person is so much outside or some
liked by a person. So he would way that people actually do not love but show
I love that hair dressing. Now they love because somebody has more
supposing his fiancee or his wife wore
money. As the money is not going to
another type of hair-dressing because part with, no doubt. But you love that
everyday new things are coming. Then person because he has more money. Or
immediately the husband would say, he has a better car, or he is better
"oh, I hate you because of your hair-
dressing." Because he loves one type
of hair-dress, that's why he loves.
dressed or what ever it is. So this kind
of an idea one has also is a killer of love.
If love is killed joy is lost. You cannot
Otherwise if you have another hair-
have joy without love. I say joy and
dress you hate it. I don't like it. To say
love, both are just the same. Then it gets
that I don't like it and I like it, itself is a
even subtler and subtler and subtler.
sign that the conditioning is too much.
Then you start say loving our own
You make a proper hair dress and you
children. That's very common. I mean
dress up properly and you come out and
suddenly people say, "oh, I hate." Who
are you? What right we have got to say
that to any one. You are not a judge
appointed by any law-courts. So why
do we say to hurt someone to say I hate
it. On the contrary you must say that
alright, I like this but you could be
better. That's the sign of love, where
of-course also some people don't even
love their children, I mean there are,
all kinds. But then they go on, "this is
my child, this is my child, this is my
child". That's again the death of love.
As I told you before the sap of the tree
rises, goes to every fruit, goes to every
leaf, goes to every part and comes back.
It's not attached. If you are attached to
you want a person to be dressed up in a
way that is appealing. But this is on
very-very baser level we see people.
one part or to one flower, because it is
more beautiful then the tree will die and
the flower will also die. So that's the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-46.txt 
 September- October 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 1D
43
written by Rabindra Nath Tagore and
an Englishman had given a very
beautiful preface to that, an
death of the love.
So you have to have love which
doesn't get entangled or attached. Every
time I tell like this, they say, how to do introduction. And he said, "that the
it? The love of the spirit is of that kind. creativity is killed in the West", so he
Love of conditioned mind is different. asked a gentleman who was an Indian
A conditioned mind can love in a limited critic. He said, "Don't you criticise your
poets? You don't have people who are
critics?" "Yes, yes we have, they
Then the greatest enemy of love criticise." "So what do they criticise?"
is ego within us, which is like a balloon "Oh they can criticise that this time
way because it is conditioned.
on top of our head and this ego gives
us a very big tension. The conditioning
of-course like they see, say for example,
there was no rain, so we had problems
and things.
He said, "No No No No, we are
they see a carpet. Not it is according to
their conditioning is not good. So they
say what a carpet it is! Or something.
This kind of conditioning of very low
level and the higher level at the most is
thinking about the poets? Do they
criticise an artist." Is it meant for
criticism. It is created ,what ever he felt
he has created but supposing he has put
something very vulgar then of-course
we don't like it. But if it is created by a
beautiful mind, has to be beautiful, then
that you lave your own country. So my
country is the best whether it is killing
people, whether it is destroying the
world peace. Its all right, because I
you don't criticise" He said "No.
belong to a particular country, so it is
because we cannot create like that. So
what business have we got to criticise?"
the best. We can never criticise our
country and countrymen. It goes on This is how intelligently what we have
subtler and subtler but on the done. We have norms about everything,
intelligence side it is even worst. about art, about every creation. We
Because intelligently if you have don't like this carpet, Why? Because it
understood that something is good then does not appeal to our intellectual
nobody can say anything.. Because understanding of the norms we have
through your brain you have reached and in that frame it doesn't get
understood. Actually it is very fitted. So we don't like it Can you even
surprising. I was reading the book
create one inch of that. So this ego gives
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-47.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
44
you an unauthorised action. It is to see." I saw, it was beautiful, very
unauthorised Unadhikar Chestha beautiful. I said, "why don't you
(3aaaaa a). Unauthorised. You He said, "no use, people will just
have no authority to criticise. You criticise, I do it for my own pleasure.
cannot do anything. So why should you They will just spoil the whole joy of my
criticise? Better appreciate and see for creation." So one of the basic things we
show?"
yourself that you are not in authority. should avoid is to criticise others.
You are not worthy of it to criticise. If Better to criticise yourself. Criticise
you are not worthy of it, then why yourself, your brothers and sisters.
should you criticise anything? And Criticise your country. Criticise all the
otherwise also you must know that you habits you have and laugh at yourself.
are a slave of your ego. What ever your
ego dictates and your intelligence, so
called intelligence brings you to a point,
to some norm and then it becomes a
This is the best way. If you know how
to laugh at yourself, then you will not
object or will not stand in the
of
way
any creativity of another person. So
with ego you become so unauthorised.
You can criticise anything. You think
you have a right, Who has given you
this right to criticise is the question one
collective ego of a particular
community bf a particular country, of a
particular ideology. It is collectively. So
then we think this is no art, that is the
reason we cannot have masters any should ask to oneself. How can we
criticise anyone.. As saints as you are
more in art.
now, of-course, you can make out who
We cannot have Rambrant.
Though Rambrant must have himself is caught up, who has bad vibrations,
suffered a lot. You know they have who has the problem. You know that.
You know it. Its not conditioning. Its
suffered a lot. All these artists suffered
not just you are doing because there is
a lot. Even Micheal Angelo suffered a
some ego but you are feeling it on your
lot. Not only monitarily but otherwise,.
Criticise, Criticise, Criticise.
finger tips. Its an actual feeling within
you. Its the bodha, which you know,
So I think people have given up I then what should you do. In your love
met on artist, who has done a lot of art you have to tell the person if possible
work. I said, "why don't you show me."
He said "No, I don't want to show. It is
that this is wrong with you. Better be
corrected. But in a way that he does it.
created for myself. I said, "I would like
On the contrary if you tell him in a way
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-48.txt 
 45
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9 & 10
September - October
2002
improve. I have seen they tremendously
that the becomes even worst that what
it is. You have not loved that person at
all. Allow everybody to grow. There
are many people in Sahaja Yoga who
are very-very good, excellent, no doubt.
But also there are some people whom
we call as very very difficult. They have
sort of crack in their head or something,
that part is missing sometimes. Some
screws are loose, I think. Sometimes
improve. But when they are inside the
Sahaja Yoga community, they become
a nuisance and they want to become
more nuisance. Because their ego plays
the part, may be their conditioning plays
the part, whatever it is. They want to
be a nuisance. So we have to ask them
that please now depart for a while. Now
if that nuisance value is lost in a person,
they behave like clowns. We have
then he has to be a straight-forward. He
known some people just can't be helped.
They could be very intelligent
otherwise. They could be very sharp
otherwise. But in Sahaja Yoga they
can't be anymore a nuisance and
logically it can appeal to a person if you
tell that person that it is the reason why
we want you to be out. But that is taken
can't come down to that level where you
as very disgustingly troublesome, I
can say now the growth is possible.
Supposing the Mother Earth was very
know that. But you have to show
complete patience and complete
understanding and you must talk like a
hot like Sun, there would have been no
growth or it was cold like Moon, there person who loves. Love has such
would have been no growth. It had to power that nobody wants to do
come to the centre where it had both something that will suggest that they
don't love. Very powerful thing it is. It
binds people in such a beautiful manner
a
the things in proper proportion to grow.
In the same way human being has to
that one wants to do something for
work out that you keep a moderation
and a balance and understand not to go
example you want to give me flowers
to extremes of anything. That balance because you know I love flowers. So
you learn when you love someone. In you want to give me flowers to suggest
Sahaja Yoga as you know that we have that Mother, we love you. Just to
to ask some people to leave Sahaja
suggest. I know you love me but just
want to sort of reinforce it, the thought
Yoga.
in me. So you want to give me a flower
This is out of love for them. to show your love and expression of
Because once they go out, they
your inner feelings for me. So all those
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-49.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV 9& 10
September - October
2002
46
material things can be used to express
of the Mother, finished. So once you
your love. They can be very easily reach that point, you can say now you
expressed in such a manner that another are in 'Nirvikalpa' because there is no
person knows what is love. But the Vikalpa, there is no doubt in your head.
whole power of Sahasrara is love. So if Because you love. In love you don't
you see that this brain has to doubt. doubt. No question. Only when you
Brain has to doubt. After now.verifying think you doubt. But when you love you
the powers of Sahaja Yoga through
your brain and intelligence if you reach
a point where you understand that no,
its no use of analysing, synthesizing.
doing all these things.
don't doubt. You just love. Because you
enjoy love and that's why love is
and joy is love.
joy
So after so many days the
Sahasrara has been opened out. We
Its just love. Its simple love. So
have to open out our Sahasrara again
the same Sahasrara which has been used
through our meditative processes,
before its brain for analysing, for through understanding ourselves and
criticising, for doing all kinds of others. May be logically reaching that
nonsensical things, now wants to love point. There is no way out now. We
and enjoy the love. And there is the have reached to the end of if now. The
culmination. Where the brain just loves whole logic has ended up now.
that is the situation one has to reach. It
Jump in the ocean of love.
Finished. Once you jump in the ocean
just loves. It knows only love because
it has seen the power of love. You reach
of love, there is nothing to be done. Just
a certain logical conclusion and then
you see the point like Adi Shankra hue of it, every touch of it. That's what
wrote so many things like Vivek one has to learn by reasoning, that
Chudamani, this, that and all those Sahaja Yoga is nothing but love.
to be enjoyed, every wave of it, every
treatises and then he gave that. He said
May God Bless You.
no, nothing. He just writes of the praise
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-50.txt 
 131
900
999
9900
