January - February, 2002 Volume: XIV Issue: 1 & 2 HAL FURE The Divine Cool Breeze 1v1r 00 The spirit is like the steady axis of a wheel. If our attention reaches the immovable firm axis at the very centre of the wheel of our existence (which is constantly moving), we become enlightened by the spirit, the source of inner peace, and reach a state of complete calm and self-knowledge. (Her Holiness Shri Mataji) (Meta Modern Era) HOIDITRH DHARMA

 Diwali Рија Shudi Camp, 1988 AM Shri Mataji on a boat trip near Green Island, Australia

 The Divine Coo1 Breeze Volume *IV Issue 1&2 Jan Feb 200 2 Feb. 2002 Shri Krishna Puja, 29 July 2001 14 Shri Shiv Puja, Pandharpur, 29.2.1984 24 Voices 26 Puja Protocols 42 1 The Essence of Sahaja Yoga, London, 1983

 BREE ZE THE DIVIN E COOL Published by V.J. Nalgirkar 162 - A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi 110067 Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph.: 5447291, 5170197 For subscription please write to Mr. O. P. Chandna N-463 (G-11), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi - 110034 Ph. : (011) 7013464 Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to: THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple C- 17, Qutub Institutional Area New Delhi - 110016

 Shri Krishna Puja Nirmal Nagri Canajoharie, New York, USA, 29 July, 2001 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today we have gathered here to time, when you see Him advising worship Shri Krishna, the one who was Arjuna, it is very surprising that here Virata, who fought all kinds of evil he is talking only of spirituality, of without entering into the arena. Shri complete detachment and there He is Krishna's life itself is very beautiful, telling Arjuna that "You go and fight. They are already dead people. Whom creative and loving thing. But to understand Him, it is not easy. For are you fighting?" This conflict is difficult to example, in Kurukshetra, where the understand, that how could Shri war was going on and Arjuna became depressed and he said that "Why Krishna, the same person who is preaching that you all have to become should we fight, fight our own kith and kin, fight our own close relations, sthitapragya, suddenly starts telling friends and our gurus? Is it religion? is Arjuna that you go and fight the foes. One side it is complete detachment it dharma?" Before that, in Gita, Shri and another side is the war! "How will Krishna has described a personality you explain this?" In Shri Krishna's which is a sage. We can call him a saint, or He called it Sthitapragya. So own words, one can say, that once you when asked what is the definition of are a realized soul and you have the Sthitapragya, the description He reached that highest position in your awareness, to you everything is futile. gave was about a person who is But just now, what you have to do is to absolutely at peace with himself and at save the dharma - not the dharma that peace with his atmosphere. It is very surprising. All this people talk about, but the dharma means evolutionary process of human knowledge He gave in the first place in Gita. That is - that is the best, that He beings which is going on and if all the called as the Gyanamarga. That is good people, those who stand for Sahaja Yoga, by which you get the righteousness, are finished, then how will this evolutionary power be saved? subtle knowledge. But at the same

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 Jan.-Feb. 2002 2. kinds of rituals, everything, and you So you have to save them and for that, think that you are very close to God. if you have to kill, you don't kill This is one, which is being accepted by dead anybody, they're already many, many people and by many so- because they're not evolved souls and called religions, that we must have they don't care for their Realization. So you have to fight them. You complete dedication for God. How can have to fight the negative forces. You you you are not yet connected to have to fight the wrongdoers. All this God. How are you doing? How can He explains in a very beautiful you have any dedication to God, with manner, that we have within us three whom you are not at all connected? The second one was the karma, that kinds of powers, which we also know, and by the middle one that we have, you do your work. You go on doing we rise above all these material, your work with a detached mind. I physical, mental, emotional - all these mean it's not possible, but that's what problems facing us into a new realm of they say and we are doing our karmas, good karmas, we do all kinds of good spirituality. And that's what He wanted to save from the cruel people, from things, go to various places for our aggressive, who were also cleansing, meet many great people of the misleading others. It's a very good spirituality, go to all various places and pray. Visit all auspicious places which understanding, if you have, that who is your relation., who is your brother, who are being described. All kinds of is your sister? Those who are evolved rituals, we do for that. That is the karma yoga. And that is souls are your relations. They are your own and for them, if you have to fight what the karma yoga, according to us, is the right side. the people who are aggressive people, Many people, as you know, are you better do it. You have to do it. That right-sided. Right-sided people are is the way of dharma. So we have three paths, as you the people who are, as you know, fll know, in Sahaja Yoga. The one is of of ego, arrogance and think no end of - very difficult to correct Bhakti. Bhakti is where you sing the themselves praise of God, have devotion, do all them. They also never see anything

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 stage you are equipped with the divine wrong with them. Whichever way they power that you can finish off anything act, they think is all right. That is the karma yoga, but He has said that that is negative around you. whatever karmas you do, whatever its This is to be understood that that's a state. That's not just talking, That's fruits are, that you cannot say. He said not just believing that I am that, but it's it in a very uncertain manner because a state. If you come up to that state definitely, if He had said it with where you are beyond all these things certainty, people would never have understood Him. So He said it is not and you have all the knowledge, pure knowledge, the subtle knowledge of possible that whatever karmas you are doing could be the karmas which will being, this is the Gyanamarg. Many the blessings of the people say that everybody cannot go get you to Gyanamarg and, for that, you have Dívine...'Karmanyevadhikaraste Ma to have a special type of personality, Phaleshu Kadachana', He has said it. but this is very misleading. Every one So then, which karmas we should do? Or should we give up all the can go into Gyanamarg. It is very, very karmas? All the action, we should give innately this within built us, evolutionary attainment. It is within us up? People were in two minds. This is the style of Shri Krishna, is to put and all of us can have that. Only thing is we have no confidence perhaps that people in two minds so they use their discretion. And the 3rd one is the we go on avoiding it and go to cheaper discretion. Which you call as the things like becoming devoted to Gyanmarga. It's the central path by something, doing some sort of a ritual, which you evolve. You evolve into a going to some sort of a holy place, all new state. Into a new state of your kinds of nonsense, which doesn't give mind, a new state of your being by you the evolutionary ascent by which which you become absolutely above you know the knowledge, the pure every nonsense. Also you are knowledge, the real knowledge. So endowed with power to fight whatever far, whatever you have known was is bad, what ever is corrupting, written in the book, whatever your whatever is killing this world. At that parents told you or whatever you have ver

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1&2 explored outside. But the knowledge all the knowledge. Unless and until which is the purest, which is the real you have the whole knowledge, you knowledge, which is the gnyana, that are not yet a gyani, a person who knows. In this way, He has established you can only get through your ascent and establish in yourself properly in that our evolutionary process has to that state. If you go on denying it, you come beyond all other human cannot get it. But everyone has a right awareness. Other human awareness to get it. You need not be educated, is of no value for a human spiritual personality. Now he knows sömething, you need not be a very simple person, you need not be very rich or poor, say how many miles it is from here to, makes no difference, as long as you say, New York or what trains go there. are a human being and a humble Al this knowledge is not real- how much this cloth will cost, how much human being, thinking that you have to this carpet will cost, in what shop can achieve that state. You all can get that well. And at you get. All this knowledge is just slate which you know very that tate you become absolutely useless, is not the real knowledge. knowledgeable, knowledgeable about Such a person doesn't know this kind yourself, knowledgeable about others, of knowledge, but what he knows is knowledgeable about everything that the knowledge about your being. goes around. But this state must be knowledge about the whole universe, maintained and try to go above that which is not how many stars there are state where you have no more doubts or how many universes there are. No- left in you. This is what Shri Krishna it is the subtle inner personality of taught and this is what one has to everything, he knows. In that subtlety, he discovers so many new things achieve, but He, being a diplomat, He tried to tell you other stories. which he may not even heard about "Try this, try that, this, that." But and, thus, you reach a state of great knowledgeable personality. This is actually what He has praised is (Gyanamarg. Ours is a Gyanamarg. what we have to achieve. We are born That is the knowledge, the path of as human beings and we know so knowledge in which you have to know many things aiready. People know so

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIVissue1 & 2 Jan.-Feb, 2002 He doesn't say that. So what should be many things, but they don't know the actual. This knowledge doesn't come the state? What should be the through your reading or through your condition? He said, "If you praise Me, intellectual pursuit or from your it you have, bhakti tor Me, you are emotional movement no. It is giving Me presents, you are doing all sorts of things, you are very dedicated, shashwat. It is all the time there. It exists. It will exist. And it is just to but you should do ananya bhakti. Word is "ananya." Ananya means be understood, just to be known to yourself what it is. It cannot change. It when there s not the other, when we cannot be remolded. It is what it is. are one, when we are connected, then And that is what you know now. the bhakti you do that time, whatever music you have of devotion, whatever Nobody would doubt that because those who have not got this state, they flowers you give, whatever expression you have, it should be ananya. That's may doubt, they may call you crazy. the word He said, that do ananya they may think anything, but with the. open eyes, whatever you say is the bhakti. Pushpam, Phalam, Toyam, truth. In the same way, with the open Whatever you give Me, l'Il take. He'll heart and a open brain, when you take everything. He's the one who is the only Bhokta means He is the only know that, that is the real truth and that is what is to be known. enjoyer. But what will you get," He For that, according to Shri Krishna, says, "when you do ananya bhakti?" Means "when you are one with Me." you have to go through various tests. One is you go on praying to Him. He That means you are connected with Him. That's how He has explained says, "You go on praying to Me and bhakti. But people don't understand. if you give Me flowers, IIl take. If you give Me water, I'll take. What- They think that bhakti means you go ever you'll give Me, I'll take." He on singing on the street, "Hare Rama, Hare Krishna," this and that, is bhakti. says clearly, but what will you gain Is not. If that was real, they would have out of that is very important. He doesn't say. "If you give Me achieved something, but they did not. something. I'l give you something." Now don't blame Krishna for that. He

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1&2 has clearly said it should be ananya within us if we have the bhakti which is Is after being united, after the yoga, with bhakti. Only by changing your dress, the Yogeshwara. This is what one has wearing a particular type of style, to understand Now, there are many karma yogis that's not the way. That's all so outward. It's just to show off, but who go on working like mad, absolute actually ananya bhakti is within madly. They think we are doing, after all [nishkam Karma], without any yourself, when you are that state then desire we are serving people, we are you are one with the Divine. Unless serving the nation, we are serving this. and until that state you have achieved. Ultimately, what do you get? What you not only that, but have established, it doesn't give you anything. Many get may be money. Might be you might people have told Me, "We are doing so get a good house, maybe all these much of bhakti yog, Mother. We don't things, but you don't get peace of Really, what sort of heart. You don't get peace of mind. get anything." " bhakti yog?" We do read Shri You don't get that joy, that joy which Krishna's Gita. Every morning get up has no boundaries, which cannot be at four o'clock, take bath, read explained, which cannot be described, that boundless joy, you don't have. Krishna's Gita, do this, do that. Then we sing bhajans, this. We never get And you don't get that eternal peace, which can stop wars. Completely, it anything. So what is the reason?" Reason is that you are not one with can abolish this cruel nature of human God. And when you are one with God, beings. That you don't get. But apart then what does He give you? He won't from that, you get the powers. You get the knowledge -knowledge, the subtle give you cheap things which will vanish in no time, but of some eternal knowledge about everyone. You know about everyone, where are they nature. So He gives you peace, peace of missing the point. You know about the heart. He gives you balance. Also yourself and about others. This knowledge you get, not in the college He gives you a tranquil temperament, or in the schools, but within yourself is joy of life. All these things are there

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 of knowledge and way, but also you have destroyed so the ocean aboriginals, SO whichever way you want to see, many many fundamental things that you should whichever you want to achieve, is have preserved. A day may come there, there present. That is what is when they will realize that this is what the real knowledge, what we call that the they have been doing and this was achieve through sukshamgyana - means the subtle really wrong. A day will come when knowledge, knowledge about chakras, we'll have so many realized souls in America. But just now as the situation knowledge about the universe. is that the people are just gone mad Everything you can get out of this. But and then you get more interested in giving with the idea of making money knowledge to others. You don't want to they discover that now no more, finished. So now what to do? What to know so many things then. What is the do? Come to Sahaja Yoga. Do Sahaja need to know about banking, say about who is the richest man in the Yoga and then you will get the whole world? All these things you don't treasures of your being which are within you, which will give you all the want to know. Your whole attitude changes and what you get is nothing comfort, all the joy and all the supremacy that any amount of money, but a kind of a tranquil mind which any amount of power can give. This is knows everything that is to be known. what we have to do, is to take to That is what one has to achieve. Now this country of yours, America, Sahaja Yoga and make others also Sahaja Yogis so that they also get that is very karamkandi. It goes on doing work, work, work. They're workaholics. peace, joy and satisfaction and this They work so hard and what do you madness of running from one thing to get? You get children who are drug another will be finished because you addicts. You get wives who are can never be satisfied with that. Want to buy today one thing, then tomorrow running here and there. You get broken families and no peace. You want another thing, then want to do another thing. You are never satisfied. support wars. Only thing is that so far You don't get any joy out of what you this country is being protected in a

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 are desiring. So your pure desire, it how to discriminate and then you become experts on discrimination, on should be to be one with the Divine. vibrations. On vibrations, you can That is how it will work out. Shri Krishna's specialty was that He judge everything so clearly, so always supported people who were beautifully. Others realized souls, who were on the right you, that's a different point, but you may not agree with know what is right and what is wrong. path, who were doing righteous things. And that is what Shri Krishna's gift is. He would never support anybody who As it is, you know He is controlling may be well off, who may be a great sixteen sub-chakras within us. He a great king was thing. Like controls everything. He controls your Duryodhana. He invited Shri Krishna to his house, to his big palace to be his throat, nose, eyes, ears. All these things He controls, but ultimately, what guest. Shri Krishna said, "I am sorry." does He say? He says He is the Virata. He went to Vidura, who was the son of Virata means the one who is the great, a maid, Dasiputra, because Vidura great lord, what we call "Akbar" and was a realized soul. Because he was a that's what in the Muslim thing they realized soul, to Him he was much higher, much than accept that Allah-O-Akbar. greater I mean, because it is in a poetry, it's Duryodhana, who was a ruler because he was a crook, because he was a partly clear, partly not clear, but He was a Virata and He showed His form bad man. So the discrimination to Arjuna and Arjuna was amazed to between good and bad becomes one in your mind, becomes one of your see His form, that He's the Virata. He's the one who is great, absorbing inner temperament, then you are always very much satisfied because everything and He's the one who is you know you have not been doing taking out everything. He's a Yama. He is the one who is the god of death. something that is wrong. The discrimination is the gift of Shri He's so many. You know His names Krishna. Apart from anything else, He are there written down. All these gives us the gift of discrimination. That powers are with him, which He uses is His style, I should say, to teach you wherever it is needed. So the Sahaja

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1 &2 is the deity of America. America is also of have the first Yogis power very collective. Like it will be interested satisfaction. Imagine in this place, you in every country. It will be bothered are all enjoying so much, you are living about everyone, but in a wrong way it here so happy. Shows what? You are tries to help. Always it is never in the so satisfied. Otherwise nobody would like. They would say, "No, we want right way. Now, supposing there is a some nice place. What is this? We country where they are producing a lot don't want to live here with everyone." of drugs. Why not invade that country, But to live with others, this collectivity instead of invading other countries? He's like that. also is the blessing of Shri Krishna. He missing. Uniess and until you have teaches you to be collective, the fun of collectivity, the enjoyment of that, you cannot use your power of collectivity. A person who is secluded, collectivity properly. Though they are collective, but what collective work who keeps himself off like a drunkard is not the one who worships Shri have they done? Even now, they want Krishna. The one who is one with Shri to say they are separate, they are Krishna enjoys everyone who [is] different. "Whatever problems we are facing are our own." So this collectivity there, specially if they are all realized souls, that person enjoys their has been so much minimized in a company very much. That is country of Shri Krishna itself. Though. they have that within themselves, a something so easily understood in your lives if you see how you live feeling that they should talk about every country, they should give lead to happily, morally, absolutely perfect, in every country, they should consult no way you do anything immoral, steal every country, but always take a anything or have bad feelings for other wrong decision about those countries. people. It's something surprising that This comes because they are not has happened to you, that you are all living so happily in one place together discriminating. They should be discriminating. with such joy! His collectivity is to be understood So many things can be said about Vishuddhi chakra, but specially I am because I always say that Shri Krishna

 10 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 1& 2 is shifty, going from here to there, more concerned about two chakras on there to there, then you are actually two sides. One of them is, as you know, is the Lalita chakra on left side going against your dharma, against and Shri chakra on the right side. I've your evolutionary process and one day always told ladies that please keep will come when you might become this covered. It looks so simple. It's blind, you might deveiop cataracts. You might develop all kinds of very important. Don't expose this because power of this should be diseases of the eyes, which are very important to pay attention to. Then this Shri chakra and Lalita preserved chakra, they're very important. They connection also goes to the tongue. The tongue is looked after. But those are, I should say, feminine powers and they are the feminine powers of Shri people have a very bad habit of Krishna, which must be understood suddenly saying horrible things, of that whatever way you respect your suddenly saying very bad words or sometimes getting after somebody body, that is the way your chakras are with very bad remarks, all such things and that is the way you suffer. For are very bad for the tongue and this is example, you do not respect Shri Ganesha, you will suffer. And if you what Shri Krishna doesn't like. In case respect Ganesha and do not behave you use your tongue for saying harsh in a manner that you should behave, things to others, being sarcastic, being you will suffer. You'll have problems. harsh on others, or using abusive So the whole body reacts. Body reacts words, your tongue, one day, I don't know how it will react. It will react in to outside influences in such a manner different ways. God knows, it might that you start seeing there is become thick. It won't move. God something wrong somewhere and that's why you behave like this. Apart knows, it might be sucked inside. from that, eyes are supplied by this That's the physical side of it, but also chakra only, so when you look at mental side of it, that you wouldn't know what you are talking about. If you something, it should be very pure glance. The purer it is, the better you say something, you'll say something else. It's possible with your tongue. It's will enjoy. But if the glance is not pure,

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 11 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1&2 But don't accept it. If you accept it and quite possible that we may not be able go on crying about it and weeping to talk, may not be able to say about it, then you can get cancer. But anything. Anything is possible if you try to trouble your tongue like that, using it supposing somebody says something, you should know he is a stupid fool, for wrong purposes. Tongue is not for being used for abusive things, as well just keep out of it, then nothing can as for - like some people try to be extra happen, So both ways one has to be kind and gentle and this and that to careful because Krishna is playing achieve some ends. This kind of thing around and He sees how far you can also is very, very much is dangerous go. Now throat - throat is very for the tongue and you might develop blisters on your tongue to such an important. We should look after it. extent that people who even go on Those people who shout, scream, saying harsh things to others and all ultimately can lose their power of speech, can become frantic with their that can develop a kind of a cancer. Some people think that if you bear problems of the throat, specially throat up everything it is good. Is not. If can develop horrible disease by which somebody is trying to oppress you, you just - they can just get swollen up. don't try to bear it. Throw it away We call it snake disease and you feel suffocated. because it you bear also, you can So when you talk to someone, talk move to the left and you can get a sweet manner, but don't horrible things like cancer. You can get clearly, in cancer. Those who are aggressive, shout at the person, never. Neither they can get also diseases and those you try to show peevishness in your who are very much, I should say, speech. If you are peevish, then cancer can set in. So both ways you bearing type also get into trouble. So you should be in a balanced state, have to be careful, as you are Sahaja should not accept anything. Yogis. You have to have this Supposing anybody calls you name, knowledge, that you will not do, bear just keep quiet, look at that person anything nonsensical if anybody that's all. Know that he's a stupid fool. speaks - means you should not accept

 12 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 it. One may say something to you. It's others, not to sit on somebody's head. all right. And sometimes you should It's very, very dangerous tor your tell him off. "That you were saying like throat and such a throat will always, will always be in danger of getting this, is not so." It's best is not to bear it up and to suffer. You're not Christ. You some horrible diseases. All this I have don't have His powers. Because if you told you because so many things we do that, you'll develop cancer. So try know about Vishuddhi Chakra. We should have very subtle knowledge to be in a way just in the centre. about the Vishuddhi Chakra. We watching everything. if should also have little idea, that what aggression or if there's recession one of the two things you must not can happen to our Vishuddhi chakra if we try not to look after it. give in to any of these attitudes, but So this is what is Shri Krishna's develop an attitude of standing very work. Also teeth He looks after. Ears firmly on your own grounds. He looks after. You know what is to be For example, there was a Chinese done about the teeth and the ears. story I read once - a king wanted his two cocks to win in a race, so they said These are His own sixteen- we can say works. We can call them as you send them to a sage and train them up. So he sent them to a sage. Karyas sixteen on which He works on different, different levels. And you They were trained very well. And when must try to develop your powers of they were brought, they stood in the arena and many cocks were there, your Vishuddhi chakra by so many ways and so many excersizes, by who started attacking them, but these two were standing like this, least understanding what goes wrong with bothered. They tried and tried, but us when we do not understand and these two were standing like this. As a value our Vishuddhi chakra. Now result, all of them ran away. So that's America is the Vishuddhi of the whole world, so it is very important that the what is the character you should have. Is not to bend to something because people who are in charge here should know all the powers of Vishuddhi, plus somebody is aggressive and also not to aggress others, not to torture how to preserve it and how to expand

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 Jan.-Feb. 2002 13 it to the whole world. With these two that comes to your hands and teaches you. So it's such an important chakra. hands also are from Vishuddhi chakra In the same way, America is very and, with that, you have to spread Sahaja Yoga. You have to go to important and, as citizens of America, different worlds, different countries, you should try to maintain the religion, even to small villages you have to the dharma here and to create a great spread Sahaja Yoga. Only in the understanding for world problems and try to give love to all the people from hands first, you see the cool breeze. That means you feel the universal whatever country they may be coming. power of the Divine in your hands. So this is the collective, universal love May God bless you all

 Maha Shivaratri Puja Pandharpur, Maharashtra, February 29, 1984 Pravachana of Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi In these modern times, a place Now the whole story has to be taken in a very sensible way, with the which is supposed to be a holy place becomes the most unholy place. It's common-sense in it. That God Himself is capable of all kinds of miracles. We, such a topsy-turvy condition these days. And when we are trying to who are created by God are doing establish something very fundamental some things which look miraculous that's like a little seedling that has to say, if you take about 100 year old come out of the stones, it has to fight situation of this world. We can say lots of things, so we have to keep our today we are seeing many things brains intact and be sensible about which could be called miraculous. 100 years back no one could have thought every thing and try to see what we can we could have all these achieve through our patience and understanding. It's very important. arrangements done here in such far- Today I think is a very great day, for fetched places. But, all these miracles come from the power of God. So we all of us, because this place is the place of Virata, of Shri Vitthala. It is the place are the creators of that 'wee' bit-very where Shri Vitthala appeared to a wee bit of that miracle. So all the miracles of God cannot be explained devoted son and when he asked Him that, "You better stand on a brick", He and should not be explained. They are stood there. And they say that He stood beyond our minds, and, to make people feel the presence of God, God there, waiting. Some peopie say that can do anything! the statue that we see came out of the Mother Earth on this sand and that's He can move into all of the 3 what Pundarikaksh carried saying that, dimensions and also in the 4th "These are the ones who came to see dimension and can do whatever He me and my parents when I was busy feels like. That's what you have seen now in your day-to-day life, how many with them, so they are standing on the miracles take place - to all of you- and same brick which I threw".

 15 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 represents the Spirit. And the Spirit is you can't understand how it works out; even it works out on things which are residing in all of you in your hearts. not living, and people are quite The seat of Sadashiva is on top of your amazed at how these things happen. head; but is reflected in your heart. So we have to believe, now, after Now, your brain is the Vitthala. So to seeing all this ourselves, that He is bring Spirit to your brain means enlightenment of your brain. God! And He can do anything that He "Enlightenment of your brain" means: teels like, and we are nothing! We are The limited capacity of your brain has to become unlimited in it's capacity to nothing. There should be no rationality about it-of under-standing God's realize God. I will not use the word miracles. "How can it be?" You can't 'understand. "To 'realize' God". How explain. Only when you achieve that powerful He is, how miraculous He is, state of mind where you believe how great He is! Another is that the brain of man can create - of course, through your experiences that God is all-powerful. It's very difficult, this out of the dead-but, when the Spirit comes into brain, then you create concept. It's very difficult; because we are limited people. We have limited Living things, Living work of Kundalini. Even the dead start behaving like powers. We can not understand how God could be all-powerful, because living, because 'you touch the Spirit in we haven't got the capacity. So this the dead'. Like the nucleus inside every atom God who is our creator, who is our or a molecule, has the Spirit of that preserver, the one who desired that molecule. And if you become your we should exist-who is our existence itself, is all-powerful God. All powertul. Spirit - we can say the 'brain' of a He can do whatever He likes with you. molecule or an atom is like the nucleus; body of the nucleus. But the He can create another world, he can destroy this world. It's only if He has to one that controls the nucleus is the 'desire'. Spirit that resides within the nucleus. My idea of coming to Pandharpur So now you have got the attention for Shiva Puja was this that Shiva of the body-the whole body of the

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 Jan.-Feb. 2002 16 atom, then the nucleus, and 'inside' your brain-this is the second state- the nucleus is the Spirit. then you really become Self-realised, In the same way-we have this body, in the full way. Because then your Self, that is the Spirit becomes your the attention of the body. And then we brain. Action is very dynamic. It opens have the nucleus that is the brain. And the Spirit is in the heart. So the brain is then, the 5th dimension in the human controlled through the Spirit. How? being. That around the heart there are seven First when you become realized, auras-which can be multiplied into any collectively conscious, and start number. Seven raised to power 16 raising the Kundalini, you cross the 4th dimension. But when your Spirit thousand which are the ones which watch the seven chakras-raised to comes into your brain, then, you become the 5th dimension-means, power 16 thousand. you become the Doer. Our brain, now, Now this Spirit is watching through this aura-watching, I am again saying for example says "Alright, lift this thing up". So you touch it with your hand, 'watching' through this aura. This aura is watching the behaviour of your you lift it up. You are the doer. But when the brain 'becomes' the Spirit, seven centers in your brain. Is also watching all the nerves that are the Spirit is the doer. working the brain. 'Watching'; again. And when Spirit is the doer, then you become a complete Shiva; Self- But when you bring the Spirit into your realized. In that state, if you get angry, brain, then you go 'two' steps ahead. Because when your Kundalini rises, you are not attached. You are not an to 'anything She touches the Sadashiva and attached person Sadashiva informs the Spirit. Informs whatsoever. If you possess any thing- in the sense-reflects, in the Spirit, so you are not attached. You cannot that's the first state where the attach, because Spirit is detachment. watching auras start communicating to Complete detachment. You don't your different chakras in the brain and bother about any attachments whatsoever. 'Even' for a second, you integrating it. But when you bring your "Spirit" to are not attached.

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 17 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 identified with your Spirit. Because if Now I would say, to understand the detachment of Spirit we should study you have to watch your attention you ourselves very well, clearly-"How are will have to be your Spirit. Otherwise how are you watching? we attached?" We are attached, firstly, So now see-where is your attention by our brain. Mostly by our brain. Because all our conditionings are in going? First, the attachmentis, in all gross our brain and all of our ego is also in ways, to your body. So we see Shiva doesn't know attachment to His body! He So emotional brain. all our attachments are through our brain and sleeps anywhere. He goes to the cemeteries and sleeps there. Because, all our egoistical attachments also are through our brain. That's why it is said He's not attached, He can never be caught up by any bhoots or any thing; that after Realization one must try to Shiva-Tattwa nothing of the kind. He is detached. The by practice the detachment is to be watched and seen practising detachment. Now how do you practice this through 'your own' attachments. Now, because you are realized detachment? Because we get attached to souls,- not yet the Spirit-it has not yet something-of course through our come into your brain of course, but still you are realized souls. brain, but through our attention. So we So what you can do is at least to try to do what we call "Chitta Nirodh' (fan Artu), is to control your attention. watch your attention. You can do that. "Where is it going?" In the practice of You can watch your attention very ieru clearly; by seeing where your attention Sahaja Yoga, if you have to rise higher you have to improve your 'own' is going. And then, 'controlling' your instrument and not the instrument of attention, also, you can do. Very others. This is one thing one should simple. To control your attention you have to just remove your attention know for definite. from 'this', to 'that'. Try to change your Now, you just watch your attention, where is it going. Watch yourself. As priorities, all this has to be done soon as you start watching your Self, 'Now,after realization a complete detachment. your attention, you will become

 18 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1&2 Jan.-Feb. 2002 So the body demands comfort. Try "Which ever way you keep me l'll remain in that state, 'and' I will enjoy". to make body uncomfortable a little bit, Further in his poem, Kabira says, "If you Try. What you think it to be comfortable, try to make it a little make me go on an elephant---means the royal conveyance---l'll go; if you make uncomfortable. That's why people went me walk, I'll walk", "Jaise rakhahu taise to Himalayas. You see, coming to this place itself has caused us lot of hi rahu"--So 'no' reaction on that point- --no reaction. First---'No explanation', problems. So going to Himalayas--you can imagine. So after realization they then no reaction! used to take their body to Himalayas: Now, second is about food. That's the first seeking human beings had as Alright, go through all this. Let's see how you act". So what you call the animals. No attention on food! Whether you penance side starts now. In a way, it's have salt or not, whether you have this a penance which you can do very or that, 'no attention' on food. Actually easily because now you are realized souls. With enjoyment, little, try to you should not remember what you make this body.. For shiva, it doesn't ate this morning. But we think as to matter whether He's in a cemetery or in what we are going to eat tomorrow. his own Kailasha or anywhere. We consume food not for running this body but for a sort of a more Where is your attention? You see, satisfaction of tongue pleasures. Once that your human is attention IS you start understanding that pleasure hopelessly bad! Very entangled, non- sense it is. "We did this because of is a sign of gross attention, 'any' kind this"- there is an explanation--or of pleasure is others have to give an explanation. sensationalization; sensation. 'Very "No explanation' is needed to be given gross' it is. or to be accepted, or to be asked for. But when! Say " No pleasures," it No explanation. To exist without doesn't mean that you should become explanation is the best way. In a serious people and people of sort of as somebody is dead in your family! But simple Hindi language. ही E A TE (jaise rakhahu taise hi rahu): you should be like Shiva. So detached.

 19 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 needs is that whatever He wears is his He came on a bull, which was running very fast, to get married. He beauty. He doesn't need any thing to was sitting on a bull with his two feet be done. So attachment to 'anything' is like this, you see. And the bull is ugliness. Is ugliness. Is nonsense. But running fast and He is holding the bull; you can dress up whatever way you the feet like this! And He's going for his wedding! And with Him are coming like. Or, even if you are in the most people with one eye, without noses, all ordinary dress, you look the most kinds of funny people coming with magnificent person. But it's not that if Him; and His wife feeling quite you say that, "Alright, so in these circumstances let us go about on a embarrassed at the non-sensical one sheet wrapped around." The things people are talking about Shiva. beauty that has "evolved" within you He's not bothered what his reputation would be. But that does't mean that through Spirit, gives you that power you become hippies. You see this is that you can wear whatever you feel the problem that once you start like, makes no difference to your thinking like that, you become hippies. beauty, your beauty is there all the Many people believe that if you try to time'. But have you achieved that behave like Shiva, you become Shiva; state? And that state only you ahieve when your Spirit enters into your brain. that if you take 'ganja' you become With ego-oriented people it is more Shiva because Shiva used to take "ganja. Because He was 'consuming' difficult. And that is why they cannot all that to finish off from this world. For enjoy things. At the slightest pretext him what does it matter whether its they topple down. And Spirit, which is the source of joy, just doesn't come, ganja, what does it matter, give him doesn't show. The joy is beauty. The any thing, He'll never get drunk. No question. He's 'consuming' all that. Or joy itself is beauty. But, that is a state one has to 'achieve'. they think, if they live like Shiva, the Attachments come by various way He was detached about things. He was least bothered about His methods. You go a little ahead with it, then you have attachments of your appearance. What appearance Shiva

 20 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Isue 1 & 2 separation, you feel attached. family. What will happen to my child? Because if you are that, how will you What will happen to my husband? What will happen to my mother, to y be attached? Do you see that point? Because there is a difference and a wife, this, that, nonsense. Who is your father and who is your distance between you and yours%3; mother? Who is your husband and that's why you get attached to it. But it's 'me' who is the other? This whole who is your wife? For Shiva He doesn't know all these things. To Him He and universe is me. Who is the other? Everything is me, who is the other? It His Power are 'inseparable' things. So is not that it's a brain wave or an ego He stands as singular personality. There is no 'duality'. When there is brain wave. So who is the other? duality then only you say 'my' wife. Nobody! That's only possible when your You go on saying 'my' nose, 'my' ears. Spirit comes into your brain and you "my' hands, my, my, my, my, my,.. become part and parcel of Virata itself, Go deep down. Virata is the brain, as I told you. Then Till you say 'my' there is some duality. But when I say, "I, the nose" 'everything' that you do: When you then there is no duality. Shiva the show your temper, when you show your affection, when you show your Shakti, Shakti the Shiva. There is no compassion, or anything, it is the Spirit duality. But we live throughout on our that is expressing. Because brain has duality and because of that there is an attachment? If you are the light and lost its identity. The so-called "limited" you are the lamp, then where is the brain it has become the unlimited daulity? If you are the moon and you Spirit. I do not know, I "really" do not know are the moonlight then where is the how to give an analogy to a thing like duality? If you are the sun and you are the sunlight, you are the word and you that. But what we can do is to are the meaning, then where is the understand it: That if a colour is duality? dropped in the ocean, the ocean But when there is this separation, becomes colourful, is not possible. there is duality. And because of this But, try to understand, if a little colour,

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 21 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 is the light of the Spirit and this light of limited colour, is dropped into the ocean, the colour loses its identity the Spirit acts, works, thinks, co- completely. Think of the other way ordinates, does everything. This is the reason today I decided to bring Shiva- round. If the ocean is coloured, and is Tattwa to the Brain. poured into atmosphere or onto any The first procedure is to take your part, any little wee bit, or onto any brain towards the Shiva Tattwa by spot, onto any atom or anything, it all telling it: "See where are your going becomes colourful. Mr. Brain? You are putting attention to So the Spirit is like the ocean which this. You are putting attention to that, has the light in it. And when this ocean getting involved! Now detach, become pours into the little cup of your brain, the cup loses its identity and the brain yourself. Only the Brain. Spiritual! Detach, Detach. everything becomes Everything! You can make everything And then, take this 'detached' brain, Spiritual. Everything. You touch 'completely' filled with the colour of the anything it is Spiritual! The sand Spirit. It will automatically happen. As becomes Spiritual, the land becomes long as you'll have these limitations to your attention, it will not happen. So Spiritual, atmosphere becomes Spiritual, celestial bodies becomes one has to 'really deliberately' do this Spiritual. Everything becomes tapasya. Every individual. I'm with you; so you don't need any Spiritual! So it is the ocean that is the Spirit, while your brain is limited. puja that way. But that state has to be So the detachment from your achieved, and for achieving that state, you need the puja. I hope so many of limited brain has to be brought in. All limitations of brain should be 'broken you will become the Shiva-tattwas in so that when this ocean fills that brain; my lifetime. But don't think I'm asking it should break that little cup and 'every you to suffer. There is no suffering in bit' of that cup should become this kind of an ascent. If you colourful. The whole atmosphere, understand that this is the complete everything, whatever you look at, joyous state. That is the time when you become Niranand. That's the joy should be colourful. Colour of the Spirit

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 Jan.-Feb. 2002 22 named in the Sahasrara, the name of start our Sahaja Yoga, where some of the joy is Niranand, and you know your you may not attain. But most of you Mother's name is Nira. So you become should try to go deeper. 'Everyone'. For that you don't need persons who Niranand. So today's worship of Shiva has a are very well educated or well placed. special meaning. I hope whatever we No. Not at all. But people who do in the outward way, in a gross way. meditate, dedicate, go deeper, happens also in the subtler way. I am because they are like the first roots trying to push your Spirits into your which have to reach, for others, much wwww brains, but I find it rather sometimes deeper, so that others can follow. difficult because your attention is still Now for today's Puja we'll have a involved. very short Ganesh-Atharvasheersha. Try to detach yourself. Not to wash my feet or anything much Temper, lust, greed, 'everything': on it but a saying of Atharvasheersha, Try to reduce. Like in food: today, I told and you can put. Shiva is all the time clean, pure, Warren, "Ask them to eat less, not like gluttonous people". You see, once in a immaculate. So, what are you going to while, on a day of a big banquet you wash the immaculate? One may say that, "Mother when we wash Your can eat more, but you cannot eat everytime like that. It's not a sign of a Feet, we get your vibrations in the Sahaja Yogi. Try to control. Try to water". "But its so detached that there control your speech: Whether you is no need to wash; at a state where get completely washed, express temper in your speech or you you express your compassion; or you are completely cleaned out. Then we'll have a Devi Pujan because Gauri who artificially compassionate. Try to control. I know, some of you is Virgin, is to be worshipped. So we'll may not do much. It's alright. I have say the 108 names of the Virgin. Then tried to tell you many a times; I'll try to we'll do a Shiva puja. help you but, 'most' of you can do it. I'm sorry I cannot tell you And you should try that. everything in one short speech, all So on a deeper level, from today we about this. But detachment 'must start

 23 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 &2 expressing' itself in your Realization. form of the Shiva-tattwa. 'Absolutely'. I hope I've been able to explain to Detachment. What is surrendering? Is you why I am here today and why nothing. Because when you are today is a very big day. You all who are you are surrendered, detached, automatically. When you are holding here are specially very lucky people, on to other things you are not who should think that God has been kind to you, that He has chosen you surrendered, that's all. What is there to surrender to me? I today to be here, to listen to this. And am such a detached person I don't then once you get detached, you'll understand all that. What am I to get start feeling responsible Abhiyukta; out of you? I am so detached. Nothing. Responsible. Responsibility, not giving So today I hope we all pray that "O ego but responsibility which is Which is Lord, give us strength and that source executing by itself. of attraction by which we give up 'all' expressing by itself manifesting by other attrctions of 'all' the pleasures, of itself. 'joy' of ego, of every thing that we think of, but we should fall into the 'pure joy' May God Bless you

 VOICES Andrew Low (Expressions of a New Sahaja Yogi, who came to Albert Hall, London, Public Programme on 14-7-2001) internal, inaudible voices can be edifying Auditory hallucinations, like hearing and encouraging. Not alI voices are voices, are sometimes one of the unfriendly, malign or similar. Some can be humorous, kind and gentle. Indeed, symptoms of schizophrenia, and jolly frightening they are too. I remember very most often I feel that I receive little in the well, one autumn when I was 21 and at way of reply to my own inner voice, and I long for more news from my voices. I remember reading Charlotte college, when I first started to hear voices inside my mind. These disembodied voices were not always hostile, but very Bronte's Jane Eyre and the passage often they were. As I remember, three where Jane hears Mr. Rochester's voice or four of these voices either waited for me to self-harm ("cut yourself") or across the moors, crying, "Jane! Jane!. It is supposed to be a supernatural voice. Salman Rushdie's novel, Midnight's commit suicide. The voices didn't instruct me to kill anyone, so l'm not in jail, and I didn't kill myself, so this isn't a ghost Children, had a central character who had the gift of telepathy and the ability moving the pen across the page. The to send secret signals. He is one of the voices were quite often rude and special children born in the first hour of personal and they tried to encourage me India's independence from the British- to kill myself by saying they would torture my girlfriend if I didn't do as they wished. others can walk on water, walk through mirrors, swallow swords and travel It was a bad time and lasted about a through time, but he can hear voices. fortnight. It really shook me and was one After all, it is magic realism. Political of the reasons I had to drop out of allegory that the novel is, the children college. Since those days and my diagnosis are unable to pool and harness their of schizophrenia, I feel that I have talents, and their unity is split by become more comfortable with my selfishness and snobbery and hatred. This is so true of our attempts to "auditory hallucinations", even if I have not entirely come to terms with the communicate with each other, through whatever medium, including voices, real problem. Part of my perplexity has always been that I feel that some or not.

 25 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 &2 Jan.-Feb. 2002 One of the most useful things I read smoking but taking the revenue from taxes on tobacco? The haughty health regarding my voices was a sentence in professional advising you to keep taking the tables? Who listens? Is the voice of James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. There is a priest who is giving a frightening sermon on the terrors of hell and he says, "God spoke to you reason the one we heed the most? The voices can be edifying, but I find one of the best solaces for my problem by so many voices, but you would not is an Indian form of meditation, Sahaja hear". This helped me because, although I felt that my own voice was not yoga, which is now practised worldwide, thanks to the efforts of the many people reciprocated, I came to feel that it was "the others" who were at fault. We have who bring us its message free of charge, in unbelievably. It is a pantheistic faith: the freedom to choose whether we speak that it believes in the validity of many or not and they could go their own way and be damned as far as was faiths; and in that the people of different concerned. I felt alone, but I also felt religions, or indeed no religion and all, can sit together in the pursuit of a more resigned and at peace. The sentence is interesting from common goal, peace and spiritual several angles. "We would not hear" is growth. Sahaja yoga has been telling: we are all guilty of being spiritually exceedingly good for my purblind at times, not listening to the problem and, indeed, for my health in "voices" voices of reason, moderation, love or general. I would very much like to see it kindness. God's words do often fall on introduced to a place like the faith zone the rocky ground of deaf ears. His words at the Maudsley Hospital in London, and spirit will never flourish ina hardened where they have health professionals and prejudiced heart. "By so many and religious people exploring the voices" makes me think of the different interface between religion and mental health. people in our communities, our pluralist society. It makes me contemplate the Perhaps we could all do with a bit more of the God in the James Joyce words and opinions of other people. Who has a voice? Who has higher authority? quotation, the one who speaks with the The government telling you to stop still, small voice of a big, big friend.

 EXCERPTS ON PUJA PROTOCOLS FROM TALKS BY SHRI MATAJI Sahasrara Day, May 5, 1980 to begin with. Everything is going to be "Today I am to tell you a few more exposed one day-but not to everyone. secrets about Sahaja Yoga it is that for If you can recognize this that you are the Puja you should not get people of privileged, then you will behave in a mediocre nature, because to bear a way that you have been given this Puja is very difficult. People have not privilege. Today there are many yet understood the value of My Being, of My Feet, of My Hands. They cannot, people in the whole world who are I am thinking of all these they do not deserve to be here. So do meditating. people. You also have to think of all of not get anybody because he is your them and know that they are part and friend, or a sister, or a brother. It is parcel of My being, as you all are and wrong. You are spoiling the chances of you are the alert ones. the person, because it is too much for So at this time in this Puja you are him. He cannot bear it. It is meant for very few people. So remember that it is not meant for many people. not only doing Puja for yourself, for London people, but for the whole world. Not only for Sahaja Yogis who Now what we call the Charanamrut, are all over, (or course for them also) meaning the Ambrosia of My Feet, is but in this Puja you are expressing not meant for everyone. Neither are the blessings of the Puja meant for yourself as Sahaja Yogis who have everyone. So try to avoid people who recognized Me and are requesting to are not yet fully equipped. First thing bless the rest of the people so that they will start is doubting. Also there they also recognize Me as you have will be a problem with the protocol. recognized. By this Puja I hope They won't be able to accept it with recognition will be much clearer. By My recognition only you will recognize that protocol. It is a very great privilege to be here, and this privilege cannot be yourself and the whole thing will work out in a very very beautiful manner. granted to every person. Only thing I want you to be sincere, If you could understand,. this is the not to play games in Sahaja Yoga. It secret of Sahaja Yoga and in this secret you have to get very few people will harm you very much and harm

 27 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 Jan.-Feb. 2002 also other Sahaja Yogis, so don't try to cannot talk like this to the multitudes, but I can tell you this because I want to play games. It will harm you because you will be harming the path of give you the complete keys. emancipation and as a result you wil If you can look at yourself as how be punished, as a result you will be the privileged you are, and understand it, understand what all Sahaja Yoga is, loser. So please try to be sincere, it is not difficult. then you will understand that what a This is not the way to be taken, privilege it is for you to be here, what fortune what reward. For what you many people I have seen they think I am chastising and all these words, are have done, how many lives have been wrong. For Mataji they should not be completely rewarded by being here. This will help you to do Puja in a more used. There are many words that should not be used for Me. It is just sincere manner. May God Bless you. your privilege to be here and you must Now you must meditate also after understand that privileges are given to the Puja because My vibrations you do people who are deserving. I am telling not suck in without meditation. Always you these things because you are it happens so far I have had very few Pujas in which all My whole vibrations, deserving. Sincerity is the key of your success. were sucked in. If you have sincerity It's a privilege. I am giving you the key which, it is. To the western mind about it, it is really the sincerity part of it you will suck all My vibrations. Tell people think if you tell somebody your mind not to ask questions and to something like that they can use a misbehave, but to suck the vibrations word like chastise and all these words clearly. This is for your own nourishment, for your own growth, for are not to be used. You must use words which are 'protocolish', which your own enjoyment. July 19, 1980 are proper. If in your protocol you are not alright Brighton, England you know how you start fitting wrong Now for the Puja one has to bowls into wrong nets and spoil the understand that without Realisation, whole joke. So be careful how you take Puja has no meaning, because you it. Take it as a privilege, as a VIP are not 'Ananya', means you have to become aware of your whole.. treatment for you, you are all VIPS. I

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 28 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1 &2 is awakened by which your Deities are Krishna's description of Bhakti is awakened. So first your vibrations 'Ananya'. He says: must improve to receive. 'I will give Ananya Bhakti'. He wants If the reception is not good what is Ananya Bhakti, means when there is the use of any Puja or projection? So, not the other, means when you are first of all we sort of prepare our Realised. Otherwise He says: instrument or prepare our projecting "Pushpam phalam toyam- instrument. That preparation by A flower a fruit and the water- Whatever you give Me I accept' praying to different Deities, as we call that a Kundalini Puja. By praying to My But when it comes to giving He Kundalini you improve your reflection, says: "You have to come to ME with because then the Vibrations from Me Ananya Bhakti start flowing into yours and they Means: awaken it. This is the projection as far When you have become one with Me, as you are concerned. Once the instrument is alright then you project then you should have the devotion- not before that Before that you are notoutside. And how do you project? By worshipping the Goddess as the connected. Now Puja is Protector of the whole Universe. the left-sided projection, it is the neutralising of the Praising Her Powers. right side very much, especially for By saying that, by repeating that, you echo, in your projection, Her people who are very right-sided3; atmosphere which is very right-sided. Powers. And then your projection becomes that powerful. It is a very Puja is ideal for them. It is Bhakti, it is subtle happening that takes place. It is the devotion that you project. Now what happens actually when you miraculous. These things look so project the Puja? It has been found out simple. Like just washing My Feet, and now as I am telling you that first simple thing is washing My Feet. Now see these Feet. I don't know if you see you have to awaken within you the Deities that are still asleep, by the whole universe - I see there, and I worshipping them. But as these really get stunned by them. When you wash My Feet what do Deities, primordial Deities are with Me, you do? Actually My Feet have been you worship Me, and every Deity in Me

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 1&2 29 Jan.-Feb. 2002 makes no difference, otherwise, if you very hard. And then you put a working little water to soothe them, to suggest say in a very rational manner. But to that Love that are these Feet, it makes that you can feel the effort put in by these Feet. And a kind of a very sweet, a very big difference. Say sweetness a melodious love flows out of these Feet little thing, a little baby-just puts her hand on her mother's cheeks, you see, then. Like today I was coming and I just to express the gratitude, and the suddenly, saw Paul standing same mother's heart starts jumping with love. It is a very reciprocal behaviour. thing happened, see, what a care it is, what an understanding Mother is It is very subtle, and that kind of a coming, She should not be lost. Just subtle working is fixed already, it that, and the things started melting, works that way only. The more you love from your heart the more there is, because this Love understands the joy will be there. The more you are everything, does not want anything, but is only excited if there is somebody rational and mental there will not be so much. to receive the love. There should be, first of all your Now how do you say you are going to receive? By expressing these small cleansing is important, but the small things. So when you soothe My projection should be towards your Mother. That is the height. Once you Feet, wash them, clean them, you know what they mean, recognise. That achieve that height then you become all powerful, and then you can give to recognition, how are you to show? You others. But that giving is nothing but is ceremonies, little these see, ceremonies are important because a very, very, as I told you, is a very mutual and an absolutely reciprocal they express your recognition. It could be absolutely done, dead and finished, and it could be absolutely living if you thing. Because the Devi knows about you, everything. If you try anything know why you are doing it. Then you else She knows, and She will also tell apply some oil and things, again you, frankly, that this should not be soothe My Feet. Just to say3B done, should not be done, clearly, so "Mother, you have worked very hard that you do not be under any Your Feet have worked very hard." misunderstandings about it. But still to Just saying that itself, 1 mean, work it out you must know it has to be

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1 & 2 reciprocal, it cannot be one sided. The because that is the essence of sincerity cannot be one sided, it has to everything, I think, that is the most essential thing. That is why we be both the sides. Then it works out better, and a kind of homogeneous worship Ganesha first, and Ganesha was created first by God, because He feeling, with that love comes in; sort of is the eldest son. He is the first son. He a lubricant, a beautiful feeling of is the eldest brother that you have, and movement within yourself comes in. Puja really is a triggering thing, it though Kumara (Kartikeya) is treated triggers you. It triggers you into a another realm. It is really miraculous. as an elder brother always, while Ganesha calls Himself as a younger brother He was first created. Once you have done the Puja then you Beçause He remains young always, can project out much more in your silence. Your silence itself becomes so never grows. So in a way He is always powerful. younger to you all. It is a very, very subtle understanding. A very young, Now in this special case of our western lives, we have to establish our little thing is so much wiser, He is wisdom. Can you imagine a little baby is so intelligent? A little baby so wise, innocence, very important. It is the first thing that is attacked, innocence is attacked by so many things. So we much more. He is like a grown up little have to establish our innocence, and baby, a very matured, wise little baby. innocence is the most powerful thing; it So by age, you are always older than does not see anything bad, it does not Him, but by wisdom He is the eldest. see anything wrong, it does not see Then like this you should understand how we invoke all the anything it loves. The child does not know that the mother hates the child. Deities in us by doing these small The child does not know if the father things, by saying things, by saying hates the child. The child does not their mantras, because now you are know if anybody hates. In innocence awakened, every word you say is they live, and then they suddenly awakened, now is 'Siddha' mantras. On this Guru Puja I am really going discover sometime, they are shocked, how people are - they do not love. to give you the way of how to do the So Ganesha is very important for Siddha, establishment of the Siddha. the western countries, very important To master every Chakra and the Deity

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 1 & 2 31 Jan.-Feb. 2002 bestowed upon it: to master it, how to this point. You cannot enlighten the do it. I will tell you this Guru Puja no Sun. It is illumined by itself. Now, when doubt-going to work it out. But this the clouds are removed, the Puja is to be done with tull superimposition is removed, the sun understanding and with full recognition shines through the atmosphere. So our Spirit is also superimposed by that it is a great fortune. ignorance. As long as there is superimposition, you cannot see the Even the Devas are jealous of it, all the rishis are jealous of it. The greatest advantage for you, the greatest Spirit. And even when few clouds fortune, make full use of it. And there disappear, the superimposition exists. One has to have a clear sky to see the are very simple things that can please very simple things-you know your light of the Spirit shining through. Mother can be pleased with very simple There are many ways by which we can things. It is like that only, is how much try to remove the clouds. heart you have put into it is the point. The first and foremost things is the It is more to be felt and understood assumption, the faith, that we are the Spirit and realised than to be thought about, the rest and that is because you will go into thoughtless superimposition. You have to assume It is sort of more that within yourself. After realisation, awareness. should become very easy. That you triggering I am so happy and joyous to be are something much more, something here with so many Sahaja Yogis and very different from what you have known so far. so many of them are very new to Me, So now the new situation arises: perhaps I have known all of you thousands of years back. In Sahaja that you do not have a blind faith, but you have a faith that has come out of Yoga, you have all to understand one simple thing, that you are the Spirit, an experience. So your intellect should and whatever is not the Spirit is not not fight it. It should not try to challenge it. If it starts challenging it yourself. We can compare the Spirit with the and if you listen to your intellect you sun: the sun can be covered with the will again go down. Even if you get the glimpses of a star in the sky, then the clouds. There can be superimposition on the sun, but sun remains as it is at scientists believe that there is a star.

 32 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1&2 such a statue, Vigraha. So in the same manner, even if you Vigraha means the one which is a get the glimpses of your realisation, you have to at least believe that you vibrating statue. And then go on are also the Spirit. looking at that statue, and try to raise You go on sticking to that your Kundalini. And Kundalini used to come up to Agnya, but the jumping experience and keeping your attention beyond the Sahasrara was an on the fact that you are the Spirit. Tell your intellect not to cheat you impossible task because one has to go from form to formless. And it was so anymore. You can turn the face of your difficult to get out of form to formless, intellect by this. and even to concentrate on abstract or Now your intellect will start working formless was another impossible task. for the pursuit of the Spirit. This is what faith means. Faith gives rise to pure As the Muslims did or many others tried to do. Under these circumstances intelligence. Now once you have seen clouds removed, still there are clouds. it was necessary that the formless had to take a form so that there were no So you have to use the wind to remove more complications. As soon as you the clouds, wind of the Holy Ghost. concentrate on the form you become And that you know there are many formless. Like if you have ice before ways of taking advantage of the wind. So the wind comes from some other you, as soon as you start touching the ice, it melts away and you start felling source. That is the source of the Holy the cool. Ghost, your own Kundalini. And also So the problem is very easily solved you have in person the Primordial Kundalini before you. Compared to now, Puja is one of the things by which you can excite the forms into formelss. many other seekers who came before Now your centres are the centres of you, you are very fortunate. energies, but they too have a guiding Because worshipping any Vigraha, Deity sitting on all these Chakras. any statue of self-created vibrations of the Mother Earth people had big They are also the formless made into problems. They had to first of all do a forms. And when you do the Puja, the meditation which was called as forms melt into formless energies. And these formless energies start flowing, Savikalpa Samadhi. That means in and then blows the wind. And that is that status you had to concentrate on

 33 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 So it would be better if you all keep how these misidentifications, these superimpositions on Spirit are your hearts open and watch the Puja without thinking about it. Today we will removed. Now you cannot think about reverse the method of Puja. First we the Puja, These are things which happen into a realm which is beyond will do the Havan and then the Puja, it will be better. Because by that we wil thinking. So you have to understand that you evoke the fire element which burns away all the evils. When you wash My cannot rationalise the Puja. You Feet, you do the same thing and even should have the maximum advantage when you evoke the fire you do the on your chakras. For that, you must same thing. fully, just concentrate on the Puja, and how the wind is blowing. And the wind Today first we will have the Havan will see to it that it drives out all the and then the Puja, both are the same. You can worship Me with water or with clouds. So your only work is, your only fire. The essence of fire is the glow, all method is just to concentrate on the Puja and witness. You are a seer. that is wrong, all that is evil is burnt off and then the glow shows on the faces Seer has double meaning. The one and on the bodies of the seekers. And who sees only, just sees and he is only knowledge, he is a seer. Without any also the atmosphere is charged with thought, without any reaction, just the beautiful vibrations when you have sees and absorbs automatically, the Havan." Madrid, Spain spontaneously, he is the seer. For Me May 24, 1986 Today I will tell you the importance sometimes it is burden-some because there should be some parity between you and the Deities some balance of Puja. Even among the early Christians must be there. Here you are saying all the mantras they used to do the Puja of the adoration to the Mary's statues, and the Deities are awakened and there you are who do not want to Maybe, or maybe photographs or we receive anything within your heart. Sol can say the stained glass copies of the Mother of Christ. am the One who has to stock up all the extra energy that is produced in My But later on people started to Body. become more rational and they did not

 34 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue1&2 Actually Vishnu, Virata. understand what is the importance of the Mahavishnu, Vishnu becomes the Puja and when they could not explain Virata. Now this Vishnu Tatwa it, they gave up glorifying the Puja in the regular manner. Even before becomes the Virata and also He Christ they used to have a particular becomes Rama and Krishna and then the Virata, means the Akbar. So Christ type of tabernacle which measured is the Omkara itself, is the vibrations and was specially made and a Puja itself. All other incarnations had to take place was created to worship what the principle or the essence of the they called Jehovah. Now this Jehovah in our Sahaja Yoga is Mother Earth to create their body Sadashiva and Mother Mary is except for Christ's body which is absolutely Omkara and the Earth Mahalakshmi. She incarnated before also. She element of that being Shri Ganesha. So we can say that Christ is the incarnated as Sita and then She incarnated as Radha, and then She Power of Shri Ganesha which incarnated as Mother Mary. Now it is incarnated. So that is the reason He could walk on the water. So He is the clearly written about the birth of Christ in a book purest form of Divinity. Because He is Devi the called Mahatmayam. He was the son of just vibrations. So when you do Puja to Radha, Radha is the Mahalakshmi. So Me because I am in person, there is He was born in another state as an nothing unreal. If they had done Puja to Christ, they egg and half of the egg reincarnated as Shri Ganesha and half of it became must, they have done Puja to Christ Mahavishnu which is our Lord Jesus also, when He lived, and to His Mother. It is said that in the 10 Christ. All the description about Jesus commandments that whatever is Christ is given in that Mahavishnu's created by the Heavens and by the Earth should not be recreated, description exactly the same. Now this Mahalakshmi came on this Earth and reproduced and worshipped. So the She brought forth Her child with incarnations are created by the Heavens. Only in modern times it is immaculate conception which She had done before also as Radha. So the possible to take a photograph of the incarnations. But in the former days Christ is the son of the Great Being of

 35 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1&2 other statues, also there may be many there was no possibility. Now whatever is created by the Mother who might be giving you vibrations. Earth is what has come out of the Also in India as you know we went, some of you to Ganapatipule where it the is Mother which Earth Swayambhus, is created by the is the Ganesha which has come, the Mother Earth. Now have Mahaganesha that is Christ that has we everywhere, we find the Swayambhus come out of the Mother Earth Mahaganesha so the lower portion of things. Another thing is some realised souls also have made some beautiful the body you see there and the head is the whole of the mountain and there statues. I went to Portugal and they had a the water of the sea is also sweet and there are many sweet water wells festival of the Lady of the Rocks. So I went to see that place and there was a there. If you remember a photograph of very small little statue of this height of mine was taken there, many people the Mary, about say five inches and took photographs. And in some the face was just like mine, exactly like mine and they said that this was found photographs in My heart there is a light suddenly by two young children who coming out. And some told Me some were following a rabbit which hid photographs which did not have the inside a niche. So these children saw light, but when they retook, I mean the some light inside the niche and they negative was again taken as a started following under a rock and they photograph and again they took a reached the source of the light-was photograph with that, then the light this statue. They brought it out. And in came out in there. So one must know that in the realm the light they walked and when the people outside, were lots of people of Divine there are all kinds of miraculous things. Same is the Puja. were gathered, they were amazed to Now when we do the Puja, first of all see they brought out the statue from somewhere inside. you will praise Shri Ganesha. By doing So they worship that statue in that that in you Shri Ganesha will be place. Now this statue gives you awakened and established. By vibrations, as I give you vibrations. But worshipping Me as Shri Ganesha your not so much as I innocence will be established. And you give you. And all the

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 36 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 For example if you are rude to Me, if will see the vibrations rise. Also your you are not respectful, the Christ gets vibrations will be increased and you very angry because He has said that, will feel very stable within yourself. Now when you will take Shri anything against Holy Ghost, He will not tolerate. So My Chakra, the Agnya Ganesha's names you will know what starts throwing anger and moving very qualities He has. What powers He fast. Now I have to bear it, I cannot tell gives you. When you praise those you the way Christ wants Me to tell you. qualitites the powers of those qualities Because He is very direct and I have to will start emitting through you. This is how the Divine works. As if you get little bit be careful so that you don't get upset. Moreover while doing the Puja charged with those qualities. Then you supposing you are a doubting type or praise the Goddess, the Adi Shakti. you are opposing it then you do not Now the Adi Shakti has all the seven chakras within Her awakened. absorb the vibrations and I have And She has to work with all these problems. Because the vibrations are flowing and you are not receiving it, so l seven chakras. For the first time such don't know how to contain within Myself an incarnation has come. It is like, you if you do not suck in the vibrations, so I make, first one room then the second take time to take them out. So all these room then the third room, seven rooms things are very symbolic, whatever we and then the whole house is done. You are doing is very symbolic. And that get the keys and you open the house is symbol actually acts. For example if yours. That is how I could achieve Self Realisation en masse. It could not you give somebody a flower that person feels extremely joyous and happy and happen earlier. But now it is possible gratitude comes in. So when you offer because of this combination of all the Me say flowers or anything like water or seven chakras. So now when you are praising the Adi Shakti, I am also a anything then the elements are happy Mahamaya that I look like you; and the Deities are happy in the | behave like you, I have made myself chakras. And then they emit their vibrations, of their qualities and their exactly like you. Very difficult to make, but I have. And this body has to bear blessing on you. They give you their qualities and lots of things to make you understand Sahaja Yoga and your own powers. the blessings. That is how the Divine

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 37 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 December 18, 1989 acts, and gradually after Puja you will Ganapatipule feel it that the whole thing is working "As it is now you all believe I am Adi out. Shakti and you have proof of it. Puja is Now we are doing Puja at this time one of the ways you can have proof of and all over the world people know it. Much more, because when you are that there is a Puja going on here. So doing My Puja, Deities which are they are also sitting in meditation, and within My chakras they get excited, as they also get the blessings. They are also waiting for this moment when the they feel happy, they want to emit more vibrations. When they start Puja starts. So we give them a time like 11'o clock or so, after 11 o' clock emitting more vibrations, then you are surprised that how after Puja you just we should sit down and they start at 11 o'clock. Now they are getting the same get so drenched and you just get elevated and at a much higher level. blessing though you are doing the Of course it is true that during the Puja but they also get the blessings in their meditation. Puja time you feel much more If you are not yet so clever and if elevated for some time, you feel you can keep it up. Some people definitely you do not know all those few things retain it, but people go up and down which are important in the Puja does not matter, because if you are ignorant like a yo-yo. They don't have that about it, innocent about it, God knows, capacity to retain it. That is why one He forgives, He does not mind. You has to meditate in thoughtless should not mind if you commit any awareness to keep up that status. But mistakes or anything. Just with a the Puja of only the Goddess is humble heart do the way you like. allowed, Puja of the God is allowed but we must know who is the God, or who Gradually you will learn, but if you is the Goddess. know and then you deliberately make So doing the Puja of every person mistakes then it is not good. As we blindly, anybody comes forward, says forgive our children, God also forgives this and that should not be accepted. innocent children. So you should be You will be surprised for the first four very relaxed about it and just do it for years I did not even allow them to have the joy of your heart. May God Bless You. any Puja whatsoever. Even they said

 38 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1& 2 I will put My name on that so it is My "you are our Guru, you should allow us to do Guru Puja". I said "Nothing property so that whatever you have given Me is Mine, so called, and is with doing, I will not." Then first after four years on the Navratri day they wanted you. That is how we started this proper to have one Puja. I said "Alright you understanding of things that we have can have it. "But very few people and to have a particular type of metal, then they found that the Puja gave them so much of vibrations, so much particular type of style. Now these of elevated spirituality, and they metals have an effect on us, very dimensions much an effect on us, and in what touched so metal you do the Puja also has an suddenly that then they started effect. Its all a science of spirituality, requesting Me "Mother, you must give which we must understand is very us a Puja." People had no idea how to really do it. It was very embarrassing important and should be done in a proper way if we have to have the best but I had to tell them each and every results, it's like a science. thing, do like this, do like that, you must have this like this. I must always And so the Puja started. I think now work it out this way. people have got quite a good sense of First time I went to Delhi you will be it. Now it is in Maharashtra especially they are experts and it is very difficult surprised, if somebody can get hold of that photograph I was just shrunk and I to argue with them. So they said "Mother we are supposed to give you a was just shrunk, the whole body had sari." Then I said "Give me an ordinary sari, I will not take expensive." Then shrunk. I had become so thin and I was so shocked because they were using they argued with Me this thing, that all plastics and things from plastic used in the Puja, all kind of things. "Oh God I thing, it went on and on and on and on and then it started on to, they said" said," now what to do?" Solnever used to also allow them to give Me any We cannot give you false sari." I said money or anything before. Then I said "Alright give me sari, anything". The it alright start with one pye", then they has become so expensive now you see I have been requasting that now started with one pye, gradually they increased because I thought that they from future try to understand that now I am old and to an old Goddess you can do not know that you have to use silver.

 39 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 If you become thoughtless in Puja, give something simple. But nobody is know that your heart is also involved in willing to accept, now we are growing it. Collect the Puja material and offer it so much this that, airight let us see sincerely. There should be no formality how we reconcile each other. So this is how it is that it makes no or binding in the offerings. It is correct to wash hands, but is your heart washed? difference but it does in a way what When attention is on heart it does not importance you give to everything that go to others. Although you remain quiet you want to do. It is very important. It is from outside, you are speaking from the complete attention, dedication, within. Hence you should not be silent and the complete importance that you for long time. If man's heart is not clean, give to anything that you do. It is very then the silence becomes very harmful. important. If you do not give it the At the same time loose talks can bring highest priority it doesn't work. If it is catastrophes. just by the way, it doesn't work. You should say the Mantras in Puja So it is important to understand that but with great faith (Shraddha). There is no alternative to Shraddha. You should if you have to gain anything in Puja you have to give it the highest priority. perform the Puja when Shraddha And then just before Puja if your mind is telling you anything, or doubting, grows deep, so that the heart itself gets all Puja performed. At that time waves just tell him to stop. Because that mind of bliss start flowing because it is the Spirit that is saying, 'How can any can act against you. So for the Puja you should be all prepared, in a way, in thought come at that time? a receptive way and receive it." People pour wine in the glass. Your "Puja is an external offering, but Puja is like that. In that, wine is your you should understand how you get the reward of the blessings of the Puja faith and the glass is the recitation of and its Prasad. A Puja or a prayer Mantras and the worshipping. When you are drinking that wine forgetting grows from your heart. Mantras are the words of your Kundalini. But if Puja everything, how can a thought come! is not performed from your heart or if Then only bathing in the ocean of bliss! Kundalini is not associated with How can that joy be expressed in recitation of Mantras then that Puja thoughts? However, the joy that you get after drinking the wine is eternal and becomes a ritual.

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 40 everyone should pay their respect, and ever present. It becomes your asset. stand, and should not resume their seat Pujas Many such have been until Shri Mataji takes Her seat. We performed in My presence. Every time a big wave comes and takes you to a may be seated for Puja for long periods new land. Experiences of rnany such of time so to help our attention it is lands becomes your own. They give advisable to eat something before hand vastness to personality and open new and to wear loose clothes. gates of joy. Only a few representatives will Best is worshipping in the heart. If, perlorm the Puja to Shri Mataji. We feel in the photograph by looking at it, can be placed in heart or, after the Puja, its should not way any disappointed that are not we performing Puja. In Sahaja Yoga view goes to heart, then the joy which everything is preplanned by the you get only at that time, can become Divine. So we should not leave the everlasting and ever-present. place which we first occupy, unless for Through experience and with the a specific reason, we should not worry grace of our Mother, there are quidelines each one of us should it we are seated distant from Shri follow during Puja of our Mother which Mataji. The place so given by the helps us in attaining the maximum Almighty is the proper place for our advancement in the search of the benefit. The function of Puja of our Divine. It is not our physical proximity Mother is planned at a right place and which is of concern, it is our depth a right time by the Divine. Hence we should not insist on any specific time and place of our choice. Further, at the which is important. Further, many such powers may be place of Puja all actions should be gained by the seekar during such carried out peacefully. A Pujas. Hence during such occasions of IF we are fortunate enough to be Puja we should not waste time allowing ourselves to think of things around, but present when our Mother is worshipped should concentrate on Puja of Shri in person we should assemble at the place of Puja always before the arrival of Shri Mataji. Until She arrives all Mataji and try to gain the maximum that is given out by Shri Mataji. Every moment of time during Puja should take Bandhan and sit in meditation. When Shri Mataji arrives is thus very precious and the Sahaja

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 Yogi should try to gain maximum all protocols have to be observed. It benetit from the opportunity that they should be placed at a high place and should not be moved frequently. get at the occasion of such Pujas The attention should be always to- The photograph is not an object of wards the Puja and should not get dis- adornment for the household and as turbed because of the temporary trou- such daily worship should be done bles that may be experienced. Sahaja with an offering of tlowers, or washing Yogis should not bring new seekers who have not yet recognised Shri If possible an oil lamp/candle should the photograph and applying kumkum. be lighted in the morning and evening Mataji's Divine Nature, as this may af- fect the vibrations of the Puja. and mantras recited. The feet and legs should not be Everyone shuld try to remain by heart at the function of Puja at every stretched towards the photograph, even in sleep. If it happens unknow- moment and with attention try to ab- sorb the maximum level of vibrations. ingly, humbly request Her forgiveness. In collective Puja and meditation af- This not only helps our individual as- ter the Aarti and mantras have been cent, but serves towards the comfort of our Mother by absorbing the vibra- sung, Shri Mataji has said it is advis- tions She generates within Her physi- able to maintain the same atmosphere of devotion and silence for some more cal body. After Puja, if permitted by Shri time as we have requested Her Holi- ness Shri Mataji to be present and ac- Mataji, the seeker may have Darshan of the Mother. cept the Puja and Her presence be- Nobody should touch Shri Mataji comes manifested to all through the vibrations. At that point of time Sahaja unless permitted by the Mother, to do so is against the protocol of the Divine, Yogis should silently enjoy the vibra- When Shri Matají leaves the place tions for some time and absorb as of Puja everybody should get up and much as possible the vibrations which pay respect to Shri Mataji. The photograph of Shri Mataji rep- have been bestowed. At times of Puja and collective medi- resents Her in our house and other tation in general personal talk on non- places where it resides. It has there- Sahaja Yoga matters should be avoided as our attention becomes diverted. fore to be kept with great respect and

 The Essence of Sahaja Yoga London, 1983 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) their ignorance in which they have been In today's talk I will dwell on the living. In all the ego-oriented countries it essence of Sahaja Yoga. First of all we is very difficult to bring home the truth need to understand that we are passing through an extremely serious time, that we are still ignorant. We have to know a lot. It is very difficult because unpredictable with pregnant they think they know every-thing, consequences. because they have been to the moon. When we look at life, we do not seem to understand that if we miss this The Russians, for instance, still say that they saw no God when they orbited in opportunity that has come our way, for space, which is like saying that one has our evolution, we will not only be been to the third floor but hasn't seen depriving ourselves of it-or this country, the top. England, but also it will be a Where does God reside? Where stupendous loss for the whole of does He manifest within us? In what creation. manner does He manifest? We do not The trouble, however, is that in the know what to see. What we want to see name of God, of evolution and of higher is possible only through our effort. "If life, a plethora of spurious people have we have not been able to see God, then come out making it well nigh impossible (difficult), to convince any one of the He does not exist" This is how we develop our attitude in this matter. But existence of truth. Some times I feel that I better say 'no' to all that we did not know have developed a unique method by which I through our effort. Because we have not known about Him, so He does not can give realisation en masse all over exist. You turn round in a cave. So the world. But it really poses a problem when you see a shadow of your-self for me if the masses are not interested. In fact, it is only very few who take a you believe in that only and say keen interest in their evolutionary "Nothing else existed". The light does not exist. That kind of attitude I have process and would like to come out of drem

 43 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2 persistently been facing. And sometimes I do not know how to give or what is even a King? Just think of it. Who is he? What does he think of himself? He has complained against them realisation. Now you have to start us. Even the laws are so stupid some the other way round. You have to seek. You have to ask for it. Nobody is going times that one can hardly understand. I feel so much mud is going to cover their to fall at your feet and say. "Well, you brains that they may not receive their get your realisation." You have this, for Heaven's sake, please have it" realisation. They may miss it. Actually the Divine does not know Because nothing is selling here. what human beings have created. Nothing is selling here. You are used Really I tell you, the Divine is in the dark to salesmanship, that is, if anything is as to all the nonsenses that you have selling you have to be persuaded or created around you. All kinds of requested. You can save pounds for a sale and all that. But nothing is for sale nonsenses you have created out of here. This is a very difficult thing for your ignorance, out of your ego, and out people to understand. In this present of the choice that you had. I can't atmosphere, where we do not know if explain why people have created this kind of ignorance which cannot be we can get anything which is not for broken or removed. Because you are so much identified with it. It is like a sale, Somehow, we have to work very hard. Sometimes it is very frustrating and sometimes so stupid the way stuck up stamp which refuses to come people react. Like the other day when off. And when such a thing happens you feel "O, God"! The whole creation has we had a meeting at Brighton I was laughing all the while. It is so sad. A been created, the whole working has taken place and the human beings who came to our gentleman have grown so well having reached this programme made complaints. Look, who has got time to put him on a video; stage. But now in this modern life which who is interested in taking his you are leading you find them so stupid photograph?. He says he is a managing and foolish that they have begun director. So what?. In the presence of deluding others with their stupidity and foolishness. How are we to approach the Divine what is a managing director

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1&2 44 realisation to so many people. I know it those people who are true seekers? Those who have been seekers for has happened with so many. But they do not know what they have to achieve. ages? All their lives before have been lost. Sometimes it is very disappointing. The ego is such a horrible stuff that But still, hoping against hopes, I hope people do not want to see what they haven't got with them, what they have we reach all the corners of the universe, to have and what they deserve. They do where we find all people who are true seekers. It is their desire to seek the not want to see that beauty, that light, that is the Spirit. The reflection of God's Divine. It is the power of all true seekers to love is the most precious thing you could think of. In England progress has know the Divine. It is for those who are managing directors, or kinds or been very slow. I would not have been something! What does it matter in the disappointed if it was at the time of presence of God? They would be Christ, because then there were very few seekers. Actually even the close pushed out. They will not be allowed to enter the kingdom of God. That disciples that Christ collected were not true seekers. You are seekers of truth. kingdom is only for those who have known. Not for those who simply talk So many of you have taken to this path just to pursue the truth. But where are about God. Those who say that we are worshippers of God and we have we going? What are we doing about it all? What are our ideas about the truth? learned so much, it will be said "That is Is it that our ideas are but by products of well, then go back to the place from our ego? Is if that we do not want to where you have come? Whatever you known is through your seek the truth? I have met all kinds of have awareness, and in your awareness you people in this country who occupy have come to know. The awareness important positions, lords, ladies and a has to be enlightened. It is not what you host of others. They ask "Who wants to know but human awareness which has change?" Because they think they are still to grow. It involves such a lot of the greatest. Born thus, they hope to journey even after our realisation. carry their lordship and their It takes no time, sometimes, to give possessions with them to heaven?

 Jan.-Feb. 2002 45 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1& 2 * Supposing somebody says "What ever When they say who wants to change?" What can be said? Except are out side, that much more are inside". So why not see? Why should I that they have reached the dead end, the full stop from which no further put a barrier to seeing? If that is going to give the best in the world, if it is going to journey is possible. Now this, I must say, can work out give an inkling of that beautiful thing called the Spirit. Why should we not only with people who are seekers, who have it? You don't have to pay for it, not want to know, through their awareness, what is the truth. You have to know your even exert for it. You don't have to do Spirit, for without knowing your Spirit anything. But you must desire. This is the point you cannot know the truth and what I am trying to make. If you do not desire ever I talk to you is a complete waste of time. Because you haven't got the it from your own heart, God is not going awareness today, to know the truth, I to fall at your feet, imploring "Please am talking about. So, I must earnestly desire me". And if you understand that ask you to become the Spirit. Why you have to really desire it because it is such a desirous thing, that I must tell should you hesitate to do what you are you that this Kundalini is the pure told so that you will get your realisation? You have to become the Spirit first. Desire within you. It is not yet Unless and until this awareness is manifested, not yet awakened, in the sense that it has not yet acted. Imagine enlightened, you cannot see. It is like descibing the nature of colours to a how important it is. You should have the blind mam. You have to open your desire to be one with the Divine, to be one with your Spirit. The desire has to eyes. Even this people find difficult, they have become naive, they do not be strong, if not, then you would be challenging the Kundalini, that is, you know what is is, and also they have no inclination to understand. Now, you see turn anti-Kundalini. Then the Kunalini a tree standing there and somebody would not rise. Sometimes you have to take it upon has told you that there are roots but you do not believe it because they are not yourself for going into and discovering visible. Why not try to find out? the truth. It is you who have to find it out.

 SAL Jan.-Feb. 2002 46 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1& 2 So, when the situation is difficult and For example, I say this is a place which the children are also so adamant what has lots of diamonds or a cave in which can a Mother do. Push them in? I am there is a lot of gold. The gold is not going to come to you. You have to go tO very much concerned, because this ego which sometimes is selfish and the cave to get it. It is as simple. I am not saying you have to walk towards it. You conceited, satisfies itself and is happy. It (the ego) will not allow you to get to have to desire and desire from your the point where you really stand, where heart. It is impossible for me to raise you have all your powers and where your kundalini if you do not desire it, because Kundalini itself is the pure you are the master of being. The identification with the ego is so much desire. What can I do about it? Can I that it is easy to take a bull by the horns force it? You cannot push it out. If you but to take an ego oriented man to the want to have a seed planted you have practices of Sahaja Yoga is very to put it in the Mother Earth. You cannot take it out in bits and pieces. If that pure difficult. desire is not there, then I am breaking Today I am rather disgusted with the my head against the wall. So, it is ego oriented people, but other moods also come, the moods of compassion important to understand that you must and tremendous love. I should do have that desire which is the highest. If something to bring sense to these you are salisfied with things which are useless and nonsensical what am I to people. Something should happen to them otherwise what I see is a do about it? But this is something innate complete disaster. It is going to and does not work with people who do happen. I do not want to frighten you not have pure desire. This has been like Mrs Thatcher does about the written down since long; it cannot be forced, Russians. That might be imaginary. But changed; it cannot be explained, discussed or argued about. this is real. l am warning you that the Nothing can be done; it has to work out disaster is going to come as destruction from within. Even if you have worked it itself. But the greatest thing is the failure of the desire that it could not out on some one, you may not achieve Tuted the results. communicate with you who are chosen

 47 Jan.-Feb. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue1&2 I hope those who come for the first specially in order to bring the Kingdom time will understand my difficulty, and of Heaven. But suddenly you will find that they have all fallen into a sieve try to see that you should desire only your self realisation and nothing else. without a way out. The Sahaja Yogis Just desire that, and forget about too feel frustrated at times. Whatever it is, as far as I am concerned they have everything else even if you are a tremendous desire. But I am so managing director or a king. Keep all desireless that the desire may not your shoes outside and just desire your Spirit. I have to see that you all get your always work out. You see, I am a desireless person. So, I ask the Sahaja realisation somehow. It is like a Mother's desire to give a bath to the Yogis to desire, so that people will have the great desire to become the Spirit. baby and get him cleansed. So, which This is the greatest thing that we can ever you like, whether to be desolute or like to receive a rebuke, I am willing to give to our brothers and sisters, to the work it out. But at least ensure that you people, to the children, the beautiful desire to get your realisation. light and the beautiful time they all have May God bless you to enjoy.

 Miracle Photographs Shri Ganesha in sky May 1994, Goulbern, Australia

 Shri Shiva Idol Elephanta Caves, Mumbai,1985 (By a Western Sahaja Yogi) FF Shri Shiva Idol, Elephanta Caves, Mumbai, 1985 (After 10 minutes of Meditation by a Western Sahaja Yogi



----------------------

2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 January - February, 2002
Volume: XIV Issue: 1 & 2
HAL FURE
The Divine Cool Breeze
1v1r
00
The spirit is like the steady axis of a wheel. If our attention reaches the immovable
firm axis at the very centre of the wheel of our existence (which is constantly
moving), we become enlightened by the spirit, the source of inner peace, and
reach a state of complete calm and self-knowledge.
(Her Holiness Shri Mataji)
(Meta Modern Era)
HOIDITRH
DHARMA
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Diwali
Рија
Shudi Camp, 1988
AM
Shri Mataji on a boat trip near Green Island, Australia
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The Divine Coo1 Breeze Volume *IV Issue 1&2 Jan Feb 200 2
Feb. 2002
Shri Krishna Puja, 29 July 2001
14
Shri Shiv Puja, Pandharpur, 29.2.1984
24 Voices
26 Puja Protocols
42
1
The Essence of Sahaja Yoga, London, 1983
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 BREE ZE
THE
DIVIN E COOL
Published by
V.J. Nalgirkar
162 - A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi 110067
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph.: 5447291, 5170197
For subscription please write to
Mr. O. P. Chandna
N-463 (G-11), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi - 110034
Ph. : (011) 7013464
Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to:
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple
C- 17, Qutub Institutional Area
New Delhi - 110016
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Shri Krishna Puja
Nirmal Nagri
Canajoharie, New York, USA, 29 July, 2001
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today we have gathered here to time, when you see Him advising
worship Shri Krishna, the one who was Arjuna, it is very surprising that here
Virata, who fought all kinds of evil he is talking only of spirituality, of
without entering into the arena. Shri complete detachment and there He is
Krishna's life itself is very beautiful, telling Arjuna that "You go and fight.
They are already dead people. Whom
creative and loving thing. But to
understand Him, it is not easy. For
are you fighting?"
This conflict is
difficult to
example, in Kurukshetra, where the
understand, that how could Shri
war was going on and Arjuna became
depressed and he said that "Why Krishna, the same person who is
preaching that you all have to become
should we fight, fight our own kith and
kin, fight our own close relations, sthitapragya, suddenly starts telling
friends and our gurus? Is it religion? is Arjuna that you go and fight the foes.
One side it is complete detachment
it dharma?" Before that, in Gita, Shri
and another side is the war! "How will
Krishna has described a personality
you explain this?" In Shri Krishna's
which is a sage. We can call him a
saint, or He called it Sthitapragya. So
own words, one can say, that once you
when asked what is the definition of are a realized soul and you have
the Sthitapragya, the description He reached that highest position in your
awareness, to you everything is futile.
gave was about a person who is
But just now, what you have to do is to
absolutely at peace with himself and at
save the dharma - not the dharma that
peace with his atmosphere.
It is very surprising. All this people talk about, but the dharma
means evolutionary process of human
knowledge He gave in the first place in
Gita. That is - that is the best, that He
beings which is going on and if all the
called as the Gyanamarga. That is good people, those who stand for
Sahaja Yoga, by which you get the righteousness, are finished, then how
will this evolutionary power be saved?
subtle knowledge. But at the same
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
Jan.-Feb. 2002
2.
kinds of rituals, everything, and you
So you have to save them and for that,
think that you are very close to God.
if you have to kill, you don't kill
This is one, which is being accepted by
dead
anybody,
they're
already
many, many people and by many so-
because they're not evolved souls and
called religions, that we must have
they don't care for their Realization.
So you have to fight them. You complete dedication for God. How can
have to fight the negative forces. You you you are not yet connected to
have to fight the wrongdoers. All this God. How are you doing? How can
He explains in a very beautiful you have any dedication to God, with
manner, that we have within us three whom you are not at all connected?
The second one was the karma, that
kinds of powers, which we also know,
and by the middle one that we have,
you do your work. You go on doing
we rise above all these material,
your work with a detached mind. I
physical, mental, emotional - all these
mean it's not possible, but that's what
problems facing us into a new realm of
they say and we are doing our karmas,
good karmas, we do all kinds of good
spirituality. And that's what He wanted
to save from the cruel people, from things, go to various places for our
aggressive, who were also cleansing, meet many great people of
the
misleading others. It's a very good spirituality, go to all various places and
pray. Visit all auspicious places which
understanding, if you have, that who is
your relation., who is your brother, who
are being described. All kinds of
is your sister? Those who are evolved
rituals, we do for that.
That is the karma yoga. And that is
souls are your relations. They are your
own and for them, if you have to fight
what the karma yoga, according to us,
is the right side.
the people who are aggressive people,
Many people, as you know, are
you better do it. You have to do it. That
right-sided. Right-sided people are
is the way of dharma.
So we have three paths, as you the people who are, as you know, fll
know, in Sahaja Yoga. The one is of of ego, arrogance and think no end of
- very difficult to correct
Bhakti. Bhakti is where you sing the themselves
praise of God, have devotion, do all them. They also never see anything
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
stage you are equipped with the divine
wrong with them. Whichever way they
power that you can finish off anything
act, they think is all right. That is the
karma yoga, but He has said that that is negative around you.
whatever karmas you do, whatever its
This is to be understood that that's
a state. That's not just talking, That's
fruits are, that you cannot say. He said
not just believing that I am that, but it's
it in a very uncertain manner because
a state. If you come up to that state
definitely, if He had said it with
where you are beyond all these things
certainty, people would never have
understood Him. So He said it is not
and you have all the knowledge, pure
knowledge, the subtle knowledge of
possible that whatever karmas you are
doing could be the karmas which will being, this is the Gyanamarg. Many
the blessings of the people say that everybody cannot go
get you
to Gyanamarg and, for that, you have
Dívine...'Karmanyevadhikaraste Ma
to have a special type of personality,
Phaleshu Kadachana', He has said it.
but this is very misleading. Every one
So then, which karmas we should
do? Or should we give up all the
can go into Gyanamarg. It is very, very
karmas? All the action, we should give
innately
this
within
built
us,
evolutionary attainment. It is within us
up? People were in two minds. This is
the style of Shri Krishna, is to put and all of us can have that. Only thing
is we have no confidence perhaps that
people in two minds so they use their
discretion. And the 3rd one is the
we go on avoiding it and go to cheaper
discretion. Which you call as the things like becoming devoted to
Gyanmarga. It's the central path by something, doing some sort of a ritual,
which you evolve. You evolve into a going to some sort of a holy place, all
new state. Into a new state of your kinds of nonsense, which doesn't give
mind, a new state of your being by you the evolutionary ascent by which
which you become absolutely above
you know the knowledge, the pure
every nonsense. Also you are knowledge, the real knowledge. So
endowed with power to fight whatever far, whatever you have known was
is bad, what ever is corrupting, written in the book, whatever your
whatever is killing this world. At that
parents told you or whatever you have
ver
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1&2
explored outside. But the knowledge all the knowledge. Unless and until
which is the purest, which is the real you have the whole knowledge, you
knowledge, which is the gnyana, that are not yet
a gyani, a person who
knows. In this way, He has established
you can only get through your ascent
and establish in yourself properly in
that our evolutionary process has to
that state. If you go on denying it, you
come beyond all other human
cannot get it. But everyone has a right
awareness. Other human awareness
to get it. You need not be educated, is of no value for a human spiritual
personality. Now he knows sömething,
you need not be a very simple person,
you need not be very rich or poor,
say how many miles it is from here to,
makes no difference, as long as you
say, New York or what trains go there.
are a human being and a humble Al this knowledge is not real- how
much this cloth will cost, how much
human being, thinking that you have to
this carpet will cost, in what shop can
achieve that state. You all can get that
well. And at you get. All this knowledge is just
slate which you know very
that tate you become absolutely useless, is not the real knowledge.
knowledgeable, knowledgeable about
Such a person doesn't know this kind
yourself, knowledgeable about others, of knowledge, but what he knows is
knowledgeable about everything that the knowledge about your being.
goes around. But this state must be knowledge about the whole universe,
maintained and try to go above that which is not how many stars there are
state where you have no more doubts
or how many universes there are. No-
left in you. This is what Shri Krishna it is the subtle inner personality of
taught and this is what one has to everything, he knows. In that subtlety,
he discovers so many new things
achieve, but He, being a diplomat, He
tried to tell you other stories.
which he may not even heard about
"Try this, try that, this, that." But and, thus, you reach a state of great
knowledgeable personality. This is
actually what He has praised is
(Gyanamarg. Ours is a Gyanamarg.
what we have to achieve. We are born
That is the knowledge, the path of
as human beings and we know so
knowledge in which you have to know
many things aiready. People know so
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIVissue1 & 2
Jan.-Feb, 2002
He doesn't say that. So what should be
many things, but they don't know the
actual. This knowledge doesn't come
the state? What should be the
through your reading or through your
condition? He said, "If you praise Me,
intellectual pursuit or from your it you have, bhakti tor Me, you are
emotional movement no. It is giving Me presents, you are doing all
sorts of things, you are very dedicated,
shashwat. It is all the time there.
It exists. It will exist. And it is just to
but you should do ananya bhakti.
Word is "ananya." Ananya means
be understood, just to be known to
yourself what it is. It cannot change. It
when there s not the other, when we
cannot be remolded. It is what it is.
are one, when we are connected, then
And that is what you know now.
the bhakti you do that time, whatever
music you have of devotion, whatever
Nobody would doubt that because
those who have not got this state, they
flowers you give, whatever expression
you have, it should be ananya. That's
may doubt, they may call you crazy.
the word He said, that do ananya
they may think anything, but with the.
open eyes, whatever you say is the bhakti. Pushpam, Phalam, Toyam,
truth. In the same way, with the open
Whatever you give Me, l'Il take. He'll
heart and a open brain, when you take everything. He's the one who is
the only Bhokta means He is the only
know that, that is the real truth and that
is what is to be known.
enjoyer. But what will you get," He
For that, according to Shri Krishna,
says, "when you do ananya bhakti?"
Means "when you are one with Me."
you have to go through various tests.
One is you go on praying to Him. He That means you are connected with
Him. That's how He has explained
says, "You go on praying to Me and
bhakti. But people don't understand.
if you give Me flowers, IIl take. If
you give Me water, I'll take. What- They think that bhakti means you go
ever you'll give Me, I'll take." He on singing on the street, "Hare Rama,
Hare Krishna," this and that, is bhakti.
says clearly, but what will you gain
Is not. If that was real, they would have
out of that is very important. He
doesn't say. "If you give Me achieved something, but they did not.
something. I'l give you something."
Now don't blame Krishna for that. He
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1&2
has clearly said it should be ananya
within us if we have the bhakti which is
Is
after being united, after the yoga, with
bhakti.
Only by changing your dress, the Yogeshwara. This is what one has
wearing a particular type of style, to understand
Now, there are many karma yogis
that's not the way. That's all so
outward. It's just to show off, but who go on working like mad, absolute
actually ananya bhakti is within madly. They think we are doing, after
all [nishkam Karma], without any
yourself, when you are that state then
desire we are serving people, we are
you are one with the Divine. Unless
serving the nation, we are serving this.
and until that state you have achieved.
Ultimately, what do you get? What you
not only that, but have established, it
doesn't give you anything. Many
get may be money. Might be you might
people have told Me, "We are doing so get a good house, maybe all these
much of bhakti yog, Mother. We don't things, but you don't get peace of
Really, what sort of heart. You don't get peace of mind.
get anything." "
bhakti yog?" We do read Shri You don't get that joy, that joy which
Krishna's Gita. Every morning get up
has no boundaries, which cannot be
at four o'clock, take bath, read explained, which cannot be described,
that boundless joy, you don't have.
Krishna's Gita, do this, do that. Then
we sing bhajans, this. We never get And you don't get that eternal peace,
which can stop wars. Completely, it
anything. So what is the reason?"
Reason is that you are not one with can abolish this cruel nature of human
God. And when you are one with God,
beings. That you don't get. But apart
then what does He give you? He won't
from that, you get the powers. You get
the knowledge -knowledge, the subtle
give you cheap things which will
vanish in no time, but of some eternal
knowledge about everyone. You know
about everyone, where are they
nature.
So He gives you peace, peace of missing the point. You know about
the heart. He gives you balance. Also yourself and about others. This
knowledge you get, not in the college
He gives you a tranquil temperament,
or in the schools, but within yourself is
joy of life. All these things are there
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
of knowledge and
way, but also you have destroyed so
the
ocean
aboriginals,
SO
whichever way you want to see,
many
many
fundamental things that you should
whichever you want to achieve, is
have preserved. A day may come
there, there present. That is what is
when they will realize that this is what
the real knowledge, what we call that
the they have been doing and this was
achieve
through
sukshamgyana - means the subtle really wrong. A day will come when
knowledge, knowledge about chakras, we'll have so many realized souls in
America. But just now as the situation
knowledge about the universe.
is that the people are just gone mad
Everything you can get out of this. But
and
then you get more interested in giving with the idea of making money
knowledge to others. You don't want to they discover that now no more,
finished. So now what to do? What to
know so many things then. What is the
do? Come to Sahaja Yoga. Do Sahaja
need to know about banking, say
about who is the richest man in the Yoga and then you will get the
whole world? All these things you don't treasures of your being which are
within you, which will give you all the
want to know. Your whole attitude
changes and what you get is nothing comfort, all the joy and all the
supremacy that any amount of money,
but a kind of a tranquil mind which
any amount of power can give. This is
knows everything that is to be known.
what we have to do, is to take to
That is what one has to achieve.
Now this country of yours, America, Sahaja Yoga and make others also
Sahaja Yogis so that they also get that
is very karamkandi. It goes on doing
work, work, work. They're workaholics. peace, joy and satisfaction and this
They work so hard and what do you madness of running from one thing to
get? You get children who are drug another will be finished because you
addicts. You get wives who are
can never be satisfied with that. Want
to buy today one thing, then tomorrow
running here and there. You get
broken families and no peace. You
want another thing, then want to do
another thing. You are never satisfied.
support wars. Only thing is that so far
You don't get any joy out of what you
this country is being protected in a
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
are desiring. So your pure desire, it how to discriminate and then you
become experts on discrimination, on
should be to be one with the Divine.
vibrations. On vibrations, you can
That is how it will work out.
Shri Krishna's specialty was that He judge everything so clearly, so
always supported people who were beautifully. Others
realized souls, who were on the right you, that's a different point, but you
may not agree with
know what is right and what is wrong.
path, who were doing righteous things.
And that is what Shri Krishna's gift is.
He would never support anybody who
As it is, you know He is controlling
may be well off, who may be a great
sixteen sub-chakras within us. He
a great king was
thing. Like
controls everything. He controls your
Duryodhana. He invited Shri Krishna
to his house, to his big palace to be his
throat, nose, eyes, ears. All these
things He controls, but ultimately, what
guest. Shri Krishna said, "I am sorry."
does He say? He says He is the Virata.
He went to Vidura, who was the son of
Virata means the one who is the great,
a maid, Dasiputra, because Vidura
great lord, what we call "Akbar" and
was a realized soul. Because he was a
that's what in the Muslim thing they
realized soul, to Him he was much
higher,
much
than
accept that Allah-O-Akbar.
greater
I mean, because it is in a poetry, it's
Duryodhana, who was a ruler because
he was a crook, because he was a partly clear, partly not clear, but He
was a Virata and He showed His form
bad man. So the discrimination
to Arjuna and Arjuna was amazed to
between good and bad becomes one
in your mind, becomes one of your
see His form, that He's the Virata.
He's the one who is great, absorbing
inner temperament, then you are
always very much satisfied because everything and He's the one who is
you know you have not been doing taking out everything. He's a Yama.
He is the one who is the god of death.
something that is wrong. The
discrimination is the gift of Shri He's so many. You know His names
Krishna. Apart from anything else, He
are there written down. All these
gives us the gift of discrimination. That
powers are with him, which He uses
is His style, I should say, to teach you
wherever it is needed. So the Sahaja
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1 &2
is the deity of America. America is also
of
have
the
first
Yogis
power
very collective. Like it will be interested
satisfaction. Imagine in this place, you
in every country. It will be bothered
are all enjoying so much, you are living
about everyone, but in a wrong way it
here so happy. Shows what? You are
tries to help. Always it is never in the
so satisfied. Otherwise nobody would
like. They would say, "No, we want right way. Now, supposing there is a
some nice place. What is this? We country where they are producing a lot
don't want to live here with everyone."
of drugs. Why not invade that country,
But to live with others, this collectivity instead of invading other countries?
He's like that.
also is the blessing of Shri Krishna. He
missing. Uniess and until you have
teaches you to be collective, the fun of
collectivity, the enjoyment of that, you cannot use your power of
collectivity. A person who is secluded, collectivity properly. Though they are
collective, but what collective work
who keeps himself off like a drunkard
is not the one who worships Shri
have they done? Even now, they want
Krishna. The one who is one with Shri to say they are separate, they are
Krishna enjoys everyone who [is] different. "Whatever problems we are
facing are our own." So this collectivity
there, specially if they are all realized
souls, that person enjoys their has been so much minimized in a
company very much. That is country of Shri Krishna itself. Though.
they have that within themselves, a
something so easily understood in
your lives if you see how you live feeling that they should talk about
every country, they should give lead to
happily, morally, absolutely perfect, in
every country, they should consult
no way you do anything immoral, steal
every country, but always take a
anything or have bad feelings for other
wrong decision about those countries.
people. It's something surprising that
This comes because they are not
has happened to you, that you are all
living so happily in one place together discriminating. They should be
discriminating.
with such joy!
His collectivity is to be understood
So many things can be said about
Vishuddhi chakra, but specially I am
because I always say that Shri Krishna
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 10
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 1& 2
is shifty, going from here to there,
more concerned about two chakras on
there to there, then you are actually
two sides. One of them is, as you
know, is the Lalita chakra on left side going against your dharma, against
and Shri chakra on the right side. I've
your evolutionary process and one day
always told ladies that please keep will come when you might become
this covered. It looks so simple. It's blind, you might deveiop cataracts.
You might develop all kinds of
very important. Don't expose this
because power of this should be diseases of the eyes, which are very
important to pay attention to. Then this
Shri chakra and Lalita
preserved
chakra, they're very important. They connection also goes to the tongue.
The tongue is looked after. But those
are, I should say, feminine powers and
they are the feminine powers of Shri people have a very bad habit of
Krishna, which must be understood suddenly saying horrible things, of
that whatever way you respect your suddenly saying very bad words or
sometimes getting after somebody
body, that is the way your chakras are
with very bad remarks, all such things
and that is the way you suffer. For
are very bad for the tongue and this is
example, you do not respect Shri
Ganesha, you will suffer. And if you what Shri Krishna doesn't like. In case
respect Ganesha and do not behave
you use your tongue for saying harsh
in a manner that you should behave, things to others, being sarcastic, being
you will suffer. You'll have problems. harsh on others, or using abusive
So the whole body reacts. Body reacts
words, your tongue, one day, I don't
know how it will react. It will react in
to outside influences in such a manner
different ways. God knows, it might
that you start seeing there is
become thick. It won't move. God
something wrong somewhere and
that's why you behave like this. Apart knows, it might be sucked inside.
from that, eyes are supplied by this That's the physical side of it, but also
chakra only, so when you look at mental side of it, that you wouldn't
know what you are talking about. If you
something, it should be very pure
glance. The purer it is, the better you
say something, you'll say something
else. It's possible with your tongue. It's
will enjoy. But if the glance is not pure,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002 11
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1&2
But don't accept it. If you accept it and
quite possible that we may not be able
go on crying about it and weeping
to talk, may not be able to say
about it, then you can get cancer. But
anything. Anything is possible if you try
to trouble your tongue like that, using it
supposing somebody says something,
you should know he is a stupid fool,
for wrong purposes. Tongue is not for
being used for abusive things, as well just keep out of it, then nothing can
as for - like some people try to be extra
happen, So both ways one has to be
kind and gentle and this and that to careful because Krishna is playing
achieve some ends. This kind of thing
around and He sees how far you can
also is very, very much is dangerous
go.
Now throat - throat is very
for the tongue and you might develop
blisters on your tongue to such an
important. We should look after it.
extent that people who even go on
Those people who shout, scream,
saying harsh things to others and all ultimately can lose their power of
speech, can become frantic with their
that can develop a kind of a cancer.
Some people think that if you bear
problems of the throat, specially throat
up everything it is good. Is not. If can develop horrible disease by which
somebody is trying to oppress you,
you just - they can just get swollen up.
don't try to bear it. Throw it away We call it snake disease and you feel
suffocated.
because it you bear also, you can
So when you talk to someone, talk
move to the left and you can get
a sweet manner, but don't
horrible things like cancer. You can get
clearly, in
cancer. Those who are aggressive, shout at the person, never. Neither
they can get also diseases and those
you try to show peevishness in your
who are very much, I should say, speech. If you are peevish, then
cancer can set in. So both ways you
bearing type also get into trouble. So
you should be in a balanced state, have to be careful, as you are Sahaja
should not accept
anything. Yogis. You have to have this
Supposing anybody calls you name, knowledge, that you will not do, bear
just keep quiet, look at that person
anything nonsensical if anybody
that's all. Know that he's a stupid fool.
speaks - means you should not accept
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 12
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
it. One may say something to you. It's
others, not to sit on somebody's head.
all right. And sometimes you should It's very, very dangerous tor your
tell him off. "That you were saying like
throat and such a throat will always,
will always be in danger of getting
this, is not so." It's best is not to bear it
up and to suffer. You're not Christ. You
some horrible diseases. All this I have
don't have His powers. Because if you
told you because so many things we
do that, you'll develop cancer. So try
know about Vishuddhi Chakra. We
should have very subtle knowledge
to be in a way just in the centre.
about the Vishuddhi Chakra. We
watching everything. if
should also have little idea, that what
aggression or if there's recession
one of the two things you must not
can happen to our Vishuddhi chakra if
we try not to look after it.
give in to any of these attitudes, but
So this is what is Shri Krishna's
develop an attitude of standing very
work. Also teeth He looks after. Ears
firmly on your own grounds.
He looks after. You know what is to be
For example, there was a Chinese
done about the teeth and the ears.
story I read once - a king wanted his
two cocks to win in a race, so they said
These are His own sixteen- we can
say works. We can call them as
you send them to a sage and train
them up. So he sent them to a sage.
Karyas sixteen on which He works on
different, different levels. And you
They were trained very well. And when
must try to develop your powers of
they were brought, they stood in the
arena and many cocks were there, your Vishuddhi chakra by so many
ways and so many excersizes, by
who started attacking them, but these
two were standing like this, least understanding what goes wrong with
bothered. They tried and tried, but us when we do not understand and
these two were standing like this. As a
value our Vishuddhi chakra. Now
result, all of them ran away. So that's
America is the Vishuddhi of the whole
world, so it is very important that the
what is the character you should have.
Is not to bend to something because
people who are in charge here should
know all the powers of Vishuddhi, plus
somebody is aggressive and also not
to aggress others, not to torture
how to preserve it and how to expand
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
Jan.-Feb. 2002
13
it to the whole world. With these two
that comes to your hands and teaches
you. So it's such an important chakra.
hands also are from Vishuddhi chakra
In the same way, America is very
and, with that, you have to spread
Sahaja Yoga. You have to go to important and, as citizens of America,
different worlds, different countries,
you should try to maintain the religion,
even to small villages you have to
the dharma here and to create a great
spread Sahaja Yoga. Only in the understanding for world problems and
try to give love to all the people from
hands first, you see the cool breeze.
That means you feel the universal whatever country they may be coming.
power of the Divine in your hands. So
this is the collective, universal love
May God bless you all
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Maha Shivaratri Puja
Pandharpur, Maharashtra, February 29, 1984
Pravachana of Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
In these modern times, a place
Now the whole story has to be
taken in a very sensible way, with the
which is supposed to be a holy place
becomes the most unholy place. It's
common-sense in it. That God Himself
is capable of all kinds of miracles. We,
such a topsy-turvy condition these
days. And when we are trying to who are created by God are doing
establish something very fundamental
some things which look miraculous
that's like a little seedling that has to say, if you take about 100 year old
come out of the stones, it has to fight
situation of this world. We can say
lots of things, so we have to keep our
today we are seeing many things
brains intact and be sensible about which could be called miraculous. 100
years back no one could have thought
every thing and try to see what we can
we could have all these
achieve through our patience and
understanding. It's very important.
arrangements done here in such far-
Today I think is a very great day, for
fetched places. But, all these miracles
come from the power of God. So we
all of us, because this place is the place
of Virata, of Shri Vitthala. It is the place
are the creators of that 'wee' bit-very
where Shri Vitthala appeared to a
wee bit of that miracle. So all the
miracles of God cannot be explained
devoted son and when he asked Him
that, "You better stand on a brick", He
and should not be explained. They are
stood there. And they say that He stood
beyond our minds, and, to make
people feel the presence of God, God
there, waiting. Some peopie say that
can do anything!
the statue that we see came out of the
Mother Earth on this sand and that's
He can move into all of the 3
what Pundarikaksh carried saying that, dimensions and also in the 4th
"These are the ones who came to see
dimension and can do whatever He
me and my parents when I was busy
feels like. That's what you have seen
now in your day-to-day life, how many
with them, so they are standing on the
miracles take place - to all of you- and
same brick which I threw".
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 15
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
represents the Spirit. And the Spirit is
you can't understand how it works out;
even it works out on things which are residing in all of you in your hearts.
not living, and people are quite
The seat of Sadashiva is on top of your
amazed at how these things happen. head; but is reflected in your heart.
So we have to believe, now, after Now, your brain is the Vitthala. So to
seeing all this ourselves, that He is bring Spirit to your brain means
enlightenment of your
brain.
God!
And He can do anything that He "Enlightenment of your brain" means:
teels like, and we are nothing! We are
The limited capacity of your brain has
to become unlimited in it's capacity to
nothing. There should be no rationality
about it-of under-standing God's realize God. I will not use the word
miracles. "How can it be?" You can't 'understand. "To 'realize' God". How
explain. Only when you achieve that powerful He is, how miraculous He is,
state of mind where you believe how great He is! Another is that the
brain of man can create - of course,
through your experiences that God is
all-powerful. It's very difficult, this out of the dead-but, when the Spirit
comes into brain, then you create
concept. It's very difficult; because we
are limited people. We have limited
Living things, Living work of Kundalini.
Even the dead start behaving like
powers. We can not understand how
God could be all-powerful, because
living, because 'you touch the Spirit in
we haven't got the capacity. So this
the dead'.
Like the nucleus inside every atom
God who is our creator, who is our
or a molecule, has the Spirit of that
preserver, the one who desired that
molecule. And if you become your
we should exist-who is our existence
itself, is all-powerful God. All powertul. Spirit - we can say the 'brain' of a
He can do whatever He likes with you.
molecule or an atom is like the
nucleus; body of the nucleus. But the
He can create another world, he can
destroy this world. It's only if He has to
one that controls the nucleus is the
'desire'.
Spirit that resides within the nucleus.
My idea of coming to Pandharpur
So now you have got the attention
for Shiva Puja was this
that Shiva of the body-the whole body of the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
Jan.-Feb. 2002
16
atom, then the nucleus, and 'inside'
your brain-this is the second state-
the nucleus is the Spirit.
then you really become Self-realised,
In the same way-we have this body,
in the full way. Because then your
Self, that is the Spirit becomes your
the attention of the body. And then we
brain. Action is very dynamic. It opens
have the nucleus that is the brain. And
the Spirit is in the heart. So the brain is
then, the 5th dimension in the human
controlled through the Spirit. How? being.
That around the heart there are seven
First when you become realized,
auras-which can be multiplied into any
collectively conscious, and start
number. Seven raised to power 16 raising the Kundalini, you cross the 4th
dimension. But when your Spirit
thousand which are the ones which
watch the seven chakras-raised to comes into your brain, then, you
become the 5th dimension-means,
power 16 thousand.
you become the Doer. Our brain, now,
Now this Spirit is watching through
this aura-watching, I am again saying
for example says "Alright, lift this thing
up". So you touch it with your hand,
'watching' through this aura. This aura
is watching the behaviour of your you lift it up. You are the doer. But
when the brain 'becomes' the Spirit,
seven centers in your brain. Is also
watching all the nerves that are
the Spirit is the doer.
working the brain. 'Watching'; again.
And when Spirit is the doer, then
you become a complete Shiva; Self-
But when you bring the Spirit into your
realized. In that state, if you get angry,
brain, then you go 'two' steps ahead.
Because when your Kundalini rises, you are not attached. You are not an
to 'anything
She touches the Sadashiva and attached person
Sadashiva informs the Spirit. Informs
whatsoever. If you possess any thing-
in the sense-reflects, in the Spirit, so
you are not attached. You cannot
that's the first state where the attach, because Spirit is detachment.
watching auras start communicating to Complete detachment. You don't
your different chakras in the brain and
bother about any attachments
whatsoever. 'Even' for a second, you
integrating it.
But when you bring your "Spirit" to
are not attached.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002 17
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
identified with your Spirit. Because if
Now I would say, to understand the
detachment of Spirit we should study you have to watch your attention you
ourselves very well, clearly-"How are will have to be your Spirit. Otherwise
how are you watching?
we attached?" We are attached, firstly,
So now see-where is your attention
by our brain. Mostly by our brain.
Because all our conditionings are in going? First, the attachmentis, in all gross
our brain and all of our ego is also in
ways, to your body. So we see Shiva
doesn't know attachment to His body! He
So
emotional
brain.
all
our
attachments are through our brain and sleeps anywhere. He goes to the
cemeteries and sleeps there. Because,
all our egoistical attachments also are
through our brain. That's why it is said
He's not attached, He can never be
caught up by any bhoots or any thing;
that after Realization one must try to
Shiva-Tattwa
nothing of the kind. He is detached. The
by
practice the
detachment is to be watched and seen
practising detachment.
Now how do you practice this through 'your own' attachments.
Now, because you are realized
detachment?
Because we get attached to souls,- not yet the Spirit-it has not yet
something-of course through our
come into your brain of course, but still
you are realized souls.
brain, but through our attention. So we
So what you can do is at least to
try to do what we call "Chitta Nirodh'
(fan Artu), is to control your attention.
watch your attention. You can do that.
"Where is it going?" In the practice of
You can watch your attention very
ieru
clearly; by seeing where your attention
Sahaja Yoga, if you have to rise higher
you have to improve your 'own' is going. And then, 'controlling' your
instrument and not the instrument of attention, also, you can do. Very
others. This is one thing one should simple. To control your attention you
have to just remove your attention
know for definite.
from 'this', to 'that'. Try to change your
Now, you just watch your attention,
where is it going. Watch yourself. As priorities, all this has to be done
soon as you start watching your Self, 'Now,after realization a complete
detachment.
your attention, you will become
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 18
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1&2
Jan.-Feb. 2002
So the body demands comfort. Try
"Which ever way you keep me l'll
remain in that state, 'and' I will enjoy".
to make body uncomfortable a little bit,
Further in his poem, Kabira says, "If you
Try. What you think it to be
comfortable, try to make it a little
make me go on an elephant---means the
royal conveyance---l'll go; if you make
uncomfortable. That's why people went
me walk, I'll walk", "Jaise rakhahu taise
to Himalayas. You see, coming to this
place itself has caused us lot of hi rahu"--So 'no' reaction on that point-
--no reaction. First---'No explanation',
problems. So going to Himalayas--you
can imagine. So after realization they then no reaction!
used to take their body to Himalayas:
Now, second is about food. That's
the first seeking human beings had as
Alright, go through all this. Let's see
how you act". So what you call the animals.
No attention on food! Whether you
penance side starts now. In a way, it's
have salt or not, whether you have this
a penance which you can do very
or that, 'no attention' on food. Actually
easily because now you are realized
souls. With enjoyment, little, try to you should not remember what you
make this body.. For shiva, it doesn't
ate this morning. But we think as to
matter whether He's in a cemetery or in
what we are going to eat tomorrow.
his own Kailasha or anywhere.
We consume food not for running this
body but for a sort of a more
Where is your attention? You see,
satisfaction of tongue pleasures. Once
that your human
is
attention
IS
you start understanding that pleasure
hopelessly bad! Very entangled, non-
sense it is. "We did this because of is a sign of gross attention, 'any' kind
this"- there is an explanation--or of pleasure is
others have to give an explanation. sensationalization; sensation. 'Very
"No explanation' is needed to be given
gross' it is.
or to be accepted, or to be asked for.
But when! Say " No pleasures," it
No explanation. To exist without
doesn't mean that you should become
explanation is the best way. In a
serious people and people of sort of as
somebody is dead in your family! But
simple Hindi language.
ही
E
A TE (jaise rakhahu taise hi rahu):
you should be like Shiva. So detached.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 19
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
needs is that whatever He wears is his
He came on a bull, which was
running very fast, to get married. He beauty. He doesn't need any thing to
was sitting on a bull with his two feet be done.
So attachment to 'anything' is
like this, you see. And the bull is
ugliness. Is ugliness. Is nonsense. But
running fast and He is holding the bull;
you can dress up whatever way you
the feet like this! And He's going for his
wedding! And with Him are coming like. Or, even if you are in the most
people with one eye, without noses, all ordinary dress, you look the most
kinds of funny people coming with magnificent person. But it's not that if
Him; and His wife feeling quite you say that, "Alright, so in these
circumstances let us go about on a
embarrassed at the non-sensical
one sheet wrapped around." The
things people are talking about Shiva.
beauty that has "evolved" within you
He's not bothered what his reputation
would be. But that does't mean that through Spirit, gives you that power
you become hippies. You see this is
that you can wear whatever you feel
the problem that once you start like, makes no difference to your
thinking like that, you become hippies. beauty, your beauty is there all the
Many people believe that if you try to time'. But have you achieved that
behave like Shiva, you become Shiva;
state? And that state only you ahieve
when your Spirit enters into your brain.
that if you take 'ganja' you become
With ego-oriented people it is more
Shiva because Shiva used to take
"ganja. Because He was 'consuming' difficult. And that is why they cannot
all that to finish off from this world. For enjoy things. At the slightest pretext
him what does it matter whether its
they topple down. And Spirit, which is
the source of joy, just doesn't come,
ganja, what does it matter, give him
doesn't show. The joy is beauty. The
any thing, He'll never get drunk. No
question. He's 'consuming' all that. Or joy itself is beauty. But, that is a state
one has to 'achieve'.
they think, if they live like Shiva, the
Attachments come by various
way He was detached about things.
He was least bothered about His methods. You go a little ahead with it,
then you have attachments of your
appearance. What appearance Shiva
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 20
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Isue 1 & 2
separation, you feel attached.
family. What will happen to my child?
Because if you are that, how will you
What will happen to my husband?
What will happen to my mother, to y be attached? Do you see that point?
Because there is a difference and a
wife, this, that, nonsense.
Who is your father and who is your
distance between you and yours%3;
mother? Who is your husband and that's why you get attached to it. But
it's 'me' who is the other? This whole
who is your wife? For Shiva He doesn't
know all these things. To Him He and universe is me. Who is the other?
Everything is me, who is the other? It
His Power are 'inseparable' things. So
is not that it's a brain wave or an ego
He stands as singular personality.
There is no 'duality'. When there is brain wave. So who is the other?
duality then only you say 'my' wife. Nobody!
That's only possible when your
You go on saying 'my' nose, 'my' ears.
Spirit comes into your brain and you
"my' hands, my, my, my, my, my,..
become part and parcel of Virata itself,
Go deep down.
Virata is the brain, as I told you. Then
Till you say 'my' there is some
duality. But when I say, "I, the nose" 'everything' that you do: When you
then there is no duality. Shiva the
show your temper, when you show
your affection, when you show your
Shakti, Shakti the Shiva. There is no
compassion, or anything, it is the Spirit
duality. But we live throughout on our
that is expressing. Because brain has
duality and because of that there is an
attachment? If you are the light and lost its identity. The so-called "limited"
you are the lamp, then where is the brain it has become the unlimited
daulity? If you are the moon and you Spirit.
I do not know, I "really" do not know
are the moonlight then where is the
how to give an analogy to a thing like
duality? If you are the sun and you are
the sunlight, you are the word and you that. But what we can do is to
are the meaning, then where is the understand it: That if a colour is
duality?
dropped in the ocean, the ocean
But when there is this separation, becomes colourful, is not possible.
there is duality. And because of this
But, try to understand, if a little colour,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002 21
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
is the light of the Spirit and this light of
limited colour, is dropped into the
ocean, the colour loses its identity the Spirit acts, works, thinks, co-
completely. Think of the other way ordinates, does everything. This is the
reason today I decided to bring Shiva-
round. If the ocean is coloured, and is
Tattwa to the Brain.
poured into atmosphere or onto any
The first procedure is to take your
part, any little wee bit, or onto any
brain towards the Shiva Tattwa by
spot, onto any atom or anything, it all
telling it: "See where are your going
becomes colourful.
Mr. Brain? You are putting attention to
So the Spirit is like the ocean which
this. You are putting attention to that,
has the light in it. And when this ocean
getting involved! Now detach, become
pours into the little cup of your brain,
the cup loses its identity and the brain yourself. Only the Brain.
Spiritual! Detach, Detach.
everything becomes
Everything! You can make everything
And then, take this 'detached' brain,
Spiritual.
Everything. You touch
'completely' filled with the colour of the
anything it is Spiritual! The sand Spirit. It will automatically happen. As
becomes Spiritual, the land becomes
long as you'll have these limitations to
your attention, it will not happen. So
Spiritual, atmosphere becomes
Spiritual, celestial bodies becomes
one has to 'really deliberately' do this
Spiritual. Everything becomes tapasya. Every individual.
I'm with you; so you don't need any
Spiritual! So it is the ocean that is the
Spirit, while your brain is limited.
puja that way. But that state has to be
So the detachment from your
achieved, and for achieving that state,
you need the puja. I hope so many of
limited brain has to be brought in. All
limitations of brain should be 'broken
you will become the Shiva-tattwas in
so that when this ocean fills that brain;
my lifetime. But don't think I'm asking
it should break that little cup and 'every
you to suffer. There is no suffering in
bit' of that cup should become this kind of an ascent. If you
colourful. The whole atmosphere, understand that this is the complete
everything, whatever you look at,
joyous state. That is the time when you
become Niranand. That's the joy
should be colourful. Colour of the Spirit
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
Jan.-Feb. 2002
22
named in the Sahasrara, the name of
start our Sahaja Yoga, where some of
the joy is Niranand, and you know your you may not attain. But most of you
Mother's name is Nira. So you become
should try to go deeper. 'Everyone'.
For that you don't need persons who
Niranand.
So today's worship of Shiva has a
are very well educated or well placed.
special meaning. I hope whatever we
No. Not at all. But people who
do in the outward way, in a gross way.
meditate, dedicate, go deeper,
happens also in the subtler way. I am
because they are like the first roots
trying to push your Spirits into your which have to reach, for others, much
wwww
brains, but I find it rather sometimes deeper, so that others can follow.
difficult because your attention is still
Now for today's Puja we'll have a
involved.
very short Ganesh-Atharvasheersha.
Try to detach yourself.
Not to wash my feet or anything much
Temper, lust, greed, 'everything':
on it but a saying of Atharvasheersha,
Try to reduce. Like in food: today, I told
and you can put.
Shiva is all the time clean, pure,
Warren, "Ask them to eat less, not like
gluttonous people". You see, once in a
immaculate. So, what are you going to
while, on a day of a big banquet you
wash the immaculate? One may say
that, "Mother when we wash Your
can eat more, but you cannot eat
everytime like that. It's not a sign of a
Feet, we get your vibrations in the
Sahaja Yogi. Try to control. Try to
water". "But its so detached that there
control your speech: Whether you is no need to wash; at a state where
get completely washed,
express temper in your speech or you
you
express your compassion; or you are completely cleaned out. Then we'll
have a Devi Pujan because Gauri who
artificially compassionate.
Try to control. I know, some of you
is Virgin, is to be worshipped. So we'll
may not do much. It's alright. I have
say the 108 names of the Virgin. Then
tried to tell you many a times; I'll try to
we'll do a Shiva puja.
help you but, 'most' of you can do it.
I'm sorry I cannot tell you
And you should try that.
everything in one short speech, all
So on a deeper level, from today we
about this. But detachment 'must start
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 23
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 &2
expressing' itself in your Realization. form of the Shiva-tattwa. 'Absolutely'.
I hope I've been able to explain to
Detachment. What is surrendering? Is
you why I am here today and why
nothing. Because when you are
today is a very big day. You all who are
you are surrendered,
detached,
automatically. When you are holding here are specially very lucky people,
on to other things you are not
who should think that God has been
kind to you, that He has chosen you
surrendered, that's all.
What is there to surrender to me? I today to be here, to listen to this. And
am such a detached person I
don't then once you get detached, you'll
understand all that. What am I to get start feeling responsible Abhiyukta;
out of you? I am so detached. Nothing.
Responsible. Responsibility, not giving
So today I hope we all pray that "O
ego but responsibility which is
Which is
Lord, give us strength and that source
executing by itself.
of attraction by which we give up 'all' expressing by itself manifesting by
other attrctions of 'all' the pleasures, of
itself.
'joy' of ego, of every thing that we think
of, but we should fall into the 'pure joy'
May God Bless you
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 VOICES
Andrew Low
(Expressions of a New Sahaja Yogi,
who came to Albert Hall, London, Public Programme on 14-7-2001)
internal, inaudible voices can be edifying
Auditory hallucinations, like hearing
and encouraging. Not alI voices are
voices, are sometimes one of the
unfriendly, malign or similar. Some can
be humorous, kind and gentle. Indeed,
symptoms of schizophrenia, and jolly
frightening they are too. I remember very
most often I feel that I receive little in the
well, one autumn when I was 21 and at
way of reply to my own inner voice, and
I long for more news from my voices.
I remember reading Charlotte
college, when I first started to hear voices
inside my mind. These disembodied
voices were not always hostile, but very
Bronte's Jane Eyre and the passage
often they were. As I remember, three
where Jane hears Mr. Rochester's voice
or four of these voices either waited for
me to self-harm ("cut yourself") or
across the moors, crying, "Jane! Jane!.
It is supposed to be a supernatural voice.
Salman Rushdie's novel, Midnight's
commit suicide. The voices didn't instruct
me to kill anyone, so l'm not in jail, and I
didn't kill myself, so this isn't a ghost Children, had a central character who
had the gift of telepathy and the ability
moving the pen across the page. The
to send secret signals. He is one of the
voices were quite often rude and
special children born in the first hour of
personal and they tried to encourage me
India's independence from the British-
to kill myself by saying they would torture
my girlfriend if I didn't do as they wished.
others can walk on water, walk through
mirrors, swallow swords and travel
It was a bad time and lasted about a
through time, but he can hear voices.
fortnight. It really shook me and was one
After all, it is magic realism. Political
of the reasons I had to drop out of
allegory that the novel is, the children
college.
Since those days and my diagnosis are unable to pool and harness their
of schizophrenia, I feel that I have talents, and their unity is split by
become more comfortable with my selfishness and snobbery and hatred.
This is so true of our attempts to
"auditory hallucinations", even if I have
not entirely come to terms with the communicate with each other, through
whatever medium, including voices, real
problem. Part of my perplexity has
always been that I feel that some
or not.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 25
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 &2
Jan.-Feb. 2002
One of the most useful things I read
smoking but taking the revenue from
taxes on tobacco? The haughty health
regarding my voices was a sentence in
professional advising you to keep taking
the tables? Who listens? Is the voice of
James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as
a Young Man. There is a priest who is
giving a frightening sermon on the terrors
of hell and he says, "God spoke to you
reason the one we heed the most?
The voices can be edifying, but I find
one of the best solaces for my problem
by so many voices, but you would not
is an Indian form of meditation, Sahaja
hear". This helped me because, although
I felt that my own voice was not
yoga, which is now practised worldwide,
thanks to the efforts of the many people
reciprocated, I came to feel that it was
"the others" who were at fault. We have
who bring us its message free of charge,
in
unbelievably. It is a pantheistic faith:
the freedom to choose whether we speak
that it believes in the validity of many
or not and they could go their own way
and be damned as far as was faiths; and in that the people of different
concerned. I felt alone, but I also felt religions, or indeed no religion and all,
can sit together in the pursuit of a
more resigned and at peace.
The sentence is interesting from
common goal, peace and spiritual
several angles. "We would not hear" is growth. Sahaja yoga has been
telling: we are all guilty of being spiritually exceedingly good for my
purblind at times, not listening to the problem and, indeed, for my health in
"voices"
voices of reason, moderation, love or
general. I would very much like to see it
kindness. God's words do often fall on
introduced to a place like the faith zone
the rocky ground of deaf ears. His words
at the Maudsley Hospital in London,
and spirit will never flourish ina hardened
where they have health professionals
and prejudiced heart. "By so many and religious people exploring the
voices" makes me think of the different
interface between religion and mental
health.
people in our communities, our pluralist
society. It makes me contemplate the
Perhaps we could all do with a bit
more of the God in the James Joyce
words and opinions of other people. Who
has a voice? Who has higher authority?
quotation, the one who speaks with the
The government telling you to stop
still, small voice of a big, big friend.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 EXCERPTS ON PUJA PROTOCOLS
FROM TALKS BY SHRI MATAJI
Sahasrara Day, May 5, 1980
to begin with. Everything is going to be
"Today I am to tell you a few more
exposed one day-but not to everyone.
secrets about Sahaja Yoga it is that for
If you can recognize this that you are
the Puja you should not get people of
privileged, then you will behave in a
mediocre nature, because to bear a
way that you have been given this
Puja is very difficult. People have not
privilege. Today there are many
yet understood the value of My Being,
of My Feet, of My Hands. They cannot, people in the whole world who are
I am thinking of all these
they do not deserve to be here. So do meditating.
people. You also have to think of all of
not get anybody because he is your
them and know that they are part and
friend, or a sister, or a brother. It is
parcel of My being, as you all are and
wrong. You are spoiling the chances of
you are the alert ones.
the person, because it is too much for
So at this time in this Puja you are
him. He cannot bear it. It is meant for
very few people. So remember that it
is not meant for many people.
not only doing Puja for yourself, for
London people, but for the whole
world. Not only for Sahaja Yogis who
Now what we call the Charanamrut,
are all over, (or course for them also)
meaning the Ambrosia of My Feet, is
but in this Puja you are expressing
not meant for everyone. Neither are
the blessings of the Puja meant for yourself as Sahaja Yogis who have
everyone. So try to avoid people who recognized Me and are requesting to
are not yet fully equipped. First thing bless the rest of the people so that
they will start is doubting. Also there they also recognize Me as you have
will be a problem with the protocol. recognized. By this Puja I hope
They won't be able to accept it with recognition will be much clearer. By
My recognition only you will recognize
that protocol. It is a very great privilege
to be here, and this privilege cannot be
yourself and the whole thing will work
out in a very very beautiful manner.
granted to every person.
Only thing I want you to be sincere,
If you could understand,. this is the
not to play games in Sahaja Yoga. It
secret of Sahaja Yoga and in this
secret you have to get very few people will harm you very much and harm
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 27
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
Jan.-Feb. 2002
also other Sahaja Yogis, so don't try to
cannot talk like this to the multitudes,
but I can tell you this because I want to
play games. It will harm you because
you will be harming the path of give you the complete keys.
emancipation and as a result you wil
If you can look at yourself as how
be punished, as a result you will be the
privileged you are, and understand it,
understand what all Sahaja Yoga is,
loser. So please try to be sincere, it is
not difficult.
then you will understand that what a
This is not the way to be taken,
privilege it is for you to be here, what
fortune what reward. For what you
many people I have seen they think I
am chastising and all these words, are
have done, how many lives have been
wrong. For Mataji they should not be completely rewarded by being here.
This will help you to do Puja in a more
used. There are many words that
should not be used for Me. It is just sincere manner. May God Bless you.
your privilege to be here and you must
Now you must meditate also after
understand that privileges are given to
the Puja because My vibrations you do
people who are deserving. I am telling
not suck in without meditation. Always
you these things because you are
it happens so far I have had very few
Pujas in which all My whole vibrations,
deserving.
Sincerity is the key of your success.
were sucked in. If you have sincerity
It's a privilege. I am giving you the key
which, it is. To the western mind
about it, it is really the sincerity part of
it you will suck all My vibrations. Tell
people think if you tell somebody
your mind not to ask questions and to
something like that they can use a misbehave, but to suck the vibrations
word like chastise and all these words
clearly. This is for your own
nourishment, for your own growth, for
are not to be used. You must use
words which are 'protocolish', which
your own enjoyment.
July 19, 1980
are proper.
If in your protocol you are not alright
Brighton, England
you know how you start fitting wrong
Now for the Puja one has to
bowls into wrong nets and spoil the understand that without Realisation,
whole joke. So be careful how you take
Puja has no meaning, because you
it. Take it as a privilege, as a VIP
are not 'Ananya', means you have to
become aware of your whole..
treatment for you, you are all VIPS. I
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
28
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1 &2
is awakened by which your Deities are
Krishna's description of Bhakti is
awakened. So first your vibrations
'Ananya'. He says:
must improve to receive.
'I will give Ananya Bhakti'. He wants
If the reception is not good what is
Ananya Bhakti, means when there is
the use of any Puja or projection? So,
not the other, means when you are
first of all we sort of prepare our
Realised. Otherwise He says:
instrument or prepare our projecting
"Pushpam phalam toyam-
instrument. That preparation by
A flower a fruit and the water-
Whatever you give Me I accept'
praying to different Deities, as we call
that a Kundalini Puja. By praying to My
But when it comes to giving He
Kundalini you improve your reflection,
says: "You have to come to ME with
because then the Vibrations from Me
Ananya Bhakti
start flowing into yours and they
Means:
awaken it. This is the projection as far
When you have become one with
Me,
as you are concerned. Once the
instrument is alright then you project
then you should have the devotion-
not before that Before that you are notoutside. And how do you project? By
worshipping the Goddess as the
connected.
Now Puja is
Protector of the whole Universe.
the left-sided
projection, it is the neutralising of the Praising Her Powers.
right side very much, especially for
By saying that, by repeating that,
you echo, in your projection, Her
people who are very right-sided3;
atmosphere which is very right-sided. Powers. And then your projection
becomes that powerful. It is a very
Puja is ideal for them. It is Bhakti, it is
subtle happening that takes place. It is
the devotion that you project. Now
what happens actually when you miraculous. These things look so
project the Puja? It has been found out simple. Like just washing My Feet,
and now as I am telling you that first simple thing is washing My Feet. Now
see these Feet. I don't know if you see
you have to awaken within you the
Deities that are still asleep, by the whole universe - I see there, and I
worshipping them. But as these really get stunned by them.
When you wash My Feet what do
Deities, primordial Deities are with Me,
you do? Actually My Feet have been
you worship Me, and every Deity in Me
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 1&2
29
Jan.-Feb. 2002
makes no difference, otherwise, if you
very hard. And then you put a
working
little water to soothe them, to suggest say in a very rational manner. But to
that Love that are these Feet, it makes
that you can feel the effort put in by
these Feet. And a kind of a very sweet,
a very big difference. Say sweetness a
melodious love flows out of these Feet
little thing, a little baby-just puts her
hand on her mother's cheeks, you see,
then.
Like today I was coming and I
just to express the gratitude, and the
suddenly, saw Paul standing same mother's heart starts jumping with
love. It is a very reciprocal behaviour.
thing happened, see, what a care it is,
what an understanding Mother is
It is very subtle, and that kind of a
coming, She should not be lost. Just subtle working is fixed already, it
that, and the things started melting, works that way only. The more you
love from your heart the more there is,
because this Love understands
the joy will be there. The more you are
everything, does not want anything,
but is only excited if there is somebody
rational and mental there will not be so
much.
to receive the love.
There should be, first of all your
Now how do you say you are going
to receive? By expressing these small cleansing is important, but the
small things. So when you soothe My projection should be towards your
Mother. That is the height. Once you
Feet, wash them, clean them, you
know what they mean, recognise. That achieve that height then you become
all powerful, and then you can give to
recognition, how are you to show? You
others. But that giving is nothing but is
ceremonies,
little
these
see,
ceremonies are important because
a very, very, as I told you, is a very
mutual and an absolutely reciprocal
they express your recognition. It could
be absolutely done, dead and finished,
and it could be absolutely living if you
thing. Because the Devi knows about
you, everything. If you try anything
know why you are doing it. Then you
else She knows, and She will also tell
apply some oil and things, again you, frankly, that this should not be
soothe My Feet. Just to say3B
done, should not be done, clearly, so
"Mother, you have worked very hard
that you do not be under any
Your Feet have worked very hard."
misunderstandings about it. But still to
Just saying that itself, 1 mean,
work it out you must know it has to be
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1 & 2
reciprocal, it cannot be one sided. The
because that is the essence of
sincerity cannot be one sided, it has to everything, I think, that is the most
essential thing. That is why we
be both the sides. Then it works out
better, and a kind of homogeneous worship Ganesha first, and Ganesha
was created first by God, because He
feeling, with that love comes in; sort of
is the eldest son. He is the first son. He
a lubricant, a beautiful feeling of
is the eldest brother that you have, and
movement within yourself comes in.
Puja really is a triggering thing, it though Kumara (Kartikeya) is treated
triggers you. It triggers you into a
another realm. It is really miraculous.
as an elder brother always, while
Ganesha calls Himself as a younger
brother He was first created.
Once you have done the Puja then you
Beçause He remains young always,
can project out much more in your
silence. Your silence itself becomes so
never grows. So in a way He is always
powerful.
younger to you all. It is a very, very
subtle understanding. A very young,
Now in this special case of our
western lives, we have to establish our little thing is so much wiser, He is
wisdom. Can you imagine a little baby
is so intelligent? A little baby so wise,
innocence, very important. It is the first
thing that is attacked, innocence is
attacked by so many things. So we
much more. He is like a grown up little
have to establish our innocence, and
baby, a very matured, wise little baby.
innocence is the most powerful thing; it
So by age, you are always older than
does not see anything bad, it does not
Him, but by wisdom He is the eldest.
see anything wrong, it does not see
Then
like this you should
understand how we invoke all the
anything it loves. The child does not
know that the mother hates the child.
Deities in us by doing these small
The child does not know if the father things, by saying things, by saying
hates the child. The child does not
their mantras, because now you are
know if anybody hates. In innocence awakened, every word you say is
they live, and then they suddenly
awakened, now is 'Siddha' mantras.
On this Guru Puja I am really going
discover sometime, they are shocked,
how people are - they do not love.
to give you the way of how to do the
So Ganesha is very important for Siddha, establishment of the Siddha.
the western countries, very important
To master every Chakra and the Deity
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 1 & 2
31
Jan.-Feb. 2002
bestowed upon it: to master it, how to
this point. You cannot enlighten the
do it. I will tell you this Guru Puja no
Sun. It is illumined by itself. Now, when
doubt-going to work it out. But this the clouds are
removed, the
Puja is to be done with tull superimposition is removed, the sun
understanding and with full recognition shines through the atmosphere. So
our Spirit is also superimposed by
that it is a great fortune.
ignorance. As long as there is
superimposition, you cannot see the
Even the Devas are jealous of it, all
the rishis are jealous of it. The greatest
advantage for you, the greatest Spirit. And even when few clouds
fortune, make full use of it. And there disappear, the superimposition exists.
One has to have a clear sky to see the
are very simple things that can please
very simple things-you know your light of the Spirit shining through.
Mother can be pleased with very simple
There are many ways by which we can
things. It is like that only, is how much
try to remove the clouds.
heart you have put into it is the point.
The first and foremost things is the
It is more to be felt and understood
assumption, the faith, that we are the
Spirit
and realised than to be thought about,
the rest
and
that
is
because you will go into thoughtless
superimposition. You have to assume
It is sort of more that within yourself. After realisation,
awareness.
should become very easy. That you
triggering
I am so happy and joyous to be
are something much more, something
here with so many Sahaja Yogis and very different from what you have
known so far.
so many of them are very new to Me,
So now the new situation arises:
perhaps I have known all of you
thousands of years back. In Sahaja
that you do not have a blind faith, but
you have a faith that has come out of
Yoga, you have all to understand one
simple thing, that you are the Spirit, an experience. So your intellect should
and whatever is not the Spirit is not not fight it. It should not try to
challenge it. If it starts challenging it
yourself.
We can compare the Spirit with the and if you listen to your intellect you
sun: the sun can be covered with the
will again go down. Even if you get the
glimpses of a star in the sky, then the
clouds. There can be superimposition
on the sun, but sun remains as it is at
scientists believe that there is a star.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 32
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1&2
such a statue, Vigraha.
So in the same manner, even if you
Vigraha means the one which is a
get the glimpses of your realisation,
you have to at least believe that you vibrating statue. And then go on
are also the Spirit.
looking at that statue, and try to raise
You go on sticking to that your Kundalini. And Kundalini used to
come up to Agnya, but the jumping
experience and keeping your attention
beyond the Sahasrara was an
on the fact that you are the Spirit. Tell
your intellect not to cheat you impossible task because one has to go
from form to formless. And it was so
anymore. You can turn the face of your
difficult to get out of form to formless,
intellect by this.
and even to concentrate on abstract or
Now your intellect will start working
formless was another impossible task.
for the pursuit of the Spirit. This is what
faith means. Faith gives rise to pure As the Muslims did or many others
tried to do. Under these circumstances
intelligence. Now once you have seen
clouds removed, still there are clouds.
it was necessary that the formless had
to take a form so that there were no
So you have to use the wind to remove
more complications. As soon as you
the clouds, wind of the Holy Ghost.
concentrate on the form you become
And that you know there are many
formless. Like if you have ice before
ways of taking advantage of the wind.
So the wind comes from some other
you, as soon as you start touching the
ice, it melts away and you start felling
source. That is the source of the Holy
the cool.
Ghost, your own Kundalini. And also
So the problem is very easily solved
you have in person the Primordial
Kundalini before you. Compared to
now, Puja is one of the things by which
you can excite the forms into formelss.
many other seekers who came before
Now your centres are the centres of
you, you are very fortunate.
energies, but they too have a guiding
Because worshipping any Vigraha,
Deity sitting on all these Chakras.
any statue of self-created vibrations of
the Mother Earth people had big They are also the formless made into
problems. They had to first of all do a
forms. And when you do the Puja, the
meditation which was called as forms melt into formless energies. And
these formless energies start flowing,
Savikalpa Samadhi. That means in
and then blows the wind. And that is
that status you had to concentrate on
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 33
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
So it would be better if you all keep
how these misidentifications, these
superimpositions on Spirit are
your hearts open and watch the Puja
without thinking about it. Today we will
removed. Now you cannot think about
reverse the method of Puja. First we
the Puja, These are things which
happen into a realm which is beyond
will do the Havan and then the Puja, it
will be better. Because by that we wil
thinking.
So you have to understand that you
evoke the fire element which burns
away all the evils. When you wash My
cannot rationalise the Puja. You
Feet, you do the same thing and even
should have the maximum advantage
when you evoke the fire you do the
on your chakras. For that, you must
same thing.
fully, just concentrate on the Puja, and
how the wind is blowing. And the wind
Today first we will have the Havan
will see to it that it drives out all the and then the Puja, both are the same.
You can worship Me with water or with
clouds. So your only work is, your only
fire. The essence of fire is the glow, all
method is just to concentrate on the
Puja and witness. You are a seer.
that is wrong, all that is evil is burnt off
and then the glow shows on the faces
Seer has double meaning. The one
and on the bodies of the seekers. And
who sees only, just sees and he is only
knowledge, he is a seer. Without any also the atmosphere is charged with
thought, without any reaction, just the beautiful vibrations when you have
sees and absorbs automatically, the Havan."
Madrid, Spain
spontaneously, he is the seer. For Me
May 24, 1986
Today I will tell you the importance
sometimes it is burden-some because
there should be some parity between
you and the Deities some balance of Puja.
Even among the early Christians
must be there.
Here you are saying all the mantras they used to do the Puja of the
adoration to the Mary's statues,
and the Deities are awakened and
there you are who do not want to Maybe, or maybe photographs or we
receive anything within your heart. Sol
can say the stained glass copies of the
Mother of Christ.
am the One who has to stock up all the
extra energy that is produced in My
But later on people started to
Body.
become more rational and they did not
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 34
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue1&2
Actually
Vishnu,
Virata.
understand what is the importance of
the
Mahavishnu, Vishnu becomes the
Puja and when they could not explain
Virata. Now this Vishnu Tatwa
it, they gave up glorifying the Puja in
the regular manner. Even before becomes the Virata and also He
Christ they used to have a particular becomes Rama and Krishna and then
the Virata, means the Akbar. So Christ
type of tabernacle which measured
is the Omkara itself, is the vibrations
and was specially made and a Puja
itself. All other incarnations had to take
place was created to worship what
the principle or the essence of the
they called Jehovah. Now this
Jehovah in our Sahaja Yoga is
Mother Earth to create their body
Sadashiva and Mother Mary is
except for Christ's body which is
absolutely Omkara and the Earth
Mahalakshmi.
She incarnated before also. She element of that being Shri Ganesha.
So we can say that Christ is the
incarnated as Sita and then She
incarnated as Radha, and then She Power of Shri Ganesha which
incarnated as Mother Mary. Now it is incarnated. So that is the reason He
could walk on the water. So He is the
clearly written about the birth of Christ
in a book
purest form of Divinity. Because He is
Devi
the
called
Mahatmayam. He was the son of just vibrations. So when you do Puja to
Radha, Radha is the Mahalakshmi. So Me because I am in person, there is
He was born in another state as an nothing unreal.
If they had done Puja to Christ, they
egg and half of the egg reincarnated
as Shri Ganesha and half of it became must, they have done Puja to Christ
Mahavishnu which is our Lord Jesus
also, when He lived, and to His
Mother. It is said that in the 10
Christ.
All the description about Jesus commandments that whatever is
Christ is given in that Mahavishnu's created by the Heavens and by the
Earth should not be recreated,
description exactly the same. Now this
Mahalakshmi came on this Earth and reproduced and worshipped. So the
She brought forth Her child with incarnations are created by the
Heavens. Only in modern times it is
immaculate conception which She had
done before also as Radha. So the possible to take a photograph of the
incarnations. But in the former days
Christ is the son of the Great Being of
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 35
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue1&2
other statues, also there may be many
there was no possibility. Now
whatever is created by the Mother who might be giving you vibrations.
Earth is what has come out of the Also in India as you know we went,
some of you to Ganapatipule where it
the
is
Mother
which
Earth
Swayambhus, is created by the
is the Ganesha which has come, the
Mother Earth. Now
have Mahaganesha that is Christ that has
we
everywhere, we find the Swayambhus come out of the Mother Earth
Mahaganesha so the lower portion of
things. Another thing is some realised
souls also have made some beautiful
the body you see there and the head is
the whole of the mountain and there
statues.
I went to Portugal and they had a
the water of the sea is also sweet and
there are many sweet water wells
festival of the Lady of the Rocks. So I
went to see that place and there was a
there.
If you remember a photograph of
very small little statue of this height of
mine was taken there, many people
the Mary, about say five inches and
took photographs. And in some
the face was just like mine, exactly like
mine and they said that this was found
photographs in My heart there is a light
suddenly by two young children who coming out. And some told Me some
were following a rabbit which hid photographs which did not have the
inside a niche. So these children saw
light, but when they retook, I mean the
some light inside the niche and they negative was again taken as a
started following under a rock and they photograph and again they took a
reached the source of the light-was photograph with that, then the light
this statue. They brought it out. And in
came out in there.
So one must know that in the realm
the light they walked and when the
people outside, were lots of people of Divine there are all kinds of
miraculous things. Same is the Puja.
were gathered, they were amazed to
Now when we do the Puja, first of all
see they brought out the statue from
somewhere inside.
you will praise Shri Ganesha. By doing
So they worship that statue in that
that in you Shri Ganesha will be
place. Now this statue gives you
awakened and established. By
vibrations, as I give you vibrations. But
worshipping Me as Shri Ganesha your
not so much as I
innocence will be established. And you
give you. And all the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
36
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
For example if you are rude to Me, if
will see the vibrations rise. Also your
you are not respectful, the Christ gets
vibrations will be increased and you
very angry because He has said that,
will feel very stable within yourself.
Now when you will take Shri anything against Holy Ghost, He will not
tolerate. So My Chakra, the Agnya
Ganesha's names you will know what
starts throwing anger and moving very
qualities He has. What powers He
fast. Now I have to bear it, I cannot tell
gives you. When you praise those
you the way Christ wants Me to tell you.
qualitites the powers of those qualities
Because He is very direct and I have to
will start emitting through you. This is
how the Divine works. As if you get little bit be careful so that you don't get
upset. Moreover while doing the Puja
charged with those qualities. Then you
supposing you are a doubting type or
praise the Goddess, the Adi Shakti.
you are opposing it then you do not
Now the Adi Shakti has all the
seven chakras within Her awakened. absorb the vibrations and I have
And She has to work with all these problems. Because the vibrations are
flowing and you are not receiving it, so l
seven chakras. For the first time such
don't know how to contain within Myself
an incarnation has come. It is like, you
if you do not suck in the vibrations, so I
make, first one room then the second
take time to take them out. So all these
room then the third room, seven rooms
things are very symbolic, whatever we
and then the whole house is done. You
are doing is very symbolic. And that
get the keys and you open the house is
symbol actually acts. For example if
yours. That is how I could achieve Self
Realisation en masse. It could not you give somebody a flower that person
feels extremely joyous and happy and
happen earlier. But now it is possible
gratitude comes in. So when you offer
because of this combination of all the
Me say flowers or anything like water or
seven chakras. So now when you are
praising the Adi Shakti, I am also a anything then the elements are happy
Mahamaya that I look like you;
and the Deities are happy in the
|
behave like you, I have made myself chakras. And then they emit their
vibrations, of their qualities and their
exactly like you. Very difficult to make,
but I have. And this body has to bear
blessing on you.
They give you their qualities and
lots of things to make you understand
Sahaja Yoga and your own powers.
the blessings. That is how the Divine
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-40.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002 37
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
December 18, 1989
acts, and gradually after Puja you will
Ganapatipule
feel it that the whole thing is working
"As it is now you all believe I am Adi
out.
Shakti and you have proof of it. Puja is
Now we are doing Puja at this time
one of the ways you can have proof of
and all over the world people know
it. Much more, because when you are
that there is a Puja going on here. So
doing My Puja, Deities which are
they are also sitting in meditation, and
within My chakras they get excited, as
they also get the blessings. They are
also waiting for this moment when the they feel happy, they want to emit
more vibrations. When they start
Puja starts. So we give them a time
like 11'o clock or so, after 11 o' clock
emitting more vibrations, then you are
surprised that how after Puja you just
we should sit down and they start at 11
o'clock. Now they are getting the same get so drenched and you just get
elevated and at a much higher level.
blessing though you are doing the
Of course it is true that during the
Puja but they also get the blessings in
their meditation.
Puja time you feel much more
If you are not yet so clever and if elevated for some time, you feel you
can keep it up. Some people definitely
you do not know all those few things
retain it, but people go up and down
which are important in the Puja does
not matter, because if you are ignorant like a yo-yo. They don't have that
about it, innocent about it, God knows, capacity to retain it. That is why one
He forgives, He does not mind. You has to meditate in thoughtless
should not mind if you commit any
awareness to keep up that status. But
mistakes or anything. Just with a
the Puja of only the Goddess is
humble heart do the way you like. allowed, Puja of the God is allowed but
we must know who is the God, or who
Gradually you will learn, but if you
is the Goddess.
know and then you deliberately make
So doing the Puja of every person
mistakes then it is not good. As we
blindly, anybody comes forward, says
forgive our children, God also forgives
this and that should not be accepted.
innocent children. So you should be
You will be surprised for the first four
very relaxed about it and just do it for
years I did not even allow them to have
the joy of your heart.
May God Bless You.
any Puja whatsoever. Even they said
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-41.txt 
 38
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1& 2
I will put My name on that so it is My
"you are our Guru, you should allow us
to do Guru Puja". I said "Nothing property so that whatever you have
given Me is Mine, so called, and is with
doing, I will not." Then first after four
years on the Navratri day they wanted
you.
That is how we started this proper
to have one Puja. I said "Alright you
understanding of things that we have
can have it. "But very few people and
to have a particular type of metal,
then they found that the Puja gave
them so much of vibrations, so much particular type of style. Now these
of elevated spirituality, and they metals have an effect on us, very
dimensions much an effect on us, and in what
touched
so
metal you do the Puja also has an
suddenly that then they started
effect. Its all a science of spirituality,
requesting Me "Mother, you must give
which we must understand is very
us a Puja." People had no idea how to
really do it. It was very embarrassing important and should be done in a
proper way if we have to have the best
but I had to tell them each and every
results, it's like a science.
thing, do like this, do like that, you
must have this like this. I must always
And so the Puja started. I think now
work it out this way.
people have got quite a good sense of
First time I went to Delhi you will be
it. Now it is in Maharashtra especially
they are experts and it is very difficult
surprised, if somebody can get hold of
that photograph I was just shrunk and I
to argue with them. So they said
"Mother we are supposed to give you a
was just shrunk, the whole body had
sari." Then I said "Give me an ordinary
sari, I will not take expensive." Then
shrunk. I had become so thin and I was
so shocked because they were using
they argued with Me this thing, that
all plastics and things from plastic used
in the Puja, all kind of things. "Oh God I
thing, it went on and on and on and on
and then it started on to, they said"
said," now what to do?" Solnever used
to also allow them to give Me any
We cannot give you false sari." I said
money or anything before. Then I said
"Alright give me sari, anything". The it
alright start with one pye", then they has become so expensive now you
see I have been requasting that now
started with one pye, gradually they
increased because I thought that they
from future try to understand that now I
am old and to an old Goddess you can
do not know that you have to use silver.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-42.txt 
 39
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
If you become thoughtless in Puja,
give something simple. But nobody is
know that your heart is also involved in
willing to accept, now we are growing
it. Collect the Puja material and offer it
so much this that, airight let us see
sincerely. There should be no formality
how we reconcile each other.
So this is how it is that it makes no or binding in the offerings. It is correct to
wash hands, but is your heart washed?
difference but it does in a way what
When attention is on heart it does not
importance you give to everything that
go to others. Although you remain quiet
you want to do. It is very important. It is
from outside, you are speaking from
the complete attention, dedication,
within. Hence you should not be silent
and the complete importance that you
for long time. If man's heart is not clean,
give to anything that you do. It is very
then the silence becomes very harmful.
important. If you do not give it the
At the same time loose talks can bring
highest priority it doesn't work. If it is
catastrophes.
just by the way, it doesn't work.
You should say the Mantras in Puja
So it is important to understand that
but with great faith (Shraddha). There is
no alternative to Shraddha. You should
if you have to gain anything in Puja
you have to give it the highest priority.
perform the Puja when Shraddha
And then just before Puja if your mind
is telling you anything, or doubting,
grows deep, so that the heart itself gets
all Puja performed. At that time waves
just tell him to stop. Because that mind
of bliss start flowing because it is the
Spirit that is saying, 'How can any
can act against you. So for the Puja
you should be all prepared, in a way, in
thought come at that time?
a receptive way and receive it."
People pour wine in the glass. Your
"Puja is an external offering, but
Puja is like that. In that, wine is your
you should understand how you get
the reward of the blessings of the Puja
faith and the glass is the recitation of
and its Prasad. A Puja or a prayer
Mantras and the worshipping. When
you are drinking that wine forgetting
grows from your heart. Mantras are
the words of your Kundalini. But if Puja
everything, how can a thought come!
is not performed from your heart or if
Then only bathing in the ocean of bliss!
Kundalini is not associated with
How can that joy be expressed in
recitation of Mantras then that Puja thoughts? However, the joy that you get
after drinking the wine is eternal and
becomes a ritual.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
40
everyone should pay their respect, and
ever present. It becomes your asset.
stand, and should not resume their seat
Pujas
Many such
have
been
until Shri Mataji takes Her seat. We
performed in My presence. Every time
a big wave comes and takes you to a
may be seated for Puja for long periods
new land. Experiences of rnany such
of time so to help our attention it is
lands becomes your own. They give advisable to eat something before hand
vastness to personality and open new
and to wear loose clothes.
gates of joy.
Only a few representatives will
Best is worshipping in the heart. If, perlorm the Puja to Shri Mataji. We
feel in
the photograph by looking at it, can be
placed in heart or, after the Puja, its
should
not
way
any
disappointed that
are not
we
performing Puja. In Sahaja Yoga
view goes to heart, then the joy which
everything is preplanned by the
you get only at that time, can become
Divine. So we should not leave the
everlasting and ever-present.
place which we first occupy, unless for
Through experience and with the
a specific reason, we should not worry
grace of our Mother, there are
quidelines each one of us should it we are seated distant from Shri
follow during Puja of our Mother which Mataji. The place so given by the
helps us in attaining the maximum Almighty is the proper place for our
advancement in the search of the
benefit. The function of Puja of our
Divine. It is not our physical proximity
Mother is planned at a right place and
which is of concern, it is our depth
a right time by the Divine. Hence we
should not insist on any specific time
and place of our choice. Further, at the
which is important.
Further, many such powers may be
place of Puja all actions should be gained by the seekar during such
carried out peacefully.
A Pujas. Hence during such occasions of
IF we are fortunate enough to be
Puja we should not waste time allowing
ourselves to think of things around, but
present when our Mother is worshipped
should concentrate on Puja of Shri
in person we should assemble at the
place of Puja always before the arrival
of Shri Mataji. Until She arrives all
Mataji and try to gain the maximum that
is given out by Shri Mataji.
Every moment of time during Puja
should take Bandhan and sit in
meditation. When Shri Mataji arrives
is thus very precious and the Sahaja
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-44.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
Yogi should try to gain maximum all protocols have to be observed. It
benetit from the opportunity that they should be placed at a high place and
should not be moved frequently.
get at the occasion of such Pujas
The attention should be always to-
The photograph is not an object of
wards the Puja and should not get dis-
adornment for the household and as
turbed because of the temporary trou-
such daily worship should be done
bles that may be experienced. Sahaja with an offering of tlowers, or washing
Yogis should not bring new seekers
who have not yet recognised Shri If possible an oil lamp/candle should
the photograph and applying kumkum.
be lighted in the morning and evening
Mataji's Divine Nature, as this may af-
fect the vibrations of the Puja.
and mantras recited.
The feet and legs should not be
Everyone shuld try to remain by
heart at the function of Puja at every
stretched towards the photograph,
even in sleep. If it happens unknow-
moment and with attention try to ab-
sorb the maximum level of vibrations.
ingly, humbly request Her forgiveness.
In collective Puja and meditation af-
This not only helps our individual as-
ter the Aarti and mantras have been
cent, but serves towards the comfort
of our Mother by absorbing the vibra-
sung, Shri Mataji has said it is advis-
tions She generates within Her physi-
able to maintain the same atmosphere
of devotion and silence for some more
cal body.
After Puja, if permitted by Shri time as we have requested Her Holi-
ness Shri Mataji to be present and ac-
Mataji, the seeker may have Darshan
of the Mother.
cept the Puja and Her presence be-
Nobody should touch Shri Mataji comes manifested to all through the
vibrations. At that point of time Sahaja
unless permitted by the Mother, to do
so is against the protocol of the Divine,
Yogis should silently enjoy the vibra-
When Shri Matají leaves the place
tions for some time and absorb as
of Puja everybody should get up and
much as possible the vibrations which
pay respect to Shri Mataji.
The photograph of Shri Mataji rep-
have been bestowed.
At times of Puja and collective medi-
resents Her in our house and other
tation in general personal talk on non-
places where it resides. It has there-
Sahaja Yoga matters should be avoided
as our attention becomes diverted.
fore to be kept with great respect and
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-45.txt 
 The Essence of Sahaja Yoga
London, 1983
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
their ignorance in which they have been
In today's talk I will dwell on the
living. In all the ego-oriented countries it
essence of Sahaja Yoga. First of all we
is very difficult to bring home the truth
need to understand that we are passing
through an extremely serious time, that we are still ignorant. We have to
know a lot. It is very difficult because
unpredictable
with
pregnant
they think they know every-thing,
consequences.
because they have been to the moon.
When we look at life, we do not seem
to understand that if we miss this The Russians, for instance, still say that
they saw no God when they orbited in
opportunity that has come our way, for
space, which is like saying that one has
our evolution, we will not only be
been to the third floor but hasn't seen
depriving ourselves of it-or this country,
the top.
England, but also it will be a
Where does God reside? Where
stupendous loss for the whole of
does He manifest within us? In what
creation.
manner does He manifest? We do not
The trouble, however, is that in the
know what to see. What we want to see
name of God, of evolution and of higher
is possible only through our effort. "If
life, a plethora of spurious people have
we have not been able to see God, then
come out making it well nigh impossible
(difficult), to convince any one of the He does not exist" This is how we
develop our attitude in this matter. But
existence of truth.
Some times I feel that I
better say 'no' to all that we did not know
have
developed a unique method by which I through our effort. Because we have
not known about Him, so He does not
can give realisation en masse all over
exist. You turn round in a cave. So
the world. But it really poses a problem
when you see a shadow of your-self
for me if the masses are not interested.
In fact, it is only very few who take a you believe in that only and say
keen interest in their evolutionary "Nothing else existed". The light does
not exist. That kind of attitude I have
process and would like to come out of
drem
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-46.txt 
 43
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1 & 2
persistently been facing. And
sometimes I do not know how to give
or what is even a King? Just think of it.
Who is he? What does he think of
himself? He has complained against
them realisation. Now you have to start
us. Even the laws are so stupid some
the other way round. You have to seek.
You have to ask for it. Nobody is going
times that one can hardly understand. I
feel so much mud is going to cover their
to fall at your feet and say. "Well, you
brains that they may not receive their
get your realisation." You have this, for
Heaven's sake, please have it"
realisation. They may miss it.
Actually the Divine does not know
Because nothing is selling here.
what human beings have created.
Nothing is selling here. You are used
Really I tell you, the Divine is in the dark
to salesmanship, that is, if anything is
as to all the nonsenses that you have
selling you have to be persuaded or
created around you. All kinds of
requested. You can save pounds for a
sale and all that. But nothing is for sale
nonsenses you have created out of
here. This is a very difficult thing for
your ignorance, out of your ego, and out
people to understand. In this present of the choice that you had. I can't
atmosphere, where we do not know if
explain why people have created this
kind of ignorance which cannot be
we can get anything which is not for
broken or removed. Because you are
so much identified with it. It is like a
sale, Somehow, we have to work very
hard. Sometimes it is very frustrating
and sometimes so stupid the way stuck up stamp which refuses to come
people react. Like the other day when
off. And when such a thing happens you
feel "O, God"! The whole creation has
we had a meeting at Brighton I was
laughing all the while. It is so sad. A
been created, the whole working has
taken place and the human beings
who came to
our
gentleman
have grown so well having reached this
programme made complaints. Look,
who has got time to put him on a video;
stage. But now in this modern life which
who is interested in taking his
you are leading you find them so stupid
photograph?. He says he is a managing and foolish that they have begun
director. So what?. In the presence of
deluding others with their stupidity and
foolishness. How are we to approach
the Divine what is a managing director
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1&2
44
realisation to so many people. I know it
those people who are true seekers?
Those who have been seekers for has happened with so many. But they
do not know what they have to achieve.
ages? All their lives before have been
lost. Sometimes it is very disappointing.
The ego is such a horrible stuff that
But still, hoping against hopes, I hope
people do not want to see what they
haven't got with them, what they have
we reach all the corners of the universe,
to have and what they deserve. They do
where we find all people who are true
seekers. It is their desire to seek the
not want to see that beauty, that light,
that is the Spirit. The reflection of God's
Divine.
It is the power of all true seekers to
love is the most precious thing you
could think of. In England progress has
know the Divine. It is for those who are
managing directors, or kinds or been very slow. I would not have been
something! What does it matter in the disappointed if it was at the time of
presence of God? They would be Christ, because then there were very
few seekers. Actually even the close
pushed out. They will not be allowed to
enter the kingdom of God. That disciples that Christ collected were not
true seekers. You are seekers of truth.
kingdom is only for those who have
known. Not for those who simply talk
So many of you have taken to this path
just to pursue the truth. But where are
about God. Those who say that we are
worshippers of God and we have
we going? What are we doing about it
all? What are our ideas about the truth?
learned so much, it will be said "That is
Is it that our ideas are but by products of
well, then go back to the place from
our ego? Is if that we do not want to
where you have come? Whatever you
known is through your seek the truth? I have met all kinds of
have
awareness, and in your awareness you people in this country who occupy
have come to know. The awareness
important positions, lords, ladies and a
has to be enlightened. It is not what you
host of others. They ask "Who wants to
know but human awareness which has
change?" Because they think they are
still to grow. It involves such a lot of
the greatest. Born thus, they hope to
journey even after our realisation.
carry their lordship and their
It takes no time, sometimes, to give
possessions with them to heaven?
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-48.txt 
 Jan.-Feb. 2002
45
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1& 2
*
Supposing somebody says "What ever
When they say
who wants to
change?" What can be said? Except are out side, that much more are
inside". So why not see? Why should I
that they have reached the dead end,
the full stop from which no further
put a barrier to seeing? If that is going to
give the best in the world, if it is going to
journey is possible.
Now this, I must say, can work out
give an inkling of that beautiful thing
called the Spirit. Why should we not
only with people who are seekers, who
have it? You don't have to pay for it, not
want to know, through their awareness,
what is the truth. You have to know your
even exert for it. You don't have to do
Spirit, for without knowing your Spirit anything.
But you must desire. This is the point
you cannot know the truth and what
I am trying to make. If you do not desire
ever I talk to you is a complete waste of
time. Because you haven't got the
it from your own heart, God is not going
awareness today, to know the truth, I to fall at your feet, imploring "Please
am talking about. So, I must earnestly
desire me". And if you understand that
ask you to become the Spirit. Why
you have to really desire it because it is
such a desirous thing, that I must tell
should you hesitate to do what you are
you that this Kundalini is the pure
told so that you will get your realisation?
You have to become the Spirit first.
Desire within you. It is not yet
Unless and until this awareness is manifested, not yet awakened, in the
sense that it has not yet acted. Imagine
enlightened, you cannot see. It is like
descibing the nature of colours to a
how important it is. You should have the
blind mam. You have to open your
desire to be one with the Divine, to be
one with your Spirit. The desire has to
eyes. Even this people find difficult,
they have become naive, they do not
be strong, if not, then you would be
challenging the Kundalini, that is, you
know what is is, and also they have no
inclination to understand. Now, you see
turn anti-Kundalini. Then the Kunalini
a tree standing there and somebody would not rise.
Sometimes you have to take it upon
has told you that there are roots but you
do not believe it because they are not
yourself for going into and discovering
visible. Why not try to find out?
the truth. It is you who have to find it out.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-49.txt 
 SAL
Jan.-Feb. 2002
46
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 1& 2
So, when the situation is difficult and
For example, I say this is a place which
the children are also so adamant what
has lots of diamonds or a cave in which
can a Mother do. Push them in? I am
there is a lot of gold. The gold is not
going to come to you. You have to go tO very much concerned, because this
ego which sometimes is selfish and
the cave to get it. It is as simple. I am not
saying you have to walk towards it. You
conceited, satisfies itself and is happy.
It (the ego) will not allow you to get to
have to desire and desire from your
the point where you really stand, where
heart. It is impossible for me to raise
you have all your powers and where
your kundalini if you do not desire it,
because Kundalini itself is the pure you are the master of being. The
identification with the ego is so much
desire. What can I do about it? Can I
that it is easy to take a bull by the horns
force it? You cannot push it out. If you
but to take an ego oriented man to the
want to have a seed planted you have
practices of Sahaja Yoga is very
to put it in the Mother Earth. You cannot
take it out in bits and pieces. If that pure
difficult.
desire is not there, then I am breaking
Today I am rather disgusted with the
my head against the wall. So, it is ego oriented people, but other moods
also come, the moods of compassion
important to understand that you must
and tremendous love. I should do
have that desire which is the highest. If
something to bring sense to these
you are salisfied with things which are
useless and nonsensical what am I to people. Something should happen to
them otherwise what I see is a
do about it? But this is something innate
complete disaster. It is going to
and does not work with people who do
happen. I do not want to frighten you
not have pure desire. This has been
like Mrs Thatcher does about the
written down since long; it cannot be
forced, Russians. That might be imaginary. But
changed;
it
cannot
be
explained, discussed or argued about.
this is real. l am warning you that the
Nothing can be done; it has to work out
disaster is going to come as destruction
from within. Even if you have worked it
itself. But the greatest thing is the
failure of the desire that it could not
out on some one, you may not achieve
Tuted
the results.
communicate with you who are chosen
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-50.txt 
 47
Jan.-Feb. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue1&2
I hope those who come for the first
specially in order to bring the Kingdom
time will understand my difficulty, and
of Heaven. But suddenly you will find
that they have all fallen into a sieve
try to see that you should desire only
your self realisation and nothing else.
without a way out. The Sahaja Yogis
Just desire that, and forget about
too feel frustrated at times. Whatever it
is, as far as I am concerned they have
everything else even if you are a
tremendous desire. But I am so
managing director or a king. Keep all
desireless that the desire may not
your shoes outside and just desire your
Spirit. I have to see that you all get your
always work out. You see, I am a
desireless person. So, I ask the Sahaja realisation somehow. It is like a
Mother's desire to give a bath to the
Yogis to desire, so that people will have
the great desire to become the Spirit.
baby and get him cleansed. So, which
This is the greatest thing that we can
ever you like, whether to be desolute or
like to receive a rebuke, I am willing to
give to our brothers and sisters, to the
work it out. But at least ensure that you
people, to the children, the beautiful
desire to get your realisation.
light and the beautiful time they all have
May God bless you
to enjoy.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-51.txt 
 Miracle
Photographs
Shri Ganesha
in sky
May 1994, Goulbern, Australia
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-52.txt 
 Shri Shiva Idol
Elephanta Caves, Mumbai,1985
(By a Western Sahaja Yogi)
FF
Shri Shiva Idol, Elephanta
Caves, Mumbai, 1985
(After 10 minutes of Meditation
by a Western Sahaja Yogi
