IRMALA Volume: XIV Issue: 5 & 6 May-June, 2002 PURE The Divine Gool Breeze "URE RELIC 00 God doesn't care for people who are rich and well-off or people who are poor. What he sees is what richness you have got of spirituality. He doesn't bother about vour education, of your degrees, of pompousness etc. What he sees is how innocent you are. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi NODIT DHARMA YAHSIA UNIVERSAL

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIV Issu e 5& 6 May-June 2002 Diwali Puja, Los Angles 18.11.2001 2. 11 Puja at Brahmapuri - 30.12.1989 12 Christmas Puja - Ganapatipule - 25.12.2001 22 Shri Ganesha Puja - 8.8.1989 37 Puja at Aurangabad - 19.12.1989 39 Puja at Shri Rampur - 21.12.1989 41 Shri Christ Puja - Ganapati Pule - 25.12.1989 44 Sankranti Puja - 14.01.1990

 Diwali Puja Los Angles - 18.11.2001 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) It's a very-very great day today, I should say, where the evil the knowledge is very subtle, very subtle; it's not superficial knowledge, it is very subtle, and because they don't has been suppressed. Where evil that spreads its power all over is only know this subtle knowledge they fall because of two factors; one is that you into the wrong path of, I should say, ignorance and then they try to oppose not knowledgeable, you are are staying blind and you follow things the people who are doing good. But above all, is the power of God. All this which are not right but you think are drama is played to prove the existence powerful. This illusion creates not only of that great Power. It has all worked problems but absolute destruction. So we faced a very big challenge, no out so well and for all of you, Sahaja yogis, it's a very great achievement doubt, and it was easily solved. It was that you can see the play. Many people based on all wrong basis just to create who have achieved so called success a problem. Problem was created with a purpose and nobody could imagine cannot see that, but you can see it that it would be solved so easily and so because you are spectators. Though quickly. My desire was to get over it all the world is a part-and-parcel of the drama, you are outside it, and so you before the Diwali, that has happened. Due to ignorance also people do lots of can see it so clearly. Whatever has things. Anybody who follows some happened nobody could have believed it that it would finish before Diwali. religion or some sort of a thing, it's only because they are not aware of the truth, they are ignorant about achieving the truth, and they cling on to which is being created and we also So it goes like this, the stupidity the fact that they know everything. sometimes think that this kind of stupid With all this happening there have thing will impress others. Impression is been so many factions, so many stupid not the point. If you see among all people, who are getting completely these people who are lost, what ruined by ignorance. Now before impression have they created? They were there to create a great impression coming to Sahaja yoga, you know, all

 May-June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 on you to show as if they were great think, we understand many things warriors and fighters but what which animals cannot understand. We cook our food, they don't. But also impression they have created! sometimes I think we cook our brains Whether you are a realised soul or not because the way people behave and they can see that it's a miracle, it's a try to avoid the truth with their ego is miracle, how things have worked out, Now the new phase has started. You surprising. all have a very-very open challenge to All this happens. It is a drama, as I get people into enlightenment. People told you, but you better study it properly and apply it to yourself and see if you are not so ignorant now, they are not so much blasted. Moreover, I find them are also a part-and-parcel of that very much changed. Their attitude drama. For that you have to rise higher, towards truth has changed, and they you have to rise higher, higher above understand there is truth beyond all this that they have gone through. It's your ego and your super ego, your very important because if a human conditioning and from there to watch yourself, to see yourself. What is this? being starts thinking this is the truth they just get stuck up. At any cost Why am I doing such and such thing? Why my attention is like that? What is whatever may happen, he will go on the main reason for my own sticking to that. He won't be able even possession, I should say, or for my own to verify whether it is the truth or not. misunderstandings? Why do I accept wrong things? Once you start seeing Animals can make out because they that, and if you find even a wee bit of have got innate capacity to smell the such nonsensical understanding within evil, innate. We cannot, human beings you then you can forgive also people cannot. If there's a evil man, a dog will bark at him, otherwise it will go and who have been absolutely brain- throw him down. It will do everything washed, absolutely brainwashed and they did everything under that which is not normally done. How is it he influence. As it is now you have risen has developed this capacity to find out much higher than all these people and who is a thief and who is not? We have much more aware than all of them. So a higher awareness. We think about you have to just understand this point many things which animals cannot

 May - June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 You need not know and then you can forgive all the yourself. mistakes they have committed. And for everything as to what things are the people who are actually bad you happening and how they are don't have to worry, that's the work of happening, how they are working. the Divine power to destroy them. That's not your work. You are a Watch yourself and see for yourself if soldier, so you have to just fight, you have any of such ideas, any fight the ignorance, your own and lingering either. Try to cleanse the of others because mostly soldiers fail when they have their ego. When mirror so that you see your complete image and try, look at, then try to they fail they have other obstacles in cleanse it. It's very important that you their minds. There should be no should cleanse yourself. obstacle but you should just push forward and know that there is no There are people who have done obstacle at all. It's just a myth that lots of wrong things. I simply pity them. there are some obstacles and that They have done wrong things, it is you can overcome. It's not easy to their responsibility to see what they raise the awareness of people because it looks there's a very little have been doing. Why they have been distance of crossing over but it's doing it? What is the need to do that? not so, it's not so. It is a very All this introspection will work out so well, then your real powers will come, difficult task sometimes for some people to get out of the bandhans of your powers of giving realisation, your powers to understand the problems of Agya. At that point, I find, some of you fail and for that the best thing is your country. of the whole world. And to introspect. When you think you once you feel that you are the soldier to fight it out, you have the are always correct and you are alright, the best is to introspect. Am responsibility to fight it out, then things Il doing everything right or not? How will work out. You cannot leave am I working for my betterment? everything to the Divine Power. You The illusion is such that sometimes have to use the Divine power and you have to work it out because you are you think you are doing well. Say, in the soldiers of Divine. Of-course, with our Sahaja Yoga some people are very forward type; they will come that beautiful idea you start cleansing

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2002 find out faults within yourself. What are forward, they will do this, do that, these things that are staggering you? This is the best way of improving your but inside what is the purpose? The purpose is that people should see that you are doing this work, that awareness. Like you are going in the work. The purpose should be that car, and you have to know the road, you have to know how you are driving, you should be able to see yourself within. You must see what is the you have to see what are the problem inside and you will very problems, but instead of that, you think, oh-no end of yourself! It won't well understand that you have been of great help to yourself and to others. For example, there's a very work out. Today is a day of very great big building and all the buildings that happening, I should say. Celebrating are in nearby area may fall down due to earthquake but this one building the Diwali is a very-very joyous, but this joy is not for ourselves. This joy is which will be standing erect. The for the whole world. We have to work reason is that, that building is constructed on very solid ground. In for the whole world. We worked for the same way if Sahaja Yoga is ourselves, for our jobs, for our money, constructed on a very sound ground whatever it is, but what are you doing for others? That you should see in nobody can destroy it, nobody can distort it. And every person has to do yourself. It is very important. Only that. For example, some people told such people are useful in Sahaja Yoga me your Sahaja yogis, you know are like this, like that, are big show offs. I care and they are doing something for said, really? I can't believe it that they others. It's a great enjoyment with that. could be like that! I said, I would like to When the lights are burning, to give because they have concern, they have you happiness, they are burning their meet them whosoever they are. So they said, no, you can find them out bodies to give you happiness. They yourself, who are those people, and are the ones who should teach us that why they behave like this. I said, we have to do something ourselves to myself I know everything but I want enjoy our own higher awareness. All this will work out, I am sure. I am also you to know. Finding faults with others trying my best to make this light is a very nice thing, very easy also but

 May - June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 unshaken and full of enthusiasm, think of the past and the problems of the past. You have now overcome it. There, it is you who are anxious to fill your pitchers; can do it. It's not my Just enjoy yourself and have faith in anxiety that's going to help you. So, yourself and work it out. I am sure very soon it will happen, very quickly it will you stop even if you want to have complete picture about yourself. You happen. It is your desire, also you have to first give up identification have method of working it out, you have anxiety to work it out. Main with yourself otherwise you will never know what's wrong with you. anxiety should be: how can If you are too much identified with transform this person?" You can transform anyone. You tell one you, you cannot. person, another person follows it. Like Now, as it is what is the aim after when we came in the plane, I found at all, what is the aim of our lives? We the airport so many people had put up have to change the whole world into a their hands towards me like that. I peaceful thing. Changing yourself of- said, "who are these people?" They course is a great thing no doubt, but were not Sahaja yogis. They had seen changing others also we solve all the somebody or what has. happened I problems of the world. If all the people could not ask them. But all of them of this world become good people, said they are feeling cool breeze in Sahaja yogis then can you imagine their hands. They didn't know anything about it, they didn't know about what will happen! Think of that dream I have, that we have to change each kundalini, nothing. Then what is this and every person, that we can change cool coming? But basically they are there to get their realisation, only we and we have to transform them into good people. If they are not have to extend our ideas, we have to transformed they are like a candle extend our love, instead of getting without any flame, and if they are annoyed with them, better is to give capable of getting transformed we should try all methods, all the tricks to that they are very anxious to get do that. I am sure very soon such a transformed! They are all fed up with them a chance. You will be amazed all the artificial things they are having. day will come when you will say, So, now you will be amazed how many Mother, now we are very safe. Don't

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2002 7. to ourselves. So, again I will say are waiting there for you to give them introspection is very-very important in self realisation, and let them celebrate their Diwali with you. Enjoy the Diwali. Sahaja Yoga, and the light inside is there, you have to look after it. Diwali you cannot celebrate with I was extremely happy to hear from one candle. You have to have more and more candles; that's what is your many people that they felt the blessings of Diwali. But you see, job. Only by your own candle you are yesterday you had these showers, going to do it, it's your own and it can how timely they were, never happened enlighten anyone. Then why not use it in the history of this world, never at any cost, at any place? I have met some Sahaja yogis, I asked them, happened. Why yesterday these what did yo do? They said, no, showers came and tried to give a new nothing, nothing, we did nothing. experience of the showers? All this is a Why? Then what's the use of getting time, I should say that even the nature realisation if you have done nothing? knows, and we should also know that You don't want to give realisation to this is the time for a special thing. Normally I get letters about people anyone, don't want to talk to anyone, who are sick or their parents are sick you feel so shy about it. Then I met or their this is sick, all types of, then some who said, just now, Mother, we are coming from your programme. somebody's marriage is broken, then somebody has children they are sick. "How are you so late?" Because they Means all kinds of nonsensical told us that there's some bomb scare. problems they write about. Reason is "So you were waiting outside?" "Yes". "How many?" "All of us". Thousands waiting, there was no bomb. They said this, they themselves who write are not realised souls, or may be they are half baked because they could themselves there's no bomb so we went inside and we all got our realisation. "But you say that why should we write to Mother? We can get it done ourselves! were realised souls!" No, we had a Instead of that one has to write what realisation that sometimes we have to wait but now we are convinced that they have achieved, how they have nobody can harm us, nobody can achieved that, how they have got love from others, how they have worked out trouble us, overpower us, only we do it

 May - June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 attention to yourself and to your Sahaja Yoga in small villages. All this is much better to write than to write, ascent. You have to respect "my mother is sick, my father is sick'. yourself. If you are their relation it's All these relationships, they go on of your business, like none understanding wisdom that we are killing you. So no one is your brother, nobody is your sister, only Sahaja here, we have come here for a very- yogis are your brothers and sisters. very special work, of very high quality. If that is not then all such people write. Now you have some cousins and cousins, so let it be. That's not your One lady got married in Sahaja job. You don't have to work it out. Even Yoga, and she wrote to me that I was before coming I got letters like that somebody's cousin's cousin, this thing divorced about eight months back or is sick. So, I asked this lady, I said, nine months back and all my relations why do you write all these things, all are now saying, why did you marry in the time about this cousin and that Sahaja Yoga, and every body is criticising me and Sahaja Yoga. I said, cousin? She said, Mother I am trying who asked her to marry? I never asked Oh! Sahaja spread to yoga. her. So now the marriage has become Because if they will be cured then they will come to Sahaja Yoga. This the main point for her, that all my is not the way we want to spread family people are saying, What did Sahaja Yoga. It looks like advertising they do for Sahaja Yoga? If this or something speciality that you marriage doesn't become alright then should cure somebody then some they will say that something is wrong people will come to Sahaja Yoga. We with Sahaja Yoga, let them say. We just don't want such people. I never have not committed that way. Everytime I have told you that don't want to hurt but I want to give you write to me for your mother, father corrections and understanding and the wisdom. Why are you Sahaja Yogis? this, that. If you don't know how to Just to cure all the relations? They cure them, better give up Sahaja may be sick because of some Yoga. You yourself can cure them. mistakes they have committed. You can work it out yourself but you Instead of paying attention to all could see so many letters everyday for me. I asked them, is your father in such people you should pay

 May-June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 Sahaja Yoga? "No". "Mother?" "No". "Brother?" "No, nobody". So, why are the attention is on wrong things and on wrong basis. If you have some you asking me? What relationship I intelligence, then you must know that have with them? They are not Sahaja now you belong to a very high quality yogis. I am only responsible for Sahaja spiritual people which are very few, in this world. They are very few and you yogis. They are not Sahaja yoigs so must make a concentrated effort why do you want to trouble me? It is seeing that this quality must be in so impossible to understand. In Sahaja Yoga you are supposed to get self many and there must be lots of realisation, alright. Then those who aspirants. Find them out, tell them-you have found it, so you can also have it. want to have self realisation, you can But don't worry about things which are give them and fix them properly but of no value to you. You must know you instead of somebody who is hanging in are a special race, you are special the air and who is falling from the soldiers who have been trained for airport to some other place, all kinds of doing Sahaja work. So, wasting things, all this is really maddening and energy on your relations, on brothers and sisters is no good for you. It is to sickening. I am not concerned, you should not be concerned also. be understood now that you have your own energy, preserve it. For what? For What you should do is to see that these people who are talking about it Sahaja yogis. You should should come to Sahaja Yoga, and you everyone who is a Sahaja yogi or must tell them because you are not wants to become a Sahaja yogi, who doing Sahaja Yoga that's why it is are established Sahaja yogis you must there or that person is not doing help them because we are one Sahaja Yoga that's why this is the personality, and these are all the different hands of one personality, one problem. We are alright, we are fine. Because Sahaja Yoga is open so God. So, this oneness must be established within yourself, and everybody comes there. I would others request you on a Diwali day to promise to yourself, I will not waste my energy should also see that oneness in you. There are some on people who are not Sahaja yogis. people who are very active, there are some persons who are very It's very important because all the time

 May - June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 10 active in criticising. All that you will work out, I am sure, because this is the see and you will definitely try to correct it if you love that or you give up. These are special people, specially selected year of great achievements and great success but with that if you start doing for a very special cause and you can- something nonsensical, nothing will not waste your energy on small work out. Of-course, I don't say that nonsensical things that is one thing we haven't got such Sahaja yogis with you should know. us, we have. We have all the soldiers On this Diwali day you have to with us, no doubt. All the armaments know that you have to burn yourself they have, everything they have, but for the light of the Divine, to absolutely we need more and for that we have to work out collectively. Must plan what spread all over. But don't do it too should we do. much. Like some people came and told me, Mother, we have given up Recently there has been a big our parents, we have given up this, argument about the Islamic behaviour. we have given up that, still we are not good. So, I said, why should you nor Hindus. We are not, because you give up? You are catching on to cannot put yourself into a small arena something then you are giving up, or saying I am Sahaja yogi but I am a automatically all this is finished. We are neither Christians, nor Islamic Christian, you cannot. You have to No, we were, you see, very much give up that margin. You are a Sahaja attached to our family, parents, yogi out and out and all the other country, this that and now we have nonsensical things are not belonging given up some. Such half baked to you. I have seen many Muslims also people are no good, and don't who came to Sahaja Yoga but out of pay too much attention to them. them very few are real Sahaja Yogis, They don't deserve any attention. but they will come, listen to my lecture, That is very much to be understood this that. But very few are really that you should not also be like that Sahaja yogis, in the real sense of the nor you should have friends like word. Then you will start seeing the that nor you should make them defects of your community or so called Sahaja yogis. Sahaja yogi is a religion you belong to, what you will special character of a soldier who

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 11 May-June 2002 are we working it out. The attention fights for the truth. That kind of all this from should a personality when you will have move nonsensical mundane things to then there will be lights all over. yourself. It should be a very dynamic force, I should say, and I am This Diwali day I bless you all from my heart and I want you to respect sure next year it would be very different. We will have all the beautiful yourself and understand what is the blessings of the Divine, we must do it position of your being in this organisation, you can call, or in this collectively, understandingly. May God Bless You movement of Sahaja Yoga and how Puja at Brahmapuri 30.12.1989 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Like Brahmapuri, there are many All the saints have made them work very hard and to work out their small little places where the saints have worked for the betterment of problems. They have also pointed the evils of society. They did not go and sit people. Because, you see, they are so collective, they could not bear the poverty of this country. The way some place to place working for the people are claiming that we are emancipation of the society. in the Himalayas. They went from making people fatalists is absolutely May God Bless You wrong because no saint has done that.

 Christmas Puja Ganapatipule - 25-12-2001 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Nice to see so nmany know what the truth is. The truth is that Sahaja today in the Christmas become the Spirit. He is the one who Puja. Christianity has has talked about the Second Birth, of spread all over the world realization, but they have forgotten and there are so many, so called, Christians who say achieve. Its such a funny thing that all they follow Christ. i don't know such great people came on this earth yogis coming here you are the Spirit and you have to about what he said, what they have to trom which angle? Christ was the and created a proper religion for our embodiment of Param Chaitanya. He ascent, and I don't know how people was Omkara. He was Shri Ganesha have become so stupid with the and those who follow him have to be teachings of the so called their very different people. But as always masters. Its all money oriented. Apart from that it is not standing on the truth. I think this is the second Crucifixion of happens in every religion that they go at random into the opposite direction. Completely opposite. this religion. There is no religion, which is following really its principles as have been described. I don't know how they Essence of Christ's life was detachment and sacrifice. For a manage to twist the truth in this manner, just to make some money or person who is detached, there is nothing like sacrifice. He sees his life some fuss. Such a ritualistic stuff is as just a drama. Such a great going on in the name of Christ. Though personality came on this earth and they have faltered so many times and created this so-called Christian they had experience of such bad religion, which has gone into wars. All influence on the world. We don't know kinds of hypocritical things and now why such a round about things come the people are discovering about it. He up and people accept it. They just stood for truth and Christians do not accept. You take any religion. These

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2002 13 days Islam is talking, I don't know, of on these people. Its such a shameful thing to do in the name of God and in what? the name of spirituality! There were two important things in the life of Mohammed Saheb. The first Now our duty is to tell them what is one is called as 'Miraj which is nothing the truth. Our duty is to bring them to but the awakening of the Kundalini, the proper path of spirituality, because absolutely clearly, and the second one they are all lost. Christians are lost, he has talked about is Jihad. Jihad Muslims are lost, Hindus are lost. All of means killing your bad things, them are lost. They have no idea as to killing your bad nature, killing all the what their religion professed and what shadripus (six ones) within you. It they are supposed to do. Ultimately doesn't mean that you become a Christ was crucified. So you can see, Muslim and kill yourself. It's a stupidest how, when there was truth, untruth thing to do. Did you become tried to finish it off. They could not bear Musalmaan just to kill yourself and it. We have an example of Socrates. commit suicide? Calling it as a ritual What was the need to kill him, but they they are saying that by this we will go to killed. In this way, so far we know, in 'Jannat', into the heavens. How can the past all the people who are pivotal for the truth are being finished you? As Muslims they are not religious. Not at all, and then by killing those because they don't want the truth. sinful people, how will you go to the They are following some religion heavens where you will have the because they can have power over enjoyment of Jannat? There is no other people, religion that they have reasoning. But all these Maulanas, first made. Miraj is a Kundalini awakening of all, have finished their education. and they say that Miraj will never take Have finished their education. They do place. Very Good. not educate themselves at all, so they have no idea in this world, where are So many of you have got realization. You have got your they standing? What is their position? Some few are educated but they are also lost with the idea of having power vibrations and cool breeze which is

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Iasue 5 & 6 May June 2002 14 described in Koran, that you should followed in the South. They will shave feel the cool breeze. But who can tell the head of a woman, make her go the Muslims. You talk something and round a temple, pour water on her, and they will cut your throat, that's all. They she is just tumbling around. She is not will to Jihad. So its such a stupid walking. They go on putting water on go thing they are doing, and in these her. I have seen it myself. We have modern times, as we see, people have 'Sati'-is the killing of the woman after crossed all the maryadas, all the the death of her husband. This is things of religion. I went to America something no one can understand, and I was surprised how they have why put all the dharma on women and forgotten of morality. They have no why not on the men? But one thing good that Hindu religion has now sense of morality and they are selling it in the market, making money out of it. become so much out of date that you On the contrary these Muslims, can correct all these things. So many specially there is a class called things I have corrected in my own life "Wahabis', these people are saying time. I was surprised, how could I do that the women are the one who spoil it? But these Muslims and Islamics, you cannot correct them. Such horrible your morality and so hide them. They should be covered. Any women who things they do to their women and were wearing white chappals in whenever you try to help them, it is Afghanistan, they were beating them, impossible. For example I started a killed them, and so many people in place for the women who are left-out in the world alone, who are like orphans, India, specially in North, have taken to who have children. I was surprised, Islamic culture. They really ill-treat women in the North. I was married in the North, and I know how they have most of them are Muslims and they have 8 to 10 children each. So now we have to make an orphanage also. This been unkind. So North of India is is what they are producing out of their already contaminated by this, and the South is contaminated by the fanatic religion! You can see this around. Hindus. All kinds of rituals, worst type, Even Hindus have a funny system of widowhood. They make a woman bestowed upon only on women are

 15 May-June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 I said, "Why?" Because it is written in widow, its terrible. And they are forcing the Bible that you must drink. I didn't some of them, quite a lot of them, to live in Vrindavan. I was told that they know! How could it be? How could get one Rupee per day, and what do Christ say that you should drink? He they do? They sing bhajans. In one was not only a realized seif, but he was realization himself. He said, 'you rupee how can one live in this country? have said it'. Whatever you may say, They are good at creating so many he has said it. Where? He went to one beggers and begger women. If that is wedding. Alright. In that wedding he the religon, better not have it. We have made wine for the people. He did not. had enough of this. All kinds of He went there and in such a short time ritualism through this brahminism! he just put his hand in the water and it These brahmins are absolutely good started tasting like grape juice, and for nothing. Those who try to teach grape juice has the same word wine in religion have to be something of a great level. So in Sahaja Yoga you the Hebrew language. I said, I can do give up everything because this is all that. That does not mean that I like nothing but mud and in the mud you people to drink. Who can say such a nonsense? will be finished. You have to tell people about it. What are they going to do? It is awareness. It is important. They have misused the religion for all Chetna is important and if you spoil kind of bad things. Like in England if your awareness how can you be somebody dies they must have Sahaja yogis? It was impossible to tell Champagne (ta). When they go for the burial they must have Champagne. them that you cannot drink. But drinking even in India has become I was surprised. How is it they are all against Its going to have Champagne for this? common. very Christianity, its against Hinduism, its And how is it out of religion, you say? against Islam and though it is written All these priests also drink. One priest down in Koran, "Don't drink", they all came to Sahaja Yoga. I was very drink and instead of following the happy. But he said, "I will come to religion, they have become the Sahaja, but I will not give up drinking."

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 16 May June 2002 I cann't understand. Of-course greatest sinners. Is that what Christ wanted them to do? You have to be there are some who are money- pure people. Nirmal Tatvam you must oriented, who are power oriented, but have. That's what it is. these things do not give joy. What gives joy is your inner light of truth, I told a story about which you have. All of you have, as you Also you Shalivahana, who met Christ in know, you all have experienced but I would say, this experience has to be Kashmir and he asked Christ about his given to others. Its not only for you, name and his country. He said I come give it to as many people as possible. from a country where people are Malechh (A ). Malechh means But how many do that? How many those who have desire for 'mal', for people do that? filth. So he told him, "why don't you go We have also Sikh community. and teach them Nirmal Tatvam", Sahlivahana said. That is what Nirmal They came to Sahaja, but they Tatwam you have got, which purifies said we cannot worship Goddess. said, "Why?" Surprising! Because you, which cleanses you, which gives you joy, happiness and the truth. This is what you should ask for. Otherwise it is all darkness. You don't see the light. Shri Guru Nanak has talked Shri about the Goddess, the Devi; the first sentence of his book is 'Adya'. Whether you are Christian, Hindu, Adya is the Adishakti and for this if Muslim, anyone, you cann't see light of the Sikhs stupidly say then why do they have the Chandigarh. They truth and you have to take the light of truth. But after that, what you have to are so stupid also. Nothing to really compare. Now you have to understand do? You have to give it to others. You have to transform others. You have that have you given up all that worked very hard for it, and some nonsense in your life or are you times I am surprised how people who sticking on to that? That is very are doing such a good work are so important, and as long as you are humble and so good! How have they sticking on to that same, there will be achieved it? a problem.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2002 17 Sahaja Yoga does so much. I was not possible and all that, who are you surprised in America there were 300 to say that? What do you know about Sahaja Yogis. Nothing happened to spirituality? What do you know what them. Some were on the tower, some can happen to a person who is were on the street. All of them were spiritual, spiritually equipped? What there and nothing has happened to can it work out. What ever we know about human beings we try to draw them. Some of them said that conclusions which are all wrong. See somebody told us inside, told us inside that, run away. And we in your life. There are so many started running in the other miracles in the lives of Sahaja Yogis, and the other day I told somebody to, direction. Some were delayed. I don't know how all these three were better, compile them. So, he said, delayed? But such a devil of the people within one month all those letters who are thinking of destroying the came up to my head. So, I said, forget whole world are coming round. This is it. Don't write. Its not one or two. From the reason I went to America and I told all over the world people are writing. them that this war will be over before But those who are intellectuals are Diwali and it ended. Before Diwali this very difficult. Its impossible to put this war will be over and it ended. What a into their heads. stupid thing to think that they can So what ever is possible we have to destroy the creation of God like this? do our maximum. Put our attention to Who are they? How have they got the right to destory the world? But that is people who want it. Now in India it has what is a human nonsense. gone into jails. It has gone into schools and everywhere, and somebody told Christ came on this earth. He me the other day that even in a worked for a long time and he was to Catholic Church they have started be crucified, so he was crucified. But taking to Sahaja Yoga. I don't know crucifixion is not our glory. Our glory is what's wrong in their heads and how his resurrection. That He was they have managed but that's how resurrected, no doubt. To say that its Sahaja Yoga is spreading. But it has to

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2002 18 spread much more. You have to, all of try to give realisation to others. You you individually should go round and have powers. Have faith in yourself. think they lack in faith or whatever it is. work it out and talk about it. But Sahaja yogis are little shy. Once I was going A very few people come out and do it. In Italy, I have seen and also Australia, by plane. One lady was very very hot. So I asked her "what Guru she Sahaja Yoga has spread a lot because of their conviction that we have to give followed. She told me the name. I was others what we have. We have to surprised that she didn't know share it. From the life of Christ one has anything about spirituality, and these to understand his sacrifice. It is such a people have huge houses and big lot of sacrifice to be crucified like that, temples and everything, and she was telling me the praise of her Guru. I with the thieves, but he did it! In the same way when you all people want to thought she was very shameless. She do Sahaja Yoga work, you should not has not got anything in her? She was so very hot, and she is talking about it. But Sahaja yogis won't. I was father, what will happen to my grand think, what will happen to my grand mother. I mean whatever letters I get surprised why Sahaja yogis don't talk are all about this. Its very funny. They about it. The other day I had gone with somebody in the market and I had a are only worried about some relations. They are not worried about the relation Sahaja Yogi with him. Now I was surprised that he started telling them all over the world you have, worried about me and he started giving them about the wife or children, I get only realisation and they were very happy letters like this. Nobody writes to me about it. Every where you go, you have that they have given realisation to so many people. They never write how neighbours, you go to markets, every they have been able to achieve where you should go and talk about it. Like they sing carols, we should also spreading of Sahaja Yoga. None have bhajans and things to tell other writes. Very surprising. You have to tell me. I hope you all people people. We have to tell. Why are we so understand the importance of shy? This shyness is not going to help spreading Sahaja Yoga. If you don't do Sahaja Yoga. So please see that you

 May-June 2002 19 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 when they go on complaining that I that, you are absolutely useless. The should be married, and I have not got greatest thing for me, as you have so many lights here, we should have married as yet. Marriage was never our idea but then we had to allow many more Sahaja yogis all over the marriages, and now it has become the world. If you want to change this world, and if you want to avoid all main issue with everyone. Either they are not married, if they are married, the trials and tribulations of the useless life they are leading, you they are not happy. If they are have to save them, you have to divorced, they must be married again. salvage them. That's your job. All sorts of things, complications for That's what you have to pay for which I am not prepared. Sahaja Yoga Sahaja Yoga. Not for yourself, not for is not for that. If your marriage is not yourself. Don't get worried about successful, its not my job, and if it yourself. If you read the letters I get, goes on, we have to stop marriages. I you will get disgusted. Now the kind of don't want you to write all these things to me. It shows how poor you letters I get that they want to marry. are in Sahaja Yoga. Why not write to Alright. There are many girls who me how many people you have given claim that we have been applying for 4 years, we couldn't get married. Firstly realisation to. That will make me happy. Instead of complaining about you must know, out of proportion women are there. They are very good. your wife and all. That's not my Say if there are 40 boys there would concern. As it came, we have married be atleast 120 or may be even 150 you. If you cannot carry on, its your girls. Now whom should we marry duty. And this is what is the snag of those girls? Just think of it. But they Sahaja Yoga. In every religious write letters of complaints that we movement there have been so many have applied 4 times. We cann't, we wrong things. While in Sahaja Yoga I think marriages are a very big hurdle. can't help it. So you go outside, marry Moreover boys don't come, because in anywhere you feel like or else you wait India very easy to marry boys. You and see and dedicate your life to Sahaja Yoga. Its a very difficult thing also get money, this, that. But girls,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 20 May June 2002 these are 5 times more than the boys. That is the greatest justification for Boys don't want to marry. They will have their own marriages, though they for his coming on this earth is Agya. are Sahaja yogis. I cann't understand And if you give realisation they have the crucifixion of Christ, for his birth why in Sahaja Yoga also, after coming crossed the Agya. They have gone to realisation, to them marriage is a beyond and they are in Sahasrara. So very important thing! What is most in Sahaja Yoga you understand every important is that how many people thing. It is very easy to understand. you give realization to. That is your Sahaja Yoga is the simplest thing to understand, but after self realisation, life. If a lotus is there, it will open, but it So you have to go round and see how must give fragrance. Even the lotus has the responsibility. Then what many people you can give realisation about you people? I am not saying you to. Every thing is alright. All your get crucified like Christ. No, 1 say you worshipping is alright. Your puja is enjoy your life, you have peace and alright. But what is most important is, how many people you have given stability, balance, but at the same time realisation to? I would like to know how you have to spread Sahaja Yoga. This is what is your job now. Your job is many people you have given, not important. Only this is Specially with ladies. Ladies are rather important how many people you weak in giving realisation. They can do give realization to. It is very-very a lot, I know, they can. After all I am difficult becaue they have made a also a woman. But some how I find the mess of all the great incarnations, all ladies in Sahaja Yoga are not of a level. They can do a lot and lot but those great Sufis and Saints. But at some how they don't understand the least you people don't do that. So importance of their lives. You are very please try to think whom can you give realization? To whom you can talk important. How many people there are about Sahaja Yoga? We have to who have got realisation. There were spread out, and next time I hope I hear so many sufis who got realisation. They write poetry, finished. There from you, how many people you have given realisation to. were so many saints who did so much,

 21 May-June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 come with your own demands. She wrote so many things. In India we had comes on her own. She has her own so many saints. They wrote all these things. Pepole will read them but timing. But if you are people in nothing happens. You have the art of majority, who have really become giving realisation. You know about Saints and making others saintly, then Kundalini. You know all about it. Go I am for you. Otherwise I am available ahead and talk to people. I was alone to you. You can have my vibrations, when I started Sahaja Yoga, and I am you can have my pujas. All these things are permitted, no doubt. But for a woman! So what about you? There is that you are only capable, you are only now a challenge for all of you. How many people have you made Sahaja entitled for that, if you are doing yogis? Even in your family, people are Sahaja Yoga, if you are spreading not Sahaja yogis. Your daughter is not. Sahaja Yoga, if you are giving to Your son is not. So what's the use of others, then only you will be singing glory to Chirst? If you are considered really capable of receiving singing glory to him, you must make the vibrations of the Goddess. In some people cross their Agya. He is so countries if it is so much powerful, why highly placed within us. But you have not with your country, with your neighbourhood, with your friends, with never respected him, that such a your relations, it is powerful. So tonight highly placed personality in you have you have to decide that you are going crossed over, so why not others? to dedicate yourself in giving it to Let us see from today's Puja how others. It is very joy giving, talking much determination you have. You about Sahaja Yoga. May God bless you. should know that a Goddess does not

 Shri Ganesha Puja 8-8-1989 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today you have come here to and he starts restoring things within worship me as Shri Ganesha. We himself. But in the beginning he only have been singing the praise of Shri remembers what nice things have happened to him. So we always like to Ganesha before every puja, and we have tremendous respect for Shri ponder about our childhood, what we enjoyed in our childhood. But as we Ganesha because we have found out that unless and until Shri Ganesha, start growing up, we start to remembering, all those miseries and who is the symbol of our innocence, is awakened within us we cannot enter all the tribulations we had to go through. All the ordeals through which into the kingdom of God. And even to stay there, and to enjoy the blessings of Shri Ganesha, we have to have our we had passed, we try to magnify it. In childhood the children only remember innocence fully blossoming. So we the people who have loved them and praise him and He is very easily not the people who have hurt them. They don't want to remember perhaps. pleased. And whatever we have done grow It looks like that. But when they wrong, before coming to Sahaja Yoga, He completely forgives because He is up, they only try to remember the the Eternal Child. You have seen people who have harmed them or children, when you slap them, have troubled them. And that's how they make themselves very miserable. sometimes get angry with them; they forget it. They only remember the love and not what they have suffered at But the principle of Shri Ganesha is extremely subtle, is the subtlest of your hands. Till they grow up, they do not have memory of bad things done subtle. And it exists in every thing. to them. From the very beginning, a That it exists in the matter, in the form of vibrations. There is no matter which child is born to a mother, he does not is without vibrations. It has vibrations remember what he has gone through. Gradually the memory starts working which are seen even in the atoms and

 23 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2002 the curse of Shri Ganesha. When also in the molecules of all matters that exist. So Shri Ganesha is the first people start doing wrong things, one, who was established in the behaving in a wrong manner then the collectively, matter as well. As a result we can see, catastrophes come to teach them a He exists in the Sun, He exists in the lesson. So in His essence, though He Moon, He exists in the whole universe, exists in every thing, also in that He in the whole creation and He continues has capacity to assert His will to bring to exist in human beings also. Only the forth the destruction of the whole human beings have the capacity to world. somehow or other to cover up their innocence. Otherwise, animals are We have Shri Ganesha's idea as a innocent. Human beings have the minute being. We think He can go on a freedom. If they want, they can cover little mouse, so He must be very up their innocence, they can shut minute. He is as minute as He is great. down the doors of Shri Ganesha and He surpasses all the deities because say that He doesn't exist. They can of his wisdom. He is the giver of cloud it. And that is why, we find wisdom. He gives us wisdom. He among human beings that they are makes us learn. He is our Guru, in that doing so many horrible things, respect, Mahaguru, because He avoiding the existence of Shri teaches us, how we should behave. If Ganesha. But He acts, acts in a way we try to surpass Him and try to that He shows natural results of our misbehave, even the Mother won't wrong doings. Like if you do things support, becaus She knows that those which are not pleasing to Shri who surpass Shri Ganesha are also Ganesha, He goes upto a point, the people who will never respect the forgives you upto a point, and then it Mother. So He is the epitome of starts emerging out as diseases, as respect. He does not know any other physical diseases and in women it God. He doesn't know Sada Shiva. He becomes a mental disease. Also it can does not know anybody else. That He create problems in the nature. The only respects the Mother. So He is the natural catastrophes are also only one who is the power of devotion and

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 &6 May - June 2002 24 complete surrender to Mother, and important point, because He is the that's why He is the most powerful giver of wisdom. So the parents must deity, among all the deities, and understand that if He is the giver of nobody can surpass him in His wisdom, there should be wisdom within me. And if I have the wisdom, powers. then I have the balance and I don't lose temper with children, but I try to We have to understand that as correct them in such a manner that children are growing Shri Ganesha they get corrected. On the contrary if starts growing in them also. But as they are human beings they can you try to be very harsh with your children, they might react and they some-how or the other try to over- might go astray, or if you try to restrict power Shri Ganesha. So it's the duty too much, then also they will behave in of the parents, who are Sahaja yogis, to see that they look after their children the same manner. in a way, in a detached way, to see So one thing is to be taught to your that Shri Ganesha in them is settled. The first sign of Shri Ganesha in a own children, as Shri Ganesha himself does, that respect your Mother. Your child is wisdom. If the child is not wise, if he is troublesome, if he does not mother means, your Holy Mother and know how to behave, then it shows your own mother. That is very important. If the father does not make that Shri Ganesha is being attacked by him. And these days, in the modern the child respect the mother, the child can never be alright. Because the times, as it is, children are very much under attack. Innocence is under authority comes from the father, no attack, and it is very difficult for people doubt, but the mother must be to make a fine line, as to how for to go respected. But for that it is very with children and how far not to go. important that mother must respect Today's lecture will be more the father. So, in the present situation concerning about how far to go with if you start fighting with each other, Shri Ganesha, as far as children are misbehaving and talking in a manner concerned, because that's very that's not proper, it will have very bad

 25 May-June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 miracles in agriculture, to begin with. effect on the Ganesha Tatwa of the child. This upbringing is a very Miracles of agriculture are such that important thing in Sahaja Yoga, people are amazed but it is very because by God's grace, you all have simple. Once you start exciting the Ganesha principle into the seed, it got realized children. So you must become 10 times, sometimes 100 know, how far to go with your children. To make them wiser, to be moral, to be times. Even the Mother earth which seems to be something dead, can be righteous, first thing is that you should try to preserve their wisdom. If they vibrated. Supposing, you Sahaja yogis walk barefeet on the ground, the say something wise, you must Mother Earth gets vibrated. Such appreciate it. But they should not also Mother Earth will act on the grass, on say out of place, out of grace. So the the trees, on the flowers, on misbehaviour is also not to be tolerated, in the sense, that whatever everything. As it is, the Sahaja yogis is wisdom within has to be expressed have been telling me, that in their outside as light. Ashrams, all the flowers that they grow are out of size and very fragrant. Like daisies never had fragrance Now, we go further with it to see in how far Shri Ganesha acts. As I said, London, or in England, never. The in the subtlest of subtlest He exists. daisy's size was so small. Now it has But you have to awaken Him. For become so big and it is so fragrant. It is a miracle. First time, when I told example, you have seen water which is vibrated. Vibrated means what? somebody that daisies are fragrant, Vibrated means that Ganesha Tatwa they could not believe it. And when is being enlightened in that water. So they saw the fragrance they were when that water, goes into your surprised. stomach, or in to your eyes, or wherever you want to put it, it acts. In the same way, Ganesha Tatwa Acts in a way, that it excites Shri understands things, organises, works Ganesha Tatwa into anything that you out, if it is awakened. If it is not put it. Now you have seen we have got awakened, it is sleeping, then it does

 May - June 2002 26 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 not. So it acts, it works out. Like a little If you have an attention which is all the time going from this place to that seed, when it sprouts, at the tip of the place, that place to that place, then it is seed, there is a little cell, which has got the Ganesha Tatwa which is being affected. Especially in the case, when awakened. So it knows how to go we start looking at men, looking at women, all the time, then also our down, how to go round the stone and Ganesha Tatwa gets very much how to embed itself and how to reach destroyed. Such people are difficult for the source of water. But it has only the rising in their ascent, because Agya sense, how far to go to exist, how far to go to nourish itself. On a very material itself goes out. Then this Ganesha Tatwa can also be reduced if you are plane, how to allow the tree to grow. very much materialistic, all the time worried about your things, like you But this Ganesha Tatwa starts have some thing in the house, you becoming very very subtle and subtlest are worried about, and looking at at the point of Agya chakra. At the everything, all the time trying to correct point of Agya chakra, it understands it, and all the time worried about the that it has now the spiritual dimension. Same Ganesha Tatwa which acted in a matter. Then also this Ganesha Tatwa small little tip of the root, now, acts for can be lost, because you are all the the spiritual thing. That's why, people time worried about these things, like we are going to the shop and you are close their eyes, when they meditate, because they do not want to see seeing everything, what is there, what anything else but they want Shri is there, and what should I buy. Like that also, if you do too much, it will be. Ganesha, just to act for the meditative But supposing. you are buying process of their Kundalini. This something out of beauty, for beauty, process of meditation, when we close our eyes, acts. But if you see some- you want to buy something for beautifying your house, that means body sleeping and he is dreaming, you will see his eyes will be all the time you are trying to do something to moving. This Ganesha Tatwa is now please others. You are doing it to activated by your attention. make others very happy. Then it acts

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 27 May-June 2002 the feeling of the mother for the child. the other way round. Then it increases your ascent. But if it is done only to That subtle feeling you have that create a kind of a joy for others, people have come to my house. Now see how they are happy, they are sharing of the beauty of whatever you enjoying this and they are appreciating have bought or you have taken. But it. In that you also satisfy a very great supposing you are buying anything, for Ganesha principle, that is, you have making others feel jealous, that also I taken note of the artists. Though the have recentiy learnt that there is a capacity like that for people to buy artists are creative, they are creating something to make others jealous. Not all beautiful things, out of matter, through the Swadhisthana. But to make somebody feel happy. If there being Swadhisthana are people who buy things just to without make others jealous then also their governed by Shri Ganesha, it cannot Ganesha Tatwa can be destroyed. be beautiful. These days as you see What you should buy, anything, you that the artists are taking towards the should make a beautiful house. When grotesque things and very immoral somebody comes to your house, he things. And these things are of no should say, what a nice thing we have eternal value. Today people will buy seen! Not attachment to the thing. But them and tomorrow they will throw attachment to the thing, how people away. Only the things which have got the subtle Ganesha principle in it feel, how they feel nice and relaxed and they feel their Shri Ganesha, acting, which makes you soothe down, which makes you feel peaceful, within them, which is beauty. which makes you feel happy, is the one that is appreciated. So Shri When this feeling comes in then you should say, there is Ganesha Ganesha establishes within you, the Tatwa. And it is a very motherly higher Self. So the baser self, which enjoys all baser things of life, are being feeling, it is like a mother, who always wants to give sweet things to her curtailed down, are being cut down. children. In the same way, you have Sometimes completely destroyed by Shri Ganesha. I will give you an . This is called that Vatsalaya (

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 28 May - June 2002 example of Mona Lisa. If you see I have not seen any picture as such, Mona Lisa, I think she cannot be an of those days where these principles actress, she cannot be a beauty are not there. Even Picasso has used contestant, I think Her face is very it. Even people who are quite modern serene, very motherly, very pure. And had to use this principle to popularise. why is it that she is eternally so much But to get popularity some have used appreciated? The reason is, there is just anti Ganesha principle. All such Ganesha principle in her. She is a things have vanished into thin air, and I see now gradually it's all going down mother. And the story about that one is that this lady had lost her child, and and down and down and down. she would never smile, she would Despite the fact, the people have lost never cry. And once one little child was their morals, they would like to have brought to her, she saw the child, then Rambrandt, they would like to have the smile that came on her face, of her Leonardo da Vinci. They would like to love for the child, is being depicted by have, such artists, who have done Mother and Child. It is very surprising! this great artist. That's why people are Even I went to Austria this time, I said, appreciating it. And you have seen in the West, though the people don't what statue you have? They said that show much interest in the Mother- we have got beautiful Madonna and child relationships. Anywhere you go the child. So this principle is the most the Mother-Child theme is the best. I pleasing principle. It's the most will show you a photograph, this is pleasing principle for human beings. mother and child, this is Christ's To see the children, to play with them, Mother and child. When the Christ was to enjoy their company, why? Because, it is that sweetness of the brought down, the Mother is there. child, which really I should say, trickles They have to have Mother and Child principle acting. Otherwise that picture down within you. When you see a is not regarded something great, or child, immediately, the face becomes cheerful. I have told you I have seen you will have to have actually Christ, who is the Ganesha principle himself, even a crocodile cracking her eggs. It to be sure. was shown in a film. And you would

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2002 29 for your child has to be absolutely have seen her eyes at that time! How carefully, she was cracking? So important, but we should not, as beautiful her eyes were, full of such Sahaja yogis, have only attachment love pouring out! You can't believe that for your children. First thing and the second thing is we must know, how to these are the eyes of the same crocodile. And so slowly she is give a complete margin to your love. The margin is benevolence. Is it cracking with her mouth all the eggs, benevolent for my child? Am I spoiling and the little little crocodiles coming my child? Am I too much encouraging out and then, she brings them on the my child? Am I playing into the hands shore and washes them in the mouth of my child? Or I am managing my all the time, so carefully. Like a bathroom she uses her mouth, you child all right. Because in childhood, father and mother have to manage the see! child. They have to train the children, and the children have to be obedient, You should see how animals also act to their children. But when you and they have to listen to them. But these days children are not obedient. become sort of modern, so called, They are not, because they find that your actions are very funny. There are the parents are not obedient to each people, who are killing children, there other. Also they find that the society is are people who are abusing children, I such that where children go on than they worse mean are 'Rakshasas'. Even 'Rakshasas' have pestering the parents, so they also become like that. But doesn't matter not done, Pishachas' have not done. The Ganas are surprised, what sort of you are Sahaja yogis, you should bring these new creatures have come up, up your children, who should be from where? That they have no love obedient, who should be wise, who should be sensible. Give the same for their children, that they can kill their love, that the crocodile has for the children, murder them, break their hands. It's to their own children! If they baby crocodiles. could do it to their own children, what will they do to others' children? So love Now, when we come to the subtler

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 5 & 6 May - June 2002 30 side of Ganesha Tatwa i.e. it say. But there were masters of this expresses in our eyes. When I see music sitting there, when you were something, I see it as a joy giving singing. They were the masters of thing. Just a joy giving thing. And if I want to buy something, then I willl say all right I can buy it for certain person, he will like it. Because I know, what drama and very well known artists in India, so they offered me, 'Mother, we want to celebrate your birthday." I said, it is very difficult, because it will they like. So will buy that thing for that be so far away. No, no, we will come. person, or else, if I am buying The whole night they traveled and the something for my family, I will think the whole day practically. They came at about 5'0 clock, imagine. They same. Like I have built a house now, where I am going to put all the things, finished their drama about 3'0 clock or the presents you have given me, like a 4'o clock and they traveled all the day, museum. And I am going is ask all the arrived at around 5'0 clock, from somewhere called Belgaum. And 6- villagers, to come and see it. Because they have never seen such things, 6:30 was the programme. So they they can't travel to Switzerland, or were all dressed up there. And what a England. So I am thinking of making compeering they did! They said, we this house in such a manner that these were ashamed. We used to think, we Maharashtrians are very good at villagers who have never seen beautiful things, should come and see. music, very good at talas and this. But In India, it is not a case very much with we were ashamed, the way these simple people to have jealousy. Only foreigners sang our music so well, we the new materialistic people have cannot sing like them. Though their developed this habit of jealousy. But music we cannot sing, while they sang otherwise, they will always say, what a our music. And we are all very much nice thing? How beautiful it is? ashamed and embarrassed, how could they sing so well. And the Like you were singing songs about appreciation was so great, that I was Sahaja Yoga, in Pune. Actually, you my-self embarrassed, the way they have really picked up very well, I must were singing. How it has happened?

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 &6 31 May-June 2002 These people, what is it their Guru has appreciated that these people who done? What have they done to these have never known Indian music are singing so well. So in that appreciation people, that they could sing so well. fatherliness, So, the appreciation, as a whole thing that also, that enamoured. We have a tape of that, I motherliness was there, that 'Vatsalya' think, audio tape. I don't know video was there, and the situation was so tape we have or not. But if you have, beautiful. Even, say, when a person like Ravi Shankar has to play with please get it. It is very interesting, the Yehudi Menuhin-Yehudi Menuhin is a way they appreciated my children, the child before him-but I have seen how way they were singing. They were he looks after him and how he protects such masters, so developed in that! The way they were appreciating as if him, as you say in Hindi language- 'Sambhalna. All the time he (Ravi they were appreciating children singing so deeply. In that the rapport Shankar) is looking after him and managing him. And also we have seen was very sweetened, rapport of "Vatsalya' (aHEA), is the feeling of a in the music part, when suppose a Table wala' is sitting and a very senior motherliness. Look at these children, they are singing so well, it has musician is sitting, he (Table wala) will happened with many people, I have say, please look after me, always with very great feeling of a child. All these seen. When some artists come, they saw you people appreciating and things are very important in life to singing, they had the same feeling. create good relationships between How could these children, how could ourselves also. Those who are these people sing so well? How did younger to us, those who are not so they know so well? I mean, all that well off, or those who are not so much talented, or those who are not so much feeling, beautiful and all that appreciation created such a nice equipped in knowledge of Sahaja Yoga or who are not so much senior in atmosphere, as we had some very great artists and how they appreciated Sahaja Yoga. We have to look after the others i a fatherly manner or you you. Instead of saying, "O, what is this music? Nothing". They so much can say in a motherly manner. They

 32 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May - June 2002 is the question of one has to be all are not equipped, we have a Ganesha Tatwa, so excite their Ganesha Tatwa. the time connected with the whole. They should feel dependent on us for Unless and until you are connected completely, you cannot understand achieving the mastery or achieving the collectivity of innocence. higher state. Like the Guru principle is absolutely The collectivity of innocence I see sometimes, I am very happy that a child bound by Ganesha principle. If a Guru of somebody is in the lap of somebody. does not have Ganesha principle, he Sitting very sweetly. Coming as if he is becomes a horrid, horrid, horrid fellow your own father, coming and sitting just and nobody wants to stick on to him. on your lap, without knowing that he is not And they all run away from him. my father. But still that consciousness is Though he might punish, he might also always there. So this spreads the feeling of 'my' and possession, that this my, this is mine, this is mine. What makes you feel get angry, with his disciples, but basically, what he thinks is that 'he is my protege, and I am developing him and building him'. But if the modern that now we are a means, we can say, an thinking is set, let them be individuals, instrument, a media by which we express let them be independent. So the father Ganesha Tatwa always i.e. vibrations. and mother do not look after their So the vibrations itself, about which children in the manner, that they should. That-"see, this is my son. you are asking, these vibrations have got a talent, I must teach him, themselves are nothing but the principle of Shri Ganesha, is 'Omkara'. and he must come up. He is the one, who is the continuation of my own And when it is, then what is that self". So this idea of having every feeling, as I told you the Vatsalya 'aa a The feeling of love between a individual, you are an individual, I will child and a mother. That feeling itself teach you or get out of the house. You do whatever you like, stand on your is vibrations. Between the child and legs. No, life is a continuous process. the mother, the distance between the It is not just you stand on your legs. It two, is vibrations. And that is what one

 33 May-June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 extend to everything that you do. You has to feel that he is a child still, and there is the mother and the mother is should see what? Things that are good. Whatsoever has got vibrations. bringing the child, giving all the powers to the child, loving the child, Today, I want to tell you something understanding the limitations of the child, looking after all that. All the very important about this All Pervading Power we have heard about. These sweetness, all the wisdom of the child are nothing but vibrations. The Parma to be appreciated, that is vibrations. Chaitanya is nothing but vibrations, And if you see the subtle side of it, it's where all identities are lost, the mother not my child, its not only a limited thing because it is eternal, it is everywhere, is lost, tather is lost, nothing remains. It is just this vibrations, the subtle you cannot have it. In everything you do, I have seen people the way they Vatsalya; exists. And this is the only handle the things in the West. We thing, out of which everything comes and remains in itself. Like we can say. Indians also have to learn from them. that the sun's rays come out and then So we have to accept for that, what they try to create chlorophyll. So is the way to handle also beautiful it's not that you cannot compare sun with that. Or we can say that from the things. How to look after beautiful ocean, the clouds come out and they things, how to manage beautiful relationships? You shouldn't be harsh. try to nourish the Mother Earth. That's You shouldn't be unkind. You also, they cannot be compared. Everything is inside. This Param shouldn't see things which are insulting to others, so that the Chaitanya has got everything inside. So we can say that everything is relationships are maintained. So all the relationships that are between nothing but knowledge, is nothing human beings and God are through but truth, is nothing but light. But when the folds of it come out, then we get the Ganesha principle. So when it into the folds of that Chaitanya, then becomes relationship between you and God, then there are vibrations, we become ignorant. But there is and then the same relationship should nothing like ignorance, it does not

 34 May - June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 In exist. Like there is darkness because In the same way, this Param Chaitanya acts and what we get lost is, there is no light. Once light comes, it (darkness) does not exist. So in our awareness, that is our Param Chaitanya. That is why, the play starts. ignorance does not exist. But The play starts, like, day before what happens that the folds of this ocean, into that people go and it is lost. yesterday's Puja, What did happen? Thus we understand one thing very We were sitting there, and it started clearly that we are in Param raining. So to prove, that I can control rain so it rained. Some people were Chaitanya. We are made by Param covering out.I gave a bandhan. After Chaitanya. All the time we are sometime, the rain moved out from the surrounded by it, only thing is we are puja to the backside. It was not raining sometimes lost in the force. And why, where we were sitting and after that it why we are lost in the force, because became the Sun and it was so cloudy. of our own unawareness. This Sun came, it became sunny. So that's awareness has to come, that we how, you have to become aware of the are part and parcel of that Param Chaitanya. The whole thing is called powers of Chaitanya. Now when you as 'Chid-vilasa', is the vilasa, is the give bandhan, what you do is, to put Chaitanya into action. Though you are, playful enjoyment of God's attention. Now you will say, how can that be? For suppose, in the ocean, but the ocean acts upon you all the time. You cannot example, we see the sun, I will just give a simele closer to it. We see the act in the ocean, you cannot ask the water to do this, to do that. But as a sun and then we see the water. We see the water in the lake. There is realised soul, you are empowered, water, and because of sun we can see now you can ask water, all right you dissolve. You do this, you do that. the water. Then supposing, we see the But for that, it is important to be the mirage and we think, this is water and masters. And to become the masters, we run after the water. But the whole thing is the play of the sun, whether it you see, like a matter becomes a is a mirage, whether it is water, human being, and from human beings they have to become masters of the whether it is the sun.

 35 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 5 & 6 May-June 2002 now you are empowered and you can matter, and you handle the matter. So do it. It works out in everything. It we come back to the same. Like, agriculture we can handle, just by works in your talent, in your understanding, in your education, in vibrating, we can handle water, we can handle Sun, we can handle Moon. everything. Like there are some boys, who said, "Mother see we could not Because there is rapport now, we are solve our problem so we gave a aware, that rapport has been established. So all this play is bandhan. Immediately the whole thing extremely beautiful to me, I see it. But came and we wrote it down and there is the solution", It is happening with now you all have to know that you all have become realised souls and you them. have those powers. So in every action, in every thing, So all other non-sensical things you whatever you do, you should know, it is were indulging in, better give it up. the Param Chaitanya that acts. Only There is no sense in it. What ever is thing you have to be aware of your Self and aware of it, it acts. And you just sensible, you should do, because jump into that awareness and it works. there is Shri Ganesha within you, who is absolutely sensible. He is nothing That you have seen. But still so many but sense; He is the giver of sense, So people do not know. So many people still know from their brains, do not know He is the killer of demons as they say. He is the one, who removes all the from their hearts. And so many people even if they know in their hearts, they ordeals by improving our awareness. do not act in their attention. So only True, ordeals cannot remain, because these three things you have to improve, you give the bandan and it works out. Now, I asked somebody to write down one is your heart, another is your the miracles, and now he says, it has head and third is liver. If you can become voluminous. It is, because improve your these three organs, the before realisation, whatever looked Param Chaitanya will act. But then all like miracle, is no more a miracle. this attention about money should be given up. Param Chaitanya will create Miracle has lost its meaning. Because

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 36 May -June 2002 handle their Kundalini, sometimes the everything for you. It may not create money, because it does not have a way they behave towards themselves and others! All these things are to be mint, but it will create possibilities. And this is something to be understood very understood. Now that we have entered well and it is so blissful to know that into the Kingdom of God, means Param now you are aware of the Param Chaitanya, and that we are very Chaitanya, and you can master it. important citizens of that. If one can Master it is not in the sense that you understand this, then I think Sahaja can dominate it, but you ask it like Yoga can be very successful. 'Jinn', do this! Do that! With respect. Everything will work out miraculously, everything will workout. And all those But the way sometimes we do not pay who respect to Param Chaitanya, is also not aware about the are something surprising. The way we act, possibilities where they can reach? all the time, the way we are behaving! They are thrown out, in the sense in the Like in my presence, the people will folds, in the ignorance, so called, into the darkness. Again they can come sit down and close their eyes or they will start worshipping the photograph back to light, when they have sense. instead of me. Sometimes the way they May God Bless You

 Puja at Aurangabad 19 December, 1989 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Aurangabad special sianificance in my were very quick and very clever, own life because my intelligent and supple. They destroyed forefathers came from a has a like mammoths and the others who most of these big animals, and in that place very near from here river there were lots of crocodiles. called as Paithan but When the King of the elephants known originally known as Gajendra was drinking water, one of as the big crocodiles in the water attacked Pratishthana. it is the place him. He wanted to kill him so that the where the Rishi Valmiki wrote the whole genes of these elephants would great epic 'Ramayana'. He lived here. So there is a big quarrel going on be destroyed. That's where Shri because Valmiki had his ashram in Vishnu appeared and He killed the different places. But actually Valmiki crocodile and saved the elephant. Out of all these big animals, only the lived here in this area. On the other elephant was saved and that's why that side of Godavari, which was going on place is called as 'Gajendra Moksha'. to Paithan or Pratishthana, was the kingdom of Shalivahanas. Valmiki used to plunder people. He belonged to the fisherman caste, Sita stayed here. Her one son went Then saint Narada came and he to Russia and another to China. The name of the one who went to China plundered him also. So Narada asked was Kush and the one who went to why are you plundering me? Valmiki Russia was known as Lav. Those who said, 'because I have to feed my went to Russia are called as Slavs or children, my wife and a large family. I am the only earning member.' Then Narada said, "do you think your Lev, and those who went to China are called as Kushanas. children will sacrifice everything for you?" Valmiki said, "I'm sure, they Around here was a very big struggle of evolution between the big animals will". Narada said, "now you become

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May - June 2002 38 like a dead man" and they took his Then the story afterwards leads to dead body, so called, and four saints be coming of Sita there. So a very important part of Ramayana was put it in his house and told the family that this fellow died while plundering played here, and he said that us. But there is a way to again bring Shalivahana helped this Valmiki him to life. You have to promise that temple and treated him with great sombody from you has to die in respect as their master. But actually their master long time back was one his place. They tried. All of them made one excuse or the other, for they Chandilya, where we have taken some did not want to die. So Valmiki got land near the river Neera. up and realised that so far he has The people here are very God- been really doing something wrong. fearing, and they respect saints, and Saint Narada advised him to chant the they also know who is a real saint, name of Rama. He said then I will say mostly. I hope you will understand that Mara, Mara, means I am dead. So when we think of the comfort of our repeating it, it came to Rama, Rama. So Narada said, "it won't work out, spirit, the whole life is penetrated with the light of the spirit, and we start and you have to do penance as you have done lots of bad things in your changing our attitude towards life. Not only that but also we have a kind of life, and you have hurt many people". So he sat down for penance on a big tremendous confidence in our virtues and we enjoy them. Though we can say, mountain here which is called as Valmiki Mountain. And the termites ate in a way, that in this culture there is not much of finesse, not much of up his body. Only his neck was saved artificiality. They won't say 'thank you' and the whole body was eaten up by hundred times. They don't say 'sorry. termites. So then Shri Vishnu appeared before him and removed the They won't even fold their hands termites and gave him realisation. A normally. The women specially to men, and say 'namaskar'. Only to God they termite in Sanskrit language is called as Valmi. That's how he was called fold their hands. Valmiki. May God Bless You

 Puja at Shrirampur 21.12.1989 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) It is not necessary how into you, makes you very happy, many things you give me. and you don't know why you are just enjoying It's not necessary how many offers are happy, your happiness. Then one has to say that there. It's more important how many you really have become a Sahaja people you give realisation to. And secondly, how are you? Have you Yogi. At that state, you want to share it. You don't want to keep it to yourself. evolved? Have you really become You will work very hard and do independent? And can you get rid of all everything that is possible under the your conditionings, your ego? And have you become a very mild, beautiful, sun. Your mind will think how to compassionate, collective personality? spread it, how to give this joy to others. You won't be happy unless and until The question of introspection to see yourselves, is very important. you communicate with others. So first you become the capitalist and then If we do not have a proper car, we you become a communist. cannot drive. In the same way, if your being is in a funny situation, then you The first thing is, how far we have cannot ascend. That's a fact. So we enjoyed? Second is what have we got in our mind now? How are we going to enjoy, every thing, is the sign how much we have achieved. If there's a expand Sahaja Yoga outside? First, cup, then a very little joy can go into it. the light has to improve. Then automatically the light has to spread. But if it is like an ocean, all the rivers of joy fall into it. So, it is the amount of What is the relationship we have with enjoyment you have, not fun, I mean ourselves? I have told you, aiso, don't saying form groups. Another thing is some enjoyment. I not am frivolousness, cheapness but a very people have developed a habit of meditative deep enjoyment that you moving their neck too much. While have within yourself. It just bubbles singing, they move their neck and their

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May - June 2002 40 body. You can move body but the neck very important. In India, you must should only be moved with the body. comb your hair properly because they Before meditation, you can check think you are all beggars. Only the yourself - what's wrong with you - beggars have hair like this. Please put oil and make your hair properly. You before my photograph and then you should be proud of your forehead. It is should go into meditation. the Ekadasha. You have to fight the whole world with this Ekadasha of As we were coming, I just said, now yours. So please see that you keep this is the wrong road. They said, "how your forehead absolutely open, hair properly done and oiled. In the night, do you know Mother?" Just I know. Just find out. Just to know everything, you can put some oil and it will soothe you need not know everything about it. you. You will find it very much better, But that is the sign that you have specially for liver patients, it is very become very aware. To be aware of important. They must put oil in their everything. It is not like sitting down heads because they are dried out here that you should say, "that's very people. There's no fat in their hair and beautiful or it's very grand". That's not the hair do not grow. They become the point. Not to certify, not to criticize immediately bald. but how much do you know feel it in You have to bring out what Sahaja the atmosphere. Because we have a culture is, through manifesting it, very big brain and we have two lobes without my telling you, so what is the in our head. It's not one brain but two Sahaja Culture, how we work it out lobes and when the awareness ourselves, our things. starts giving you light, you start knowing within yourself, everything Also, try to judge where is your and you are silent. You don't have attention? All the time keep to assert, manipulate or to exert attention on your attention. Where yourself, but, just to know and that's a is my attention? Mr. Attention very beautiful thing one has to do. where are you lost? And that will work out for you. Another thing which I can tell you is May God Bless You.

 Shri Christ Puja Ganapati Pule 25.12.1989 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) have Christ to that extent and how they Today, we assembled celebrate the birth of stupid ideas of allowing people to here to ruined so many people with their Christ. When you think of his birth, indulge into all kinds of filthy things. The second point is very important one knows that he was born in a very to see how he was born in a very humble place, and all his life he lived in a very humble way. Also as Sahaja humble way. He was the son of a Yogis you know that he was the carpenter, so, he lived like a incarnation of Shri Ganesha, which in carpenter. But in the Western life, a sense, is innocence. And he was people are so materialistic and to crucified due to stupid understanding them, to live lavishly, to show off their a of blind people. He was the eternal wealth, and to piunder people, plunder child. It is so sad that when we talk countries after countries for material gains is a common thing. They do not about Christ and Christianity, we feel that Christianity has gone just the think that it is wrong. In fact, they are quite proud of it. other way round, on the other side of Christ. If one is construction, the other is destruction, if one is innocence, the The great thing about Christ was other is cunning. that he wanted people to love each other and be humble, but the Where there is Christianity; in its arrogance and the cruelty that one has seen of the Christian nations, one practice, its very surprising that innocence has no place and respect. cannot understand how they are any Chastity has no place, no respect where near Christ! He has said, which was the essence of Christ. He "blessed are those who are meek". Where are those meek people living? was made of it. It is sometimes so called Not in the Western countries. Not shocking how these Christian Nations have maligned the countries where Christ is

 42 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 May - June 2002 you are Sahaja Yogis and that you are worshipped, where churches are the followers of Christ. You are the raised in his honour, and have been worshipping the Virgin Mother for so gnostics as described, "the one who many years. What a sinful thing to do knows", and that's how you have to to Christ! Is the greatest sin that we help people to emancipate. It is very surprising that I saw that the Western say we are following Christ, and to do all these horrible things. All such life, the stupid destructive ideas, did people have to go to hell. They may not kill the innocence. But still I would say that this kind of lovey-dovey stuff not realise but they are already getting must be given up. It is just most un- into it. They are already having this Christian because if you see, his life problem. They are worse than the was a life of a 'Tapasvi'. A man who people who crucified Christ. Every day there's crucifixion. lived in a very detached manner. So for Sahaya Yogis who are coming from Christian life, have to understand, if He was bearing all the brunt of the they have to get rid of it, they should people, everything. But the outcome of that life is so horrifying that sometimes be like that. I get worried, that I hope they don't Among the Christians, marriage make something out of me like that. dominates the whole life style. Its Now you people are born again. As absurd in Sahaja Yoga. If one of the Christ has said, you are to be born partners is not alright, it affects the again. You have achieved that state other spouse. It covers the whole which Christ was talking about. You personality. It's not the case with Muslims and Hindus. I mean, I am are special type of people. I never had married too. It doesn't cover my whole such hopes. The first encounter was so horrible, I did not think that many entire being with it. How can it? And that the problem is that once marriage would come out of it. But so many of system starts, anything starts, it becomes so important that I am faced you have come out of it and have really glorified the name of Christ. I would request you, now, to know that with problems all the time. The

 43 May-June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 at all than even eating your food. marriages are performed and then the The more ado you start making of it, letters start pouring in that 'this has happened to my marriage'. It is a you start falling into the same trap where I pulled you out. headache. They will ruin their wives, they will ruin their husbands, they will We have come out from hell. Now ruin Sahaja Yoga. The importance of Sahaja Yoga is so minimized by this be dignified, be sensible, and over Christian mind. It is a juxtapositon as importance to such unimportant things can call it. There is no similarity will not allow you to rise high, But I you don't say you don't mary. Of course, between the life Christ must have thought people would lead and the you must marry. Of course, if you are Sahaja Yogini and know about Sahaja one people are leading. So it is Yoga, then of course you are helped necessary for Sahaja Yogis to have a dignity and sense, and to knoW much more. You get much more that they are grounded in Sahaja power, much more joy, much more Yoga. And marriage and all those understanding, and it is very good. But the inter-relationship is so important, things are just subsidiary. It's not on small things, is beyond me to the end of life. understand. Then I see that the girls fall in love with the men that they I have to marry people because I marry-finished. The man is finished. believe that one should lead a proper married life, because if you just take The woman is finished. up sanyasa without going through this Today, I am taking this great married life, you can become very much hypocritical. But that doesn't occasion to tell you that Christ was born to immaculate conception. mean that marriage is everything. It's so important. it's just and that's how I have given you not something that has to happen. It's your second birth, and you are so pure. So all the impurities, you must see them not more important than praying. clearly. I know you don't like them but It's not even important than they will creep from here and there. meditating. It's not more important

 May - June 2002 44 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 If you have to come up to this stage, higher than this, but you must have the worthiness. If your are not sea you have to keep up the staircase. You think that you have achieved a lot worthy, you will be drowned. So we because now you have a settled have to develop that worthiness and family, settled children and you are we have Chirst before us. What a life it was! He lived like a human being in a worried about your own children all the humble way. And how truthfully time. No, it's another temptation. It's a forthright he was to say everything so very big temptation. So on the great occasion of the birth of Christ, we clearly! In the same way, you will have have to say to ourselves that we are your strength where you will know that dedicated to Sahaja Yoga. That's you are much more than your the main thing. Everything is nationality. You a higher are subsidiary. personality, a Sahaja Yogi who is dwelling in the kingdom of God. That's We are on the cusp of a wave the bliss. Not the family bliss and the children bliss but the bliss of God. from where we are going to jump on May God Bless You to another wave which will be much

 Sankranti Puja Kalwe, 14 January 1990 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today is the day for us beautiful. It has made your life very celebrate in India very much, joyous and very happy. Now we are at to a point where we have to trigger a because the sun moves down to new jump, a new flight. And for this Capricorn, and from Capricorn it then flight, we have to see that we really comes to Tropic of Cancer. When the become very light in our ideas, sun comes back to this earth then all the creativity of Mother Earth starts thoughts and in our conditionings. so much full of You acting and She creates such beautiful are All of types things like flowers, nice nourishing conditionings. things and fulfilling things like fruits conditionings are on us. They are so and She makes our eyes cool down deep that sometimes I fail to with the greenery She has, and the understand human beings. I just don't way She blesses us is manifold with understand how we get stuck to things which are of no value, which are of no the advent of the sun. sense, and they get lost. In this In the same way now that the sun of higher jump, which you are going to Sahaja Yoga has risen and is coming take, many will be left behind as a to the zenith and it has definitely result, those who will not be able to shown you the result on the Earth come out of that. So at this stage, I principle that is your Mooladhar and have to request you that you should your creative power of that Mooiadhar really fully dedicate yourself to meditation, and surrender yourself to which is the Kundalini, has been rising collectivity. Everyday, you must think and rising and rising and opening your in evening what have I done for Sahaja being, and showing the results in your Yoga? What have I done for myself? lives. It has made your lives very

 May - June 2002 46 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6 Please try to understand that will be departing. You have to tell there's a very big jump you have to your fellow men that this is a very take. It has to be triggered and for that crucial time and none of us should would like you to be ready. To be just take for granted Sahaja Yoga. absolutely prepared because in this All other things are just a kind of an jump you might be lost, and many might be left behind because they illusion that you feel that your worldly things are alright, and worldly things could not get over their conditionings. you can manage; God doesn't care for people who are rich and well-off The conditionings are of various or people who are poor. What He types of ignorance, blind faith and sees is what richness you have got all other things that we have gone of spirituality. He doesn't bother through. Also we have conditionings about your education, of your of our country, of our race, of our degrees, of pompousness etc. What styles and so many other things by He sees is how innocent you are. which we judge others. But we have to judge ourselves, that are we in a How much you have worked for Sahaja culture or not? If you are not in Sahaja Yoga? What you have done for Sahaja culture than it's going to be God's work? So all these priorities have very difficult that you will board the to be changed, and one must ship which is going to take us off. understand that Sahaja Yoga judges I have to just warn you that later on you on a very subtle level. So in this you should not say that Mother so many were left behind! If you find last judgement now as you people have been judged as good people. But still anybody left behind, please try to help for the second jump that you are going that person. Please try to correct that to have, we have to be very careful person and with clear idea and clear that, may be, some of you who think voice and clear-cut instructions. If you really find that somebody is going you are Sahaja Yogis in your heart but are not may be left behind in this wrong, you better warn him. I'm telling you all today because you big jump we are going to take.

 47 May-June 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Isue 5 & 6 So it is important that the sun has your life style. Actually, after some time, I don't think I will have to tell risen and now gone to the zenith, and you anything. You will get your own light to at the time of its zenith, one has to be see for yourself what is right and what very careful because the same sun is wrong. But still I would say for all the which has started making this beautiful Western people specially, that you greenery all round us may scorch with its heat. So be careful, and one has must open your heart in the puja, in the to be aware and all the time under music, in everything, Just see that you the guidance of Sahaja Yoga to open your heart. If you cannot open understand what is wrong with us, your heart, it won't work. Because it works through Spirit which resides in what is making us so heavy, what is our heart. So please try to open your making us so difficult? heart for everything. All your conditionings, all your ego will So far l'm very happy that whatever I have been telling you and whatever disappear when you decide that 1 have been guiding you, you have have to open my heart for Sahaja accepted it very calmly and sweetly. Yoga. May God Bless you And that you have tried to imbibe it in

 THE DIVINE COOL BRE EZE B REEZE Published by V.J. Nalgirkar 162-A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067 Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph. : 5447291, 5170197 For subscription please write to Mr. O. P. Chandna N- 463 (G-11), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi - 110034 Ph. : (011) 7013464 Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to: THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Clo Sahaja Yoga Temple C-17, Qutub Institutional Area New Delhi - 110016

 Lake Peru Camp California



----------------------

2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 IRMALA
Volume: XIV Issue: 5 & 6
May-June, 2002
PURE
The Divine Gool Breeze
"URE RELIC
00
God doesn't care for people who are rich and well-off or people who are poor. What he
sees is what richness you have got of spirituality. He doesn't bother about vour
education, of your degrees, of pompousness etc. What he sees is how innocent you are.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
NODIT
DHARMA
YAHSIA
UNIVERSAL
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume XIV Issu e 5& 6 May-June 2002
Diwali Puja, Los Angles 18.11.2001
2.
11 Puja at Brahmapuri - 30.12.1989
12 Christmas Puja - Ganapatipule - 25.12.2001
22 Shri Ganesha Puja - 8.8.1989
37 Puja at Aurangabad - 19.12.1989
39 Puja at Shri Rampur - 21.12.1989
41 Shri Christ Puja - Ganapati Pule - 25.12.1989
44 Sankranti Puja - 14.01.1990
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Diwali Puja
Los Angles - 18.11.2001
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
It's a very-very great day
today, I should say, where the evil
the knowledge is very subtle, very
subtle; it's not superficial knowledge, it
is very subtle, and because they don't
has been suppressed. Where evil that
spreads its power all over is only know this subtle knowledge they fall
because of two factors; one is that you into the wrong path of, I should say,
ignorance and then they try to oppose
not knowledgeable, you are
are
staying blind and you follow things the people who are doing good. But
above all, is the power of God. All this
which are not right but you think are
drama is played to prove the existence
powerful. This illusion creates not only
of that great Power. It has all worked
problems but absolute destruction. So
we faced a very big challenge, no
out so well and for all of you, Sahaja
yogis, it's a very great achievement
doubt, and it was easily solved. It was
that you can see the play. Many people
based on all wrong basis just to create
who have achieved so called success
a problem. Problem was created with a
purpose and nobody could imagine cannot see that, but you can see it
that it would be solved so easily and so because you are spectators. Though
quickly. My desire was to get over it all the world is a part-and-parcel of the
drama, you are outside it, and so you
before the Diwali, that has happened.
Due to ignorance also people do lots of
can see it so clearly. Whatever has
things. Anybody who follows some happened nobody could have believed
it that it would finish before Diwali.
religion or some sort of a thing, it's only
because they are not aware of the
truth, they are ignorant about
achieving the truth, and they cling on to which is being created and we also
So it goes like this, the stupidity
the fact that they know everything. sometimes think that this kind of stupid
With all this happening there have thing will impress others. Impression is
been so many factions, so many stupid not the point. If you see among all
people, who are getting completely these people who are lost, what
ruined by ignorance. Now before impression have they created? They
were there to create a great impression
coming to Sahaja yoga, you know, all
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 May-June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
on you to show as if they were great think, we understand many things
warriors and fighters but what which animals cannot understand. We
cook our food, they don't. But also
impression they have created!
sometimes I think we cook our brains
Whether you are a realised soul or not
because the way people behave and
they can see that it's a miracle, it's a
try to avoid the truth with their ego is
miracle, how things have worked out,
Now the new phase has started. You surprising.
all have a very-very open challenge to
All this happens. It is a drama, as I
get people into enlightenment. People
told you, but you better study it properly
and apply it to yourself and see if you
are not so ignorant now, they are not so
much blasted. Moreover, I find them
are also a part-and-parcel of that
very much changed. Their attitude
drama. For that you have to rise higher,
towards truth has changed, and they
you have to rise higher, higher above
understand there is truth beyond all
this that they have gone through. It's your ego and your super ego, your
very important because if a human conditioning and from there to watch
yourself, to see yourself. What is this?
being starts thinking this is the truth
they just get stuck up. At any cost Why am I doing such and such thing?
Why my attention is like that? What is
whatever may happen, he will go on
the main reason for my own
sticking to that. He won't be able even
possession, I should say, or for my own
to verify whether it is the truth or not.
misunderstandings? Why do I accept
wrong things? Once you start seeing
Animals can make out because they
that, and if you find even a wee bit of
have got innate capacity to smell the
such nonsensical understanding within
evil, innate. We cannot, human beings
you then you can forgive also people
cannot. If there's a evil man, a dog will
bark at him, otherwise it will go and who have been absolutely brain-
throw him down. It will do everything washed, absolutely brainwashed and
they did everything under that
which is not normally done. How is it he
influence. As it is now you have risen
has developed this capacity to find out
much higher than all these people and
who is a thief and who is not? We have
much more aware than all of them. So
a higher awareness. We think about
you have to just understand this point
many things which animals cannot
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 May - June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
You need not know
and then you can forgive all the yourself.
mistakes they have committed. And for everything as to what things are
the people who are actually bad you happening and how they are
don't have to worry, that's the work of happening, how they are working.
the Divine power to destroy them. That's not your work. You are a
Watch yourself and see for yourself if soldier, so you have to just fight,
you have any of such ideas, any fight the ignorance, your own and
lingering either. Try to cleanse the of others because mostly soldiers
fail when they have their ego. When
mirror so that you see your complete
image and try, look at, then try to they fail they have other obstacles in
cleanse it. It's very important that you their minds. There should be no
should cleanse yourself.
obstacle but you should just push
forward and know that there is no
There are people who have done obstacle at all. It's just a myth that
lots of wrong things. I simply pity them. there are some obstacles and that
They have done wrong things, it is you can overcome. It's not easy to
their responsibility to see what they raise the awareness of people
because it looks there's a very little
have been doing. Why they have been
distance of crossing over but it's
doing it? What is the need to do that?
not so, it's not so. It is a very
All this introspection will work out so
well, then your real powers will come,
difficult task sometimes for some
people to get out of the bandhans of
your powers of giving realisation, your
powers to understand the problems of Agya. At that point, I find, some of
you fail and for that the best thing is
your country. of the whole world. And
to introspect. When you think you
once you feel that you are the soldier
to fight it out, you have the are always correct and you are
alright, the best is to introspect. Am
responsibility to fight it out, then things
Il doing everything right or not? How
will work out. You cannot leave
am I working for my betterment?
everything to the Divine Power. You
The illusion is such that sometimes
have to use the Divine power and you
have to work it out because you are
you think you are doing well. Say, in
the soldiers of Divine. Of-course, with
our Sahaja Yoga some people are
very forward type; they will come
that beautiful idea you start cleansing
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2002
find out faults within yourself. What are
forward, they will do this, do that,
these things that are staggering you?
This is the best way of improving your
but inside what is the purpose? The
purpose is that people should see
that you are doing this work, that awareness. Like you are going in the
work. The purpose should be that car, and you have to know the road,
you have to know how you are driving,
you should be able to see yourself
within. You must see what is the
you have to see what are the
problem inside and you will very problems, but instead of that, you
think, oh-no end of yourself! It won't
well understand that you have been
of great help to yourself and to
others. For example, there's a very
work out.
Today is a day of very great
big building and all the buildings that
happening, I should say. Celebrating
are in nearby area may fall down due
to earthquake but this one building the Diwali is a very-very joyous, but
this joy is not for ourselves. This joy is
which will be standing erect. The
for the whole world. We have to work
reason is that, that building is
constructed on very solid ground. In for the whole world. We worked for
the same way if Sahaja Yoga is ourselves, for our jobs, for our money,
constructed on a very sound ground whatever it is, but what are you doing
for others? That you should see in
nobody can destroy it, nobody can
distort it. And every person has to do yourself. It is very important. Only
that. For example, some people told such people are useful in Sahaja Yoga
me your Sahaja yogis, you know are
like this, like that, are big show offs. I care and they are doing something for
said, really? I can't believe it that they others. It's a great enjoyment with that.
could be like that! I said, I would like to When the lights are burning, to give
because they have concern, they have
you happiness, they are burning their
meet them whosoever they are. So
they said, no, you can find them out bodies to give you happiness. They
yourself, who are those people, and are the ones who should teach us that
why they behave like this. I said, we have to do something ourselves to
myself I know everything but I want enjoy our own higher awareness. All
this will work out, I am sure. I am also
you to know. Finding faults with others
trying my best to make this light
is a very nice thing, very easy also but
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 May - June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
unshaken and full of enthusiasm, think of the past and the problems of
the past. You have now overcome it.
There, it is you who are anxious to fill
your pitchers; can do it. It's not my Just enjoy yourself and have faith in
anxiety that's going to help you. So, yourself and work it out. I am sure very
soon it will happen, very quickly it will
you stop even if you want to have
complete picture about yourself. You happen. It is your desire, also you
have to first give up identification have method of working it out, you
have anxiety to work it out. Main
with yourself otherwise you will
never know what's wrong with you. anxiety should be: how can
If you are too much identified with transform this person?" You can
transform anyone. You tell one
you, you cannot.
person, another person follows it. Like
Now, as it is what is the aim after when we came in the plane, I found at
all, what is the aim of our lives? We the airport so many people had put up
have to change the whole world into a their hands towards me like that. I
peaceful thing. Changing yourself of- said, "who are these people?" They
course is a great thing no doubt, but were not Sahaja yogis. They had seen
changing others also we solve all the somebody or what has. happened I
problems of the world. If all the people could not ask them. But all of them
of this world become good people, said they are feeling cool breeze in
Sahaja yogis then can you imagine their hands. They didn't know anything
about it, they didn't know about
what will happen! Think of that dream I
have, that we have to change each kundalini, nothing. Then what is this
and every person, that we can change cool coming? But basically they are
there to get their realisation, only we
and we have to transform them into
good people. If they are not
have to extend our ideas, we have to
transformed they are like a candle extend our love, instead of getting
without any flame, and if they are annoyed with them, better is to give
capable of getting transformed we
should try all methods, all the tricks to that they are very anxious to get
do that. I am sure very soon such a transformed! They are all fed up with
them a chance. You will be amazed
all the artificial things they are having.
day will come when you will say,
So, now you will be amazed how many
Mother, now we are very safe. Don't
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2002
7.
to ourselves. So, again I will say
are waiting there for you to give them
introspection is very-very important in
self realisation, and let them celebrate
their Diwali with you. Enjoy the Diwali.
Sahaja Yoga, and the light inside is
there, you have to look after it.
Diwali you cannot celebrate with
I was extremely happy to hear from
one candle. You have to have more
and more candles; that's what is your many people that they felt the
blessings of Diwali. But you see,
job. Only by your own candle you are
yesterday you had these showers,
going to do it, it's your own and it can
how timely they were, never happened
enlighten anyone. Then why not use it
in the history of this world, never
at any cost, at any place? I have met
some Sahaja yogis, I asked them, happened. Why yesterday these
what did yo do? They said, no,
showers came and tried to give a new
nothing, nothing, we did nothing. experience of the showers? All this is a
Why? Then what's the use of getting time, I should say that even the nature
realisation if you have done nothing? knows, and we should also know that
You don't want to give realisation to
this is the time for a special thing.
Normally I get letters about people
anyone, don't want to talk to anyone,
who are sick or their parents are sick
you feel so shy about it. Then I met
or their this is sick, all types of, then
some who said, just now, Mother, we
are coming from your programme. somebody's marriage is broken, then
somebody has children they are sick.
"How are you so late?" Because they
Means all kinds of nonsensical
told us that there's some bomb scare.
problems they write about. Reason is
"So you were waiting outside?" "Yes".
"How many?" "All of us". Thousands
waiting, there was no bomb. They said
this, they themselves who write are not
realised souls, or may be they are half
baked because they could themselves
there's no bomb so we went inside and
we all got our realisation. "But you say that why should we write to
Mother? We can get it done ourselves!
were realised souls!" No, we had a
Instead of that one has to write what
realisation that sometimes we have to
wait but now we are convinced that they have achieved, how they have
nobody can harm us, nobody can achieved that, how they have got love
from others, how they have worked out
trouble us, overpower us, only we do it
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 May - June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
attention to yourself and to your
Sahaja Yoga in small villages. All this
is much better to write than to write, ascent. You have to respect
"my mother is sick, my father is sick'. yourself. If you are their relation it's
All these relationships, they go on
of your business, like
none
understanding wisdom that we are
killing you. So no one is your brother,
nobody is your sister, only Sahaja here, we have come here for a very-
yogis are your brothers and sisters. very special work, of very high quality.
If that is not then all such people write.
Now you have some cousins and
cousins, so let it be. That's not your
One lady got married in Sahaja
job. You don't have to work it out. Even
Yoga, and she wrote to me that I was
before coming I got letters like that
somebody's cousin's cousin, this thing divorced about eight months back or
is sick. So, I asked this lady, I said, nine months back and all my relations
why do you write all these things, all are now saying, why did you marry in
the time about this cousin and that Sahaja Yoga, and every body is
criticising me and Sahaja Yoga. I said,
cousin? She said, Mother I am trying
who asked her to marry? I never asked
Oh!
Sahaja
spread
to
yoga.
her. So now the marriage has become
Because if they will be cured then
they will come to Sahaja Yoga. This the main point for her, that all my
is not the way we want to spread family people are saying, What did
Sahaja Yoga. It looks like advertising they do for Sahaja Yoga? If this
or something speciality that you marriage doesn't become alright then
should cure somebody then some they will say that something is wrong
people will come to Sahaja Yoga. We with Sahaja Yoga, let them say. We
just don't want such people. I never have not committed that way.
Everytime I have told you that don't
want to hurt but I want to give you
write to me for your mother, father
corrections and understanding and the
wisdom. Why are you Sahaja Yogis? this, that. If you don't know how to
Just to cure all the relations? They cure them, better give up Sahaja
may be sick because of some Yoga. You yourself can cure them.
mistakes they have committed. You can work it out yourself but you
Instead of paying attention to all could see so many letters everyday for
me. I asked them, is your father in
such people you should pay
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 May-June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
Sahaja Yoga? "No". "Mother?" "No".
"Brother?" "No, nobody". So, why are
the attention is on wrong things and on
wrong basis. If you have some
you asking me? What relationship I intelligence, then you must know that
have with them? They are not Sahaja now you belong to a very high quality
yogis. I am only responsible for Sahaja spiritual people which are very few, in
this world. They are very few and you
yogis. They are not Sahaja yoigs so
must make a concentrated effort
why do you want to trouble me? It is
seeing that this quality must be in so
impossible to understand. In Sahaja
Yoga you are supposed to get self many and there must be lots of
realisation, alright. Then those who aspirants. Find them out, tell them-you
have found it, so you can also have it.
want to have self realisation, you can
But don't worry about things which are
give them and fix them properly but
of no value to you. You must know you
instead of somebody who is hanging in
are a special race, you are special
the air and who is falling from the
soldiers who have been trained for
airport to some other place, all kinds of
doing Sahaja work. So, wasting
things, all this is really maddening and
energy on your relations, on brothers
and sisters is no good for you. It is to
sickening. I am not concerned, you
should not be concerned also.
be understood now that you have your
own energy, preserve it. For what? For
What you should do is to see that
these people who are talking about it Sahaja yogis. You should
should come to Sahaja Yoga, and you everyone who is a Sahaja yogi or
must tell them because you are not wants to become a Sahaja yogi, who
doing Sahaja Yoga that's why it is are established Sahaja yogis you must
there or that person is not doing help them because we are one
Sahaja Yoga that's why this is the personality, and these are all the
different hands of one personality, one
problem. We are alright, we are fine.
Because Sahaja Yoga is open so
God. So, this oneness must be
established within yourself, and
everybody comes there. I would
others
request you on a Diwali day to promise
to yourself, I will not waste my energy
should
also
see that
oneness in you. There are some
on people who are not Sahaja yogis. people who are very active, there
are some persons who are very
It's very important because all the time
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 May - June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
10
active in criticising. All that you will
work out, I am sure, because this is the
see and you will definitely try to correct
it if you love that or you give up. These
are special people, specially selected
year of great achievements and great
success but with that if you start doing
for a very special cause and you can-
something nonsensical, nothing will not waste your energy on small
work out. Of-course, I don't say that nonsensical things that is one thing
we haven't got such Sahaja yogis with
you should know.
us, we have. We have all the soldiers
On this Diwali day you have to
with us, no doubt. All the armaments
know that you have to burn yourself
they have, everything they have, but
for the light of the Divine, to absolutely
we need more and for that we have to
work out collectively. Must plan what spread all over. But don't do it too
should we do.
much. Like some people came and
told me, Mother, we have given up
Recently there has been a big our parents, we have given up this,
argument about the Islamic behaviour. we have given up that, still we are
not good. So, I said, why should you
nor Hindus. We are not, because you give up? You are catching on to
cannot put yourself into a small arena something then you are giving up, or
saying I am Sahaja yogi but I am a automatically all this is finished.
We are neither Christians, nor Islamic
Christian, you cannot. You have to No, we were, you see, very much
give up that margin. You are a Sahaja attached to our family, parents,
yogi out and out and all the other country, this that and now we have
nonsensical things are not belonging given up some. Such half baked
to you. I have seen many Muslims also people are no good, and don't
who came to Sahaja Yoga but out of pay too much attention to them.
them very few are real Sahaja Yogis, They don't deserve any attention.
but they will come, listen to my lecture, That is very much to be understood
this that. But very few are really that you should not also be like that
Sahaja yogis, in the real sense of the nor you should have friends like
word. Then you will start seeing the that nor you should make them
defects of your community or so called Sahaja yogis. Sahaja yogi is a
religion you belong to, what you will special character of a soldier who
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
11
May-June 2002
are we working it out. The attention
fights for the truth. That kind of
all
this
from
should
a personality when you will have
move
nonsensical mundane things to
then there will be lights all over.
yourself. It should be a very
dynamic force, I should say, and I am
This Diwali day I bless you all from
my heart and I want you to respect sure next year it would be very
different. We will have all the beautiful
yourself and understand what is the
blessings of the Divine, we must do it
position of your being in this
organisation, you can call, or in this collectively, understandingly.
May God Bless You
movement of Sahaja Yoga and how
Puja at Brahmapuri
30.12.1989
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Like Brahmapuri, there are many
All the saints have made them work
very hard and to work out their
small little places where the saints
have worked for the betterment of problems. They have also pointed the
evils of society. They did not go and sit
people. Because, you see, they are so
collective, they could not bear the
poverty of this country. The way some place to place working for the
people are claiming that we are emancipation of the society.
in the Himalayas. They went from
making people fatalists is absolutely
May God Bless You
wrong because no saint has done that.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Christmas Puja
Ganapatipule - 25-12-2001
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Nice to see
so nmany
know what the truth is. The truth is that
Sahaja
today in the Christmas become the Spirit. He is the one who
Puja. Christianity has has talked about the Second Birth, of
spread all over the world realization, but they have forgotten
and there are so many, so
called, Christians who say achieve. Its such a funny thing that all
they follow Christ. i don't know such great people came on this earth
yogis coming here you are the Spirit and you have to
about what he said, what they have to
trom which angle? Christ was the and created a proper religion for our
embodiment of Param Chaitanya. He
ascent, and I don't know how people
was Omkara. He was Shri Ganesha have become so stupid with the
and those who follow him have to be teachings of the so called their
very different people. But as always masters. Its all money oriented. Apart
from that it is not standing on the truth.
I think this is the second Crucifixion of
happens in every religion that they go
at random into the opposite direction.
Completely opposite.
this religion. There is no religion, which
is following really its principles as have
been described. I don't know how they
Essence of Christ's life was
detachment and sacrifice. For a
manage to twist the truth in this
manner, just to make some money or
person who is detached, there is
nothing like sacrifice. He sees his life some fuss. Such a ritualistic stuff is
as just a drama. Such a great going on in the name of Christ. Though
personality came on this earth and they have faltered so many times and
created this so-called Christian they had experience of such bad
religion, which has gone into wars. All
influence on the world. We don't know
kinds of hypocritical things and now why such a round about things come
the people are discovering about it. He up and people accept it. They just
stood for truth and Christians do not accept. You take any religion. These
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2002
13
days Islam is talking, I don't know, of
on these people. Its such a shameful
thing to do in the name of God and in
what?
the name of spirituality!
There were two important things in
the life of Mohammed Saheb. The first
Now our duty is to tell them what is
one is called as 'Miraj which is nothing
the truth. Our duty is to bring them to
but the awakening of the Kundalini, the proper path of spirituality, because
absolutely clearly, and the second one they are all lost. Christians are lost,
he has talked about is Jihad. Jihad
Muslims are lost, Hindus are lost. All of
means killing your bad things,
them are lost. They have no idea as to
killing your bad nature, killing all the
what their religion professed and what
shadripus (six ones) within you. It they are supposed to do. Ultimately
doesn't mean that you become a
Christ was crucified. So you can see,
Muslim and kill yourself. It's a stupidest
how, when there was truth, untruth
thing to do. Did you become
tried to finish it off. They could not bear
Musalmaan just to kill yourself and it. We have an example of Socrates.
commit suicide? Calling it as a ritual
What was the need to kill him, but they
they are saying that by this we will go to
killed. In this way, so far we know, in
'Jannat', into the heavens. How can
the past all the people who are pivotal
for the truth are being finished
you? As Muslims they are not religious.
Not at all, and then by killing those
because they don't want the truth.
sinful people, how will you go to the
They are following some religion
heavens where you will have the
because they can have power over
enjoyment of Jannat? There is no
other people, religion that they have
reasoning. But all these Maulanas, first
made. Miraj is a Kundalini awakening
of all, have finished their education.
and they say that Miraj will never take
Have finished their education. They do
place. Very Good.
not educate themselves at all, so they
have no idea in this world, where are
So many of you have got
realization. You have got your
they standing? What is their position?
Some few are educated but they are
also lost with the idea of having power
vibrations and cool breeze which is
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Iasue 5 & 6
May June 2002
14
described in Koran, that you should followed in the South. They will shave
feel the cool breeze. But who can tell
the head of a woman, make her go
the Muslims. You talk something and
round a temple, pour water on her, and
they will cut your throat, that's all. They
she is just tumbling around. She is not
will
to Jihad. So its such a stupid
walking. They go on putting water on
go
thing they are doing, and in these her. I have seen it myself. We have
modern times, as we see, people have
'Sati'-is the killing of the woman after
crossed all the maryadas, all the the death of her husband. This is
things of religion. I went to America something no one can understand,
and I was surprised how they have
why put all the dharma on women and
forgotten of morality. They have no why not on the men? But one thing
good that Hindu religion has now
sense of morality and they are selling it
in the market, making money out of it.
become so much out of date that you
On the contrary these Muslims, can correct all these things. So many
specially there is a class called things I have corrected in my own life
"Wahabis', these people are saying
time. I was surprised, how could I do
that the women are the one who spoil
it? But these Muslims and Islamics,
you cannot correct them. Such horrible
your morality and so hide them. They
should be covered. Any women who things they do to their women and
were wearing white chappals in whenever you try to help them, it is
Afghanistan, they were beating them, impossible. For example I started a
killed them, and so many people in place for the women who are left-out in
the world alone, who are like orphans,
India, specially in North, have taken to
who have children. I was surprised,
Islamic culture. They really ill-treat
women in the North. I was married in
the North, and I know how they have
most of them are Muslims and they
have 8 to 10 children each. So now we
have to make an orphanage also. This
been unkind. So North of India is
is what they are producing out of their
already contaminated by this, and the
South is contaminated by the fanatic
religion! You can see this around.
Hindus. All kinds of rituals, worst type,
Even Hindus have a funny system of
widowhood. They make a woman
bestowed upon only on women are
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 15
May-June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
I said, "Why?" Because it is written in
widow, its terrible. And they are forcing
the Bible that you must drink. I didn't
some of them, quite a lot of them, to
live in Vrindavan. I was told that they know! How could it be? How could
get one Rupee per day, and what do Christ say that you should drink? He
they do? They sing bhajans. In one
was not only a realized seif, but he
was realization himself. He said, 'you
rupee how can one live in this country?
have said it'. Whatever you may say,
They are good at creating so many
he has said it. Where? He went to one
beggers and begger women. If that is
wedding. Alright. In that wedding he
the religon, better not have it. We have
made wine for the people. He did not.
had enough of this. All kinds of
He went there and in such a short time
ritualism through this brahminism!
he just put his hand in the water and it
These brahmins are absolutely good
started tasting like grape juice, and
for nothing. Those who try to teach
grape juice has the same word wine in
religion have to be something of a
great level. So in Sahaja Yoga you the Hebrew language. I said, I can do
give up everything because this is all that. That does not mean that I like
nothing but mud and in the mud you people to drink. Who can say such a
nonsense?
will be finished. You have to tell people
about it. What are they going to do?
It is awareness. It is important.
They have misused the religion for all
Chetna is important and if you spoil
kind of bad things. Like in England if
your awareness how can you be
somebody dies they must have
Sahaja yogis? It was impossible to tell
Champagne (ta). When they go for
the burial they must have Champagne. them that you cannot drink. But
drinking even in India has become
I was surprised. How is it they are
all against
Its
going to have Champagne for this?
common.
very
Christianity, its against Hinduism, its
And how is it out of religion, you say?
against Islam and though it is written
All these priests also drink. One priest
down in Koran, "Don't drink", they all
came to Sahaja Yoga. I was very
drink and instead of following the
happy. But he said, "I will come to
religion, they have become the
Sahaja, but I will not give up drinking."
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
16
May June 2002
I cann't understand. Of-course
greatest sinners. Is that what Christ
wanted them to do? You have to be there are some who are money-
pure people. Nirmal Tatvam you must
oriented, who are power oriented, but
have. That's what it is.
these things do not give joy. What
gives joy is your inner light of truth,
I told
a story about
which you have. All of you have, as you
Also
you
Shalivahana, who met Christ in know, you all have experienced but I
would say, this experience has to be
Kashmir and he asked Christ about his
given to others. Its not only for you,
name and his country. He said I come
give it to as many people as possible.
from a country where people are
Malechh (A ). Malechh means
But how many do that? How many
those who have desire for 'mal', for people do that?
filth. So he told him, "why don't you go
We have also Sikh community.
and teach them Nirmal Tatvam",
Sahlivahana said. That is what Nirmal They came to Sahaja, but they
Tatwam you have got, which purifies said we cannot worship Goddess.
said, "Why?" Surprising! Because
you, which cleanses you, which gives
you joy, happiness and the truth. This
is what you should ask for. Otherwise it
is all darkness. You don't see the light.
Shri Guru Nanak
has talked
Shri
about the Goddess, the Devi; the
first sentence of his book is 'Adya'.
Whether you are Christian, Hindu, Adya is the Adishakti and for this if
Muslim, anyone, you cann't see light of the Sikhs stupidly say then why
do they have the Chandigarh. They
truth and you have to take the light of
truth. But after that, what you have to
are so stupid also. Nothing to really
compare. Now you have to understand
do? You have to give it to others. You
have to transform others. You have that have you given up all that
worked very hard for it, and some
nonsense in your life or are you
times I am surprised how people who sticking on to that? That is very
are doing such a good work are so important, and as long as you are
humble and so good! How have they sticking on to that same, there will be
achieved it?
a problem.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2002
17
Sahaja Yoga does so much. I was
not possible and all that, who are you
surprised in America there were 300
to say that? What do you know about
Sahaja Yogis. Nothing happened to spirituality? What do you know what
them. Some were on the tower, some
can happen to a person who is
were on the street. All of them were spiritual, spiritually equipped? What
there and nothing has happened to
can it work out. What ever we know
about human beings we try to draw
them. Some of them said that
conclusions which are all wrong. See
somebody told us inside, told us
inside that, run away. And we
in your life. There are so many
started running in the other miracles in the lives of Sahaja Yogis,
and the other day I told somebody to,
direction. Some were delayed. I don't
know how all these three were
better, compile them. So, he said,
delayed? But such a devil of the people
within one month all those letters
who are thinking of destroying the
came up to my head. So, I said, forget
whole world are coming round. This is
it. Don't write. Its not one or two. From
the reason I went to America and I told
all over the world people are writing.
them that this war will be over before
But those who are intellectuals are
Diwali and it ended. Before Diwali this
very difficult. Its impossible to put this
war will be over and it ended. What a
into their heads.
stupid thing to think that they can
So what ever is possible we have to
destroy the creation of God like this?
do our maximum. Put our attention to
Who are they? How have they got the
right to destory the world? But that is
people who want it. Now in India it has
what is a human nonsense.
gone into jails. It has gone into schools
and everywhere, and somebody told
Christ came on this earth. He
me the other day that even in a
worked for a long time and he was to Catholic Church they have started
be crucified, so he was crucified. But taking to Sahaja Yoga. I don't know
crucifixion is not our glory. Our glory is
what's wrong in their heads and how
his resurrection. That He was
they have managed but that's how
resurrected, no doubt. To say that its
Sahaja Yoga is spreading. But it has to
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2002
18
spread much more. You have to, all of try to give realisation to others. You
you individually should go round and
have powers. Have faith in yourself.
think they lack in faith or whatever it is.
work it out and talk about it. But Sahaja
yogis are little shy. Once I was going
A very few people come out and do it.
In Italy, I have seen and also Australia,
by plane. One lady was very very hot.
So I asked her "what Guru she
Sahaja Yoga has spread a lot because
of their conviction that we have to give
followed. She told me the name. I was
others what we have. We have to
surprised that she didn't know
share it. From the life of Christ one has
anything about spirituality, and these
to understand his sacrifice. It is such a
people have huge houses and big
lot of sacrifice to be crucified like that,
temples and everything, and she was
telling me the praise of her Guru. I with the thieves, but he did it! In the
same way when you all people want to
thought she was very shameless. She
do Sahaja Yoga work, you should not
has not got anything in her? She was
so very hot, and she is talking about it.
But Sahaja yogis won't. I was father, what will happen to my grand
think, what will happen to my grand
mother. I mean whatever letters I get
surprised why Sahaja yogis don't talk
are all about this. Its very funny. They
about it. The other day I had gone with
somebody in the market and I had a are only worried about some relations.
They are not worried about the relation
Sahaja Yogi with him. Now I was
surprised that he started telling them all over the world you have, worried
about me and he started giving them about the wife or children, I get only
realisation and they were very happy letters like this. Nobody writes to me
about it. Every where you go, you have
that they have given realisation to so
many people. They never write how
neighbours, you go to markets, every
they have been able to achieve
where you should go and talk about it.
Like they sing carols, we should also spreading of Sahaja Yoga. None
have bhajans and things to tell other writes. Very surprising. You have to
tell me. I hope you all people
people. We have to tell. Why are we so
understand the importance of
shy? This shyness is not going to help
spreading Sahaja Yoga. If you don't do
Sahaja Yoga. So please see that you
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 May-June 2002
19
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
when they go on complaining that I
that, you are absolutely useless. The
should be married, and I have not got
greatest thing for me, as you have so
many lights here, we should have married as yet. Marriage was never
our idea but then we had to allow
many more Sahaja yogis all over the
marriages, and now it has become the
world. If you want to change this
world, and if you want to avoid all main issue with everyone. Either they
are not married, if they are married,
the trials and tribulations of the
useless life they are leading, you they are not happy. If they are
have to save them, you have to divorced, they must be married again.
salvage them. That's your job. All sorts of things, complications for
That's what you have to pay for which I am not prepared. Sahaja Yoga
Sahaja Yoga. Not for yourself, not for is not for that. If your marriage is not
yourself. Don't get worried about successful, its not my job, and if it
yourself. If you read the letters I get,
goes on, we have to stop marriages. I
you will get disgusted. Now the kind of don't want you to write all these
things to me. It shows how poor you
letters I
get that they want to marry.
are in Sahaja Yoga. Why not write to
Alright. There are many girls who
me how many people you have given
claim that we have been applying for 4
years, we couldn't get married. Firstly realisation to. That will make me
happy. Instead of complaining about
you must know, out of proportion
women are there. They are very good. your wife and all. That's not my
Say if there are 40 boys there would
concern. As it came, we have married
be atleast 120 or may be even 150
you. If you cannot carry on, its your
girls. Now whom should we marry duty. And this is what is the snag of
those girls? Just think of it. But they Sahaja Yoga. In every religious
write letters of complaints that we
movement there have been so many
have applied 4 times. We cann't, we
wrong things. While in Sahaja Yoga I
think marriages are a very big hurdle.
can't help it. So you go outside, marry
Moreover boys don't come, because in
anywhere you feel like or else you wait
India very easy to marry boys. You
and see and dedicate your life to
Sahaja Yoga. Its a very difficult thing
also get money, this, that. But girls,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
20
May June 2002
these are 5 times more than the boys.
That is the greatest justification for
Boys don't want to marry. They will
have their own marriages, though they for his coming on this earth is Agya.
are Sahaja yogis. I cann't understand And if you give realisation they have
the crucifixion of Christ, for his birth
why in Sahaja Yoga also, after coming crossed the Agya. They have gone
to realisation, to them marriage is a beyond and they are in Sahasrara. So
very important thing! What is most in Sahaja Yoga you understand every
important is that how many people thing. It is very easy to understand.
you give realization to. That is your Sahaja Yoga is the simplest thing to
understand, but after self realisation,
life. If a lotus is there, it will open, but it
So you have to go round and see how
must give fragrance. Even the lotus
has the responsibility. Then what many people you can give realisation
about you people? I am not saying you to. Every thing is alright. All your
get crucified like Christ. No, 1 say you worshipping is alright. Your puja is
enjoy your life, you have peace and alright. But what is most important is,
how many people you have given
stability, balance, but at the same time
realisation to? I would like to know how
you have to spread Sahaja Yoga. This
is what is your job now. Your job is many people you have given,
not important. Only this is Specially with ladies. Ladies are rather
important how many people you weak in giving realisation. They can do
give realization to. It is very-very
a lot, I know, they can. After all I am
difficult becaue they have made a
also a woman. But some how I find the
mess of all the great incarnations, all ladies in Sahaja Yoga are not of a
level. They can do a lot and lot but
those great Sufis and Saints. But at
some how they don't understand the
least you people don't do that. So
importance of their lives. You are very
please try to think whom can you give
realization? To whom you can talk important. How many people there are
about Sahaja Yoga? We have to who have got realisation. There were
spread out, and next time I hope I hear
so many sufis who got realisation.
They write poetry, finished. There
from you, how many people you have
given realisation to.
were so many saints who did so much,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 21
May-June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
come with your own demands. She
wrote so many things. In India we had
comes on her own. She has her own
so many saints. They wrote all these
things. Pepole will read them but timing. But if you are people in
nothing happens. You have the art of majority, who have really become
giving realisation. You know about Saints and making others saintly, then
Kundalini. You know all about it. Go I am for you. Otherwise I am available
ahead and talk to people. I was alone
to you. You can have my vibrations,
when I started Sahaja Yoga, and I am
you can have my pujas. All these
things are permitted, no doubt. But for
a woman! So what about you? There is
that you are only capable, you are only
now a challenge for all of you. How
many people have you made Sahaja entitled for that, if you are doing
yogis? Even in your family, people are Sahaja Yoga, if you are spreading
not Sahaja yogis. Your daughter is not. Sahaja Yoga, if you are giving to
Your son is not. So what's the use of
others, then only you will be
singing glory to Chirst? If you are considered really capable of receiving
singing glory to him, you must make the vibrations of the Goddess. In some
people cross their Agya. He is so countries if it is so much powerful, why
highly placed within us. But you have not with your country, with your
neighbourhood, with your friends, with
never respected him, that such a
your relations, it is powerful. So tonight
highly placed personality in you have
you have to decide that you are going
crossed over, so why not others?
to dedicate yourself in giving it to
Let us see from today's Puja how others. It is very joy giving, talking
much determination you have. You about Sahaja Yoga.
May God bless you.
should know that a Goddess does not
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Shri Ganesha Puja
8-8-1989
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today you have come here to and he starts restoring things within
worship me as Shri Ganesha. We himself. But in the beginning he only
have been singing the praise of Shri remembers what nice things have
happened to him. So we always like to
Ganesha before every puja, and we
have tremendous respect for Shri ponder about our childhood, what we
enjoyed in our childhood. But as we
Ganesha because we have found out
that unless and until Shri Ganesha, start growing up, we start to
remembering, all those miseries and
who is the symbol of our innocence, is
awakened within us we cannot enter all the tribulations we had to go
through. All the ordeals through which
into the kingdom of God. And even to
stay there, and to enjoy the blessings
of Shri Ganesha, we have to have our
we had passed, we try to magnify it. In
childhood the children only remember
innocence fully blossoming. So we the people who have loved them and
praise him and He is very easily not the people who have hurt them.
They don't want to remember perhaps.
pleased. And whatever we have done
grow
It looks like that. But when they
wrong, before coming to Sahaja Yoga,
He completely forgives because He is up, they only try to remember the
the Eternal Child. You have seen people who have harmed them or
children, when you slap them, have troubled them. And that's how
they make themselves very miserable.
sometimes get angry with them; they
forget it. They only remember the love
and not what they have suffered at
But the principle of Shri Ganesha is
extremely subtle, is the subtlest of
your hands. Till they grow up, they do
not have memory of bad things done subtle. And it exists in every thing.
to them. From the very beginning, a That it exists in the matter, in the form
of vibrations. There is no matter which
child is born to a mother, he does not
is without vibrations. It has vibrations
remember what he has gone through.
Gradually the memory starts working
which are seen even in the atoms and
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 23
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2002
the curse of Shri Ganesha. When
also in the molecules of all matters
that exist. So Shri Ganesha is the first people start doing wrong things,
one, who was established in the behaving in a wrong manner
then
the
collectively,
matter as well. As a result we can see,
catastrophes come to teach them a
He exists in the Sun, He exists in the
lesson. So in His essence, though He
Moon, He exists in the whole universe,
exists in every thing, also in that He
in the whole creation and He continues
has capacity to assert His will to bring
to exist in human beings also. Only the
forth the destruction of the whole
human beings have the capacity to
world.
somehow or other to cover up their
innocence. Otherwise, animals are
We have Shri Ganesha's idea as a
innocent. Human beings have the
minute being. We think He can go on a
freedom. If they want, they can cover
little mouse, so He must be very
up their innocence, they can shut
minute. He is as minute as He is great.
down the doors of Shri Ganesha and
He surpasses all the deities because
say that He doesn't exist. They can
of his wisdom. He is the giver of
cloud it. And that is why, we find
wisdom. He gives us wisdom. He
among human beings that they are
makes us learn. He is our Guru, in that
doing so many horrible things,
respect, Mahaguru, because He
avoiding the existence of Shri
teaches us, how we should behave. If
Ganesha. But He acts, acts in a way
we try to surpass Him and try to
that He shows natural results of our
misbehave, even the Mother won't
wrong doings. Like if you do things support, becaus She knows that those
which are not pleasing to Shri
who surpass Shri Ganesha are also
Ganesha, He goes upto a point, the people who will never respect the
forgives you upto a point, and then it
Mother. So He is the epitome of
starts emerging out as diseases, as
respect. He does not know any other
physical diseases and in women it
God. He doesn't know Sada Shiva. He
becomes a mental disease. Also it can
does not know anybody else. That He
create problems in the nature. The
only respects the Mother. So He is the
natural catastrophes are also only
one who is the power of devotion and
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 &6
May - June 2002
24
complete surrender to Mother, and important point, because He is the
that's why He is the most powerful giver of wisdom. So the parents must
deity, among all the deities, and understand that if He is the giver of
nobody can surpass him in His wisdom, there should be wisdom
within me. And if I have the wisdom,
powers.
then I have the balance and I don't
lose temper with children, but I try to
We have to understand that as
correct them in such a manner that
children are growing Shri Ganesha
they get corrected. On the contrary if
starts growing in them also. But as
they are human beings they can you try to be very harsh with your
children, they might react and they
some-how or the other try to over-
might go astray, or if you try to restrict
power Shri Ganesha. So it's the duty
too much, then also they will behave in
of the parents, who are Sahaja yogis,
to see that they look after their children
the same manner.
in a way, in a detached way, to see
So one thing is to be taught to your
that Shri Ganesha in them is settled.
The first sign of Shri Ganesha in a own children, as Shri Ganesha himself
does, that respect your Mother. Your
child is wisdom. If the child is not wise,
if he is troublesome, if he does not
mother means, your Holy Mother and
know how to behave, then it shows your own mother. That is very
important. If the father does not make
that Shri Ganesha is being attacked by
him. And these days, in the modern the child respect the mother, the child
can never be alright. Because the
times, as it is, children are very much
under attack. Innocence is under authority comes from the father, no
attack, and it is very difficult for people
doubt, but the mother must be
to make a fine line, as to how for to go respected. But for that it is very
with children and how far not to go. important that mother must respect
Today's lecture will be more
the father. So, in the present situation
concerning about how far to go with if you start fighting with each other,
Shri Ganesha, as far as children are misbehaving and talking in a manner
concerned, because that's very that's not proper, it will have very bad
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 25
May-June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
miracles in agriculture, to begin with.
effect on the Ganesha Tatwa of the
child. This upbringing is a very
Miracles of agriculture are such that
important thing in Sahaja Yoga, people are amazed but it is very
because by God's grace, you all have simple. Once you start exciting the
Ganesha principle into the seed, it
got realized children. So you must
become 10 times, sometimes 100
know, how far to go with your children.
To make them wiser, to be moral, to be
times. Even the Mother earth which
seems to be something dead, can be
righteous, first thing is that you should
try to preserve their wisdom. If they vibrated. Supposing, you Sahaja yogis
walk barefeet on the ground, the
say something wise, you must
Mother Earth gets vibrated. Such
appreciate it. But they should not also
Mother Earth will act on the grass, on
say out of place, out of grace. So the
the trees, on the flowers, on
misbehaviour is also not to be
tolerated, in the sense, that whatever everything. As it is, the Sahaja yogis
is wisdom within has to be expressed
have been telling me, that in their
outside as light.
Ashrams, all the flowers that they grow
are out of size and very fragrant. Like
daisies never had fragrance
Now, we go further with it to see
in
how far Shri Ganesha acts. As I said, London, or in England, never. The
in the subtlest of subtlest He exists. daisy's size was so small. Now it has
But you have to awaken Him. For
become so big and it is so fragrant. It is
a miracle. First time, when I told
example, you have seen water which
is vibrated. Vibrated means what? somebody that daisies are fragrant,
Vibrated means that Ganesha Tatwa they could not believe it. And when
is being enlightened in that water. So they saw the fragrance they were
when that water, goes into your surprised.
stomach, or in to your eyes, or
wherever you want to put it, it acts.
In the same way, Ganesha Tatwa
Acts in a way, that it excites Shri
understands things, organises, works
Ganesha Tatwa into anything that you
out, if it is awakened. If it is not
put it. Now you have seen we have got
awakened, it is sleeping, then it does
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 May - June 2002
26
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
not. So it acts, it works out. Like a little
If you have an attention which is all
the time going from this place to that
seed, when it sprouts, at the tip of the
place, that place to that place, then it is
seed, there is a little cell, which has got
the Ganesha Tatwa which is being affected. Especially in the case, when
awakened. So it knows how to go
we start looking at men, looking at
women, all the time, then also our
down, how to go round the stone and
Ganesha Tatwa gets very much
how to embed itself and how to reach
destroyed. Such people are difficult for
the source of water. But it has only the
rising in their ascent, because Agya
sense, how far to go to exist, how far to
go to nourish itself. On a very material itself goes out. Then this Ganesha
Tatwa can also be reduced if you are
plane, how to allow the tree to grow.
very much materialistic, all the time
worried about your things, like you
But this Ganesha Tatwa starts
have some thing in the house, you
becoming very very subtle and subtlest
are worried about, and looking at
at the point of Agya chakra. At the
everything, all the time trying to correct
point of Agya chakra, it understands
it, and all the time worried about the
that it has now the spiritual dimension.
Same Ganesha Tatwa which acted in a
matter. Then also this Ganesha Tatwa
small little tip of the root, now, acts for
can be lost, because you are all the
the spiritual thing. That's why, people time worried about these things, like
we are going to the shop and you are
close their eyes, when they meditate,
because they do not want to see seeing everything, what is there, what
anything else but they want Shri is there, and what should I buy. Like
that also, if you do too much, it will be.
Ganesha, just to act for the meditative
But supposing. you are buying
process of their Kundalini. This
something out of beauty, for beauty,
process of meditation, when we close
our eyes, acts. But if you see some-
you want to buy something for
beautifying your house, that means
body sleeping and he is dreaming, you
will see his eyes will be all the time
you are trying to do something to
moving. This Ganesha Tatwa is now
please others. You are doing it to
activated by your attention.
make others very happy. Then it acts
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
27
May-June 2002
the feeling of the mother for the child.
the other way round. Then it increases
your ascent. But if it is done only to That subtle feeling you have that
create a kind of a joy for others, people have come to my house. Now
see how they are happy, they are
sharing of the beauty of whatever you
enjoying this and they are appreciating
have bought or you have taken. But
it. In that you also satisfy a very great
supposing you are buying anything, for
Ganesha principle, that is, you have
making others feel jealous, that also I
taken note of the artists. Though the
have recentiy learnt that there is a
capacity like that for people to buy artists are creative, they are creating
something to make others jealous. Not all beautiful things, out of matter,
through the Swadhisthana. But
to make somebody feel happy. If there
being
Swadhisthana
are people who buy things just to without
make others jealous then also their governed by Shri Ganesha, it cannot
Ganesha Tatwa can be destroyed. be beautiful. These days as you see
What you should buy, anything, you
that the artists are taking towards the
should make a beautiful house. When grotesque things and very immoral
somebody comes to your house, he things. And these things are of no
should say, what a nice thing we have
eternal value. Today people will buy
seen! Not attachment to the thing. But them and tomorrow they will throw
attachment to the thing, how people away. Only the things which have got
the subtle Ganesha principle in it
feel, how they feel nice and relaxed
and they feel their Shri Ganesha, acting, which makes you soothe
down, which makes you feel peaceful,
within them, which is beauty.
which makes you feel happy, is the
one that is appreciated. So Shri
When this feeling comes in then
you should say, there is Ganesha Ganesha establishes within you, the
Tatwa. And it is a very motherly higher Self. So the baser self, which
enjoys all baser things of life, are being
feeling, it is like a mother, who always
wants to give sweet things to her curtailed down, are being cut down.
children. In the same way, you have Sometimes completely destroyed by
Shri Ganesha. I will give you an
. This is called
that Vatsalaya (
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
28
May - June 2002
example of Mona Lisa. If you see
I have not seen any picture as such,
Mona Lisa, I think she cannot be an
of those days where these principles
actress, she cannot be a beauty are not there. Even Picasso has used
contestant, I think Her face is very it. Even people who are quite modern
serene, very motherly, very pure. And
had to use this principle to popularise.
why is it that she is eternally so much
But to get popularity some have used
appreciated? The reason is, there is just anti Ganesha principle. All such
Ganesha principle in her. She is a things have vanished into thin air, and
I see now gradually it's all going down
mother. And the story about that one is
that this lady had lost her child, and and down and down and down.
she would never smile, she would Despite the fact, the people have lost
never cry. And once one little child was their morals, they would like to have
brought to her, she saw the child, then
Rambrandt, they would like to have
the smile that came on her face, of her
Leonardo da Vinci. They would like to
love for the child, is being depicted by
have, such artists, who have done
Mother and Child. It is very surprising!
this great artist. That's why people are
Even I went to Austria this time, I said,
appreciating it. And you have seen in
the West, though the people don't what statue you have? They said that
show much interest in the Mother-
we have got beautiful Madonna and
child relationships. Anywhere you go
the child. So this principle is the most
the Mother-Child theme is the best. I pleasing principle. It's the most
will show you a photograph, this is pleasing principle for human beings.
mother and child, this is Christ's
To see the children, to play with them,
Mother and child. When the Christ was
to enjoy their company, why?
Because, it is that sweetness of the
brought down, the Mother is there.
child, which really I should say, trickles
They have to have Mother and Child
principle acting. Otherwise that picture down within you. When you see a
is not regarded something great, or
child, immediately, the face becomes
cheerful. I have told you I have seen
you will have to have actually Christ,
who is the Ganesha principle himself,
even a crocodile cracking her eggs. It
to be sure.
was shown in a film. And you would
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2002
29
for your child has to be absolutely
have seen her eyes at that time! How
carefully, she was cracking? So important, but we should not, as
beautiful her eyes were, full of such Sahaja yogis, have only attachment
love pouring out! You can't believe that
for your children. First thing and the
second thing is we must know, how to
these are the eyes of the same
crocodile. And so slowly she is give a complete margin to your love.
The margin is benevolence. Is it
cracking with her mouth all the eggs,
benevolent for my child? Am I spoiling
and the little little crocodiles coming
my child? Am I too much encouraging
out and then, she brings them on the
my child? Am I playing into the hands
shore and washes them in the mouth
of my child? Or I am managing my
all the time, so carefully. Like a
bathroom she uses her mouth, you child all right. Because in childhood,
father and mother have to manage the
see!
child. They have to train the children,
and the children have to be obedient,
You
should see how animals also
act to their children. But when you and they have to listen to them. But
these days children are not obedient.
become sort of modern, so called,
They are not, because they find that
your actions are very funny. There are
the parents are not obedient to each
people, who are killing children, there
other. Also they find that the society is
are people who are abusing children, I
such that where children go on
than
they
worse
mean
are
'Rakshasas'. Even 'Rakshasas' have pestering the parents, so they also
become like that. But doesn't matter
not done, Pishachas' have not done.
The Ganas are surprised, what sort of
you are Sahaja yogis, you should bring
these new creatures have come up,
up your children, who should be
from where? That they have no love obedient, who should be wise, who
should be sensible. Give the same
for their children, that they can kill their
love, that the crocodile has for the
children, murder them, break their
hands. It's to their own children! If they
baby crocodiles.
could do it to their own children, what
will they do to others' children? So love
Now, when we come to the subtler
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 5 & 6
May - June 2002
30
side of Ganesha Tatwa i.e. it
say. But there were masters of this
expresses in our eyes. When I see
music sitting there, when you were
something, I see it as a joy giving singing. They were the masters of
thing. Just a joy giving thing. And if I
want to buy something, then I willl say
all right I can buy it for certain person,
he will like it. Because I know, what
drama and very well known artists in
India, so they offered me, 'Mother, we
want to celebrate your birthday." I
said, it is very difficult, because it will
they like. So will buy that thing for that
be so far away. No, no, we will come.
person, or else, if I am buying The whole night they traveled and the
something for my family, I will think the
whole day practically. They came at
about 5'0 clock, imagine. They
same. Like I have built a house now,
where I am going to put all the things,
finished their drama about 3'0 clock or
the presents you have given me, like a
4'o clock and they traveled all the day,
museum. And I am going is ask all the
arrived at around 5'0 clock, from
somewhere called Belgaum. And 6-
villagers, to come and see it. Because
they have never seen such things, 6:30 was the programme. So they
they can't travel to Switzerland, or
were all dressed up there. And what a
England. So I am thinking of making compeering they did! They said, we
this house in such a manner that these
were ashamed. We used to think, we
Maharashtrians are very good at
villagers who have never seen
beautiful things, should come and see.
music, very good at talas and this. But
In India, it is not a case very much with
we were ashamed, the way these
simple people to have jealousy. Only foreigners sang our music so well, we
the new materialistic people have cannot sing like them. Though their
developed this habit of jealousy. But
music we cannot sing, while they sang
otherwise, they will always say, what a
our music. And we are all very much
nice thing? How beautiful it is?
ashamed and embarrassed, how
could they sing so well. And the
Like you were singing songs about appreciation was so great, that I was
Sahaja Yoga, in Pune. Actually, you my-self embarrassed, the way they
have really picked up very well, I must
were singing. How it has happened?
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 &6
31
May-June 2002
These people, what is it their Guru has
appreciated that these people who
done? What have they done to these have never known Indian music are
singing so well. So in that appreciation
people, that they could sing so well.
fatherliness,
So, the appreciation, as a whole thing
that
also,
that
enamoured. We have a tape of that, I
motherliness was there, that 'Vatsalya'
think, audio tape. I don't know video
was there, and the situation was so
tape we have or not. But if you have, beautiful. Even, say, when a person
like Ravi Shankar has to play with
please get it. It is very interesting, the
Yehudi Menuhin-Yehudi Menuhin is a
way they appreciated my children, the
child before him-but I have seen how
way they were singing. They were
he looks after him and how he protects
such masters, so developed in that!
The way they were appreciating as if him, as you say in Hindi language-
'Sambhalna. All the time he (Ravi
they were appreciating children
singing so deeply. In that the rapport Shankar) is looking after him and
managing him. And also we have seen
was very sweetened, rapport of
"Vatsalya' (aHEA), is the feeling of a in the music part, when suppose a
Table wala' is sitting and a very
senior
motherliness. Look at these children,
they are singing so well, it has musician is sitting, he (Table wala) will
happened with many people, I have
say, please look after me, always with
very great feeling of a child. All these
seen. When some artists come, they
saw you people appreciating and things are very important in life to
singing, they had the same feeling. create good relationships between
How could these children, how could ourselves also. Those who are
these people sing so well? How did younger to us, those who are not so
they know so well? I mean, all that
well off, or those who are not so much
talented, or those who are not so much
feeling,
beautiful
and
all
that
appreciation created such a nice equipped in knowledge of Sahaja
Yoga or who are not so much senior in
atmosphere, as we had some very
great artists and how they appreciated Sahaja Yoga. We have to look after
the others i a fatherly manner or you
you. Instead of saying, "O, what is this
music? Nothing". They so much can say in a motherly manner. They
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 32
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May - June 2002
is the question of one has to be all
are not equipped, we have a Ganesha
Tatwa, so excite their Ganesha Tatwa.
the time connected with the whole.
They should feel dependent on us for Unless and until you are connected
completely, you cannot understand
achieving the mastery or achieving the
collectivity of innocence.
higher state.
Like the Guru principle is absolutely
The collectivity of innocence I see
sometimes, I am very happy that a child
bound by Ganesha principle. If a Guru
of somebody is in the lap of somebody.
does not have Ganesha principle, he
Sitting very sweetly. Coming as if he is
becomes a horrid, horrid, horrid fellow
your own father, coming and sitting just
and nobody wants to stick on to him.
on your lap, without knowing that he is not
And they all run away from him.
my father. But still that consciousness is
Though he might punish, he might also
always there. So this spreads the feeling
of 'my' and possession, that this my, this
is mine, this is mine. What makes you feel
get angry, with his disciples, but
basically, what he thinks is that 'he is
my protege, and I am developing him
and building him'. But if the modern
that now we are a means, we can say, an
thinking is set, let them be individuals, instrument, a media by which we express
let them be independent. So the father
Ganesha Tatwa always i.e. vibrations.
and mother do not look after their
So the vibrations itself, about which
children in the manner, that they
should. That-"see, this is my son.
you are asking, these vibrations
have got a talent, I must teach him, themselves are nothing but the
principle of Shri Ganesha, is 'Omkara'.
and he must come up. He is the one,
who is the continuation of my own
And when it is, then what is that
self". So this idea of having every feeling, as I told you the Vatsalya
'aa a The feeling of love between a
individual, you are an individual, I will
child and a mother. That feeling itself
teach you or get out of the house. You
do whatever you like, stand on your
is vibrations. Between the child and
legs. No, life is a continuous process.
the mother, the distance between the
It is not just you stand on your legs. It
two, is vibrations. And that is what one
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 33
May-June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
extend to everything that you do. You
has to feel that he is a child still, and
there is the mother and the mother is should see what? Things that are
good. Whatsoever has got vibrations.
bringing the child, giving all the powers
to the child, loving the child,
Today, I want to tell you something
understanding the limitations of the
child, looking after all that. All the very important about this All Pervading
Power we have heard about. These
sweetness, all the wisdom of the child
are nothing but vibrations. The Parma
to be appreciated, that is vibrations.
Chaitanya is nothing but vibrations,
And if you see the subtle side of it, it's
where all identities are lost, the mother
not my child, its not only a limited thing
because it is eternal, it is everywhere,
is lost, tather is lost, nothing remains.
It is just this vibrations, the subtle
you cannot have it. In everything you
do, I have seen people the way they Vatsalya; exists. And this is the only
handle the things in the West. We thing, out of which everything comes
and remains in itself. Like we can say.
Indians also have to learn from them.
that the sun's rays come out and then
So we have to accept for that, what
they try to create chlorophyll. So
is the way to handle also beautiful it's not that you cannot compare sun
with that. Or we can say that from the
things. How to look after beautiful
ocean, the clouds come out and they
things, how to manage beautiful
relationships? You shouldn't be harsh.
try to nourish the Mother Earth. That's
You shouldn't be unkind. You also, they cannot be compared.
Everything is inside. This Param
shouldn't see things which are
insulting to others, so that the Chaitanya has got everything inside.
So we can say that everything is
relationships are maintained. So all
the relationships that are between nothing but knowledge, is nothing
human beings and God are through
but truth, is nothing but light. But when
the folds of it come out, then we get
the Ganesha principle. So when it
into the folds of that Chaitanya, then
becomes relationship between you
and God, then there are vibrations,
we become ignorant. But there is
and then the same relationship should nothing like ignorance, it does not
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 34
May - June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
In
exist. Like there is darkness because
In the same way, this Param
Chaitanya acts and what we get lost is,
there is no light. Once light comes,
it (darkness) does not exist. So in our awareness, that is our Param
Chaitanya. That is why, the play starts.
ignorance does not exist. But
The play starts, like, day before
what happens that the folds of this
ocean, into that people go and it is lost. yesterday's Puja, What did happen?
Thus we understand one thing very
We were sitting there, and it started
clearly that we are in Param raining. So to prove, that I can control
rain so it rained. Some people were
Chaitanya. We are made by Param
covering out.I gave a bandhan. After
Chaitanya. All the time we are
sometime, the rain moved out from the
surrounded by it, only thing is we are
puja to the backside. It was not raining
sometimes lost in the force. And why,
where we were sitting and after that it
why we are lost in the force, because
became the Sun and it was so cloudy.
of our own unawareness. This
Sun came, it became sunny. So that's
awareness has to come, that we
how, you have to become aware of the
are part and parcel of that Param
Chaitanya. The whole thing is called
powers of Chaitanya. Now when you
as 'Chid-vilasa', is the vilasa, is the give bandhan, what you do is, to put
Chaitanya into action. Though you are,
playful enjoyment of God's attention.
Now you will say, how can that be? For
suppose, in the ocean, but the ocean
acts upon you all the time. You cannot
example, we see the sun, I will just
give a simele closer to it. We see the
act in the ocean, you cannot ask the
water to do this, to do that. But as a
sun and then we see the water. We
see the water in the lake. There is realised soul, you are empowered,
water, and because of sun we can see
now you can ask water, all right you
dissolve. You do this, you do that.
the water. Then supposing, we see the
But for that, it is important to be the
mirage and we think, this is water and
masters. And to become the masters,
we run after the water. But the whole
thing is the play of the sun, whether it
you see, like a matter becomes a
is a mirage, whether it is water,
human being, and from human beings
they have to become masters of the
whether it is the sun.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-36.txt 
 35
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 5 & 6
May-June 2002
now you are empowered and you can
matter, and you handle the matter. So
do it. It works out in everything. It
we come back to the same. Like,
agriculture we can handle, just by works in your talent, in your
understanding, in your education,
in
vibrating, we can handle water, we can
handle Sun, we can handle Moon. everything. Like there are some boys,
who said, "Mother see we could not
Because there is rapport now, we are
solve our problem so we gave a
aware, that rapport has been
established. So all this play is bandhan. Immediately the whole thing
extremely beautiful to me, I see it. But
came and we wrote it down and there
is the solution", It is happening with
now you all have to know that you all
have become realised souls and you
them.
have those powers.
So in every action, in every thing,
So all other non-sensical things you
whatever you do, you should know, it is
were indulging in, better give it up. the Param Chaitanya that acts. Only
There is no sense in it. What ever is thing you have to be aware of your Self
and aware of it, it acts. And you just
sensible, you should do, because
jump into that awareness and it works.
there is Shri Ganesha within you, who
is absolutely sensible. He is nothing
That you have seen. But still so many
but sense; He is the giver of sense, So
people do not know. So many people
still know from their brains, do not know
He is the killer of demons as they say.
He is the one, who removes all the
from their hearts. And so many people
even if they know in their hearts, they
ordeals by improving our awareness.
do not act in their attention. So only
True, ordeals cannot remain, because
these three things you have to improve,
you give the bandan and it works out.
Now, I asked somebody to write down
one is your heart, another is your
the miracles, and now he says, it has head and third is liver. If you can
become voluminous. It is, because improve your these three organs, the
before realisation, whatever looked Param Chaitanya will act. But then all
like miracle, is no more a miracle.
this attention about money should be
given up. Param Chaitanya will create
Miracle has lost its meaning. Because
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
36
May -June 2002
handle their Kundalini, sometimes the
everything for you. It may not create
money, because it does not have a
way they behave towards themselves
and others! All these things are to be
mint, but it will create possibilities. And
this is something to be understood very
understood. Now that we have entered
well and it is so blissful to know that
into the Kingdom of God, means Param
now you are aware of the Param Chaitanya, and that we are very
Chaitanya, and you can master it. important citizens of that. If one can
Master it is not in the sense that you
understand this, then I think Sahaja
can dominate it, but you ask it like Yoga can be very successful.
'Jinn', do this! Do that! With respect.
Everything will work out miraculously,
everything will workout. And all those
But the way sometimes we do not pay
who
respect to Param Chaitanya, is also
not aware about the
are
something surprising. The way we act, possibilities where they can reach?
all the time, the way we are behaving!
They are thrown out, in the sense in the
Like in my presence, the people will
folds, in the ignorance, so called, into
the darkness. Again they can come
sit down and close their eyes or they
will start worshipping the photograph
back to light, when they have sense.
instead of me. Sometimes the way they
May God Bless You
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Puja at Aurangabad
19 December, 1989
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Aurangabad
special sianificance in my were very quick and very clever,
own life because my intelligent and supple. They destroyed
forefathers came from a
has
a like mammoths and the others who
most of these big animals, and in that
place very near from here river there were lots of crocodiles.
called as Paithan but When the King of the elephants known
originally
known
as Gajendra was drinking water, one of
as
the big crocodiles in the water attacked
Pratishthana. it is the place
him. He wanted to kill him so that the
where the Rishi Valmiki wrote the
whole genes of these elephants would
great epic 'Ramayana'. He lived here.
So there is a big quarrel going on be destroyed. That's where Shri
because Valmiki had his ashram in Vishnu appeared and He killed the
different places. But actually Valmiki crocodile and saved the elephant. Out
of all these big animals, only the
lived here in this area. On the other
elephant was saved and that's why that
side of Godavari, which was going on
place is called as 'Gajendra Moksha'.
to Paithan or Pratishthana, was the
kingdom of Shalivahanas.
Valmiki used to plunder people.
He belonged to the fisherman caste,
Sita stayed here. Her one son went
Then saint Narada came and he
to Russia and another to China. The
name of the one who went to China plundered him also. So Narada asked
was Kush and the one who went to why are you plundering me? Valmiki
Russia was known as Lav. Those who said, 'because I have to feed my
went to Russia are called as Slavs or children, my wife and a large family.
I am the only earning member.' Then
Narada said, "do you think your
Lev, and those who went to China are
called as Kushanas.
children will sacrifice everything
for you?" Valmiki said, "I'm sure, they
Around here was a very big struggle
of evolution between the big animals will". Narada said, "now you become
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-39.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May - June 2002
38
like a dead man" and they took his
Then the story afterwards leads to
dead body, so called, and four saints
be coming of Sita there. So a very
important part of Ramayana was
put it in his house and told the family
that this fellow died while plundering played here, and he said that
us. But there is a way to again bring Shalivahana helped this Valmiki
him to life. You have to promise that temple and treated him with great
sombody from you has to die in respect as their master. But actually
their master long time back was one
his place. They tried. All of them
made one excuse or the other, for they
Chandilya, where we have taken some
did not want to die. So Valmiki got land near the river Neera.
up and realised that so far he has
The people here are very God-
been really doing something wrong.
fearing, and they respect saints, and
Saint Narada advised him to chant the
they also know who is a real saint,
name of Rama. He said then I will say
mostly. I hope you will understand that
Mara, Mara, means I am dead. So
when we think of the comfort of our
repeating it, it came to Rama, Rama.
So Narada said, "it won't work out,
spirit, the whole life is penetrated with
the light of the spirit, and we start
and you have to do penance as you
have done lots of bad things in your changing our attitude towards life. Not
only that but also we have a kind of
life, and you have hurt many people".
So he sat down for penance on a big
tremendous confidence in our virtues
and we enjoy them. Though we can say,
mountain here which is called as
Valmiki Mountain. And the termites ate
in a way, that in this culture there is not
much of finesse, not much of
up his body. Only his neck was saved
artificiality. They won't say 'thank you'
and the whole body was eaten up by
hundred times. They don't say 'sorry.
termites. So then Shri Vishnu
appeared before him and removed the They won't even fold their hands
termites and gave him realisation. A normally. The women specially to men,
and say 'namaskar'. Only to God they
termite in Sanskrit language is called
as Valmi. That's how he was called fold their hands.
Valmiki.
May God Bless You
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-40.txt 
 Puja at Shrirampur
21.12.1989
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
It is not necessary how into you, makes you very happy,
many things you give me. and you don't know why you are
just
enjoying
It's not necessary how many offers are
happy,
your
happiness. Then one has to say that
there. It's more important how many
you really have become a Sahaja
people you give realisation to. And
secondly, how are you? Have you
Yogi. At that state, you want to share
it. You don't want to keep it to yourself.
evolved? Have you really become
You will work very hard and do
independent? And can you get rid of all
everything that is possible under the
your conditionings, your ego? And have
you become a very mild, beautiful, sun. Your mind will think how to
compassionate, collective personality?
spread it, how to give this joy to others.
You won't be happy unless and until
The question of introspection to see
yourselves, is very important.
you communicate with others. So first
you become the capitalist and then
If we do not have a proper car, we
you become a communist.
cannot drive. In the same way, if your
being is in a funny situation, then you
The first thing is, how far we have
cannot ascend. That's a fact. So we enjoyed? Second is what have we got
in our mind now? How are we going to
enjoy, every thing, is the sign how
much we have achieved. If there's a expand Sahaja Yoga outside? First,
cup, then a very little joy can go into it.
the light has to improve. Then
automatically the light has to spread.
But if it is like an ocean, all the rivers of
joy fall into it. So, it is the amount of What is the relationship we have with
enjoyment you have, not fun, I mean
ourselves? I have told you, aiso, don't
saying form groups. Another thing is some
enjoyment. I
not
am
frivolousness, cheapness but a very people have developed a habit of
meditative deep enjoyment that you moving their neck too much. While
have within yourself. It just bubbles
singing, they move their neck and their
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May - June 2002
40
body. You can move body but the neck
very important. In India, you must
should only be moved with the body.
comb your hair properly because they
Before meditation, you can check think you are all beggars. Only the
yourself - what's wrong with you -
beggars have hair like this. Please put
oil and make your hair properly. You
before my photograph and then you
should be proud of your forehead. It is
should go into meditation.
the Ekadasha. You have to fight the
whole world with this Ekadasha of
As we were coming, I just said, now
yours. So please see that you keep
this is the wrong road. They said, "how
your forehead absolutely open, hair
properly done and oiled. In the night,
do you know Mother?" Just I know.
Just find out. Just to know everything,
you can put some oil and it will soothe
you need not know everything about it.
you. You will find it very much better,
But that is the sign that you have
specially for liver patients, it is very
become very aware. To be aware of important. They must put oil in their
everything. It is not like sitting down
heads because they are dried out
here that you should say, "that's very
people. There's no fat in their hair and
beautiful or it's very grand". That's not
the hair do not grow. They become
the point. Not to certify, not to criticize
immediately bald.
but how much do you know feel it in
You have to bring out what Sahaja
the atmosphere. Because we have a
culture is, through manifesting it,
very big brain and we have two lobes
without my telling you, so what is the
in our head. It's not one brain but two
Sahaja Culture, how we work it out
lobes and when the awareness
ourselves, our things.
starts giving you light, you start
knowing within yourself, everything
Also, try to judge where is your
and you are silent. You don't have
attention? All the time keep
to assert, manipulate or to exert attention on your attention. Where
yourself, but, just to know and that's a
is my attention? Mr. Attention
very beautiful thing one has to do.
where are you lost? And that will
work out for you.
Another thing which I can tell you is
May God Bless You.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Shri Christ Puja
Ganapati Pule 25.12.1989
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
have Christ to that extent and how they
Today,
we
assembled
celebrate the birth of stupid ideas of allowing people to
here
to ruined so many people with their
Christ. When you think of his birth,
indulge into all kinds of filthy things.
The second point is very important
one knows that he was born in a very
to see how he was born in a very
humble place, and all his life he lived in
a very humble way. Also as Sahaja humble way. He was the son of a
Yogis you know that he was the carpenter, so, he lived like a
incarnation of Shri Ganesha, which in carpenter. But in the Western life,
a sense, is innocence. And he was people are so materialistic and to
crucified due to stupid understanding them, to live lavishly, to show off their
a
of blind people. He was the eternal wealth, and to piunder people, plunder
child. It is so sad that when we talk countries after countries for material
gains is a common thing. They do not
about Christ and Christianity, we feel
that Christianity has gone just the think that it is wrong. In fact, they are
quite proud of it.
other way round, on the other side of
Christ. If one is construction, the other
is destruction, if one is innocence, the
The great thing about Christ was
other is cunning.
that he wanted people to love each
other and be humble, but the
Where there is Christianity; in its
arrogance and the cruelty that one has
seen of the Christian nations, one
practice, its very surprising that
innocence has no place and respect. cannot understand how they are any
Chastity has no place, no respect where near Christ! He has said,
which was the essence of Christ. He "blessed are those who are meek".
Where are those meek people living?
was made of it. It is sometimes
so called Not in the Western countries. Not
shocking how these
Christian Nations have maligned the countries where Christ is
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-43.txt 
 42
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
May - June 2002
you are Sahaja Yogis and that you are
worshipped, where churches are
the followers of Christ. You are the
raised in his honour, and have been
worshipping the Virgin Mother for so gnostics as described, "the one who
many years. What a sinful thing to do knows", and that's how you have to
to Christ! Is the greatest sin that we
help people to emancipate. It is very
surprising that I saw that the Western
say we are following Christ, and to do
all these horrible things. All such
life, the stupid destructive ideas, did
people have to go to hell. They may
not kill the innocence. But still I would
say that this kind of lovey-dovey stuff
not realise but they are already getting
must be given up. It is just most un-
into it. They are already having this
Christian because if you see, his life
problem. They are worse than the
was a life of a 'Tapasvi'. A man who
people who crucified Christ. Every day
there's crucifixion.
lived in a very detached manner. So
for Sahaya Yogis who are coming from
Christian life, have to understand, if
He was bearing all the brunt of the
they have to get rid of it, they should
people, everything. But the outcome of
that life is so horrifying that sometimes
be like that.
I get worried, that I hope they don't
Among the Christians, marriage
make something out of me like that.
dominates the whole life style. Its
Now you people are born again. As
absurd in Sahaja Yoga. If one of the
Christ has said, you are to be born
partners is not alright, it affects the
again. You have achieved that state
other spouse. It covers the whole
which Christ was talking about. You personality. It's not the case with
Muslims and Hindus. I mean, I am
are special type of people. I never had
married too. It doesn't cover my whole
such hopes. The first encounter was
so horrible, I did not think that many
entire being with it. How can it? And
that the problem is that once marriage
would come out of it. But so many of
system starts, anything starts, it
becomes so important that I am faced
you have come out of it and have
really glorified the name of Christ. I
would request you, now, to know that
with problems all the time. The
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-44.txt 
 43
May-June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
at all than even eating your food.
marriages are performed and then the
The more ado you start making of it,
letters start pouring in that 'this has
happened to my marriage'. It is a you start falling into the same trap
where I pulled you out.
headache. They will ruin their wives,
they will ruin their husbands, they will
We have come out from hell. Now
ruin Sahaja Yoga. The importance of
Sahaja Yoga is so minimized by this be dignified, be sensible, and over
Christian mind. It is a juxtapositon as
importance to such unimportant things
can call it. There is no similarity will not allow you to rise high, But I
you
don't say you don't mary. Of course,
between the life Christ must have
thought people would lead and the
you must marry. Of course, if you are
Sahaja Yogini and know about Sahaja
one people are leading. So it is
Yoga, then of course you are helped
necessary for Sahaja Yogis to have
a dignity and sense, and to knoW much more. You get much more
that they are grounded in Sahaja power, much more joy, much more
Yoga. And marriage and all those understanding, and it is very good. But
the inter-relationship is so important,
things are just subsidiary. It's not
on small things, is beyond me to
the end of life.
understand. Then I see that the girls
fall in love with the men that they
I have to marry people because I
marry-finished. The man is finished.
believe that one should lead a proper
married life, because if you just take
The woman is finished.
up sanyasa without going through this
Today, I am taking this great
married life, you can become very
much hypocritical. But that doesn't occasion to tell you that Christ
was born to immaculate conception.
mean that marriage is everything. It's
so important. it's just and that's how I have given you
not
something that has to happen. It's
your second birth, and you are so pure.
So all the impurities, you must see them
not more important than praying.
clearly. I know you don't like them but
It's not even important than
they will creep from here and there.
meditating. It's not more important
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-45.txt 
 May - June 2002
44
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
If you have to come up to this stage,
higher than this, but you must have
the worthiness. If your are not sea
you have to keep up the staircase. You
think that you have achieved a lot worthy, you will be drowned. So we
because now you have a settled have to develop that worthiness and
family, settled children and you are
we have Chirst before us. What a life it
was! He lived like a human being in a
worried about your own children all the
humble way. And how truthfully
time. No, it's another temptation. It's a
forthright he was to say everything so
very big temptation. So on the great
occasion of the birth of Christ, we
clearly! In the same way, you will have
have to say to ourselves that we are
your strength where you will know that
dedicated to Sahaja Yoga. That's
you are much more than your
the main thing. Everything is nationality. You
a higher
are
subsidiary.
personality, a Sahaja Yogi who is
dwelling in the kingdom of God. That's
We are on the cusp of a wave the bliss. Not the family bliss and the
children bliss but the bliss of God.
from where we are going to jump on
May God Bless You
to another wave which will be much
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Sankranti Puja
Kalwe, 14 January 1990
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today is the day for us beautiful. It has made your life very
celebrate in India very much,
joyous and very happy. Now we are at
to
a point where we have to trigger a
because the sun moves down to
new jump, a new flight. And for this
Capricorn, and from Capricorn it then
flight, we have to see that we really
comes to Tropic of Cancer. When the
become very light in our ideas,
sun comes back to this earth then all
the creativity of Mother Earth starts thoughts and in our conditionings.
so much
full of
You
acting and She creates such beautiful
are
All
of
types
things like flowers, nice nourishing conditionings.
things and fulfilling things like fruits conditionings are on us. They are so
and She makes our eyes cool down deep that sometimes I fail to
with the greenery She has, and the understand human beings. I just don't
way She blesses us is manifold with understand how we get stuck to things
which are of no value, which are of no
the advent of the sun.
sense, and they get lost. In this
In the same way now that the sun of
higher jump, which you are going to
Sahaja Yoga has risen and is coming take, many will be left behind as a
to the zenith and it has definitely result, those who will not be able to
shown you the result on the Earth come out of that. So at this stage, I
principle that is your Mooladhar and have to request you that you should
your creative power of that Mooiadhar really fully dedicate yourself to
meditation, and surrender yourself to
which is the Kundalini, has been rising
collectivity. Everyday, you must think
and rising and rising and opening your
in evening what have I done for Sahaja
being, and showing the results in your
Yoga? What have I done for myself?
lives. It has made your lives very
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-47.txt 
 May - June 2002
46
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 5 & 6
Please try to understand that will be departing. You have to tell
there's a very big jump you have to
your fellow men that this is a very
take. It has to be triggered and for that crucial time and none of us should
would like you to be ready. To be just take for granted Sahaja Yoga.
absolutely prepared because in this
All other things are just a kind of an
jump you might be lost, and many
might be left behind because they illusion that you feel that your worldly
things are alright, and worldly things
could not get over their conditionings.
you can manage; God doesn't care
for people who are rich and well-off
The conditionings are of various
or people who are poor. What He
types of ignorance, blind faith and
sees is what richness you have got
all other things that we have gone
of spirituality. He doesn't bother
through. Also we have conditionings
about your education, of your
of our country, of our race, of our
degrees, of pompousness etc. What
styles and so many other things by
He sees is how innocent you are.
which we judge others. But we have to
judge ourselves, that are we in a
How much you have worked for
Sahaja culture or not? If you are not in
Sahaja Yoga? What you have done for
Sahaja culture than it's going to be
God's work? So all these priorities have
very difficult that you will board the
to be changed, and one must
ship which is going to take us off.
understand that Sahaja Yoga judges
I have to just warn you that later on
you on a very subtle level. So in this
you should not say that Mother so
many were left behind! If you find last judgement now as you people have
been judged as good people. But still
anybody left behind, please try to help
for the second jump that you are going
that person. Please try to correct that
to have, we have to be very careful
person and with clear idea and clear
that, may be, some of you who think
voice and clear-cut instructions. If you
really find that somebody is going you are Sahaja Yogis in your heart
but are not may be left behind in this
wrong, you better warn him. I'm
telling you all today because you big jump we are going to take.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-48.txt 
 47
May-June 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Isue 5 & 6
So it is important that the sun has your life style. Actually, after some
time, I don't think I will have to tell
risen and now gone to the zenith, and
you
anything. You will get your own light to
at the time of its zenith, one has to be
see for yourself what is right and what
very careful because the same sun
is wrong. But still I would say for all the
which has started making this beautiful
Western people specially, that you
greenery all round us may scorch with
its heat. So be careful, and one has
must open your heart in the puja, in the
to be aware and all the time under music, in everything, Just see that you
the guidance of Sahaja Yoga to open your heart. If you cannot open
understand what is wrong with us, your heart, it won't work. Because it
works through Spirit which resides in
what is making us so heavy, what is
our heart. So please try to open your
making us so difficult?
heart for everything. All your
conditionings, all your ego will
So far l'm very happy that whatever
I have been telling you and whatever
disappear when you decide that 1
have been guiding you, you have have to open my heart for Sahaja
accepted it very calmly and sweetly. Yoga.
May God Bless you
And that you have tried to imbibe it in
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-49.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BRE EZE
B REEZE
Published by
V.J. Nalgirkar
162-A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph. : 5447291, 5170197
For subscription please write to
Mr. O. P. Chandna
N- 463 (G-11), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi - 110034
Ph. : (011) 7013464
Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to:
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Clo Sahaja Yoga Temple
C-17, Qutub Institutional Area
New Delhi - 110016
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-51.txt 
 Lake Peru Camp
California
