IRMALA DHARMA March-April, 2002 Volume: XIV Issue: 3 & 4 WIVERSAL PURE The Divine Cool Breeze 00 Salutations to you Shri Mataji, you have condescended to incarnate in this world in your complete form and occupied the thrones of your children's hearts. You are the most loving Mother to all your children. Your immaculate form is extremely soothing and justa glim your 1lle our hearts with Nirananda. O Shri Adi Shakti, thou art the cause of crea ly one glance of yours destroys all sins. NOID

 Navaratri Puja, Loutraki, Greece, 21-10-2001

 The Divin e Cool Breeze Volume XIV lssue 3 & 4 March - April 2002 Shri Ganesh Puja - 22.9.2001 Navaratri Puja - 21.10.2001 17 Shri Krishna Puja - 14.8.1989 23 First Know Thyself - 1.8.1989 30 Puja at Alibaug -17.12.1989 8.

 Co OL B RE E ZE THE DIVI NE Published by V.J. Nalgirkar 162-A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067 Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph.:5447291, 5170197 For subscription please write to Mr. O. P. Chandna N-463 (G-11), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi - 110034 Ph. : (011) 7013464 Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to: THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple C- 17, Qutub Institutional Area New Delhi - 110016

 Shri Ganesha Puja Cabella - 22.9.2001 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) who have no malice, who are living like little children, I should say, if they are Today we have assembled here to worship Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha who is the lord of innocence, He is the attacked by anyone, not that the whole world reacts to that but everyone of them cannot bear any innocent person or innocent being being harmed. You don't ocean of innocence and though He is such a young little boy He can fight the whole world, He can destroy all the negativity. That's the sign of innocence. realise that within us there is the ocean of love and ocean of understanding for There have been stories that children who have fallen from very great height children. Why? Why should it be? Why they were completely saved; nothing should we feel like that specially for happened. Their innocence is such a children, specially for innocence! There powerful thing that it doesn't harm are people who are always attacking anyone who is not to be harmed. It has innocent people, innocent children, there all the wisdom of the world, all the are, but no one wants to support them, understanding of the world and any body no one thinks that it's proper to ill-treat who tries to harm the innocence, the children and those who have done this whole world which may not have cared have to suffer. They all suffer as a so much for innocence, might not have worshipped innocence so much but they all stand, stand-up against anybody who tries to harm the innocence. You can see reaction. What is it within us that creates that reaction, that tremendous reaction against innocence? For example, if there is a regular war and if there are people fighting in a regular war, they don't have much sympathy and the world also. They your own lives around anybody tries to trouble children, all of them whatever in say alright, they are of that understanding, they are of that kind of a thing. The greatest sympathy comes when innocence is being challenged. they are, whatever they are coming from, whatever may be there nationality, they all jump-all jump to control and to safeguard that child. That's what human beings have-within What is it? What is it within us that themselves they have the power, power make us so very conscious to protect the of Shri Ganesha which gives you that innocence! It's a really shame, great feeling, that capacity, that understanding, shame for us when we find in this world that you have to protect innocent that innocence is under attack. Anything children, innocent people and the whole. else can be tolerated-innocent people world can rise against all such people who are trying to kill the innocent. There who have done nothing wrong, those

 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2002 can not be any doubt. If they cannot power of Shri Ganesha. They should not feel dejected if they are being used, a thing then they are not yet human insulted, tortured, dominated. It's alright. beings, I would say. The highest They should not try to destroy the personality can sacrifice anything and innocence of other people, of anyane. can give up anything but they can not Automatically it would work out. You will give up the feeling they have for be amazed that when innocence is innocence. It's very remarkable, we don't charged all the goodness of the world comes to the rescue of that. Example of protection and love for the innocent. this is the recent war, so called war, of oppose such an attack or criticise such realise, how much there is this ocean of What attracts the greatest strength is America where innocent people, they when we see innocent person, innocent had done nothing wrong, have been children are under attack. That's the tortured, have been killed. At that time, beauty of human beings. Of-course there are many human beings who can be every country whetherit believes in those cruel, who are i would say, I call them people or not is anxious to look after devils, may be, but when it comes to those who have done this crime. They children and to innocent people, may not be belonging to the same everyone feels it a responsibility. It' s religion, they may not be belonging to difficult for normal human beings to be innocent because they have a kind of a belonging to the same cults but at this understanding that they are something moment who does not take the side of great, that they understand everything, the innocence will be singled out and will that they can analyse everything and be destroyed, no doubt about it. Once they could be crooks, they could be aggressive, they could be troublesome, can not attack innocent people. they could be anything and they can give explanation for that, doesn't matter. But still on the whole they can never be should not ever be annoyed with our respected and they can never be children, we should not in no way punish honoured for the thing they are doing. all over the world, it is a big support, the same country, they may not be for all they will learn a lesson that you I have told you, in Sahaja yoga we them. Our main achievement should be that loving attention for children. All over the world whether he belongs to your family or to some other family or has some sort of detached attention with you, still because he is a child, he is innocent, the innocence within itself, your own innocence will try to protect him. It's very For us, the Sahaja yogis, the Sahaja culture is to respect your innocence. You might feel little bit cheated, you might feel little bit dominated, you might feel little bit disgraced, but Sahaja yogis have to be innocent because with them lies the

 March - April 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 that is put within us by the Divine. We play with innocence very much, we think that by behaving anyway we like, it's alright after all it's my own desire, my wish and we go on, we go on all the time reducing our power or we can say hiding or covering our power of innocence and we think we have done a great job that we have befooled all the people by our tricky nature! This tricky nature can not give you any satisfaction, it is not self sufficient. When you try to trick someone surprising how people take to sacrificing the lives when it comes to the attack of innocence! Children should never be attacked. They have their own power to protect, no doubt, but you shouldn't waste your energy on something that is extremely inauspicious, extremly cruel and extremely ugly. If you cannot love children, you can not love anything. I have not come across anyone so far who says that they don't love children. Luckily, but may be, some might say that we love flowers. Why? Why you love flowers? Because they are innocent, because that beauty of innocence is within them. You this trick works on you, it is repelled on you and destroys your faith in innocence which is the greatest faith; greatest help love nature, why? Because it is innocent. or the greatest power on this earth. Those people who do not respect their innocence because they think it makes you weak have not seen the power of innocence, how it works, how it acts. But the greatest innocence is seen among human beings who are Sahaja yogis. It's easy to be cunning, very easy to be cunning, it's very easy to be clever but to be wise one should understand From all over the world it reacts but so the beauty of being innocent. Possibly far, I think, the human beings are not one may say, Mother, one can get conscious of the power of innocence, exploited if you are innocent. No one can exploit an innocent person. They may believe that they have done this, they whole working out of the being is so have been very aggressive and all that beautifully achieved. but they cannot. It is like a rock, it is like a rock that is not derailed by any ocean that it is the highest thing to be innocent, and it acts as if the whole understanding, Now you see in this world what saves, what people remember, what is respected-is the high ideals. But if you see to the subtle side of all these high of anger or any kind of revenge. It is the rock that is being looked after and nourished by Shri Ganesha. I have told ideals of people, they have lived a very- before also that the innocence within you us never gets destroyed, very surprising! very beautifull life, of very good You may be a sinner, you may be a very character, of very good nature. All these cruel person, you might be anything people may have been harmed, may but it doesn't get it cannot get it after have been killed but because of their innocence they shine and shine through innocence. It is a very-very secret thing

 March April 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 ages. You can see the life of all great from the whole world, the-whole world men like that. They are all very simple, respects, nobody says that look at that, they are not delibrately spontaneous how he was crucified? What has he in their behaviour, done? Nothing of the kind. They just respect and what do they respect the essence, the essence of complete innocence. You say in Sahaja yoga that He was the incarnation of innocence, He they are spontaneously they live. Nations after nations can be destroyed but the power of innocence can not be destroyed. Have faith in that. You have to have complete faith in your Self and that your Self is nothing but innocence. You may say that innocent people get cheated. Nobody can cheat innocent people because that is something of very eternal value. They might cheat you in money, might cheat you in something but the thing that is the most elernal is your innocence and you will be the most successful person in life when you are absolutely innocent and They are stupid not to understand who you are looking after your innocence. was the incarnation of Shri Ganesha, which can be verified. So, when we think that in our own ventures we can do what we like and we don't want to even remember that, we don't want to even consider that it's a wrong thing to do, we do not know what is ahead of us. What happened to Hitler also? He thought he can destroy the whole world, he can manage to kill so many people and stil he will remain a very great personality. are the people really respected? Through ages, through history-no one like Hitler, He didn't understand if he wanted to have really the power of the As I have told you that innocence never gets destroyed. It can be covered by your ill thoughts, by ill doing it might world and if he wanted to have a be covered for the time being but if you reputation of a great man, he should can take out the clouds away from the have followed the great people and the sky of innocence, the whole thing great people are those who are innocent. becomes so obvious that you have won Their main power is their innocence. the whole world, You can take the case Take any one of them. I don't know how of Christ. He was crucified. He was to say that this power acts because it insulted, He was tortured, those who did acts in so many ways. You can pass this where are they? Who knows them? through the historical events, so many of them and what would you find? A person who is so innocent, simple and wise is remembered all your life. I was a child very small when I was in school I Nobody even knew the name, nobody is even bothered about them. The single one person was so much used and was so much tortured but despite that what used to go to the library and read about has happened! He has got the respect,

 March April 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Isue 3 & 4 that you have big authorities or you have a very big position as ministers and all that. There have been so many who the lives of great men who have created some great things for us. So many of them and I was so impressed how some came and died. There had been so many of them were so simple, so child-like. For example Abraham Lincoln for whom I people with ambitions and so many had tremendous respect was a man people who were oppressive but where are they? No body is bothered about don't know you are very clumsy, you them, nobody wants to look at them. If their photographs appear, people close know how to behave and she actually their eyes, no-no we don't want to see this man, but if there's a little boy, innocent child who is talking in a very tortured by his wife also! She said, you don't know how to dress up, you don't was very harsh on him, all the time torturing him. Ultimately he was killed. So one can say see what's the use of being Abraham Lincoln because he was killed, he was not successful. But till today all over the world people know who was Abraham Lincoln. They don't innocent manner, the whole world admires that child and these great men are really the symbols of that innocence. Their main quality was innocence from where the wisdom has come. know his wife, but they know who was Abraham Lincoln. Clumsy man, Ganesha's main quality is his wisdom. He knew what was success through His, I should say, innocent qualities. Some according to her and all sorts of degradation for him but nobody respects her, nobody thinks anything about her. Who is respected today is Abraham Lincoln. Why? Actually he was murdered, he was killed. That shows that times the innocent people are not even aware of their quality of innocence. It's very surprising! How the quality of innocence shines through human beings he had no strength to survive; but he survived through ages. So many years very simple, who may not look so have passed still he is surviving. Take intelligent and sharp, who do not become the case of all the great people who have good diplomats, what ever it is they are been innocent and that's why they had innocent. That's where ends all the glory ideals. To them their ideals were more of human beings to be innocent. important than anything else, even their lives, everything was nothing. Now the sense of ideals and idealism comes only People will say, Mother what do we do who may be very ordinary, who may be So to be innocent, what will you do? to be innocent? Firstly, you can see for from your innocence. That's the one yourself how yourmind works, what does which teaches you what is your ideal? How you should exist? What kind of a life you should lead? It's not important it do, how it reacts? This is what one has to watch, which I call as introspection.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March April 2002 What sort of plans your mind take to? anything what so ever to an innocent. What does it think is the best? In that personality. There's a sanskrit shloka like thinking, the thought process, what is the most important way to look at yourself. the spirit -it can not be killed by anyone The first and the foremost is that you should know how you react. Is it an innocent reaction or it is a vindictive shoshatey Maruta Maruta" is the air or reaction? It's very easy to see yourself what you can call, a wind, wind cannot because now you are all Sahaja yogis. also suck it. It is above all the nature You can see for yourself how is your which is trying to destroy. But you will reaction to any aggression on you or any be amazed that nature understands, I kind of a trouble coming on you. How do told you nature is that "Nainam Chhidyanti Shastrani", for "Nainam dahayati Pavka" - no fire can burn it, "Na Chainam Kleid yantapo, na innocent. It you react to that? What is your understands and it acts at the right behaviour? If you are a very powerful moment. Again the person who is person then your behaviour is that you aggressive, who is trying to malign or are not bothered. "You see it for yourself trouble an innocent person. In this way that it is just a stupid thing people are we should know that we have to worship doing to you, absolutely stupid and when our innocence. they are doing stupid things, why should we bother about it, why should we waste I know sometimes one feels that you are dominated because of that our energy about it? It comes to a point where their stupidity is found out in such a manner that all their lives and afterwards they are treated with contempt. People don't even want to take their names, they don't want to have their photographs, they don't have to have anything to do with them. sometimes one feels sad that why you are put to this kind of a treatment by others? All kinds of things come to your mind but if you worship your innocence then you will be always a happy person, always a kind person, always be a humble person. So one has to be careful. You are your own destroyer, you are the one who kills yourself. What do you say to Hitler? Hitler destroyed himself, who else destroyed him? I mean in anyway everybody has to die, so he would have been dead but who destroyed him At this time, at such a juncture what happens is the people who are crooks who are not innocent, who are against innocence, they start following them because it suits them better, it suits them to be aggressive, to be cunning and forever is himself. So you kill yourself. that's how a new group is formed which Through this you can save yourself and we can call as satanic group and this can become very glorified if you are satanic group also cannot do anything, innocent, have faith in the power of

 March - April 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 innocence. What is important is how you show in your life the power of innocence, how you behave towards each other and that is what I call the love. You cannot be compassionate unless and until you have this attitude towards yourself, you cannot be kind, temporarily you might feel this but permanently compassionate we will stop it. You must send your, what you call, your applications at least 8 days before and for Ganapatipule it is two week so otherwise there are only twenty four hours in a day and you cannot increase those. Now this one humble request I have to make that if you want to settle your marriage then please do it in a way that I can have time to see. Otherwise I will leave it to others to decide. If you like it can be done. So a simple thing is this to understand that marriage is a very important thing. You can create innocent children if you are temprament comes only through the permanent flowing of innocence through your character. It's such a transparent thing in a human being that it sustains, it overpowers all other things, leave alone the time. Thousands of years people will married. But if you behave in this manner, little irresponsible so I have to not forget you, the Sahaja yogis, if you show your valour and the strength of your request you to understand the value of time because from next time I can assure innocence. I am sorry for today's programme being so late but you know I was ready to come but the marriages are becoming you we cannot have marriages if you send your applications so late. It should be within one week's time. I hope you the main function now because it came will understand. so late that till the last minute we were deciding about marriages. But I am telling you this is the last time. Next time Thank you very much Common looking people are the best in the world: that is the reason the Lord makes so many of them. Abraham Lincoln

 Navaratri Puja Loutraki, Greece, 21.10.2001 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today we have gathered here to do And that point has arrived where all the Devi Puja. This Puja was the good people, especially the Sahaja performed many a times and the Devi Yogis should put all their mind to the was requested by the Devas to save destruction of them from the tyranny of devilish personalities like Mahishasura. people. Today I feel the same way, these horrible In those days, it was very simple because devils came as devils and situation; that there are people who you could see them that they are are themselves devils, I think, and also devils, and all their behaviour proved that we are now in the grip of a funny mesmerised by them who are trying that they were devils. Why they did it? to do something which they should Why were they cruel? Because so called 'human beings', as they are, never have done. But they don't know that there is a climax of everything. they are not, they are by nature

 March - April 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 behaviour it was cruelty which was devilish and they want to do something and by which they can destroy human innately built, very cruel%3; whenever my father saw that, he beings, and good human beings. asked them to get out. Because they It is evident that the time has always had sinister practices by which come for them to be destroyed. they used to treat others. In no way I could be against Islam or ever to criticise Mohammed Saheb. He was Divine, no doubt, and tried to I never knew that it will come up to that stage. And mostly they were from Afghanistan, can you imagine? Mostly. Of course they tortured other Afghanis also; and where-ever they went, they had a speciality that they could be very do Divine work. But out of that Divine work these stupid people have come up who accept those devilish people. You will be amazed to know that in cruel. Not all Afghanis, no, not at all, Islam there are seventy-four groups! but some of them. And they came to They say, "We follow one religion" - India from Afghanistan and we have but they do not. Out of these, some of different types of Afghanis. Some were them are really evil people, and they very loving, kind, helpful, very nice call themselves by the name as people. And some of them were very Devbandis because this is a place in cruel. First we didn't understand what India, and also they are called as is this. But because my father was a Wahabees. I have been knowing them scholar and scholar of Islam. He told since long because in our household, us "These are not Islamic. They call in my father's household, we had lots of Muslim people working as cooks, as drivers, as other servants. And these themselves Wahabees and they are not Islamic". I can see that today, so clearly. Wahabees are very interesting people Not that in other religions or in other because they don't believe even in groups there are no mad people. But these Wahabees were secretly Mohammed Saheb. So if you tell them that Mohammed Saheb has said such- and-such a thing, they say "No, we working out different groups. They are don't believe in Mohammed Saheb". not many. And that's what my father "So, in whom do you believe?" "We had told me that "One day they will become very explosive and they might try to ruin the world completely" At first, I couldn't understand, believe in Allah!" "Have you met Allah? Have you seen Him, that you are believing in Him?" But in their whole

 March April 2002 10 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 are being exposed and so many are because, after all, they looked like human beings only. But he says, he going to be exposed. But mostly they told me, "They are absolutely were the people who were interested camouflaged, and once they start their in money, in getting lots of money, somehow, in the name of religion. But cruelty you will not know what to do." at that time, people didn't see their cruel methods and their cruelties. We had one invader in our country called as Mohammed Shah Abdali. He This cruelty started growing and was a very, very cruel man, very cruel, and he used to even kill the Muslims you know we have Nizamuddin Aulia's dargah. In that been to because his concept was that you place only, I discovered, there's a Madarsa - 'Madarsa' means a 'school'. should not worship Mohammed Saheb because Mohammed Saheb said that "I am not Divine". I also used to say the And in that school they used to admit same, to save myself from the stupid small children. And it was so well people. For years I used to say, "I am planned that God only knows - I mean not Divine", but when they felt My I can't say, that there were 120 vibrations and all that, they believed. Madarsas only in Delhi! Now nobody But those who believed in Mohammed knew what they are teachig there, Saheb were never understood by what they are mesmerising, how they these people. Very, very cruel, and are doing this! It so happened once, I because they don't even believe in Mohammed Saheb, you cannot argue there I found people singing songs and with them on any point; you cannot argue with them what is written in feeling for love. They felt my love very the Koran because you don't believe in much, all of them, and they started went to this place, Nizamuddin, and all that. And I found in them a real Koran, you don't believe in Mohammed Saheb, you believe in know there was a Madarsa in that coming to Sahaja Yoga. But I didn't Allah. God knows from where do place. I asked them "Why is it, here the they have connections! vibrations, Nizamuddin was an Aulia. But gradually it was surprising that And how is it that the place doesn't they could mesmerise. As we have have good vibrations?" In between t horrible gurus who come as gurus and used to get very bad vibrations. So they mesmerise. You have seen them, they told me "Mother, there is a people being mesmerised. So many Madarsa".

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March April 2002 11 Now look sent about the 65 scholars, at evil, ambassadors, how to Afghanistan it works. Normally, evil study to used to work in those Madarsas, like this, that it would go and to how become cruel- form some can you groups, some imagine! To wars, and kill teach hatred! people. They Of few Course were there are people, but many Muslims they had who are not cruelty as but if you do their religion. not respect Which ever Mohammed they way Saheb and lived, they wanted to be cruel. In those Madarsas only, they had you are supposed to be a Muslim, what will come out of you? people who used to tell them how to be cruel, how to hate. So 'education in hatred' started. And that education of and Islam got divided into many So, all these wrong ideas grew up hatred was very well woven through groups. It's alright, but to have this these Madarsas, all over the world. kind of a group that is against all Now, as you know, Pakistan and India humanity was the most dangerous were always fighting. But this plan! I don't know how many Muslims time Pakistanis realised that If we also knew about it. They spread this fight with India in that way we will Madarsa thing all over the world and be called as terrorists'. So they people coming out of that institution said "No, we will have no terrorism became very, very cruel people. The first cruelty was to the women. Women in our country". But they are were treated with such contempt, and this new the ones stupidly absolutely no respect of any kind was had fellow (President Musharraf) -

 March - April 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 12 given to them. This itself shows that there was no-one to control them. It's complete innocence, simple existence Now, in Sahaja Yoga, you believe in not written in Koran, it's not described together. And that people believe that by Mohammed Saheb. He says "God there is definitely different groups of is merciful; He is peace-giving". people. Now what is our duty? What are we supposed to do? First of all, we have to introspect. Supposing you are a Hindu, born. You should sit down and find out if you hate anybody Whatever he did was absolutely Divine, no doubt. But some of these people, the way they took to satanic forces, people started because he's a Muslim. You cannot misunderstanding Islam. hate because you are Muslim, "Islam' means 'to surrender'. Those because you are surrendered, so how who are surrendered are you people. can you hate anyone? If you are surrendered, you are surrendered to the Divine, and how can you then be Surrendered means those who have given up all their lust, greed and all these enemies, and are above against the Divine? So these normal people. Another thing, it was misleading thoughts and ideas should very interesting to note that be given up. Supposing you are a Mohammed Saheb had said that "At Hindu. So you have no business to the time of resurrection, your hands hate anyone. That is for definite! Now would speak". That he clearly said. the word 'Hindu' also comes from the Naturally, because it was written in a River Sindhu because Alexander language which was all poetic, people couldn't say 'Sindhu', so he said can, if they want to, they can twist it. "Hindu'. And on that point many people have built this horrible hatred in India. But Mohammed Saheb never, never But cruelty was not their theme. That could have said... that. was the saving point that they didn't It's very, very shocking that in these want to torture people. So this aptitude modern times the people have taken to torture or to hate people is coming to such crooked ideas. But for that, the from other sources. And the source is, reason is that people also develop as you can see clearly, that they resistance for them. Jews they openly hate. To hate is a very bad develped a resistance for them. This quality. One of the most dangerous hatred is responsible, and this hatred, things is to hate. And so you all must between both the sides, I would say, know... (short pause) alright. Now we are having a puja. now, is too difficult. It's very evident.

 March - April 2002 13 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 My heart just weeps. At what time I we human beings, we hate others, have come on this earth, where I have when you know that love is such an to see human beings hating each overwhelming, beautiful feeling. But other! They talk of 'love and 'hate'. It's a very serious thing, that you who are To me, it is very painful to think that why then do you take to hatred? the children of one God, they'll end up like this I mean, I have experiences that if I tell you you'll be shocked. How Because people have impressed you, they have told you lies, that's why you hate. What an achievement! First to be a human being, and then to be a people have fallen down to the depth person full of hatred! Now what will be the next, I don't know! of evil nature. It's an understanding we have, to It was alright in those days for the have understanding about ourselves: Do we hate somebody? Do we get Goddess to kill. The Goddess used to ideas that we shouldn't have, or do kill all such people... (long pause).. It's a very sad feeling that God has things? Do you have such things in created human beings from amoeba to you? Just find out! Do you hate other this stage, and how can we hate people? someone? And this is what has These ideas are rotten, absolutely, happened! for the human mind. The ideas which are completely like the animals instinct, are absolutely no good for Now of course Sahaja is different. Sahajis know how to enjoy the Love. human beings at all. But that is what is They like it. They enjoy it. You can see happening, and it's coming forward. If you are poor, alright, but by hating you don't become rich, no. If you are in any that. And if somehow, you people could manage to remove this hatred- somehow, somehow - with your wn difficulties, then your duty is to remove will-power- denying and defying all that is being told to human beings, I those difficulties, but not to prosper on am sure.. (long pause).. It's a very them. All this has to finish. It is very surprising that we are not bothered at all as to what we are doing. Yes, you difficult world where those people who came on this earth went through all kinds of education, wanted to improve have to have proper sense of understanding: where are we going? If the conditions, the relationships, friendships, have fallen into the depths of hatred.. (long pause)... you have misunderstanding about somebody, better take it out,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2002 14 completely. They try to trouble you, the trouble with Sahaja Yoga is that alright. But understanding about that person. Very then you don't see around what is surprising that we never see those happening. things, how ugly they are, and how funny they are, how they ruin our don't have bad you all start enjoying yourself, and Now I must tell you, I am now in the midst of war between myth and reality. personality! Is it an area, is it a - I don't know what You may be able to correct some should I say - is it within us there is still people. All our activities as Sahaja lurking some kind of a weakness that we do not try to fight our weakness. I would now request you all to Yogis, I never realised were so important! We have to give so much time. Not to bother about nonsensical, meditate on yourself, and see for frivolous things, but something serious yourself what is wrong. that is within us or without, that must be taken out. If I ask you, 'How many shock, what can Sahaja Yogis do? It's a big shock, and to reduce this. people you hate?" You may say just 20 people' and you see the whole What can they work it out to blast atmosphere in all this fills me with such these so horrible ways of human life? remorse that I just don't know what are It's possible with the power of Love - you can manage! But we must develop that power in our hearts. Think of it! It's we going to do, the Sahaja Yogis! What are their plans? Will you please look into yourself and think what a big lesson now for all of us, to see for constructive work we are doing and ourselves - are we alright? Or we go what destructive work we have been on hating others? What is the function doing. You need a big shock to of our mind, is to hate or to love? And this love, if it enlightens you, you will understand this. be amazed, you will be such a big I like the way we have programmes force for Me. I cannot fight the whole and Pujas and all that, but if you ask thing alone. I have to have people who really develop their love and My Inner Being, I know it is very, very unhappy, very sick. At this time, what nothing else! That is one of the you have to do as Sahaja Yogis? As challenges now for all of us, for all Sahaja Yogis, minimum of minimum the Sahaja Yogis all over the world. It's not only the fight between believers and non-believers, not only the fight you should put full attention and then you have to tell everybody. You see

 15 March April 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 Sahaja Yogis, you know who is on the wrong know side. Sahaja Yogis can save, and can bring them to the right path of knowledge and love. But - be very careful with the propaganda of evil that is going on. I want to touch the deepest part of your heart, which should reconcile. I am sure you all will understand the magnitude of danger that awaits! Maybe there may not be between Sahaja Yogis and non- Sahaja Yogis, but this is a fight where we are all one and we are going to fight it out. At every stage we have to be much more subtler. human beings left, maybe there any It is very, very essential to see to may not be any children left. Because if the point today - are we also part and this kind of thing is working out, it is parcel of that evil thing that is working very difficult, very difficult. My whole out. Or are we free from that, and existence gets shaky, gets shaken up. prepared to fight it? It's a big fight and I You all should see in every nook and hope it is conclusive! After this there corner of life: Where is this talk going on? Where are people talking of will be no more of cruelties to human cruelty? What's happening. Whatever ! think, it's not one, it's not two, it's all of beings, no more fights, because this is a fight between the rakshasas and ourselves. It is not 'ordinary'. And this us. The fight that I am having is of has to be explained, also to those who are supportive of evil forces. Only a very serious nature, no doubt. But thing, you can say 'Mother how are we if you all can fight collectively, how to know who is against and who is much we can work it out! All my not?' You are knowledgeable; you are efforts, understandings, powers,

 March - April 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 16 I hope you people have understood what I want you to do. A new everything is now in your hands, and that's what you should be prepared for. Not by just reading generation is coming up. All of you, all something or talking about it; you of you, are in My Heart, and I love you have to build up within yourself the very much, and I want you people to come as soldiers to fight with Me. I am "Power of Love'. also told that there are some people I am sure with the opening of the who are forming groups extremely Sahasrara you will do that. But try to negative attitude! At this time what we to understand read something, something, with the Power of Love. It's need is complete solidarity. So all such people whom you see, tell them to behave themselves! No use making a very deep subject, and when you talk about it, half-way I'm inside, half-way them Sahaja Yogis. outside. But I have to tell you that you I am sure it's really heartfelt all develop this, and only that (Power of Love) will form a very strong opposition to these 'evil doers' as they call it. desire of mine that you should become really soldiers of love and peace. Because that is why you are My complete blessings are on you, and I want all of you to individually work it out. How many people you here, you are born for that. So enjoy yourself. love, how many people? This you have May God bless you to find out.

 Shri Krishna Puja Saffron, U.K. ,14.8.89 Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Today we have gathered to worship Shri Krishna's incarnation. Shri Sita back from Ravana. So Shri Rama sent her away. How many people who are in power would be that sensible Narayana, of Shri Vishnu. In every that they must set an example by their incarnation they carry all their behaviour in a manner that they qualities, powers and all their nature should be ideals for all other people with them. So when he incarnated he who are working under them. Shri had all the qualities of Narayana and Sitaji was Mahalaxmi. She understood the whole play and she went away. Krishna is the incarnation of Shri Shri Rama. Every incarnation tries to rectify whatever in their previous As a king Shri Rama taught how to rule the people. He established the ideals of kingship and it is said that the incarnation was misunderstood or carried out to the extremes. That's why they come back again and again. Shri Vishnu is the preserver of creation and Dharma. Sb when he took his most ideal kingdom was Rama Rajya. Under his rule there was peace, no incarnation he had to see that people competition, every one was joyous abide by their Dharma. You have to and happy because he emitted fair get your realisation to keep alright and play, Dharma, joy, bliss and peace. remain in the central path of Shri Mahalaxmi. By the first incarnation we can say that he tried to create a benevolent king as Shri Rama. But people always take to something which is not normal in the case of each incarnation. Because Shri Rama lived as an ascetic, people started following ascetism. People became austere, would not laugh or smile. Everything became very serious. As people did incarnated as a complete human not marry, they lost balance. Marriage being with all the qualities of human gives you balance. That is the time beings. He married the Laxmi principle Shri Krishna incarnated to show that that is Shri Sitaji. He lived a normal the whole creation is fun, is leela. married life. Then he gave her up and There is nothing to be serious, dry or lived like an ascetic. By his life he ascetic. Infact before Shri Rama's time showed how a husband should be with all the saints used to marry. Then also his wife. Later on he had another role a kind of funny brahaminism started. to play as a king. When he became the They weakened the caste system which was determined by birth rather Shri Rama was Purushotamma - the best among human beings. He king he found out that people were criticizing him because he brought Shri than work. The Brahmins started

 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March April 2002 18 dominating others. So Shri Krishna with their mothers, it is considered came as a son of cowman. very sweet. In the Orient they enjoy When Shri Krishna was only five, he the naughtiness of the children. The played all kinds of pranks and did all kinds of leelas like he killed one big because people do not love their cobra snake, he killed many demons with his power in a play. Shri Rama was not supposed to know that he was an incarnation. Even though it was revealed to him by various methods that he was an incarnation yet he would not accept it because he was not supposed to know. Something like Mahamaya. In the same way all the Shri Krishna used to steal the butter of cameras are now giving you all the strictness with the children is mostly children. They love their carpets and other material things because they can sell it. They can't sell their children. As children and parents are separated by materialistic ideas, the material things become more important. Now stealing is considered bad, but all the ladies, who used to take it to a evidence of the real Mahamaya, what demon in Mathura. This butter was she is like, but one may try to show that you don't remember, you have no memory of it. Because if you that the ladies won't be able to sell it remember it, your action would not be human. They would become Divine there. Also if you see the significance- actions and that may not be alright for human beings because they will not be able to stand it, they will be frightened, eaten by all the demons and they were becoming very powerful. So he thought better to eat all the butter so we starve our children just to have some money. Money orientation is there with the idea that everything is to he sold. So children become a there will be such an awe. So Shri Krishna behaved normally like a very ordinary person. permanent liability. Children are treated as if they are just burdens. If all the value system just comes down to money then children have no place in the family. According to Sahaja yoga, children are more imporant than all the wealth of the world and they are to be looked after that way. Of-course they should know what is dignity and how to In his childhood he was very fond of butter. Butter is very good for the Vishuddhi Chakra. In the tea add a little butter so that the throat which is dried out gets relief. With the help of his friends he would break the containers and eat all the butter. Then behave themselves but their little little he would tell little little lies. All his pranks are to be understood and pranks, childish sweet lies, were just to create a feeling of understanding. play pranks and not as grown ups. When children are naughty like that They should have that much freedom enjoyed. Only as children they can

 March - April 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 19 powers. These 16000 powers were they will become very serious people incarnated as women and were taken away by a horrible king. Shri Krishna defeated the king and released these to play pranks and tricks otherwise and might become ascetics. Those parents who are very strict with their children are never normal. They either women and gave them his protection are extremely perverse or they quieten down and cannot face life. Both are of by marrying them. When we have Vishuddhi problems the same style; one cannot face life and the other cannot be faced by life. we have to know what are the dieties on both the sides and what are the You have to treat your children with qualities which are lacking in us that great love and understanding, but they we are suffering. Let's see right side should know that if they misbehave, this love will be finished. Children only Krishna's essence is sweetness. His Vishudhi when we catch. Shri power was Radha. Ra energy, dha- the one who sustains the energy and care for love, they don't know money or anything else. The love you establish in your child becomes a very precious thing. Sahaja yoga is based qualities. Shri Krishna's quality was on Divine love and it can only work when people are loving. If they love his power was Allahd joy giving that he was Yogeshwara the eternal witness. Now a person who shouts money, power or their reputation etc. and not their own children or family his temper, suffers from right then they are losing a very big part of their society. and screams, talks loudly and loses Vishuddhi. One should understand that even if we have to scold somebody we have to say 'what are you doing', in a sweet manner. The best is to give some rest to the right As a king Shri Krishna wanted to establish people in dharma and he needed the help of the five elements. So he made them into five ladies whom he married. But they are the Vishuddhi by observing silence 'mauna'. On the right side the heat starts was Yogeshwara, absolutely detached coming from the liver. It starts rising, in his yoga but for all practical first it goes to the right heart. As purposes he had five wives and then result you might become a very hot there were sixteen thousand women tempered husband or father. Then it passes to the right Vishuddhi and you become a very irritable, hot-tempered person, all the time shouting at others. very part and parcel of his being. He who became his wives, who were nothing but his sixteen thousand powers. The Vishuddhi chakra has got sixteen petals, multiplied by the Virata's 1000 petals, it comes to 16000 If you use your anger in that manner then that person may be just

 The Divine Cool Breeze olume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2002 20 frightened of you, might develop an inferiority complex, might become a left sided person. God alone knows what can happen to a person who has somebody all the time shouting at him! or any particular person. So there is no need to shout, play around with it and bring it to that point which is benevolence. Shri Krishna said, you have to tell the truth, but it should also From Shri Krishna's life we have to be pleasing and it should be for the learn how he used to play the flute and benevolence. Supposing you tell the how the whole atmosphere used to become absolutely quiet without any truth to someone he may not like it at the moment but if it is for his ripple. But in modern times they have benevolence then in the long run he the other way round where the right Vishuddhi is about to break or burst. you tried to help him. Even if you have where the music does not bring peace will feel a great obligation to you that to tell some lies for benevolence, does not matter because Shri Krishna, who but excites you more and more. Such music numbs the limbic area which is is the diety, knows it. the seat of the Virata, aspect of Shri Krishna. From the right Vishuddhi it what is wrong with them, specially goes to the Sahasrara, then you take those whom you are incharge like drugs because your brain is numbed. Then again you feel the drug is not frankly tell them what is right. It is your sufficient, you take stronger drugs. duty. People escape it also. Many You go on like this, ultimately you people who don't want to face their reach a stage where you are no where. children give them toys after toys. Where it is all self destructive. You cannot shirk from telling people your family, relations etc, It is best to Discipline domination but it means whatever does not mean Shri Krishna was a divine diplomat. What is divine diplomacy? You don't have to shout. If you want to spirit and the spirit of others. That bring somebody conclusion then the best thing is to first change the subject. That's a clever thing to do. To have a we do is for the benevolence of your is Sahaja discipline. to some Left Vishudhi is the lightening like a person who can scream and shout and who can expose others as did complete. rapport with the person Vishnumaya. You should not be afraid 'how can I do it'? Mostly the people One has to know that the essence of who feel guilty have lost confidence all this diplomacy is Benevolence. You and the ego has entered the left side. have to achieve the benevolence of It's a very complicated situation. We one has to play with that person. the whole humanity. If you are doing it should be on the look out that we are you are not doing it for your own gain, not feeling guilty. Guilt is just a myth.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March April 2002 21 We want to escape reality that's why guilty, who are suffering from we say we are guilty. You have to face inferiority complex, who are sly, who feel they are good for nothing. See the contrast. Her power expresses in a the reality. Try to find out what's wrong with you and others. Because Vishnumaya is nothing but like electricity. Electricity exposes people, then she asserts her power by which she screams and shouts at people, people become self confident. person who is not self confident and roars at people. If you have a left Vishuddhi you have to use these When we talk of Vishnumaya we have to know that she is seated there. Any moment we decide we can become great speakers, we can methods. The person who has a left vishuddhi should go to the sea and address the sea, "I am the Lord of the expose people, we can be like lightening, we can be like thunder but normally we are not. So this gives balance to both types of people. In the sea, I am this, I am that", loudly. The power of Shri Krishna in the right side of the throat is over the vocal cords the power of sweetness. The same thing happens with Vishnumaya too. Vishnumaya is the potential power but she uses it to scream and shout, to centre when the kundalini rises most of the people have their vishuddhi caught up, so they have to see that they are not guilty, that they are completely themselves, that they are in the central balance in with show her existence that she is there. Now all these miraculous photographs you get are because of Vishnumaya. path by which they become sweet, kind and nice. There are many people She is the one who acts as electricity and she is the one who manages all who are artificially sweet to exploit others. Such people will go to hell because they are using the power of Shri Krishna in a very absurd manner. these things. Though she is the sister of Shri Krishna, she is very subtle and she helps you in a subtle manner. Now this microphone has electricity in it and you will be surprised that vibrations that our Vishuddhi is to be kept clear. are passing through it. From here they First of all we must have a very are going anywhere you want them to beautiful and a clear heart where there go. You can put a computer on the other side and computerise them. It is melodious music. Improve your such a remarkable thing that the one Vishuddhi, work it out, look at the who is supposed to scream and shout Virata and find out what's wrong with and roar is the one who is on the left you and correct it for it cannot be done hand side so that it exists in a potential by any one else. See that you have a way in the people who are feeling full idea about yourself. That can only It is important for us to understand is the frangrance of Shri Krishna's

 March - April 2002 22 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 the brain. So Shri Narayana enters in otherwise you can never see yourself the brain becomes as Virata Akbar. because at the vishuddhi point only When he becomes Akbar then he is the brain in the matter. That is why achieved the witness state then you people who worship Shri Krishna become brainy people without ego. Their brain develops and they have no happen if you have a good vishuddhi you become the witness. If you have can see in your vishuddhi, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with your problem, with your atmosphere ego about it. Egoless intelligence and everything. So today when we are worshipping Shri Krishna, we should manifesting. know that he ultimately becomes the brain. The fat of the stomach goes in which I call as pure intelligence starts May God Bless you

 First Know Thyself Porchester Hall, London - 1.8.89 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) At the very outset we have to that now there are people who have understand that truth is what it is We started saying that there is no God. cannot conceptualize it, or organize it, There is nothing like religion. It is not or use it for our own purpose. true. Moreover with the blinkers on both the First of all you say there is no God, sides like a horse, with all our conditionings, we cannot find the truth. you should find out, have we been able We have to be free people. We have to to find out about it or in our ego we are be open minded people, like scientists sayng there is no God. Have we been to see for ourselves what is the truth. If able to work it out to see if there is God somebody preaches, professes or says something, is not to be accepted People who talk about God. Anybody blindfolded. The essence of all the or not? You do not judge God from the can talk about God because they think religions is to find the eternal and to there is no law that can catch them. They can talk for Him, against Him or treat the transitory in its own understanding and its limitations. they can do what they like. They can even make money by talking against That's why we have lost our balance. If God and against all the Prophets. we are really the people who want to know the truth, we have to know that at human awareness we cannot know it. So first of all we have to be a little independent to be free. To know that if It becomes a concept. You have to have the spiritual awareness. This Thyself - and you have to know it on spiritual awareness is a state of your your central nervous system. As I can you have to know the Spirit Know being, where you can become the spirit. It is not artificially certifying the Divine Power which is all somebody that now you have become prevading, which is the Truth, which feel this is cold or hot, you have to feel a Hindu or a Christian or a Muslim or manifests the Truth because it is the become anything. You can commit love of God. You have to first feel it on any sin, you can do anything that is your central nervous system, which is wrong because you are a Hindu, or a Christian or a Muslim. Nothing from inside is going to stop you. So all these the bodha. One may say that in the West we have advanced so much, or we have things have become so much outward

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 &4 24 March - April 2002 gone too far with everything. But if you human enterprise, even in religions. see when we started with science what That's why today we find this kind of a have we produced? Hydrogen Bombs, farce going on. And what has gone Atom Bombs and all kinds of devils wrong is that we have to seek the sitting on our heads. Any enterprise Eternal. May be it might look a little we take, we go to extremes. There is different. For example Budha and no balance. Any mental projection is Mahavira did not talk of God at all. linear. It moves in one line and then also did not talk about the God for four recoils back and then you are years. shocked. Now you have got acid rain. You have produced machinery. As soon as you talk about God, Machinery is for you, you are not for people start jumping that when can we machinery. And thus there is no balance between you and the become God. So first you become the Self - the first step. They said first you machinery. No balance between you become the Self. Unless and untill you and science. It's just like going amuck have your eyes, how can you see the with anything that you get in your colours? It is for your benevolence, hands. And this balance you get when that you better get what you deserve, you become the Spirit. You see what is your own, is your birth right as beautifully made chandeliers here. But a human being, i.e. to become the unless there is light, they have no Spirit. That is what Sahaja Yoga is. meaning. In the same way, if you do 'Sah' means with, 'ja' means born. not have the light of the Spirit shining Born with you is the right to get this in your attention, you will not know yoga the union with the Divine. It is your meaning. Unless this microphone your birth right as a human being. You is connected to the mains, it is are the epitome of evolution. And it useless. Unless we are connected to has to work out, but please open your the mains, we do not know the hearts and open your minds, and then Absolute and that's why all these see for yourself. I know, it will work. problems are there. When I talk about But by thinking about it you cannot the instrument which lies with us, one conceptualize. This is the biggest has to know that this is the knowledge problem of our seeking that we run of the roots, for which you have to become a subtler personality. Through the gross mind you cannot see it. To become the subtler personality, you which is the most beautiful instrument have to know the roots. Something that is created within us during the after some sort of a concept. Now you have seen the instrument, process of our evolution. The first one has gone wrong some where in every

 March - April 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 25 centre is the most beautiful one, because it stands for our innocence. awakening the first thing that is established is thoughtless awareness. This innocence is the one which gives For a thought rises and falls and the us real support, real strength. It may Kundalini makes the thoughts smaller be overshadowed, there may be and in between at the present. It clouds, maybe you are a hopeless makes you stop in the present and you case. Some people might say, that we grow in the present. If you want to have destroyed our innocence. think you can think, if you don't want to Whatever you might have done this is one centre which cannot be destroyed. Kundalini crosses the Agya Chakra. You may have problems with it, but it cannot be destroyed. It is such a wonderful centre, which has got four centre, when it enters is that you just petals, which looks after the pelvic become dynamic, because second plexus. think you don't. This works out when So what happens in the second centre is for aesthetics and for creativity. My brother, a chartered In our freedom, we do all kinds of accountant, was very bad at all the things which may not be benevolent languages. Now he's making poetry in for ourselves. Doesn't matter. Kundalini cannot be destroyed. The source which is going to give you the self realization, I say, she is your that centre, like a very beautiful Sanskrit and Urdu and also in Marathi which is the most difficult language. When the Kundalini rises, it nourishes She nourishes. After mother individual Mother. And this Mother is a loving Mother and She knows each realization, Amjad Ali became a great and every thing about you from your artist. Because the Kundalini goes up past lives. She is just waiting for a and the creativity becomes so chance that She can be awakened and tremendous and active and so She can give you your second birth. dynamic. At the same time that person She is a Divine Mother. She is not becomes very mild, very sweet, very going to give you trouble. But these compassionate. problems that have come are coming from people who have no authority, who have no education, who do not temper is not your creation. It's the know what Kundalini is. So this violence, this anger, this creation of your liver. Now when the temper is there you don't know what to Kundalini will never give you any do. You are like a drunken personality problems. On the contrary when she who does whatever he likes. But all rises and when you get your this temper everything becomes so

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March April 2002 26 cool and beautiful. It's very surprising money, etc. But that's not what you that a very dynamic person becomes very compassionate. Now, also they will never be satisfied. say that certain nationalities have got have to be really satisfied with. You So now we move to the third centre special traits. Everything dissolves. Because of this centre which is so which we call as the Nabhi Chakra. creative, and which also gives you the This centre is made on one side of manifestation of pure knowledge, you water and the other side of fire. Around it are ten valencies, our innate religion start feeling on your central nervous system. You start feeling on your finger tips. Like somebody came and said to me - my Agya is catching. It means, I've got my ego on. Would spreads in this centre. Overnight anybody say like that? On the contrary people have given up drugs. Overnight if you tell somebody you've got an ego, they give up alcohalism, everything. they'll show you that they have their ego on. It's very dangerous to say to somebody your ego is on. But because of self-knowledge you know that Mr. Ego is sitting here and I cannot cross day you have a hangover. Here you through, as there's a blockage here take something and next day you are which I have to take out. within ourselves. This Nabhi Chakra or solar plexus gives us religiousness as soon as Kundalini rises and the light And the best part is that they enjoy their virtues. Some people think then what is the fun, what is this that you take something in the pub and the next much better off. It never comes down. It never gives you a reaction. Its not artificial. It's not intoxicating. It's from It 's so innate within you and once the connection is made, immediately you, it's bubbling out. you know about yourself and this centre which is responsible for creating all kinds of funny thoughts enjoy our generosity. Now all matter and horrible creativity, becomes so whatever it is, we are materialistic. But benevolent, so soothing, so beautiful. the aesthetics of matter is that you can Apart from that these people who give it to others suggesting your love in could not say one word in the Hindi it. That's the only thing that matter can language, they have started singing in do and in a very special way you can Sanskrit. So in Sahaja Yoga an artist express that love. The feelings that you who is struggling today may become a great artist. But still I would say there are temptations. You'll become a great artist, you'll start earning more Here we have a capacity that we have expressed of knowing what that person would love and this kind of a depth develops within you with such a lovable beautiful society, you enter into

 March - April 2002 27 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 whole thing that when the guests come in, they feel like running away, because so much of tension of The joy you are giving comes from thinking and planning is generated. this centre. You don't have to bother Ultimately the whole joy has and you don't need anything because everybody is looking after your needs. as to what to eat. You just eat disappeared. whatever is good for you, benevolent So the second centre does a very for you. You become so wise and also you please others. You don't displease miraculous thing, that it provides the others by saying this is bad food, I grey cells in our brain, when we are want that. 'I want' goes away. Like a using it for thinking. It also looks after candle which is not enlightened is your liver, pancreas, spleen, kidneys asking for light. I want light. But once it and part of your abdomen. But instead is enlightened it gives light to others of doing that, it is busy sending grey automatically. In the same way you cells to your brain because you are also start giving your light, your love, thinking and thinking like mad. So you your joy to others automatically. develop all other diseases, liver troubles and then you get diabetes. Nobody has to go through any ten commandments anymore. Those days Now diabetes you do not get by taking too much sugar. In India, in the become like that. Very beautiful villages, you see that they take sugar people, very affectionate, and very in such a manner that the spoon stands up in the cup. But they nver get diabetes. The reason is that the villager doesn't think of tomorrow. He just works hard, eats his food and sleeps off. He doesn't take sleeping pills either. So this diabetes comes by are gone. Now automatically you glorious. See the glow on the face of Sahaja Yogis. The face itself is radiant. Many people drop out ten to twenty years in their age and they are so enthusiastic. They never get tired. Specially in the west people get very easily tired. Young people too. Why are you tired? Because we think too much. All energy is wasted in thinking, so no energy is left to enjoy anything whatsoever. For example you invite people for dinner. You think what to drink, how to make over thinking and can be easily cured if you take to Sahaja Yoga. Then the third disease which is even more dangerous is blood cancer. Blood cancer is caused only to people who think too much. It can even be to the children if the mother is very meticulous. Particularly about her carpets, her house, everything, that the food warmer, what to do, etc. etc., so agitated and so nervous about the

 March - April 2002 28 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 hectic and for emergency this spleen even a rat doesn't enter that house and all the time thinking and planning. is the one which releases red blood This affects the child and the child also corpuscles. But if you're all the time hectic then the poor spleen becomes mad. It doesn't know what to do, and can get blood cancer. Blood cancer- one gets because your spleen is a speedometer. It's the one that gives starts producing more and more cells you the rhythm of life. When we are hectic people, all the time under l'am fixed with, because I don't know shock, then this goes out of order. For example, in the morning we get up, and then thinks that it's a mad person when to act and when not to act. So the vulnerability is there and suddenly see the newspaper and news of with some other shock he might get someone killed, or an accident. Such a blood cancer and the doctors will shock. Newspapers never give good certify you are going to die after one news. They never report how many people got realization or something is working out alright. Something horrible Because as soon as the Kundalini is that shocks your head, your limbic awakened, too much movement this area, otherwise you won't take it side and that side which is going on all seriously. month. But Sahaja Yoga has cured blood cancer of many people. the time, subsides. The Kundalini passes through and brings it back and Your system is a very delicate nourishes it. Even vulnerability to system, it gets a shock. So then you get into your car without taking your breakfast, or maybe in your hand is the breakfast, because you are late. On cancer and to all incurable diseases are because of these centres going out of place. the way there's a traffic jam. You're shouting and screaming. Some how or controls left and right side both. As you the other you reach the office and know the sternum bone creates the there's a boss barking. This is how we antibodies and they fight the live under complete tension. We are deseases. This is the centre of our supposed to be free people. In the night if you sing loudly the neighbour challenged you develop breast cancer. will come and put you in the police Supposing a man is a flirt and his wife station. You can't do anything. There's is worried, she might get breast no freedom. You have to be bound by cancer, because her motherhood is the watch. This is the exact time you challenged and her sense of security have to reach there. So all these' gets very disturbed. As a result of that Now we have the heart centre. It mother. When your mother is she gets this problem. Also you think things work on us and we become

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2002 29 too much and are very right-sided and or of the father. If you are a bad futuristic. Like people who plan too husband or if your wife is a shrew, or if much. They plan ten years ahead. you are a very bad father, or if your Even their deaths, what dress they are father is not kind to you, you may going to wear and where they are develop asthma. Or if you have not going to be buried. All this futuristic forgiven your father you may get planning creates such tremendous asthma. But the relationships of our heat in the body because the liver parents we have chosen when we which is supposed to absorb all the came on this earth. I know they may be wrong, or obstinate, or headstrong. a result the heat travels up and you They may be drunkards. But even if you leave them, stil forgive and forget. Otherwise you carry the heat is neglected by this centre and as develop asthma. Ashtma is very easily curable. The right heart is the centre of the husband problems with you.

 Puja at Alibaug 17.12.89 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Welcome to you all. So now we do not react then your thoughts will have all arrived here and we are going give up. to start this pilgrimage by travelling together. The journey is of a very subtle nature and if you realize why we watch yourself that you are not are here, you will realize that the whole reacting. But you are experiencing nation is watching you all, is trying to help you that you should ascend and subtieties, the beauty, the glory of that you should feel your depth and your being as well as, whatever is thus enjoy yourself. The travel may not around you. You don't have to force be very comfortable. The roads are yourself to break this habit but just to bad etc. It is a journey of our ascent. So the first thing should be to and enjoying the silence, the be on the watch out. It is not necessary to talk too much about it also. Nor is it In the West we have become very necessary to think about anything, because supposing you see a tree, so it is a tree only. What are we going to speedy and to bring down this speed we have to use meditative process so think about it? And whatever we may that we feel our peace within ourselves. Also the thoughts are bombarding our minds and we react think about it, its going to be the tree. So there's no harm in appearing a little bit stupid doesn't matter. The basic thing is that when we start analyzing very fast to others and to these thoughts. So one has to be aware, one has to know what is happening within yourself. That the thoughts are bombarding you. You are trying to ascend and you find it very difficult to analysis, without thinking about it, get rid of the thoughts. The thought process can start by your conditioning or by your ego. These you watch everything without reacting, are the only two problems. You are you are in Reality. And then only the the one who is under the challenge. So penetration into the subtleties of your you have got these simple people in surroundings, of your relationships, the village who start watching your friendships, the whole universe everything but they do not react. If you dawns upon you. we are breaking our own nerves and poisoning our own mind and brain. So to watch something without is Reality. If you can achieve that point, where

 March - April 2002 31 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 you. When you say I have to tolerate it because, you see, my mind doesn't accept. So accept as it is, whatever you see; that is how people grow. That's why I have said that in this pilgrimage, the first thing that we have to remember is that we have to be aware ourselves. But when you are only thinking about others, how others I have seen those who start have to behave, they should do like this or that, leave it to your leaders to accepting, that's the sign of their strength and their depth. Like the break their heads. That's not your job. propensity of this Mother Earth. She is what she is and she bears whatever is it is a headache for them I know but they have to do it. Why do you want to break your heads for nothing at all? So there. If you put a heavy thing on her, to judge others, to think of others, what She will put an equal and opposite they are doing what's wrong with them, about anything whatsoever you force and bear it. She doesn't say I am tolerating it. But, she is just accepting may think is wrong - is not going to be t. So the witnessing and awareness corrected. Like I know some people develops when we start just who are specially bureaucrats. They accepting things as they are. "I are travelling, supposing, by the car. Then they will say, "I think, you see this road should have gone this way, or I think it should have been nice if this house was facing the other way Now I like to eat a cake, but there is no round." But it's not going to change. It cake, so what to do? Now whatever is is going to be the way it is. So what is there, enjoy it as a cake. But if you go. the use of wasting your brain, your mind, your thoughts in suggesting there, you can never be happy. As something which doesn't work out and simple as that. You have to say that is never going to work out either? So "whatever is there i like". I enjoy think", doesn't work out. "I think it would have been better like this," doesn't work out. Then the second problem is "I like". on thinking like that "like". What is when we start like "I think these trees whatever is there. Then that's the should have been little taller" but they Reality. Whatever doesn't exist, if you are not. So just accept it. like it, so what can anybody do about it. Acceptance is the way we are going to enjoy. But acceptance doesn't mean tolerance because many facets in life that advantage is tolerance means you have to work taken by people because we become very hard to accept that the trees are so vulnerable to our likes and dislikes of the same height. It is too much for that the entrepreneur takes over and It works out in so many ways. In so.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March- April 2002 32 they create likes and dislikes in our conditioning. They do not belong to head and put ideas everyday. I have any one country. So now those who seen it how they do it. Through have come by plane, had to come television, through newspapers, because from every country there's one plane by which they come. You say, now I like this. But from where this must know one thing that now we have liking has come is the conditioning landed and we are all Sahaja Yogis here and forget your countries - Mix up with other people. Please do not form groups. There is no need at all Well, why? Why don't you like any to form groups. I would request you other flower? By this conditioning, we that in the buses because it starts from the airport we start forming groups and through this and that. So when you which is put into your head. So you are a slave of that conditioning. I only like roses and I don't like any other flower. miss the joy. The second part should be that it continues till the end, till you go enjoy within. Why am I here? It's not back. I think it would be a nice idea to a comfortable place by any chance, so break that and let people sit together, why am I here? To enjoy each other. of different countries and different To enjoy your own being. The more nationalities and talk to each other. Try diversions you have outside, to know about each other. Try to find out about each other, and not just what you know from the newspapers but different problems of Sahaja Yoga. appealing to your ego and your conditioning, the more your mind is busy with that, then you cannot enjoy What are the problems of Sahaja Yoga anything. in a particular country? What happens in a particular country? So we to the other come conditioning which is very subtle, that I am an Englishman or I am American or I am from another city and then reading also. Reading without light is better form a group. The grouping useless and some people still may starts in a sutble way. It is a kind of Worst of all is the conditioning of habit of remembering have insecurity. So we start clubbing. something they have read and a kind Animals do that very often. They have to do it because their sense of of "Show off" as they say. It's better to listen to others. Let others talk. In Sahaja Yoga, on what subject you will discuss, I don't know. How can insecurity is quite a lot and then human beings also do it but not the Saints, not the Angels. They don't form you discuss on anything? Now you see groups because they have no nationality. Nationality is also a this one as a green thing. Now what can you discuss about it? Let's see, it

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2002 33 is green but there is - another one who says "No, this is green, but". One may go on like that. There is no need to going off the traok, so what's the use of discussing? You all know that what he is talking is opposite the track so it's all right. You come to the conclusion. Yes, we know, we know. But to discuss it out, there is no need. Once discuss in Sahaja Yoga. I just don't know what are we going to discuss. You know everything. You know how Kundalini rises. You all know how you know and it is in your awareness, the Param Chaitanya will take care of it and you won't have to bother at all, how to correct, how to mend it or what Chakras are cleared out. You know how you get realisation. You all know who catches what and you know that how it effects. Now if that is the fact, if that is the Truth, that is what it is. What to do. That is not your work. You just leave it to Param Chaitanya and it will work out. So here we have come are we going to discuss about it? Discussions are over now. You are because this country has been very gnostics. You are knowledgeable much blessed by so many Saints and people. You have the knowledge but Yogis and you can see it in the people the knowledge that you have is shared how they are and that's why despite all by every one of you. At the most you poverty, despite all kinds of can talk about your experience. You discomforts, and despite the fact that can talk about your relationships, they have not known any Western how you have enjoyed but there is great things, they are not bothered. I nothing to discuss in Sahaja Yoga. I went to Russia, of course Russia was have heard about people who are discussing. I just don't know how can was really surprised how these people there be a discussion about Sahaja have come to Sahaja Yoga and Yoga. great and so many got realisation and I accepted it! The villagers in India may not be Discussion is just trying to show that you know better than the other or Sahaja Yogis, but they respect the you can give another opinion. In Saints. To them a Saint is more Sahaja Yoga, there is no other important than anything else. Nobody opinion. If someone has a Nabhi catch, he has a Nabhi catch. What want to give them, they will not accept. other opinion can you have? So then will ask you for anything. Even if you So that basically I think there is which we finish with different kinds of difference should we arguments and discussions and understand that materialism works things. May be somebody goes off the track may be. But you all know he is And one has to be careful on that much faster in the West than in India.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4 March April 2002 34 You must remember that you are on point. I am bringing you down to that point now, that are we getting lost into materialism? Of course, you know that grow in your awareness. If you I am a great shopper. I have to go on shopping. And I shop for all of you. But useiess. Once you start thinking like the difference between my shopping is that, you'll be surprised how much you that if I am shopping for all of you, I am will gain and how much you will going there because I know I will get achieve. things much cheaper, and of a better quality. All the good things will be there available, because I am there. I will be Sahaja Yoga. And I don't think we able to get things for all the people have much discipline of any kind either because I love all of them for whom I but it is Sahaja Yoga which somehow have to buy. It always happens like that. When I go out for shopping, even if I have to find things for 400 people, I fire. If you put your hand into the fire, it get the things there all right. That's will burn it whether you like it or not. In why I have to go. When you go then you have to think what we are going to against Sahaja Yoga, you will have to buy. I have seen that Sahaja Yogis will buy things for non-Sahaja Yogis. We have to know that we are one body become unhappy but this time with a and as this hand must look after the much deeper understanding and other hand, when we go out shopping reverence to yourself and to your or do anything, we should always think what we are going to buy for other Sahaja Yogis. a pilgrimage and should be able to cannot grow in your awareness, it is There are no do's and don'ts in or the other disciplines you. I don't have to tell you anything. It's like the the same way, if you do anything pay for it. You definitely don't want to lose your vibrations. You don't want to ascent, you have to take a very joyful serious attitude. May God Bless You

 Navaratri Puja, Loutraki, Greece, 21-10-2001



----------------------

2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 IRMALA DHARMA
March-April, 2002
Volume: XIV Issue: 3 & 4
WIVERSAL
PURE
The Divine Cool Breeze
00
Salutations to you Shri Mataji, you have condescended to incarnate in this world in your
complete form and occupied the thrones of your children's hearts. You are the most loving
Mother to all your children. Your immaculate form is extremely soothing and justa glim
your
1lle our hearts with Nirananda. O Shri Adi Shakti, thou art the cause of crea
ly one glance of yours destroys all sins.
NOID
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Navaratri Puja, Loutraki, Greece, 21-10-2001
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The Divin e Cool Breeze Volume XIV lssue 3 & 4 March - April 2002
Shri Ganesh Puja - 22.9.2001
Navaratri Puja - 21.10.2001
17
Shri Krishna Puja - 14.8.1989
23
First Know Thyself - 1.8.1989
30
Puja at Alibaug -17.12.1989
8.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Co OL B RE E ZE
THE DIVI NE
Published by
V.J. Nalgirkar
162-A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph.:5447291, 5170197
For subscription please write to
Mr. O. P. Chandna
N-463 (G-11), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi - 110034
Ph. : (011) 7013464
Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to:
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple
C- 17, Qutub Institutional Area
New Delhi - 110016
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Shri Ganesha Puja
Cabella - 22.9.2001
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
who have no malice, who are living like
little children, I should say, if they are
Today we have assembled here to
worship Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha
who is the lord of innocence, He is the
attacked by anyone, not that the whole
world reacts to that but everyone of them
cannot bear any innocent person or
innocent being being harmed. You don't
ocean of innocence and though He is
such a young little boy He can fight the
whole world, He can destroy all the
negativity. That's the sign of innocence.
realise that within us there is the ocean
of love and ocean of understanding for
There have been stories that children
who have fallen from very great height children. Why? Why should it be? Why
they were completely saved; nothing should we feel like that specially for
happened. Their innocence is such a children, specially for innocence! There
powerful thing that it doesn't harm are people who are always attacking
anyone who is not to be harmed. It has innocent people, innocent children, there
all the wisdom of the world, all the are, but no one wants to support them,
understanding of the world and any body no one thinks that it's proper to ill-treat
who tries to harm the innocence, the children and those who have done this
whole world which may not have cared have to suffer. They all suffer as a
so much for innocence, might not have
worshipped innocence so much but they
all stand, stand-up against anybody who
tries to harm the innocence. You can see
reaction. What is it within us that creates
that reaction, that tremendous reaction
against innocence? For example, if there
is a regular war and if there are people
fighting in a regular war, they don't have
much sympathy and the world also. They
your own lives around anybody tries
to trouble children, all of them whatever
in
say alright, they are of that
understanding, they are of that kind of a
thing. The greatest sympathy comes
when innocence is being challenged.
they are, whatever they are coming from,
whatever may be there nationality, they
all jump-all jump to control and to
safeguard that child.
That's what human beings have-within
What is it? What is it within us that themselves they have the power, power
make us so very conscious to protect the of Shri Ganesha which gives you that
innocence! It's a really shame, great feeling, that capacity, that understanding,
shame for us when we find in this world that you have to protect innocent
that innocence is under attack. Anything children, innocent people and the whole.
else can be tolerated-innocent people world can rise against all such people
who are trying to kill the innocent. There
who have done nothing wrong, those
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2002
can not be any doubt. If they cannot
power of Shri Ganesha. They should not
feel dejected if they are being used,
a thing then they are not yet human insulted, tortured, dominated. It's alright.
beings, I would say. The highest They should not try to destroy the
personality can sacrifice anything and innocence of other people, of anyane.
can give up anything but they can not Automatically it would work out. You will
give up the feeling they have for be amazed that when innocence is
innocence. It's very remarkable, we don't charged all the goodness of the world
comes to the rescue of that. Example of
protection and love for the innocent. this is the recent war, so called war, of
oppose such an attack or criticise such
realise, how much there is this ocean of
What attracts the greatest strength is America where innocent people, they
when we see innocent person, innocent had done nothing wrong, have been
children are under attack. That's the tortured, have been killed. At that time,
beauty of human beings. Of-course there
are many human beings who can be every country whetherit believes in those
cruel, who are i would say, I call them people or not is anxious to look after
devils, may be, but when it comes to those who have done this crime. They
children and to innocent people, may not be belonging to the same
everyone feels it a responsibility. It' s religion, they may not be belonging to
difficult for normal human beings to be
innocent because they have a kind of a belonging to the same cults but at this
understanding that they are something moment who does not take the side of
great, that they understand everything, the innocence will be singled out and will
that they can analyse everything and be destroyed, no doubt about it. Once
they could be crooks, they could be
aggressive, they could be troublesome, can not attack innocent people.
they could be anything and they can give
explanation for that, doesn't matter. But
still on the whole they can never be should not ever be annoyed with our
respected and they can never be children, we should not in no way punish
honoured for the thing they are doing.
all over the world, it is a big support,
the same country, they may not be
for all they will learn a lesson that you
I have told you, in Sahaja yoga we
them. Our main achievement should be
that loving attention for children. All over
the world whether he belongs to your
family or to some other family or has
some sort of detached attention with you,
still because he is a child, he is innocent,
the innocence within itself, your own
innocence will try to protect him. It's very
For us, the Sahaja yogis, the Sahaja
culture is to respect your innocence. You
might feel little bit cheated, you might feel
little bit dominated, you might feel little
bit disgraced, but Sahaja yogis have to
be innocent because with them lies the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 March - April 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
that is put within us by the Divine. We
play with innocence very much, we think
that by behaving anyway we like, it's
alright after all it's my own desire, my
wish and we go on, we go on all the time
reducing our power or we can say hiding
or covering our power of innocence and
we think we have done a great job that
we have befooled all the people by our
tricky nature! This tricky nature can not
give you any satisfaction, it is not self
sufficient. When you try to trick someone
surprising how people take to sacrificing
the lives when it comes to the attack of
innocence! Children should never be
attacked. They have their own power to
protect, no doubt, but you shouldn't
waste your energy on something that is
extremely inauspicious, extremly cruel
and extremely ugly. If you cannot love
children, you can not love anything. I
have not come across anyone so far who
says that they don't love children. Luckily,
but may be, some might say that we love
flowers. Why? Why you love flowers?
Because they are innocent, because that
beauty of innocence is within them. You
this trick works on you, it is repelled on
you and destroys your faith in innocence
which is the greatest faith; greatest help
love nature, why? Because it is innocent.
or the greatest power on this earth.
Those people who do not respect their
innocence because they think it makes
you weak have not seen the power of
innocence, how it works, how it acts.
But the greatest innocence is seen
among human beings who are Sahaja
yogis. It's easy to be cunning, very easy
to be cunning, it's very easy to be clever
but to be wise one should understand
From all over the world it reacts but so
the beauty of being innocent. Possibly far, I think, the human beings are not
one may say, Mother, one can get conscious of the power of innocence,
exploited if you are innocent. No one can
exploit an innocent person. They may
believe that they have done this, they whole working out of the being is so
have been very aggressive and all that beautifully achieved.
but they cannot. It is like a rock, it is like
a rock that is not derailed by any ocean
that it is the highest thing to be innocent,
and it acts as if the whole understanding,
Now you see in this world what saves,
what people remember, what is
respected-is the high ideals. But if you
see to the subtle side of all these high
of anger or any kind of revenge. It is the
rock that is being looked after and
nourished by Shri Ganesha. I have told
ideals of people, they have lived a very-
before also that the innocence within
you
us never gets destroyed, very surprising! very beautifull life, of very good
You may be a sinner, you may be a very character, of very good nature. All these
cruel person, you might be anything people may have been harmed, may
but it doesn't get it cannot get it after
have been killed but because of their
innocence they shine and shine through
innocence. It is a very-very secret thing
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 March April 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3
ages. You can see the life of all great from the whole world, the-whole world
men like that. They are all very simple, respects, nobody says that look at that,
they are not delibrately spontaneous how he was crucified? What has he
in their behaviour, done? Nothing of the kind. They just
respect and what do they respect the
essence, the essence of complete
innocence. You say in Sahaja yoga that
He was the incarnation of innocence, He
they are
spontaneously they live.
Nations after nations can be
destroyed but the power of innocence
can not be destroyed. Have faith in that.
You have to have complete faith in your
Self and that your Self is nothing but
innocence. You may say that innocent
people get cheated. Nobody can cheat
innocent people because that is
something of very eternal value. They
might cheat you in money, might cheat
you in something but the thing that is the
most elernal is your innocence and you
will be the most successful person in life
when you are absolutely innocent and They are stupid not to understand who
you are looking after your innocence.
was the incarnation of Shri Ganesha,
which can be verified. So, when we think
that in our own ventures we can do what
we like and we don't want to even
remember that, we don't want to even
consider that it's a wrong thing to do, we
do not know what is ahead of us. What
happened to Hitler also? He thought he
can destroy the whole world, he can
manage to kill so many people and stil
he will remain a very great personality.
are the people really respected?
Through ages, through history-no one
like Hitler, He didn't understand if he
wanted to have really the power of the
As I have told you that innocence
never gets destroyed. It can be covered
by your ill thoughts, by ill doing it might world and if he wanted to have a
be covered for the time being but if you reputation of a great man, he should
can take out the clouds away from the have followed the great people and the
sky of innocence, the whole thing great people are those who are innocent.
becomes so obvious that you have won Their main power is their innocence.
the whole world, You can take the case
Take any one of them. I don't know how
of Christ. He was crucified. He was to say that this power acts because it
insulted, He was tortured, those who did acts in so many ways. You can pass
this where are they? Who knows them? through the historical events, so many
of them and what would you find? A
person who is so innocent, simple and
wise is remembered all your life. I was a
child very small when I was in school I
Nobody even knew the name, nobody is
even bothered about them. The single
one person was so much used and was
so much tortured but despite that what
used to go to the library and read about
has happened! He has got the respect,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 March April 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Isue 3 & 4
that you have big authorities or you have
a very big position as ministers and all
that. There have been so many who
the lives of great men who have created
some great things for us. So many of
them and I was so impressed how some
came and died. There had been so many
of them were so simple, so child-like. For
example Abraham Lincoln for whom I people with ambitions and so many
had tremendous respect was a man people who were oppressive but where
are they? No body is bothered about
don't know you are very clumsy, you them, nobody wants to look at them. If
their photographs appear, people close
know how to behave and she actually their eyes, no-no we don't want to see
this man, but if there's a little boy,
innocent child who is talking in a very
tortured by his wife also! She said, you
don't know how to dress up, you don't
was very harsh on him, all the time
torturing him. Ultimately he was killed.
So one can say see what's the use of
being Abraham Lincoln because he was
killed, he was not successful. But till
today all over the world people know who
was Abraham Lincoln. They don't
innocent manner, the whole world
admires that child and these great men
are really the symbols of that innocence.
Their main quality was innocence from
where the wisdom has come.
know his wife, but they know who
was Abraham Lincoln. Clumsy man,
Ganesha's main quality is his wisdom.
He knew what was success through His,
I should say, innocent qualities. Some
according to her and all sorts of
degradation for him but nobody respects
her, nobody thinks anything about her.
Who is respected today is Abraham
Lincoln. Why? Actually he was
murdered, he was killed. That shows that
times the innocent people are not even
aware of their quality of innocence. It's
very surprising! How the quality of
innocence shines through human beings
he had no strength to survive; but he
survived through ages. So many years very simple, who may not look so
have passed still he is surviving. Take intelligent and sharp, who do not become
the case of all the great people who have good diplomats, what ever it is they are
been innocent and that's why they had innocent. That's where ends all the glory
ideals. To them their ideals were more of human beings to be innocent.
important than anything else, even their
lives, everything was nothing. Now the
sense of ideals and idealism comes only People will say, Mother what do we do
who may be very ordinary, who may be
So to be innocent, what will you do?
to be innocent? Firstly, you can see for
from your innocence. That's the one
yourself how yourmind works, what does
which teaches you what is your ideal?
How you should exist? What kind of a
life you should lead? It's not important
it do, how it reacts? This is what one has
to watch, which I call as introspection.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March April 2002
What sort of plans your mind take to? anything what so ever to an innocent.
What does it think is the best? In that personality. There's a sanskrit shloka like
thinking, the thought process, what is the
most important way to look at yourself. the spirit -it can not be killed by anyone
The first and the foremost is that you
should know how you react. Is it an
innocent reaction or it is a vindictive shoshatey Maruta Maruta" is the air or
reaction? It's very easy to see yourself what you can call, a wind, wind cannot
because now you are all Sahaja yogis. also suck it. It is above all the nature
You can see for yourself how is your which is trying to destroy. But you will
reaction to any aggression on you or any be amazed that nature understands, I
kind of a trouble coming on you. How do told you nature is
that "Nainam Chhidyanti Shastrani", for
"Nainam dahayati Pavka" - no fire can
burn it, "Na Chainam Kleid yantapo, na
innocent. It
you react to that? What is your understands and it acts at the right
behaviour? If you are a very powerful moment. Again the person who is
person then your behaviour is that you aggressive, who is trying to malign or
are not bothered. "You see it for yourself trouble an innocent person. In this way
that it is just a stupid thing people are we should know that we have to worship
doing to you, absolutely stupid and when our innocence.
they are doing stupid things, why should
we bother about it, why should we waste
I know sometimes one feels that you
are dominated because of that
our energy about it? It comes to a point
where their stupidity is found out in such
a manner that all their lives and
afterwards they are treated with
contempt. People don't even want to take
their names, they don't want to have their
photographs, they don't have to have
anything to do with them.
sometimes one feels sad that why you
are put to this kind of a treatment by
others? All kinds of things come to your
mind but if you worship your innocence
then you will be always a happy person,
always a kind person, always be a
humble person. So one has to be careful.
You are your own destroyer, you are the
one who kills yourself. What do you say
to Hitler? Hitler destroyed himself, who
else destroyed him? I mean in anyway
everybody has to die, so he would have
been dead but who destroyed him
At this time, at such a juncture what
happens is the people who are crooks
who are not innocent, who are against
innocence, they start following them
because it suits them better, it suits them
to be aggressive, to be cunning and forever is himself. So you kill yourself.
that's how a new group is formed which Through this you can save yourself and
we can call as satanic group and this
can become very glorified if you are
satanic group also cannot do anything, innocent, have faith in the power of
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 March - April 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
innocence. What is important is how you
show in your life the power of innocence,
how you behave towards each other and
that is what I call the love. You cannot
be compassionate unless and until you
have this attitude towards yourself, you
cannot be kind, temporarily you might
feel this but permanently compassionate
we will stop it. You must send your, what
you call, your applications at least 8 days
before and for Ganapatipule it is two
week so otherwise there are only twenty
four hours in a day and you cannot
increase those. Now this one humble
request I have to make that if you want
to settle your marriage then please do it
in a way that I can have time to see.
Otherwise I will leave it to others to
decide. If you like it can be done. So a
simple thing is this to understand that
marriage is a very important thing. You
can create innocent children if you are
temprament comes only through the
permanent flowing of innocence through
your character. It's such a transparent
thing in a human being that it sustains, it
overpowers all other things, leave alone
the time. Thousands of years people will
married. But if you behave in this
manner, little irresponsible so I have to
not forget you, the Sahaja yogis, if you
show your valour and the strength of your
request you to understand the value of
time because from next time I can assure
innocence.
I am sorry for today's programme
being so late but you know I was ready
to come but the marriages are becoming
you we cannot have marriages if you
send your applications so late. It should
be within one week's time. I hope you
the main function now because it came
will understand.
so late that till the last minute we were
deciding about marriages. But I am
telling you this is the last time. Next time
Thank you very much
Common looking people are the best in the world:
that is the reason the Lord makes so many of them.
Abraham Lincoln
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Navaratri Puja
Loutraki, Greece, 21.10.2001
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today we have gathered here to do And that point has arrived where all
the Devi Puja. This Puja was
the good people, especially the Sahaja
performed many a times and the Devi Yogis should put all their mind to the
was requested by the Devas to save destruction of
them from the tyranny of devilish personalities like Mahishasura.
people. Today I feel the same way,
these horrible
In those days, it was very simple
because devils came as devils and
situation; that there are people who you could see them that they are
are themselves devils, I think, and also devils, and all their behaviour proved
that we are now in the grip of a funny
mesmerised by them
who are trying
that they were devils. Why they did it?
to do something which they should Why were they cruel? Because so
called 'human beings', as they are,
never have done. But they don't know
that there is a climax of everything. they are not, they are by nature
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 March - April 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
behaviour it was cruelty which was
devilish and they want to do something
and
by which they can destroy human innately built, very cruel%3;
whenever my father saw that, he
beings, and good human beings.
asked them to get out. Because they
It is evident that the time has always had sinister practices by which
come for them to be destroyed.
they used to treat others.
In no way I could be against Islam
or ever to criticise Mohammed Saheb.
He was Divine, no doubt, and tried to
I never knew that it will come up to
that stage. And mostly they were from
Afghanistan, can you imagine? Mostly.
Of course they tortured other Afghanis
also; and where-ever they went, they
had a speciality that they could be very
do Divine work. But out of that Divine
work these stupid people have come
up who accept those devilish people.
You will be amazed to know that in
cruel. Not all Afghanis, no, not at all,
Islam there are seventy-four groups! but some of them. And they came to
They say, "We follow one religion" - India from Afghanistan and we have
but they do not. Out of these, some of
different types of Afghanis. Some were
them are really evil people, and they very loving, kind, helpful, very nice
call themselves by the name as people. And some of them were very
Devbandis because this is a place in cruel. First we didn't understand what
India, and also they are called as
is this. But because my father was a
Wahabees. I have been knowing them
scholar and scholar of Islam. He told
since long because in our household,
us "These are not Islamic. They call
in my father's household, we had lots
of Muslim people working as cooks, as
drivers, as other servants. And these
themselves Wahabees and they are
not Islamic". I can see that today, so
clearly.
Wahabees are very interesting people
Not that in other religions or in other
because they don't believe even in
groups there are no mad people. But
these Wahabees were secretly
Mohammed Saheb. So if you tell them
that Mohammed Saheb has said such-
and-such a thing, they say "No, we working out different groups. They are
don't believe in Mohammed Saheb". not many. And that's what my father
"So, in whom do you believe?" "We had told me that "One day they will
become very explosive and they might
try to ruin the world completely"
At first, I couldn't understand,
believe in Allah!" "Have you met Allah?
Have you seen Him, that you are
believing in Him?" But in their whole
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 March April 2002
10
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
are being exposed and so many are
because, after all, they looked like
human beings only. But he says, he going to be exposed. But mostly they
told me, "They are absolutely were the people who were interested
camouflaged, and once they start their in money, in getting lots of money,
somehow, in the name of religion. But
cruelty you will not know what to do."
at that time, people didn't see their
cruel methods and their cruelties.
We had one invader in our country
called as Mohammed Shah Abdali. He
This cruelty started growing and
was a very, very cruel man, very cruel,
and he used to even kill the Muslims
you know we have
Nizamuddin Aulia's dargah. In that
been to
because his concept was that you
place only, I discovered, there's a
Madarsa - 'Madarsa' means a 'school'.
should not worship Mohammed Saheb
because Mohammed Saheb said that
"I am not Divine". I also used to say the
And in that school they used to admit
same, to save myself from the stupid small children. And it was so well
people. For years I used to say, "I am planned that God only knows - I mean
not Divine", but when they felt My I can't say, that there were 120
vibrations and all that, they believed.
Madarsas only in Delhi! Now nobody
But those who believed in Mohammed
knew what they are teachig there,
Saheb were never understood by what they are mesmerising, how they
these people. Very, very cruel, and
are doing this! It so happened once, I
because they don't even believe in
Mohammed Saheb, you cannot argue there I found people singing songs and
with them on any point; you cannot
argue with them what is written in feeling for love. They felt my love very
the Koran because you don't believe in much, all of them, and they started
went to this place, Nizamuddin, and
all that. And I found in them a real
Koran, you don't believe in
Mohammed Saheb, you believe in know there was a Madarsa in that
coming to Sahaja Yoga. But I didn't
Allah. God knows from where do
place. I asked them "Why is it, here the
they have connections!
vibrations, Nizamuddin was an Aulia.
But gradually it was surprising that And how is it that the place doesn't
they could mesmerise. As we have have good vibrations?" In between t
horrible gurus who come as gurus and used to get very bad vibrations. So
they mesmerise. You have seen them, they told me "Mother, there is a
people being mesmerised. So many Madarsa".
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March April 2002
11
Now look
sent
about
the
65 scholars,
at
evil,
ambassadors,
how
to Afghanistan
it
works.
Normally, evil
study
to
used to work
in
those
Madarsas,
like this, that it
would go and
to
how
become cruel-
form
some
can
you
groups, some
imagine! To
wars, and kill
teach hatred!
people. They
Of
few
Course
were
there
are
people, but
many Muslims
they
had
who are not
cruelty
as
but if you do
their religion.
not respect
Which
ever
Mohammed
they
way
Saheb
and
lived, they wanted to be cruel. In
those Madarsas only, they had you are supposed to be a Muslim,
what will come out of you?
people who used to tell them how to
be cruel, how to hate. So 'education in
hatred' started. And that education of and Islam got divided into many
So, all these wrong ideas grew up
hatred was very well woven through groups. It's alright, but to have this
these Madarsas, all over the world.
kind of a group that is against all
Now, as you know, Pakistan and India humanity was the most dangerous
were always fighting. But this plan! I don't know how many Muslims
time Pakistanis realised that If we also knew about it. They spread this
fight with India in that way we will Madarsa thing all over the world and
be called as terrorists'. So they people coming out of that institution
said "No, we will have no terrorism
became very, very cruel people. The
first cruelty was to the women. Women
in our country". But they are
were treated with such contempt, and
this new
the ones stupidly
absolutely no respect of any kind was
had
fellow (President Musharraf) -
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 March - April 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
12
given to them. This itself shows that
there was no-one to control them. It's complete innocence, simple existence
Now, in Sahaja Yoga, you believe in
not written in Koran, it's not described together. And that people believe that
by Mohammed Saheb. He says "God there is definitely different groups of
is merciful; He is peace-giving". people. Now what is our duty? What
are we supposed to do? First of all, we
have to introspect. Supposing you are
a Hindu, born. You should sit down
and find out if you hate anybody
Whatever he did was absolutely
Divine, no doubt. But some of
these people, the way they took
to satanic forces, people started
because he's a Muslim. You cannot
misunderstanding Islam.
hate because you are Muslim,
"Islam' means 'to surrender'. Those
because you are surrendered, so how
who are surrendered are you people.
can you hate anyone? If you are
surrendered, you are surrendered to
the Divine, and how can you then be
Surrendered means those who have
given up all their lust, greed and all
these enemies, and are above against the Divine? So these
normal people. Another thing, it was misleading thoughts and ideas should
very interesting to note that be given up. Supposing you are a
Mohammed Saheb had said that "At Hindu. So you have no business to
the time of resurrection, your hands hate anyone. That is for definite! Now
would speak". That he clearly said.
the word 'Hindu' also comes from the
Naturally, because it was written in a River Sindhu because Alexander
language which was all poetic, people couldn't say 'Sindhu', so he said
can, if they want to, they can twist it. "Hindu'. And on that point many people
have built this horrible hatred in India.
But Mohammed Saheb never, never
But cruelty was not their theme. That
could have said... that.
was the saving point that they didn't
It's very, very shocking that in these want to torture people. So this aptitude
modern times the people have taken to torture or to hate people is coming
to such crooked ideas. But for that, the from other sources. And the source is,
reason is that people also develop as you can see clearly, that they
resistance for them. Jews they openly hate. To hate is a very bad
develped a resistance for them. This quality. One of the most dangerous
hatred is responsible, and this hatred, things is to hate. And so you all must
between both the sides, I would say,
know... (short pause) alright. Now we
are having a puja.
now, is too difficult. It's very evident.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 March - April 2002
13
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
My heart just weeps. At what time I
we human beings, we hate others, have come on this earth, where I have
when you know that love is such an to see human beings hating each
overwhelming, beautiful feeling. But other! They talk of 'love and 'hate'. It's
a very serious thing, that you who are
To me, it is very painful to think that
why then do you take to hatred?
the children of one God, they'll end up
like this I mean, I have experiences
that if I tell you you'll be shocked. How
Because people have impressed you,
they have told you lies, that's why you
hate. What an achievement! First to be
a human being, and then to be a people have fallen down to the depth
person full of hatred! Now what will be
the next, I don't know!
of evil nature.
It's an understanding we have, to
It was alright in those days for the have understanding about ourselves:
Do we hate somebody? Do we get
Goddess to kill. The Goddess used to
ideas that we shouldn't have, or do
kill all such people... (long pause).. It's
a very sad feeling that God has things? Do you have such things in
created human beings from amoeba to you? Just find out! Do you hate other
this stage, and how can we hate people?
someone? And this is what has
These ideas are rotten, absolutely,
happened!
for the human mind. The ideas which
are completely like the animals
instinct, are absolutely no good for
Now of course Sahaja is different.
Sahajis know how to enjoy the Love.
human beings at all. But that is what is
They like it. They enjoy it. You can see
happening, and it's coming forward. If
you are poor, alright, but by hating you
don't become rich, no. If you are in any
that. And if somehow, you people
could manage to remove this hatred-
somehow, somehow -
with your wn
difficulties, then your duty is to remove
will-power- denying and defying all
that is being told to human beings, I those difficulties, but not to prosper on
am sure.. (long pause).. It's a very
them. All this has to finish. It is very
surprising that we are not bothered at
all as to what we are doing. Yes, you
difficult world where those people who
came on this earth went through all
kinds of education, wanted to improve have to have proper sense of
understanding: where are we going? If
the conditions, the relationships,
friendships, have fallen into the depths
of hatred.. (long pause)...
you have misunderstanding about
somebody, better take it out,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2002
14
completely. They try to trouble you, the trouble with Sahaja Yoga is that
alright. But
understanding about that person. Very then you don't see around what is
surprising that we never see those happening.
things, how ugly they are, and how
funny they are, how they ruin our
don't have
bad you all start enjoying yourself, and
Now I must tell you, I am now in the
midst of war between myth and reality.
personality!
Is it an area, is it a - I don't know what
You may be able to correct some should I say - is it within us there is still
people. All our activities as Sahaja lurking some kind of a weakness that
we do not try to fight our weakness. I
would now request you all to
Yogis, I never realised were so
important! We have to give so much
time. Not to bother about nonsensical, meditate on yourself, and see for
frivolous things, but something serious yourself what is wrong.
that is within us or without, that must
be taken out. If I ask you, 'How many shock, what can Sahaja Yogis do?
It's a big shock, and to reduce this.
people you hate?" You may say just
20 people' and you see the whole What can they work it out to blast
atmosphere in all this fills me with such these so horrible ways of human life?
remorse that I just don't know what are
It's possible with the power of Love -
you can manage! But we must develop
that power in our hearts. Think of it! It's
we going to do, the Sahaja Yogis!
What are their plans? Will you please
look into yourself and think what a big lesson now for all of us, to see for
constructive work we are doing and ourselves - are we alright? Or we go
what destructive work we have been on hating others? What is the function
doing. You need a big shock to of our mind, is to hate or to love? And
this love, if it enlightens you, you will
understand this.
be amazed, you will be such a big
I like the way we have programmes force for Me. I cannot fight the whole
and Pujas and all that, but if you ask thing alone. I have to have people
who really develop their love and
My Inner Being, I know it is very, very
unhappy, very sick. At this time, what nothing else! That is one of the
you have to do as Sahaja Yogis? As challenges now for all of us, for all
Sahaja Yogis, minimum of minimum the Sahaja Yogis all over the world.
It's not only the fight between believers
and non-believers, not only the fight
you should put full attention and then
you have to tell everybody. You see
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 15
March April 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
Sahaja Yogis,
you know who is
on the wrong
know
side.
Sahaja Yogis can
save, and can
bring them to the
right path of
knowledge and
love. But - be
very careful with
the propaganda
of evil that is
going on.
I want to touch
the deepest part of your heart, which
should reconcile. I am sure you all will
understand the magnitude of danger
that awaits! Maybe there may not be
between Sahaja Yogis and non-
Sahaja Yogis, but this is a fight where
we are all one and we are going to
fight it out. At every stage we have to
be much more subtler.
human beings left, maybe there
any
It is very, very essential to see to may not be any children left. Because if
the point today - are we also part and this kind of thing is working out, it is
parcel of that evil thing that is working very difficult, very difficult. My whole
out. Or are we free from that, and existence gets shaky, gets shaken up.
prepared to fight it? It's a big fight and I You all should see in every nook and
hope it is conclusive! After this there
corner of life: Where is this talk going
on? Where are people talking of
will be no more of cruelties to human
cruelty? What's happening. Whatever !
think, it's not one, it's not two, it's all of
beings, no more fights, because this is
a fight between the rakshasas and
ourselves. It is not 'ordinary'. And this
us.
The fight that I am having is of
has to be explained, also to those who
are supportive of evil forces. Only a very serious nature, no doubt. But
thing, you can say 'Mother how are we if you all can fight collectively, how
to know who is against and who is much we can work it out! All my
not?' You are knowledgeable; you are efforts, understandings, powers,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 March - April 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
16
I hope you people have understood
what I want you to do. A new
everything is now in your hands,
and that's what you should be
prepared for. Not by just reading generation is coming up. All of you, all
something or talking about it; you of you, are in My Heart, and I love you
have to build up within yourself the very much, and I want you people to
come as soldiers to fight with Me. I am
"Power of Love'.
also told that there are some people
I am sure with the opening of the
who are forming groups extremely
Sahasrara you will do that. But try to
negative attitude! At this time what we
to understand
read something,
something, with the Power of Love. It's
need is complete solidarity. So all such
people whom you see, tell them to
behave themselves! No use making
a very deep subject, and when you talk
about it, half-way I'm inside, half-way
them Sahaja Yogis.
outside. But I have to tell you that you
I am sure it's really heartfelt
all develop this, and only that (Power of
Love) will form a very strong opposition
to these 'evil doers' as they call it.
desire of mine that you should
become really soldiers of love and
peace. Because that is why you are
My complete blessings are on you,
and I want all of you to individually
work it out. How many people you
here, you are born for that. So enjoy
yourself.
love, how many people? This you have
May God bless you
to find out.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Shri Krishna Puja
Saffron, U.K. ,14.8.89
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Today we have gathered to worship
Shri Krishna's incarnation. Shri
Sita back from Ravana. So Shri Rama
sent her away. How many people who
are in power would be that sensible
Narayana, of Shri Vishnu. In every that they must set an example by their
incarnation they carry all their behaviour in a manner that they
qualities, powers and all their nature should be ideals for all other people
with them. So when he incarnated he who are working under them. Shri
had all the qualities of Narayana and Sitaji was Mahalaxmi. She understood
the whole play and she went away.
Krishna is the incarnation of Shri
Shri Rama. Every incarnation tries to
rectify whatever in their previous
As a king Shri Rama taught how to
rule the people. He established the
ideals of kingship and it is said that the
incarnation was misunderstood or
carried out to the extremes. That's why
they come back again and again. Shri
Vishnu is the preserver of creation and
Dharma. Sb when he took his
most ideal kingdom was Rama Rajya.
Under his rule there was peace, no
incarnation he had to see that people competition, every one was joyous
abide by their Dharma. You have to
and happy because he emitted fair
get your realisation to keep alright and play, Dharma, joy, bliss and peace.
remain in the central path of Shri
Mahalaxmi. By the first incarnation we
can say that he tried to create a
benevolent king as Shri Rama.
But people always take to something
which is not normal in the case of each
incarnation. Because Shri Rama lived
as an ascetic, people started following
ascetism. People became austere,
would not laugh or smile. Everything
became very serious. As people did
incarnated as a complete human not marry, they lost balance. Marriage
being with all the qualities of human gives you balance. That is the time
beings. He married the Laxmi principle Shri Krishna incarnated to show that
that is Shri Sitaji. He lived a normal the whole creation is fun, is leela.
married life. Then he gave her up and There is nothing to be serious, dry or
lived like an ascetic. By his life he ascetic. Infact before Shri Rama's time
showed how a husband should be with all the saints used to marry. Then also
his wife. Later on he had another role a kind of funny brahaminism started.
to play as a king. When he became the They weakened the caste system
which was determined by birth rather
Shri Rama was Purushotamma -
the best among human beings. He
king he found out that people were
criticizing him because he brought Shri than work. The Brahmins started
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March April 2002
18
dominating others. So Shri Krishna
with their mothers, it is considered
came as a son of cowman.
very sweet. In the Orient they enjoy
When Shri Krishna was only five, he the naughtiness of the children. The
played all kinds of pranks and did all
kinds of leelas like he killed one big because people do not love their
cobra snake, he killed many demons
with his power in a play. Shri Rama
was not supposed to know that he was
an incarnation. Even though it was
revealed to him by various methods
that he was an incarnation yet he
would not accept it because he was
not supposed to know. Something like
Mahamaya. In the same way all the Shri Krishna used to steal the butter of
cameras are now giving you all the
strictness with the children is mostly
children. They love their carpets and
other material things because they can
sell it. They can't sell their children. As
children and parents are separated by
materialistic ideas, the material things
become more important.
Now stealing is considered bad, but
all the ladies, who used to take it to a
evidence of the real Mahamaya, what demon in Mathura. This butter was
she is like, but one may try to show
that you don't remember, you have no
memory of it. Because if you that the ladies won't be able to sell it
remember it, your action would not be
human. They would become Divine there. Also if you see the significance-
actions and that may not be alright for
human beings because they will not be
able to stand it, they will be frightened,
eaten by all the demons and they were
becoming very powerful. So he
thought better to eat all the butter so
we starve our children just to have
some money. Money orientation is
there with the idea that everything is to
he sold. So children become a
there will be such an awe. So Shri
Krishna behaved normally like a very
ordinary person.
permanent liability. Children are
treated as if they are just burdens. If all
the value system just comes down to
money then children have no place in
the family. According to Sahaja yoga,
children are more imporant than all the
wealth of the world and they are to be
looked after that way. Of-course they
should know what is dignity and how to
In his childhood he was very fond of
butter. Butter is very good for the
Vishuddhi Chakra. In the tea add a
little butter so that the throat which is
dried out gets relief. With the help of
his friends he would break the
containers and eat all the butter. Then
behave themselves but their little little
he would tell little little lies. All his pranks are to be understood and
pranks, childish sweet lies, were just to
create a feeling of understanding. play pranks and not as grown ups.
When children are naughty like that They should have that much freedom
enjoyed. Only as children they can
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 March - April 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
19
powers. These 16000 powers were
they will become very serious people incarnated as women and were taken
away by a horrible king. Shri Krishna
defeated the king and released these
to play pranks and tricks otherwise
and might become ascetics. Those
parents who are very strict with their
children are never normal. They either
women and gave them his protection
are extremely perverse or they quieten
down and cannot face life. Both are of
by marrying them.
When we have Vishuddhi problems
the same style; one cannot face life
and the other cannot be faced by life.
we have to know what are the dieties
on both the sides and what are the
You have to treat your children with qualities which are lacking in us that
great love and understanding, but they we are suffering. Let's see right side
should know that if they misbehave,
this love will be finished. Children only Krishna's essence is sweetness. His
Vishudhi when we
catch. Shri
power was Radha. Ra energy, dha-
the one who sustains the energy and
care for love, they don't know money
or anything else. The love you
establish in your child becomes a very
precious thing. Sahaja yoga is based qualities. Shri Krishna's quality was
on Divine love and it can only work
when people are loving. If they love
his power was Allahd joy giving
that he was Yogeshwara the eternal
witness. Now a person who shouts
money, power or their reputation etc.
and not their own children or family his temper, suffers from right
then they are losing a very big part of
their society.
and screams, talks loudly and loses
Vishuddhi. One should understand
that even if we have to scold
somebody we have to say 'what are
you doing', in a sweet manner. The
best is to give some rest to the right
As a king Shri Krishna wanted to
establish people in dharma and he
needed the help of the five elements.
So he made them into five ladies
whom he married. But they are the
Vishuddhi by observing silence
'mauna'.
On the right side the heat starts
was Yogeshwara, absolutely detached coming from the liver. It starts rising,
in his yoga but for all practical first it goes to the right heart. As
purposes he had five wives and then result you might become a very hot
there were sixteen thousand women tempered husband or father. Then it
passes to the right Vishuddhi and you
become a very irritable, hot-tempered
person, all the time shouting at others.
very part and parcel of his being. He
who became his wives, who were
nothing but his sixteen thousand
powers. The Vishuddhi chakra has got
sixteen petals, multiplied by the
Virata's 1000 petals, it comes to 16000
If you use your anger in that manner
then that person may be just
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze olume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2002
20
frightened of you, might develop an
inferiority complex, might become a
left sided person. God alone knows
what can happen to a person who has
somebody all the time shouting at him!
or any particular person. So there is no
need to shout, play around with it and
bring it to that point which is
benevolence. Shri Krishna said, you
have to tell the truth, but it should also
From Shri Krishna's life we have to be pleasing and it should be for the
learn how he used to play the flute and benevolence. Supposing you tell the
how the whole atmosphere used to
become absolutely quiet without any
truth to someone he may not like it at
the moment but if it is for his
ripple. But in modern times they have benevolence then in the long run he
the other way round where the right
Vishuddhi is about to break or burst. you tried to help him. Even if you have
where the music does not bring peace
will feel a great obligation to you that
to tell some lies for benevolence, does
not matter because Shri Krishna, who
but excites you more and more. Such
music numbs the limbic area which is is the diety, knows it.
the seat of the Virata, aspect of Shri
Krishna. From the right Vishuddhi it what is wrong with them, specially
goes to the Sahasrara, then you take those whom you are incharge like
drugs because your brain is numbed.
Then again you feel the drug is not frankly tell them what is right. It is your
sufficient, you take stronger drugs. duty. People escape it also. Many
You go on like this, ultimately you people who don't want to face their
reach a stage where you are no where. children give them toys after toys.
Where it is all self destructive.
You cannot shirk from telling people
your family, relations etc, It is best to
Discipline
domination but it means whatever
does
not
mean
Shri Krishna was a divine diplomat.
What is divine diplomacy? You
don't have to shout. If you want to spirit and the spirit of others. That
bring somebody
conclusion then the best thing is to
first change the subject. That's a
clever thing to do. To have a
we do is for the benevolence of your
is Sahaja discipline.
to
some
Left Vishudhi is the lightening like a
person who can scream and shout and
who can expose others as did
complete. rapport with the person Vishnumaya. You should not be afraid
'how can I do it'? Mostly the people
One has to know that the essence of who feel guilty have lost confidence
all this diplomacy is Benevolence. You and the ego has entered the left side.
have to achieve the benevolence of It's a very complicated situation. We
one has to play with that person.
the whole humanity. If you are doing it
should be on the look out that we are
you are not doing it for your own gain,
not feeling guilty. Guilt is just a myth.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March April 2002
21
We want to escape reality that's why guilty, who are suffering from
we say we are guilty. You have to face inferiority complex, who are sly, who
feel they are good for nothing. See the
contrast. Her power expresses in a
the reality. Try to find out what's wrong
with you and others. Because
Vishnumaya is nothing but like
electricity. Electricity exposes people, then she asserts her power by which
she screams and shouts at people, people become self confident.
person who is not self confident and
roars at people. If you have a left
Vishuddhi you have to use these
When we talk of Vishnumaya we
have to know that she is seated there.
Any moment we decide we can
become great speakers, we can
methods. The person who has a left
vishuddhi should go to the sea and
address the sea, "I am the Lord of the
expose people, we can be like
lightening, we can be like thunder but
normally we are not. So this gives
balance to both types of people. In the
sea, I am this, I am that", loudly.
The power of Shri Krishna in the
right side of the throat is over the vocal
cords the power of sweetness. The
same thing happens with Vishnumaya
too. Vishnumaya is the potential power
but she uses it to scream and shout, to
centre when the kundalini rises most
of the people have their vishuddhi
caught up, so they have to see that
they are not guilty, that they are
completely
themselves, that they are in the central
balance
in
with
show her existence that she is there.
Now all these miraculous photographs
you get are because of Vishnumaya.
path by which they become sweet,
kind and nice. There are many people
She is the one who acts as electricity
and she is the one who manages all
who are artificially sweet to exploit
others. Such people will go to hell
because they are using the power of
Shri Krishna in a very absurd manner.
these things. Though she is the sister
of Shri Krishna, she is very subtle and
she helps you in a subtle manner. Now
this microphone has electricity in it and
you will be surprised that vibrations that our Vishuddhi is to be kept clear.
are passing through it. From here they First of all we must have a very
are going anywhere you want them to beautiful and a clear heart where there
go. You can put a computer on the
other side and computerise them. It is melodious music. Improve your
such a remarkable thing that the one Vishuddhi, work it out, look at the
who is supposed to scream and shout Virata and find out what's wrong with
and roar is the one who is on the left you and correct it for it cannot be done
hand side so that it exists in a potential by any one else. See that you have a
way in the people who are feeling full idea about yourself. That can only
It is important for us to understand
is the frangrance of Shri Krishna's
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 March - April 2002
22
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
the brain. So Shri Narayana enters in
otherwise you can never see yourself the brain becomes as Virata Akbar.
because at the vishuddhi point only When he becomes Akbar then he is
the brain in the matter. That is why
achieved the witness state then you people who worship Shri Krishna
become brainy people without ego.
Their brain develops and they have no
happen if you have a good vishuddhi
you become the witness. If you have
can see in your vishuddhi, what's
wrong with you, what's wrong with
your problem, with your atmosphere ego about it. Egoless intelligence
and everything. So today when we are
worshipping Shri Krishna, we should manifesting.
know that he ultimately becomes the
brain. The fat of the stomach goes in
which I call as pure intelligence starts
May God Bless you
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 First Know Thyself
Porchester Hall, London - 1.8.89
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
At the very outset we have to that now there are people who have
understand that truth is what it is We started saying that there is no God.
cannot conceptualize it, or organize it, There is nothing like religion. It is not
or use it for our own purpose.
true.
Moreover with the blinkers on both the
First of all you say there is no God,
sides like a horse, with all our
conditionings, we cannot find the truth. you should find out, have we been able
We have to be free people. We have to to find out about it or in our ego we are
be open minded people, like scientists sayng there is no God. Have we been
to see for ourselves what is the truth. If able to work it out to see if there is God
somebody preaches, professes or
says something, is not to be accepted People who talk about God. Anybody
blindfolded. The essence of all the
or not? You do not judge God from the
can talk about God because they think
religions is to find the eternal and to there is no law that can catch them.
They can talk for Him, against Him or
treat the transitory in its own
understanding and its limitations. they can do what they like. They can
even make money by talking against
That's why we have lost our balance. If
God and against all the Prophets.
we are really the people who want to
know the truth, we have to know that at
human awareness we cannot know it.
So first of all we have to be a little
independent to be free. To know that if
It becomes a concept. You have to
have the spiritual awareness. This Thyself - and you have to know it on
spiritual awareness is a state of your your central nervous system. As I can
you have to know the Spirit Know
being, where you can become the
spirit. It is not artificially certifying the Divine Power which is all
somebody that now you have become prevading, which is the Truth, which
feel this is cold or hot, you have to feel
a Hindu or a Christian or a Muslim or
manifests the Truth because it is the
become anything. You can commit love of God. You have to first feel it on
any sin, you can do anything that is your central nervous system, which is
wrong because you are a Hindu, or a
Christian or a Muslim. Nothing from
inside is going to stop you. So all these
the bodha.
One may say that in the West we
have advanced so much, or we have
things have become so much outward
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 &4
24
March - April 2002
gone too far with everything. But if you human enterprise, even in religions.
see when we started with science what That's why today we find this kind of a
have we produced? Hydrogen Bombs, farce going on. And what has gone
Atom Bombs and all kinds of devils wrong is that we have to seek the
sitting on our heads. Any enterprise Eternal. May be it might look a little
we take, we go to extremes. There is different. For example Budha and
no balance. Any mental projection is Mahavira did not talk of God at all.
linear. It moves in one line and then also did not talk about the God for four
recoils back and then you are
years.
shocked. Now you have got acid rain.
You have produced machinery.
As soon as you talk about God,
Machinery is for you, you are not for people start jumping that when can we
machinery. And thus there is no
balance between you and the
become God. So first you become the
Self - the first step. They said first you
machinery. No balance between you become the Self. Unless and untill you
and science. It's just like going amuck have your eyes, how can you see the
with anything that you get in your colours? It is for your benevolence,
hands. And this balance you get when that you better get what you deserve,
you become the Spirit. You see what is your own, is your birth right as
beautifully made chandeliers here. But a human being, i.e. to become the
unless there is light, they have no Spirit. That is what Sahaja Yoga is.
meaning. In the same way, if you do 'Sah' means with, 'ja' means born.
not have the light of the Spirit shining Born with you is the right to get this
in your attention, you will not know yoga the union with the Divine. It is
your meaning. Unless this microphone your birth right as a human being. You
is connected to the mains, it is are the epitome of evolution. And it
useless. Unless we are connected to has to work out, but please open your
the mains, we do not know the hearts and open your minds, and then
Absolute and that's why all these see for yourself. I know, it will work.
problems are there. When I talk about But by thinking about it you cannot
the instrument which lies with us, one conceptualize. This is the biggest
has to know that this is the knowledge problem of our seeking that we run
of the roots, for which you have to
become a subtler personality. Through
the gross mind you cannot see it. To
become the subtler personality, you which is the most beautiful instrument
have to know the roots. Something that is created within us during the
after some sort of a concept.
Now you have seen the instrument,
process of our evolution. The first one
has gone wrong some where in every
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 March - April 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
25
centre is the most beautiful one,
because it stands for our innocence.
awakening the first thing that is
established is thoughtless awareness.
This innocence is the one which gives For a thought rises and falls and the
us real support, real strength. It may Kundalini makes the thoughts smaller
be overshadowed, there may be and in between at the present. It
clouds, maybe you are a hopeless makes you stop in the present and you
case. Some people might say, that we grow in the present. If you want to
have destroyed our innocence. think you can think, if you don't want to
Whatever you might have done this is
one centre which cannot be destroyed. Kundalini crosses the Agya Chakra.
You may have problems with it, but it
cannot be destroyed. It is such a
wonderful centre, which has got four centre, when it enters is that you just
petals, which looks after the pelvic become dynamic, because second
plexus.
think you don't. This works out when
So what happens in the second
centre is for aesthetics and for
creativity. My brother, a chartered
In our freedom, we do all kinds of accountant, was very bad at all the
things which may not be benevolent languages. Now he's making poetry in
for ourselves. Doesn't matter.
Kundalini cannot be destroyed. The
source which is going to give you the
self realization, I say, she is your that centre, like a very beautiful
Sanskrit and Urdu and also in Marathi
which is the most difficult language.
When the Kundalini rises, it nourishes
She
nourishes. After
mother
individual Mother. And this Mother is a
loving Mother and She knows each realization, Amjad Ali became a great
and every thing about you from your artist. Because the Kundalini goes up
past lives. She is just waiting for a and the creativity becomes so
chance that She can be awakened and tremendous and active and so
She can give you your second birth. dynamic. At the same time that person
She is a Divine Mother. She is not becomes very mild, very sweet, very
going to give you trouble. But these compassionate.
problems that have come are coming
from people who have no authority,
who have no education, who do not temper is not your creation. It's the
know what Kundalini is.
So this violence, this anger, this
creation of your liver. Now when the
temper is there you don't know what to
Kundalini will never give you any do. You are like a drunken personality
problems. On the contrary when she who does whatever he likes. But all
rises and when you get your this temper everything becomes so
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March April 2002
26
cool and beautiful. It's very surprising money, etc. But that's not what you
that a very dynamic person becomes
very compassionate. Now, also they will never be satisfied.
say that certain nationalities have got
have to be really satisfied with. You
So now we move to the third centre
special traits. Everything dissolves.
Because of this centre which is so which we call as the Nabhi Chakra.
creative, and which also gives you the This centre is made on one side of
manifestation of pure knowledge, you
water and the other side of fire. Around
it are ten valencies, our innate religion
start feeling on your central nervous
system. You start feeling on your
finger tips. Like somebody came and
said to me - my Agya is catching. It
means, I've got my ego on. Would spreads in this centre. Overnight
anybody say like that? On the contrary people have given up drugs. Overnight
if you tell somebody you've got an ego, they give up alcohalism, everything.
they'll show you that they have their
ego on. It's very dangerous to say to
somebody your ego is on. But because
of self-knowledge you know that Mr.
Ego is sitting here and I cannot cross day you have a hangover. Here you
through, as there's a blockage here take something and next day you are
which I have to take out.
within ourselves. This Nabhi Chakra or
solar plexus gives us religiousness as
soon as Kundalini rises and the light
And the best part is that they enjoy
their virtues. Some people think then
what is the fun, what is this that you
take something in the pub and the next
much better off. It never comes down.
It never gives you a reaction. Its not
artificial. It's not intoxicating. It's from
It 's so innate within you and once
the connection is made, immediately you, it's bubbling out.
you know about yourself and this
centre which is responsible for
creating all kinds of funny thoughts enjoy our generosity. Now all matter
and horrible creativity, becomes so whatever it is, we are materialistic. But
benevolent, so soothing, so beautiful. the aesthetics of matter is that you can
Apart from that these people who give it to others suggesting your love in
could not say one word in the Hindi it. That's the only thing that matter can
language, they have started singing in do and in a very special way you can
Sanskrit. So in Sahaja Yoga an artist express that love. The feelings that you
who is struggling today may become a
great artist. But still I would say there
are temptations. You'll become a
great artist, you'll start earning more
Here we have a capacity that we
have expressed of knowing what that
person would love and this kind of a
depth develops within you with such a
lovable beautiful society, you enter into
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 March - April 2002
27
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
whole thing that when the guests
come in, they feel like running away,
because so much of tension of
The joy you are giving comes from thinking and planning is generated.
this centre. You don't have to bother Ultimately the whole joy has
and you don't need anything because
everybody is looking after your needs.
as to what to eat. You just eat disappeared.
whatever is good for you, benevolent
So the second centre does a very
for you. You become so wise and also
you please others. You don't displease miraculous thing, that it provides the
others by saying this is bad food, I grey cells in our brain, when we are
want that. 'I want' goes away. Like a using it for thinking. It also looks after
candle which is not enlightened is your liver, pancreas, spleen, kidneys
asking for light. I want light. But once it and part of your abdomen. But instead
is enlightened it gives light to others of doing that, it is busy sending grey
automatically. In the same way you cells to your brain because you are
also start giving your light, your love, thinking and thinking like mad. So you
your joy to others automatically. develop all other diseases, liver
troubles and then you get diabetes.
Nobody has to go through any ten
commandments anymore. Those days Now diabetes you do not get by taking
too much sugar. In India, in the
become like that. Very beautiful villages, you see that they take sugar
people, very affectionate, and very in such a manner that the spoon
stands up in the cup. But they nver
get diabetes. The reason is that the
villager doesn't think of tomorrow. He
just works hard, eats his food and
sleeps off. He doesn't take sleeping
pills either. So this diabetes comes by
are gone. Now automatically you
glorious.
See the glow on the face of Sahaja
Yogis. The face itself is radiant. Many
people drop out ten to twenty years in
their age and they are so enthusiastic.
They never get tired. Specially in the
west people get very easily tired.
Young people too. Why are you tired?
Because we think too much. All energy
is wasted in thinking, so no energy is
left to enjoy anything whatsoever. For
example you invite people for dinner.
You think what to drink, how to make
over thinking and can be easily cured if
you take to Sahaja Yoga.
Then the third disease which is
even more dangerous is blood cancer.
Blood cancer is caused only to people
who think too much. It can even be to
the children if the mother is very
meticulous. Particularly about her
carpets, her house, everything, that
the food warmer, what to do, etc. etc.,
so agitated and so nervous about the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 March - April 2002
28
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
hectic and for emergency this spleen
even a rat doesn't enter that house
and all the time thinking and planning. is the one which releases red blood
This affects the child and the child also corpuscles. But if you're all the time
hectic then the poor spleen becomes
mad. It doesn't know what to do, and
can get blood cancer. Blood cancer-
one gets because your spleen is a
speedometer. It's the one that gives starts producing more and more cells
you the rhythm of life. When we are
hectic people, all the time under l'am fixed with, because I don't know
shock, then this goes out of order. For
example, in the morning we get up,
and then thinks that it's a mad person
when to act and when not to act. So
the vulnerability is there and suddenly
see the newspaper and news of with some other shock he might get
someone killed, or an accident. Such a
blood cancer and the doctors will
shock. Newspapers never give good certify you are going to die after one
news. They never report how many
people got realization or something is
working out alright. Something horrible Because as soon as the Kundalini is
that shocks your head, your limbic awakened, too much movement this
area, otherwise you won't take it side and that side which is going on all
seriously.
month. But Sahaja Yoga has cured
blood cancer of many people.
the time, subsides. The Kundalini
passes through and brings it back and
Your system is a very delicate nourishes it. Even vulnerability to
system, it gets a shock. So then you
get into your car without taking your
breakfast, or maybe in your hand is the
breakfast, because you are late. On
cancer and to all incurable diseases
are because of these centres going
out of place.
the way there's a traffic jam. You're
shouting and screaming. Some how or controls left and right side both. As you
the other you reach the office and know the sternum bone creates the
there's a boss barking. This is how we antibodies and they fight the
live under complete tension. We are deseases. This is the centre of our
supposed to be free people. In the
night if you sing loudly the neighbour challenged you develop breast cancer.
will come and put you in the police Supposing a man is a flirt and his wife
station. You can't do anything. There's is worried, she might get breast
no freedom. You have to be bound by cancer, because her motherhood is
the watch. This is the exact time you challenged and her sense of security
have to reach there. So all these' gets very disturbed. As a result of that
Now we have the heart centre. It
mother. When your mother is
she gets this problem. Also you think
things work on us and we become
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2002
29
too much and are very right-sided and or of the father. If you are a bad
futuristic. Like people who plan too husband or if your wife is a shrew, or if
much. They plan ten years ahead. you are a very bad father, or if your
Even their deaths, what dress they are father is not kind to you, you may
going to wear and where they are develop asthma. Or if you have not
going to be buried. All this futuristic forgiven your father you may get
planning creates such tremendous asthma. But the relationships of our
heat in the body because the liver parents we have chosen when we
which is supposed to absorb all the came on this earth. I know they may
be wrong, or obstinate, or headstrong.
a result the heat travels up and you They may be drunkards. But even
if you leave them, stil forgive and
forget. Otherwise you carry the
heat is neglected by this centre and as
develop asthma.
Ashtma is very easily curable. The
right heart is the centre of the husband
problems with you.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Puja at Alibaug
17.12.89
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Welcome to you all. So now we do not react then your thoughts will
have all arrived here and we are going give up.
to start this pilgrimage by travelling
together. The journey is of a very
subtle nature and if you realize why we watch yourself that you are not
are here, you will realize that the whole reacting. But you are experiencing
nation is watching you all, is trying to
help you that you should ascend and subtieties, the beauty, the glory of
that you should feel your depth and your being as well as, whatever is
thus enjoy yourself. The travel may not around you. You don't have to force
be very comfortable. The roads are yourself to break this habit but just to
bad etc. It is a journey of our ascent.
So the first thing should be to
and enjoying the silence, the
be on the watch out. It is not necessary
to talk too much about it also. Nor is it
In the West we have become very necessary to think about anything,
because supposing you see a tree, so
it is a tree only. What are we going to
speedy and to bring down this speed
we have to use meditative process so
think about it? And whatever we may
that we feel our peace within
ourselves. Also the thoughts are
bombarding our minds and we react
think about it, its going to be the tree.
So there's no harm in appearing a little
bit stupid doesn't matter. The basic
thing is that when we start analyzing
very fast to others and to these
thoughts. So one has to be aware, one
has to know what is happening within
yourself. That the thoughts are
bombarding you. You are trying to
ascend and you find it very difficult to analysis, without thinking about it,
get rid of the thoughts. The thought
process can start by your
conditioning or by your ego. These you watch everything without reacting,
are the only two problems. You are you are in Reality. And then only the
the one who is under the challenge. So penetration into the subtleties of your
you have got these simple people in surroundings, of your relationships,
the village who start watching your friendships, the whole universe
everything but they do not react. If you dawns upon you.
we are breaking our own nerves and
poisoning our own mind and brain. So
to watch something without
is Reality.
If you can achieve that point, where
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 March - April 2002
31
The Divine Cool Breeze Valume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
you. When you say I have to tolerate it
because, you see, my mind doesn't
accept. So accept as it is, whatever
you see; that is how people grow.
That's why I have said that in this
pilgrimage, the first thing that we have
to remember is that we have to be
aware ourselves. But when you are
only thinking about others, how others
I have seen those who start
have to behave, they should do like
this or that, leave it to your leaders to accepting, that's the sign of their
strength and their depth. Like the
break their heads. That's not your job.
propensity of this Mother Earth. She is
what she is and she bears whatever is
it is a headache for them I know but
they have to do it. Why do you want to
break your heads for nothing at all? So there. If you put a heavy thing on her,
to judge others, to think of others, what She will put an equal and opposite
they are doing what's wrong with
them, about anything whatsoever you
force and bear it. She doesn't say I am
tolerating it. But, she is just accepting
may think is wrong - is not going to be t. So the witnessing and awareness
corrected. Like I know some people develops when we start just
who are specially bureaucrats. They accepting things as they are. "I
are travelling, supposing, by the car.
Then they will say, "I think, you see
this road should have gone this way,
or I think it should have been nice if
this house was facing the other way Now I like to eat a cake, but there is no
round." But it's not going to change. It cake, so what to do? Now whatever is
is going to be the way it is. So what is there, enjoy it as a cake. But if you go.
the use of wasting your brain, your
mind, your thoughts in suggesting there, you can never be happy. As
something which doesn't work out and simple as that. You have to say that
is never going to work out either? So "whatever is there i like". I enjoy
think", doesn't work out. "I think it
would have been better like this,"
doesn't work out.
Then the second problem is "I like".
on thinking like that "like". What is
when we start like "I think these trees
whatever is there. Then that's the
should have been little taller" but they
Reality. Whatever doesn't exist, if you
are not. So just accept it.
like it, so what can anybody do about
it.
Acceptance is the way we are
going to enjoy. But acceptance
doesn't mean tolerance because many facets in life that advantage is
tolerance means you have to work taken by people because we become
very hard to accept that the trees are so vulnerable to our likes and dislikes
of the same height. It is too much for that the entrepreneur takes over and
It works out in so many ways. In so.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March- April 2002
32
they create likes and dislikes in our conditioning. They do not belong to
head and put ideas everyday. I have
any one country. So now those who
seen it how they do it. Through have come by plane, had to come
television, through newspapers, because from every country there's
one plane by which they come. You
say, now I like this. But from where this must know one thing that now we have
liking has come is the conditioning landed and we are all Sahaja Yogis
here and forget your countries - Mix
up with other people. Please do not
form groups. There is no need at all
Well, why? Why don't you like any to form groups. I would request you
other flower? By this conditioning, we that in the buses because it starts from
the airport we start forming groups and
through this and that. So when you
which is put into your head. So you are
a slave of that conditioning. I only like
roses and I don't like any other flower.
miss the joy.
The second part should be that it continues till the end, till you go
enjoy within. Why am I here? It's not back. I think it would be a nice idea to
a comfortable place by any chance, so break that and let people sit together,
why am I here? To enjoy each other. of different countries and different
To enjoy your own being. The more nationalities and talk to each other. Try
diversions you have outside, to know about each other. Try to find
out about each other, and not just what
you know from the newspapers but
different problems of Sahaja Yoga.
appealing to your ego and your
conditioning, the more your mind is
busy with that, then you cannot enjoy
What are the problems of Sahaja Yoga
anything.
in a particular country? What happens
in a particular country?
So we
to the
other
come
conditioning which is very subtle, that I
am an Englishman or I am American
or I am from another city and then reading also. Reading without light is
better form a group. The grouping useless and some people still may
starts in a sutble way. It is a kind of
Worst of all is the conditioning of
habit of remembering
have
insecurity. So we start clubbing. something they have read and a kind
Animals do that very often. They have
to do it because their sense of
of "Show off" as they say. It's better to
listen to others. Let others talk.
In Sahaja Yoga, on what subject
you will discuss, I don't know. How can
insecurity is quite a lot and then
human beings also do it but not the
Saints, not the Angels. They don't form you discuss on anything? Now you see
groups because they have no
nationality. Nationality is also a
this one as a green thing. Now what
can you discuss about it? Let's see, it
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2002
33
is green but there is - another one who
says "No, this is green, but". One may
go on like that. There is no need to
going off the traok, so what's the use of
discussing? You all know that what he
is talking is opposite the track so it's all
right. You come to the conclusion.
Yes, we know, we know. But to
discuss it out, there is no need. Once
discuss in Sahaja Yoga. I just don't
know what are we going to discuss.
You know everything. You know how
Kundalini rises. You all know how
you know and it is in your awareness,
the Param Chaitanya will take care of
it and you won't have to bother at all,
how to correct, how to mend it or what
Chakras are cleared out. You know
how you get realisation. You all know
who catches what and you know that
how it effects. Now if that is the fact, if
that is the Truth, that is what it is. What
to do. That is not your work. You just
leave it to Param Chaitanya and it will
work out. So here we have come
are we going to discuss about it?
Discussions are over now. You are because this country has been very
gnostics. You are knowledgeable much blessed by so many Saints and
people. You have the knowledge but Yogis and you can see it in the people
the knowledge that you have is shared how they are and that's why despite all
by every one of you. At the most you poverty, despite all kinds of
can talk about your experience. You discomforts, and despite the fact that
can talk about your relationships, they have not known any Western
how you have enjoyed but there is great things, they are not bothered. I
nothing to discuss in Sahaja Yoga. I went to Russia, of course Russia was
have heard about people who are
discussing. I just don't know how can was really surprised how these people
there be a discussion about Sahaja have come to Sahaja Yoga and
Yoga.
great and so many got realisation and I
accepted it!
The villagers in India may not be
Discussion is just trying to show
that you know better than the other or Sahaja Yogis, but they respect the
you can give another opinion. In Saints. To them a Saint is more
Sahaja Yoga, there is no other important than anything else. Nobody
opinion. If someone has a Nabhi
catch, he has a Nabhi catch. What want to give them, they will not accept.
other opinion can you have? So then
will ask you for anything. Even if
you
So that basically I think there is
which
we finish with different kinds of difference
should
we
arguments and discussions and understand that materialism works
things. May be somebody goes off the
track may be. But you all know he is And one has to be careful on that
much faster in the West than in India.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 3 & 4
March April 2002
34
You must remember that you are on
point. I am bringing you down to that
point now, that are we getting lost into
materialism? Of course, you know that grow in your awareness. If you
I am a great shopper. I have to go on
shopping. And I shop for all of you. But useiess. Once you start thinking like
the difference between my shopping is that, you'll be surprised how much you
that if I am shopping for all of you, I am will gain and how much you will
going there because I know I will get achieve.
things much cheaper, and of a better
quality. All the good things will be there
available, because I am there. I will be Sahaja Yoga. And I don't think we
able to get things for all the people have much discipline of any kind either
because I love all of them for whom I but it is Sahaja Yoga which somehow
have to buy. It always happens like
that. When I go out for shopping, even
if I have to find things for 400 people, I fire. If you put your hand into the fire, it
get the things there all right. That's will burn it whether you like it or not. In
why I have to go. When you go then
you have to think what we are going to against Sahaja Yoga, you will have to
buy. I have seen that Sahaja Yogis will
buy things for non-Sahaja Yogis. We
have to know that we are one body become unhappy but this time with a
and as this hand must look after the much deeper understanding and
other hand, when we go out shopping reverence to yourself and to your
or do anything, we should always think
what we are going to buy for other
Sahaja Yogis.
a pilgrimage and should be able to
cannot grow in your awareness, it is
There are no do's and don'ts in
or the other disciplines you. I don't
have to tell you anything. It's like the
the same way, if you do anything
pay for it. You definitely don't want to
lose your vibrations. You don't want to
ascent, you have to take a very joyful
serious attitude.
May God Bless You
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Navaratri Puja, Loutraki, Greece, 21-10-2001
