NIRMALA November - December, 2002 Volume: XIV Issue: 11 & 12 INIVERSAL The PURE RELIGI Divine Cool Breeze 00 You must love others, who are not Sahaja Yogis and give them realization. (Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) DHARMA VISHWA

 The Meaning of Sahaja Yoga 14 Easter Puja - 21.04.2002 Sahasrara Puja -5.05.2002 23 Shri Adi Shakti Puja - 23.06.2002 33 42 Shri Mataji Cleansed our Souls 45 Shri Mataji's talk to Sahaja Yogis in Hong Kong 48 My Heart felt Kowtow

 The Meaning of Sahaja Yoga (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Sahaja is inside you -like a germ.. parasympathetic coming into play and Something that is born within you, that working it out, it's a big system and is innately built in you which sprouts by organisation that is working it out. Now if itself, which manifests itself, like you can you want to separate it-that digestive see a seed sprouting into a tree. This is system is different, respiratory system is different and your heart system is different what is Sahaja. Now all other yogas which or some other brain system is different or go along with it are part and parcel of nervous system is different. I mean you Sahaja Yoga. They cannot be separated can't take it out like that, your brain from this to that. I think people are under misunderstanding that there are four limbs hanging on one side and your digestive system hanging on the other. It is one of one yoga or something like that. Even that won't be a misunderstanding as to integrated form of organisation which is a think that they are separated or different. living organisation which understands each other, which reacts to the demand. When we say that we have eaten this food, it doesn't mean like a bolt it has gone You cannot separate the systems but, as it is, our brains are so disintegrated or they inside in the body and just passed out of are good at that disintegrating everything the body like the bolt coming out. Does it? within us and without, that we want to It means that you have tasted the food in disintegrate the living thing which is Yoga. your mouth. It means that it has secreted some saliva in the mouth, later on it has Yoga is not a dead organisation. It's a living process absolutely a living passed through the trachea, the other places like esophagus going down into the process. When it is a living process you stomach part and then to the intestines cannot do anything about it. So it is and then to the large intestines. All this Sahaja. At the most you can little bit shift it movement in passages and all that is here and there and push it around and all that. If a tree is coming up, like in Japan done through the other kind of movement which is existing in the organs itself, like they want to give it a shape then they'll cut the stomach itself pushing it down, coming one branch first and bend it a little more from your brain, the sympathetic and then cut another one then bend it this way,

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 Kundalini starts, and the awakening that way and give it a shape. But whatever is living is working out spontaneously starts, it passes through various centres. within us with many a complicated How? How will you explain a Kundalini organisations which are living themselves which is at the base end of your spinal cord rising upward? Now if I tell you that and are aware of what they are doing. For this is even more than your digestive example your body is much more aware of me than your rationality. Say, you are a system that the Kundalini which is an energy, as we call it, is the one that thinks, possessed person. You won't accept that you are possessed. You won't accept. I understands and loves you and knows won't say myself also because I don't want each and everything about you in this life and lives before. If she is so capable and if to get any kind of a thing which is in shock there. I know human beings that if you tell she knows everything and she is an entity by itself and if she has to come up to your them something like that you can be out for any sort of trouble: so I don't tell you. head, is it easy? It is the most difficult But the body knows me. When you come thing. If you have a stone lying somewhere you can pick it up and throw it before me the whole body shakes just like that. Is it true or not, tell me. Because it is wherever you like, isn't it-very simple. Even if there is a little worm, it knows how a living body, it knows me. It's not a dead to get out of the way of a big bull coming body. So whatever is living, it's so well looked round to save itself. And a bull, if it sits after, organised and in a living way which anywhere, impossible to raise it. You try you do not understand. Because we deal your level best. There are some very with the dead. Supposing I have to start drastic methods for that, in India. You this instrument, then I know there must be have to burn some chillies, red chillies and a cord. I have to put it to the mains and work it out, and I always say that Sahaja put that smoke into the nose of the bull like that. Then only the bull would rise oir Yoga is like that. You just take out your otherwise you try anything it won't rise. It cord and put to the mains. I say like that. would be sitting and settling itself nicely on But do you think it is that simple. You the ground. So, you come across such believe that? That you just pull out the bulls also. Sometimes it happens like that. Kundalini from there and put to the mains. But, to make this Kundalini which thinks, No it is not. When the sprouting of the understands, is an individual mother of an

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 individual, which has been born with you They have to find out the means and methods and the result of that probing has all the time, who knows all about you and brought forth other yogas, which we call who loves you the most and she is the one who is going to give you your realization, as 'Rajayoga' or they call it as 'Hathayoga'. Now what is the third one you your second birth. So she is your mother. call it, 'Kriyayoga'. I think Kriya and Raj is This kind of a Kundalini that exists within the same, about the same style and us, must be the most difficult person to rise; has to be. That's why people say 'Bhaktiyoga' and 'Gyanayoga' and Kundalini raising is very difficult; it is Karmayoga'. All these are the methods human beings want to employ to make the correct. So, one has to find out the bull rise. I mean they get frustrated. They methods of how to make the bull rise. want to hang themselves by the nearest Because this Kundalini is absolute tree. So that also is another 'frustrated dharma, is absolute righteousness, yoga'. Then 'sadistic yogas', then 'beating absolute purity, idealmost personality that yogas', then 'beating other yogas. Then it you could think of, which doesn't tolerate goes on like that, you see, flowering into any nonsense, falsehood, untruth, anything like that. She is Nirmala, you can better and better things. Then fanaticism. Because human beings find it difficult to call her. She is pure, extremely pure, she is purity personified. She doesn't accept sit still, you see. They get a challenge oh! This bull doesn't rise, alright, I will make it any nonsense, no compromise. She is rise. Moreover, they haven't got the within you. See how beautiful you are! She is not afraid of anyone. She cannot be authority. Even those who are self enticed, enchanted or tempted by realised, they have no knowledge because Kundalini is not made by them. anything and she loves. But her love is Like even if I get this machinery, I don't that pure, that nothing is higher for her know how to handle, how to use it? I may than her own love. She never reconciles to try it but I may burn my hands, instead. So, such a hotch-potch of endeavour anything and she is the one who is going to give you your self realization. So for human beings who know about brings forth so many yogas in this world it, they have to find out methods of and everybody is baffled at it that how it is that there are so many yogas! Whether we pleasing her. What makes her so should do this yoga or that yoga or unhappy? Why doesn't she want to rise?

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 Buddha or Mahavira or Christ or this and are wagging with that and it goes on push that and what is it? Then 'Church yoga/ it back here at the Vishuddhi Centre. They and Buddus' and what's wrong in 'witch think Vishuddhi is here. The problem is. craft', the other day somebody said, they think the Vishuddhi is here. So they Nothing wrong but the bull will be settled push back here and they think that they down better. It won't rise then with Buddu. will achieve the raising of the Kundalini by Now, so they have to try to find out what tickling this portion. should we do? Stand on your heads, bull It is just the other way round we are won't rise. No it won't. Break your necks? trying, you see. The effect cannot reach It won't. So what should we do? the cause. You have to go to the root of We should know what is a Kundalini, the cause to come to the effect. Do you that is within us. All these yogas that have see my point? Supposing the Vishuddhi Chakra which is here, a very subtle centre come up have been depicted from the experiences of people. Because some behind is spoilt then the effects are felt, say here and your tongue gets affected, people, when they tried to raise the Kundalini, so called, say they started your eyes get affected, your nose gets jumping. So they said let us jump and the affected, your cheeks get aftected, these Kundalini will rise. Then some people are sixteen you see, all these things can started taking out their clothes may be, be affected. But by tickling your nose you some sort of a funny thing, like that. They do not touch your Vishuddhi chakra. Isn't felt heated up. So people thought let us it. Do you see my point? For example take out our clothes and we will find God. something goes wrong at the centre from Some people telt some sort of a grip on where the electricity is coming here. By the stomach or some of them did see also tickling this here you cannot cure that one these things happening whithin. So they there. You have to go to the roots or on a tree you find a fruit is getting rot, all the called it a "Moolbandha'. They said that the bandha has taken place. Something fruits are getting rot. So, by treating the has gripped there. So, the 'Kriyayoga' is fruit can you treat the disease? You will that you take out your tongue from here,l have to go to the roots. So these people mean you cut this thread of the tongue when they saw all these things happening alright and you push it back, here. Touch happening to human beings, they formed this tip of the tongue here. Normally they different types of methods. All are wrong

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 realized soul, he will say that. He doesn't and all are right. Try to understand, its talk of seperation. He talks of authority very simple. After realization all of them because he is there, he has that authority. are right. Before realization all of them are Those who talk of seperation, crying and wrong. Before your car starts if you start turning the break or using the wheel, you weeping and all that are blind like all others. They have no buisness to lead are spoiling the car. When the car has you. There is no humility about It. I mean if started and you know how to drive and I have a red shawl, I should say, I have a you have become a master of driving, then red shawl. What is there to feel humble everything is right. Otherwise the same about it. I mean whatever you are, there is car which has to drive you from my house no harm in saying what you are. When you to this Ashram will land me up somehwere. In the same way the same are not that, when you do not have that in you and you say that, it is arrogance. But thing which before realization has no when you are that you have to say that 'I meaning, after realization only you start am the Light, I am the Path.' I mean he understanding. So let us take the case of Hathayoga'. was not trying to be arrogant about it. What is there to feel bad about it? It's based on centres no doubt. It is based So, Hathayoga itself is done under a on Ishwar Pravdhan, no doubt. All the ashtangas, all the Pranidhan (af) person who is a realized soul, not only realized but who knows, who has eight sides of Hathayoga, see from human mastered the art of Shakti Path, is the pont of view I am saying, for them why Hathayoga came into being is first that raising of the Kundalini, minimum. Ofcourse Sahaja Yogis just raise it like they should fix their attention on the that; it is dfferent, but not any other yogis Ishwara Pranidhana, means they must fix their attention into the existence of God, can do that. It's only you because you are authorised, that you first raise the not blind faith, but to understand that there is God. So that you humble down yourself. Kundalini, just like this. So, what these Hathayogis have done is that boiled it Then you should go to a realized soul as a down to only physical sense. So, you have Guru. Guru means a realized soul, to have Ishwara Pranidhana, Yama- minimum. Any Tom, Dick & Harry Niyama, that too before twenty-five years becomes a guru, is a nonsense, absolute. He has to be a realised soul and if he is a of age, you have to discipline yourself in a

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 don't want exercise. They don't want way, that you should understand what is right and What is wrong. Now those who Scouts, they want somebody to love them, have done all the wrongs of the world to heal them, to cure them, to establish before their fifteen years of age, now, at them. There is no word of love in the age of twenty-five they are trying to Hathayoga these days because you pay for it. One thing you cannot pay for, is your learn what is yama and Niyama. How can love. Isn't it? How can you pay for love? you do it? Tell me now. Supposing you That's why this modern Hathayoga is just have spoiled the car completely, at the a misnomer. But after realization you can most you can ask for insurance, If you use hathayoga because you are purified, have paid for it. Now, how do you expect the car to come out absolutely, as if from you are cleansed, you are healed, your the factory, as if its absolutely new? A wounds are airight. People are wounded. horse which is being completely mutilated They are so much hurt. They are cannot run a race, isn't it? That would be extremely unhappy. You touch them and they feel it. Why talk about big things when madness. So, one has to understand that these they don't even have energy to sustain themselves. It's a strain on them and none Yama-Niyamas and all these things are of them are realized souls nor they are not meant for us. At least for the western masters in shakti path. So, that's why it people, in any case. Let us accept it. was said that you should go to a Guru who Whatever it is, in experimentation or whatever it is we have committed lots of is a realized soul, go into jungles, twenty five years of age you shauld be there and mistakes or maybe we have been experimenting. Again I will say the same practice under his guidance, in complete word. Whatever we have done, we have celebacy, with the atmosphere of done a lot of harm to ourselves, to our complete celebacy. Now, come to 'Kriya yoga'. When we body, to our mind because we had nobody to guide us, alright. We didn't want to harm take to Kriya yoga, you see, taking out the tongue, as I said, cutting out and putting it ourselves but by mistake it has happened. Now, what to do? Is a very sad affair. back into the thing here to tickle the Vishuddhi chakra. I mean, i don't know, People are sick. They cannot do sometimes your rationality also goes off. Hathayoga. The atmosphere is sick. The whole place is sick. They want love. They By doing anything like that do you think

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 you can excite this great power within Kriya yogas have started. Even the you, which is discrimination, which jumping has started, even the nudity has started. All these things are the result of understands each and every thing? You some people who are trying to raise the cannot befool Her like that. So, all these Kundalini. Even in the centre when it rises tricks that we have been trying with all these things happen but when your ourselves, of poking yourself here and health is not alright, you are sick, your poking yourself there, you are just spoiling heart is working, labouring very hard, lo your instrument for nothing at all. But it look after your physical being, you try to happens when the Kundalini rises through make it even weaker by taking to these the Vishuddhi Chakra, that when the strenuous things and by using the other dilatation of the chakra takes place, it way round method, as I told you, you also happens that your tongue is pulled inside, it happens that your eyes get dilated.I spoil your instrument. Like the electricity has to come in it. So the electricity must hope they do not put Aptrophin to dilate flow from there. If I start blowing from here their eyes to get the Kundalini awakening! or poking from here with frustration also So, it happens like that, specially takes place, the bandhas take place, the breaking this one here, electricity is not going to come, only this will be finished. stomach holds the kundalini with a Do you follow my clear cut idea? It's very bandha. It closes down the chakras. When the Kundalini comes up it closes itself clear that if you try to spoil your own instrument you are not going to get the down automatically so that the energy is energy to rise within you. But if he was a kept upward, it should not be allowed to realized soul, then he would tell you. First fall down. All these things happen within us, these bandhas happen, which some of all he may raise your Kundalini, minimum awaken your Kundalini and ask superaconscious people might be seeing and they want to think that if you pull your you to make way for the Kundalini to rise stomach like this, put your tongue inside. gradualy. Human beings when they raise the Kundalini, they raise it by every These things happen as a result of Kundalini awakening but by doing chakra, they bring the Kundalini, say Muladhara, of course they cannot touch. these things you do not awaken the So the Kundalini will come up to say Nabhi Kundalini. Now did you follow my point? at the most. Then how to retain it there? Did you? It's clear now. And that's why this

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 So they will say eat less, do not take away the character and the personality of the your attention too much. You must eat people. Like now in India nobody can write very little, so that there is not much any epic like Ramayana because we don't attention on the food. Keep yourself have any Ramas left. We won't have detached. This is before twenty five years perhaps. Nobody writes. They write only of age. Do not starve too much, eat at stories. Now the poems have started regular intervals. coming out of India like your (who was this Don't have much attention anywhere outside so that lord you had, the horrible one) Byron. attention is kept there and the Kundalini Now, Mr. Byron is born in India. I think he doesn't drop down from the little bit an has left your country. So, like that. So all inch progress, it has made in twenty five the dynamism in literature is also finished years. They are born again and again and because there is no ideal before them. they move at the pace of a little ant. And They cannot think of a perfect personality. they fix your Kundalini by means there and So, the epics are different in the same way. When we go to learn these things, they say, don't lead any adharmic life. You have to lead a very righteous life, like a we see our gurus, so called, we see their horse you see. When you have to train the lives, the impression that we have within horse you have to put these two blinds us is also just the same. And they cannot around. So they have to train the horse teach you anything unless and until they you see before it realy starts running the themselves are the light. Now, this race. But with this, is important, the most kriyayoga is also the same thing. It is important is the love of the grand parents, described by great saints in India that who are with them, in those days used to these Jalandhar Yoga and all these be, to look after the children and the love Jalandhar Bandhas and all these bandhas of the guru and the training and disciplie take place means the rebounding takes of his own self. The gurus who take money place in the stomach, in the heart and all these granthis (knots) are broken and al from you, what are they going to train you in buisness management or dubious these things are described. up methods or cheating. Their own lives are Yes, it happens in you also when the so beautifuly blended with their love and Kundalini rises. It does happen because I am quite a big master. I do everything their knowledge and their whole myself. I don't leave anything to you till understanding that it has a direct effect on

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 Nov.& Dec. 2002 so great that you feel you have got it. She you have got it. Only thing what you have rises with such a thumping joy. You get it. to do is to be absolutely freely choosing But again you go back to your crutches. the path of self realization. That's the only thing you have to do to be absolutely free. Even when you have lost all your troubles In all your freedom you have to accept and everything, is finished now, still you want to have your crutches because you Sahaja Yoga and if I find that you have are identified with them. So you go back to not chosen it by your freedom, you get out of it, very fast. You won't be there. your crutches and also want to again to become naïve. It's just acting going on for You yourself run away, if not, I see to it sometime but when you act for a long that you run away. So, one has to understand that all period then you become lame, Because these margas, all these paths, even like you have been playing games you see bhakti, I have told you that three types of and now the game is over. So you have to bhaktas are the ones who are asking for accept yourself that you are great and that kamarthita. So many have come to me for you have got it now within yourself. It is say cures, so many of them. It's a good there. Now, you are a light. You have to thing. That's a good chance for me. Then accept that, that you are a light now. You they get cured. Then they have that love, are not the same as you were before and then they are Mumukshus and they can you are transformed into this flower. You become very great Sahaja Yogis, In India should have faith in yourself and there are many who have become like confidence in you because you are being so far identified with people like that, with that. They just came for the treatment and they became great Sahaja Yogis. So, they bad experiences, indifferent experiences, You do not want to believe that there could can pass through all these various stages. has to understand that this is the So one be an experience of that kind, you do not time of Mahayoga, where all these Antar want to accept it. But if you little bit Yogas, means all these happening inside, understand it, go smoothly with it, takes place, automaticaly. I have you'll settle down with it nicely and I something to do with your Kundalini, very am here to make you the master of it, much and She knows Me very well too. So absolutly the complete mastery over all much so, as soon as She sees me She is this. When this Mahayoga comes in, you up there. So happy and the first impact is don't have to worry about anything else.

 10 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 All the yogas are at your feet. You just who gives mantras according to the age. raise your hands just like this and the It's all nonsense, complete nonsense it is, Kundalini will rise. It's a fact. You just try it. with age. You see even a realized soul would not give you a mantra. That's why it Anybody is sick you just put your hands like this and the person is going to be was regarded as a great thing, if somebody would give you a mantra. Now alright. Try yourself. This is Mahayoga, it every Tom, Dick and Harry, like a donkey is the culmination point of Sahaja brays in your ears and you think it's a very Yoga. Once you achieve it then you don't have to do anything else. Then you big mantra. I won't tell you anything what mantra I have got. become that because Kundalini works for They are trying to befool you. They the becoming and if there is something don't know they are befooling themselves. that just gives you the whole thing, then Whatever they have done they will have to why should you do it? All things that have happened to you pay very heavily. So, mantras are never after coming to Sahaja Yoga, I am going to given just like that. You have to know various points of a person as to what is give you the list of those and what are they your 'Kuldevta', the worship of your family, called in sanskrit language. Thousands of what is your personal worshipping God? years people had to work to get it but you have got it just like that. It's a fact. Its What is your horoscope? What are the stars you are catching? At this point giving difficult to accept this, that you have got it. of the mantra, time is to be determined at a just like that, without doing any head or leg or any exercies. Isn't it? But just wait and particular time of the horoscope. What is the time of the horoscope that tallies with see what you have got. Of course some the Guru's horoscope also, That's why you people don't get it because there is a must know that people used to have hardly problem, some problem is there. Doesn't one or two people. Even a person like matter, it will work out but those who get it Gyaneshwara gave a name to one person should know that you have got because of something and that something you have to in his lifetime. Here these Toms Dicks, and discover. That's what you have to find out Harrys are giving to people just like for yourself. There is a reason why you distributing, I don't know what. Nothing is easily available more than these names of have got it like that. Like mantras also you horrible things which have no meaning. If I see, somebody told me that there is a guru

 11 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 11 & 12 told these to Indians they will know. To given. It's a big ritual. Why? Because you are so vulnerable. It's like phosphorus and these foreigners they have given the name of Inga, Thinga. You all know the meaning cannot put phosphorus into you of it. At your command you can find your somebody's hand. You have to make all arangements till you put it. But supposing own mantras. Because you have some sort of an authority which you can use and you become all powerful, then what. Every every mantra that you will say will be thing becomes a child's play. Every thing is so simple. You are raising the Kundalini, awakened. You know that. After realization you know that there are centres, you can it is such a wonderful thing to say that even raise the centres, you know how to awaken if you are not yet out of your posessions, them. That is why it is Mahayoga. It had to still you work it out. Still nothing happens to your Kundalini raising system or nothing be this way sometimes. Otherwise how are we going to save this world? How this happens to that. Still you can raise the Kundalini of others. Isn't it? Still you can creation is going to be justified? We have to find out. I mean God had to find out give realization to people. You may be some method by which all of you who are possessed. They say I am fighting with the seeking Him, are to be blessed and that He spirit, that's why. But here with one hand you are raising the Kundalini automaticaly. should be manifested, so that His work should be completed. There are lots of these spirits trying to Mahayoga which So this is possess you. With one hand you are killing them that side and from one hand you are encompasses all the yogas. There is no need now to go to stone ages, to come raising the Kundalini and nothing would go back to human stage. It is something like wrong with the persons whose Kundalinis that, or else you can say, if now if I have to you are raising to that purity! Otherwise to give mantra and to take mantra a person go to India, I need not go like Columbus and end up in America. Somebody who has to starve for seven days, not to see a man's face or a woman's face. All sorts of knows the way, has come to you, who vidhis are there. Then only you can get it. knows every thing, all about it. Somebody Here some Gurus tell the desciples to who has done all this, who knows all the tricks of the trade. And also knows you wash their hands hundred and eight times very well, though still I am learning, quit a every day. All sorts of these netikriyas and all that is to be done before a mantra is lot. About human beings, I'll have to still

 12 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 Nov.& Dec. 2002 learn, I think. So many things you know, is the desire of God itself within you. So, it they can be quite queer you don't know. I can be only awakended by that desire, isn't it, itself. It is the desire of God within behave like this, you just can't, suddenly you find, Oh God! what's it? It's a great you that is being raised and the desire of God is the Shakti and the desire of God is revelation sometimes, the way you see that he loves you. His desire is to give you human beings, the way they behave. It's very interesting, very interesting all his powers, all his bounties and all his creatures, I must say. I mean they never loving capacities. This is his desire which behave the same way. You cannot is placed within you and is dormant. So predict, most unpredictable, don't know when it rises, his desire is fulfilled in you what they'lI come out with! Very and that's how you get your fulfillment. interesting people. After Sahaja Yoga you Unless and until you are God you cannot will also enjoy very much. command desire of God. But after This is all about so many yogas I have realization He gives you, bestows his told you and if you have any questions powers that you can manoeuvre His then ask me questions but sensible desire. You can raise the Kundalini in questions, again l'll say. Ask me questions other people which is the desire of God because l've told you in a very short way and you can make him desire., That is the but later on l'll give you a complete idea. greatest one can achieve. Isn't it? Now this Lama business is all wrong. I Q. What is Self-realisation? What is the must tell you very frankly my child and it has brought about lots of problems, alright best way to save mankind? By raising for you. Now everybody has got it, you. other people's Kundalini? By knowing haven't got it as yet (Shri Mataji adresses you? a seeker). Still little problem. Doesn't A. Shri Mataji says, matter. You have to little bit cooperate By Self-realisation you become the with me and get it. It is my desire and if light, alright. So you have to enlighten that is your desire also, we meet on the others also. That's one of the jobs and same point. They do some tricks to spoil by knowing it, you know the whole. You this instrument. Hypnotise, all kinds of should know the complete knowledge things they do. Now kundalini is the desire about it. You should know your self and of God within you, is not desire for a God, you should know others and try to clean

 13 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 You see, most of the maniacs, most of them. And by cleaning it only, by these people who have frights, who spreading light only you are going to have complications and all that are get everything enlightened. Isn't it? because they are not secure within What is lacking in us is knowledge, is themselves. Most of the countries who the awareness. And once you do that, are fighting, are fighting because they the whole world will be changed. This is are not secure within themselves, what you have been seeking. Isn't it! known they've You wanted to change the world. You because not themselves. If they had known know why you wanted that. Do you themselves they would not have been know that. Why you did all this, do you so unhappy. There is a treasure in you know that? Because you have been hidden. Isn't it? And once you know seekers in previous lives of very great, your own treasure, you are not going to high quality. That's why you've been remain unhappy and the whole world is seeking, All right, some mistakes, doesn't matter. But you are people of going to become very happy. That's what you were seeking. Isn't it? Your very high quality. Don't forget your own treasures, and that's what now you calibre and don't stoop down to lower have to know all about. For example levels. Because you were that. That's even if you come in this room, you don't why you were seeking and you took birth in this country. The whole world is know everything about it. You are in here. So I've to tell you all that. You find going to change. One light can out within yourself. You find out in enlighten the whole room. But you keep others. And just that, working it out. your wits enlightened, glowing all the May God Bless you. time.

 Easter Puja Istanbul, Turkey, 21.4.02 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today we have come here to worship who have applied are Muslim ladies very Jesus Christ and His Mother. sad. While Mohammed-Saheb has said that 'you must look after your mother', It's such a coincidence that the Mother of Christ came and stayed in Turkey. Isn't despite that, all these women-some of them have eight children, ten children- it surprising that She should come here after the crucifixion of Christ and stayed have come to this destitute home, Of here. I wonder if He also came with Her course, we have to give them place. We later on? But they say then He went to have to look after them because we don't Kashmir and She was also there. Quite believe in all these small type of ideas possible, on their way, they might have about religion. Most important is 'human' religion. gone there. We have to combine all these religions So we are here to worship Him. According to Sahaja Yoga, She was the together. It's a terrible task because incarnation of Mahalakshmi and She's the respect Christians- Muslims won't one who sacrificed Her Son for the sake of Christians won't respect Hindus. I mean it's a funny thing that's going on. They all religion. But unfortunately, nobody understood Her value. Nobody saw that are for God and for God's work and His She was such a great spiritual personality. love. Despite that, there's no respect. There's no love. On the contrary, they're Only through Sahaja Yoga you can understand that She was a very great all quarrelling, fighting, killing everywhere. It's very sad that in the name of religion personality who gave birth to Christ. It is very unfortunate that She was not and God, people should become so cruel respected, specially in the Islamic world. and so absurd. This is the only solution-is to give them Because of that, the women in the Islamic culture have no place. My experience is Self Realization. It is thus, Realization was very sad about them. We have started an called as Miraj in the Koran, It's called as organization for the rehabilitation of Miraj. But they have said that nobody can get Miraj. Mohammed-Saheb got it, but women who are destitutes and all of them

 15 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 11 & 12 He had to go through lots of ordeals and nobody else-like they have banned people then His body itself was resurrected. from getting Self Realization, which is not On the same lines, Sahaja Yoga is true. All human beings can get Self working out-that you get your Realization Realization. Whether they are from Africa, means your resurrection. All your wrong England, America, India, anywhere. They ideas disappear. All your nonsense all can get their Miraj. One should understand that no human being is disappears and nothing but love, created in this world to fight, to fight each understanding comes in. It was difficult, I know, in the beginning other. Even the animals don't fight. Why to start this work in India or otherwise, also should human beings fight-that too, in the name of religion! In the name of God! everywhere I found people are so ignorant Christ came on this Earth just to create and human beings hate each other. With oneness of religion, but even the some excuse, with some sort of a -l don't Christians, they only started fighting, know what ideas they have, historical ideas, and they hate. This hating in India dominating others. It's a big world of turmoil, where everybody is fighting in the has been there, but also abroad, like Hitler name of God and in the name of religion. came in. So our religion is global, is one religion. Hitler came because he hated human We respect all the Deities, all the Gods beings. He was a satanic force who incarnated and did all kinds of horrible and Goddesses-respect them and things. The way he has killed people, you worship them. We are not so stupid, not to understand that they are all one. Also, can't imagine a human being can do that. He killed children. He killed grown-up after getting Realization, you realize that all these exist on our central nervous people in the gas chambers and-such a system. They exist on our chakras. They horrible thing. When I went to Germany, they wanted Me to see all that. I said, "I are not there just because people have can't see. I will not be able to see it." But told us in history and all that, but actually that's a fact, that all of them are there My husband went there and when he came back, he was sick for seven days. together, working out the resurrection of It's so sickening. It's so inhuman to the whole world. So the greatest thing that Christ has done is the resurrection part behave like that, to kill people, under and in this resurrection, He suffered a lot. some circumstances, under certain

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 16 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 And it's working out all over the world now, conceptions and wrong ideas. everywhere people are realizing that this I don't know what sort of an idea this kind of a hatred, this kind of a wrong idea Hitler had that he got after the Jews and started killing them. All kinds of things about others is absolutely dangerous. And so, once large number of people know have happened on this Earth, all in the this, I'm sure it will all finish off. name of religion. This is the worst part of We have lots of incidents like that, even it. Throughout, people have been killing in the name of religion. Religion teaches recently. That just because you follow a particular religion, people hate you. I you to love, to love God and love each I can't understand! You cannot other. How can it teach you to hate and mean to kill? I mean, it's very surprising, still explain why, why it is done, but it's done going on. This kind of a nonsense is still and very wrong to hate any human being in the name of God, who has created you. going on. It's only Sahaja Yoga that can They don't understand God and His love. stop this nonsense and it should because, For example, Christ's life-just see it. He after all, we are humanı beings. For that, you have to have your was hardly thirty-three years of age when He was crucified. His mother had to suffer so much. Why? Why did they crucify Him? resurrection, as Christ had. And this resurrection is possible on this Earth, very Yoga. Because He was teaching about love. with Sahaja easily now None of them liked this idea of loving each Mohammed-saheb has called it Miraj. He's described it very well, very clearly. other. How can you help people if you don't love? Under what premises do you But who wants that? They don't want to have their Miraj. If somebody tries to work help others? Because you love, that's why it out, they get after that person, saying you want to enjoy others and to that This is something ridiculous'. It's all understand. Once you start loving others, then this myth finishes off. wrong. I mean this has happened with all of them. All of them have suffered Supposing you are born as a Christian or a Hlindu, or whatever it is, because of the ignorance of human or a Muslim what makes you think that you are beings-all of them. And also with Me, they are criticizing and this and that. But I am different from others? You are born the same way. You are conceived by your much more powerful, because love is much more powerful than anything else. mother the same way. You look the same

 17 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 11 & 12 way. Your nose, eyes, everything is the but still existing. They see it happening same. What makes you different? I think every day, this kind of a nonsense, but still they are continuing with it. it's something political about it, something Now what can we Sahaja Yogis do very mean to separate people in the name about it? We should think. Let us see, of God and religion. On the contrary, Sahaja Yoga is to whatever religion we are born, that's what. You have to be born in some religion. You unite all the people in the name of God, to cannot drop from heaven. So whatever make them one in the name of God. religion you are born, you are not bound Supposing there is somebody living, say, in South Africa or, say, in a far-fetched by that. You are bound by the religion of love and joy. And then you go on crying place like Benin and all that-has become a Sahaja Yogi. There are thousands who and weeping and teaching and... of have become Sahaja Yogis there. They unhappiness, of fighting. How can that are all your brothers and sisters. They're be? We are human beings. We are not animals. Even the dogs don't do that way. your own. You go there and they will treat you just like their own children, their own Why should we human beings kill each relations. They will never think what other and make a miserable life for others religion you come from or what sect you and for yourself? Because if you hate come from, nothing. I was surprised the others, you will also become hateful. A will hate the B and then the B will hate the A, way they have love. Actually, loving is an innate quality of human beings. Its' an so the whole human life and civilization innate quality. Every human being has has nothing to do but to hate! Sahaja Yoga is such a blessing to you, I been given this treasure of loving, loving must say, because it has given to you all capacity. But that capacity has become so much less, so much minimum, that with the Deities within you, enlightened, and that capacity, people fight and kill each now, you know you belong to the whole. other. It's the greatest sin to kill people in You know you are not belonging to some the name of religion. stupid ideas. I don't know what-how they believe It's very remarkable when I came here. I knew when He lived here. I knew Mother that, by killing each other, we can go to heaven! They will go to the worst hell. This Mary lived here. There is a house of Mother Mary. That gave Me a very great idea has now, of course, subsided a little,

 18 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 Muslims, some of them were Hindus and joy to know that She had lived here and so I said we must worship Her. After all, She people sing their songs; everything's there. But, they're worshipped separately was the Mother of Christ! Mother is a and people fight even in their names. They Mother. What does it matter whether She want to find something to fight. Real was a Christian, Hindu, Muslim? It doesn't fighting cocks, I tell you they are. They matter. And for Her love, She allowed Her haven't got a human quality within them, son to be sacrificed for the whole world and for the universe-what a mother! Can which is love, which is affection-must enjoy your love for each other. That's the you find such a mother in this world who thing they have lost-that capacity to love. will allow Her own son to be crucified-such matter if sonebody is born in a courageous. loving and global What does it China or in India or anywhere? He is a personality? Here we are. It's a coincidence, as I human being, He, too, has the capacity to love and you should also have capacity to said, because She lived here. Why did She come? Why did She come here? She love. could have gone directly. She came here My experience is different. I went to and lived and we have a house of Her. China with My husband In China that Now with this house only, the Christians time, they didn't have any good feelings cult. They'll fight with the for Indians, I don't know why. But they were so kind to Me, you won't believe, Muslims and the Muslims will fight with the they were so nice to Me and the way they Christians. Anything you do, they will fight. That's the main character is to fight, not to treated Me, everybody was surprised help others, not to heip each other-no, not "What's the matter? How are they so kind at all. They're just trying to be very, very to you? In China they don't like Indians. said, 'It's a myth. I don't think I have seen funny and nasty. In India we have had so many nice that with the Chinese. They're extremely, people who taught that we must love each extremely kind and respectful to Me. What have I done for them? Nothing." other. Despite that, in India peopte are Well, you'll be surprised, in one of the tighting. They have had so many Sutis in this country. In the same way, in India hotels, one of My ankle ornament[s had fallen down-silver. It did happen and then I also, we have had very great saints, very went away to a very far fetched place and great-everywhere. Some of them were

 19 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze olume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 an old woman, you are-young people! 'No, they sent it in an envelope, those anklets. no, no, no, l've enjoyed. I'll also bring my Can you imagine? All the way-l was so bride for You to be seen.' I tell you, tears much full of tears. So I said, 'These came into my eyes. I said, 'Such love, Chinese are also very loving people, such kindness.' I didn't do anything for extremely loving.' them, nothing. I didn't give them any I went for My programme. We had a women's conference. So I don't know why. money, nothing. My goodness, till the end they were so much attentive to Me-very but at the airport only these Chinese boys young boys, all below twenty-five years of arrived. They took all My luggage. I was so late! The function was at ten o'clock and I age. And they carried My wheelchair up reached about 8.30. They put Me in the three storeys with their hands. I said, 'Don't do it, I don't want....' They said, 'No, car. They put My luggage there and they said, 'We have to directly go to the no, no, no, we want You to see. We want conference.' I said, 'All right.' I went there You to come.' I said, 'Why?' [They] said, 'Iit would be nice for all of them.' I don't know and, in this short time, these boys were what made them think like that. Such really so attached to Me. When I finished the conference, they're waiting outside- enlightened people, I tell you. With love, can't believe it-the same Chinese people you get enlightened. With love, you get who are against Indians! And then, after understanding. And such deep love exists within you. that, it didn't stop. They brought two cars- Now the politicians will come and tell one for My wheelchair, one for Me-and they took Me to the best shopping places. you a story. Then somebody else will tell But I said, 'What will you do?' They said, you, 'Come and fight' and all that. That's how they have managed in Germany, "We'll carry your wheelchair upstairs. Can you imagine? They were no young people. But now, now they're relation of mine. I've never seen them changing. All this world has to change because it has suffered a lot. This is no before. So one of them said, 'Tomorrow, Mother, I won't be able to come.' I said, religion. This is not the teachings of the "Why?' He said, I'm getting married saints-no. It is not. It is devilish, that tomorrow.' And I said, 'What have you teaches you to hate others, is the worst been doing all this day?' He said, 'I thing. I mean all the enjoyment of love, all the enjoyment of affection, you don't know. enjoyed your company so much'. I'm such

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 20 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 Now-a-days, you see the problem of for your own? It's not only among the churches, this, that. I can't Christians, Hindus, Muslims, but understand, stupid people. They have everywhere human beings have become done so many laws and with those laws, very dirty and filthy. They say it is Kali whatever it is, whatever may be the Yuga. I can't understand. How can you lose the power to love? causes, but what's happening is that poor That's what Christ has talked about. children are suffering. They have no sense of pure love. Nobody understands He's talked about love very clearly. He what pure love is. Which is actually their said, 'Love thy neighbour as thyself.' Have you found anyone like that? No. You don't innate quality, their innate-I should say the 'property'. But they don't know how you find all such people. The Christians who can love somebody purely! It's all followed Christ, what did they do? something very, very wretched. It doesn't Muslims who followed Mohammed-saheb, behove human beings to be like that. Even what did they do? And Hindus who the animals are not like that, but human followed Shri Rama, what did they do? Are beings can go to any extreme. The whole they anywhere near their leaders? Are wealth of beauty, the whole wealth of they anywhere near those Incarnations creativity, the whole wealth of art, artistic of the Divine? Nowhere. The reason is-l don't blame them- temperament, the whole wealth of because they had no Realizaiton. They enjoying life is finished. If you are a fighting cock, you can't see didn't know their spirit. If you have no Realization, you cannot understand anything, any good in anyone, in anything. They will fight others and they'll fight anything, you cannot understand any enjoyment or anything. I mean, if you go to among themselves also-is a fact. They might say. We must fight.' All right, fight, Germany, you can't go and see all but then they fight among themselves the things they have done. You'll faint, also. They will torture their own brothers if you have any human qualities. Even mean, they don't love you go to Japan and the way they anyone. This is the main thing. Why take had put this Hiroshima, this-my goodness! the name of religion? What the religion I started trembling, I couldn't bear it. I has done? How could they learn it and said, 'How could human beings be that cruel?' Horrible! I mean now the days teach you such a horrible thing like hatred

 21 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 this time, He could not have been have come that they're killing their own crucified. It's only because He was not children. Extreme is this. born during Kali Yuga. That's a very big The other side of it is Sahaja Yoga, in blessing for us. Nobody can be tortured. which you love all human beings because they're human beings. They're born with Nobody can be troubled. Only thing, you have to be a humble person. You have to you in this time. You have to help each have a good character and you have to other and love each other. This is the main have a very loving personality. That's all. thing. If you can develop this, you'll be very, very strong Sahaja Yogis and you Enjoy the loving personality. You will get the blessing because you are a loving will be supported and blessed by the Divine. Divine will help you and take you personality. I mean, the way the Divine out of all troubles and tribulations and all looks after you, there are so many kinds of difficulties, if you are a loving miracles people tell Me. I'm not surprised personality. This is what the blessing of because I know the Divine has become Kali Yuga. It didn't exist like this before. extremely alert towards human beings Now, if you are a loving person, the who are good and nice. It will look after. It Divine will go out of the way to help you, to will support. It will do everything. It's very sort out your problems, to punish those surprising that it has become so alert. Like who are troubling you. I mean, it's My own Mohammed-saheb suffered so much. experience like that. I never do anything. I Everybody suffered so much, but not now. never curse anybody. I don't fight. I don't Now the Sahaja Yogis won't suffer. Take it from Me. They're looked after by the shout. Automatically, it works. I don't even tell the Divine to do anything. The Divine is Divine itself. Everything is looked after. I at the greatest, just personality, I should will tell you, people have written letters after letters all over the world, how they say. That is the one who does all the have been supported, how they have justice. Nobody can suffer under the been helped. Very surprising how they guidance and love of Divine, take it from Me. This is the blessing of Kali Yuga. I have been rescued. So we have to have trust in ourselves agree Kali Yuga is horrible. People are horrible. This is that. But there's one thing and we have to really love people. We that this Divine has become very alert. It should be humble and love. All this love was never that alert. If Christ was born at will help you all your life. This is the

 22 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 two-are not so good, but mostly, message of Christ. Christ has said, ninetynine percent Sahaja Yogis love Forgive them.' How lovingly He said, 'But each other. they don't know what they're doing." Very lovingly He pleads for all the bad people My blessings to you is this-on this day who crucified Him, that 'O, Lord, please may God give you lots of love, and loving forgive them because they don't know capacity within you, that you should have, which will change your life completely and what they are doing.' Can you imagine such a loving character of Christ? such a powerful you'll become personality, very powerful Sahaja Yogis. And now, when we are celebrating and You can do marvels and miracles if you worshipping Him, we have to worship that character within us, that we are also loving have developed the understanding of people. We love each other. All over the love. world, all the Sahaja Yogis love each May God bless you. other. Of course, there could be one or

 Sahasrara Puja Cabella Ligure, 5 May, 2002 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today is a very great day, I'must say, to of oneness with the Divine. To be one with the Divine is the Sahasrara-the Puja of celebrate Sahasrara. It's a very unique thing that greatest blessing for human beings. So has happended that your Sahasraras far, they were human beings at a lower were opened out. There were some very level of existence They had all the problems of that level - is that jealousies, few people in this whole world-there were some Sufis, there were some saints, some hatred; all kinds of problems that are other people also in China and all. But today, of fighting, of troubling others, very few, very few got their Sahasrara destroying others and not loving others. opened out. So whatever they said or All these problems existed because their written was never understood by the Sahasrara was not opened. So our main problem is to open the people. They actually tortured them, they Sahasrara of the people all over the world, crucified them and did all kinds of horrible things because they couldn't bear which is very simple, which you can all do, and it will work better if you do it somebody getting this realisation. So it's a very great day because collectively. If you are collective, you can work it out very well. collectively this Sahasrara has been Like that in Sahaja Yoga so many opened. Every one of you have got it. Also people have come whose Sahasrara was all over the world you have many people who have got their Sahasraras opened. Of completely opened and they felt their course we need many more for them to depth. Firstly you must feel your depth. If understand what is this great event of you don't feel your depth, and you are not one with your personality which is so deep, such a collective opening of Sahasrara. then you cannot enjoy the Self-Realisation. Some have grown very much, after getting First of all you should understand their realisation, very much. They have understood Sahaja Yoga very weil, and yourself. If you don't understand yourself. how can you understand other people? they have developed their depth, and their You cannot. So first this Sahasrara should consciousness is really a great awareness

 24 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 think. That must be the point, they have to be opened out fully. Fully means complete come back from that developed state to oneness with the Divine. That is not this state from where they can rise. And difficult. Only you have to meditate a little so, the people who have though got bit and then it will work out. It has worked realisation are not ascending so fast as the out in many people. I am very happy to out people who are not yet so much advanced see, and meet such people in Sahaja and modernised. Still it has worked, it has Yoga, who have achieved such a lot of collectivity and also the awareness of a worked in so many people and so many have got this ascent very well. realised soul. But I would say, that when you are So what is the awreness of a realized meditating, also outside, you should soul? That is what we have to understand today. It's a very important day, as I said. develop a state of witness. You should try to find out what is the matter, what's The awareness is such that you should now know what is happening in this wrong with you, what's wrong with others and how you can help it. Only world and how you can help it. How can you help people to get to this awareness with your vibrations you can correct so unless you have this full, full knowledge many things in your country, in your about yourself, complete strength about family, everywhere. And as you see now how Sahaja Yoga yourself, and the confidence, you cannot do it. is growing, that there's such a need and such a desire to get self realisation, But Sahasrara Day is to be celebrated just to strengthen your bond with the Divine so oniy thing, your approach should be full o of love and full of understanding. They that your consciousness becomes are coming from the darkness of absolutely enlightened and you see the ignorance and they have to go into the right point in everything. It has been in so many countries, I have element, nature, of the Divine which can seen, people have taken to it very, very be very bright for them. So slowly, slowly if fast. Surprising, in Africa, which is not you develop this passionate kindness, love for them, I am sure you can do much supposed to be very developed country, it's good, because thousands have got more to raise them. No use getting angry with them, because they are so ignorant, realisation. Those who are developed have gone beyond the point of ascent, I they don't know whal they are doing, you

 25 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 11 & 12 Yesterday I felt there were lots of see. As Christ has said that, "They don't people who were having a lot of right side know what they are doing." So what you have to do is to make them on them. This right side is of no help, it will create problems for you, sickness for you, understand whatever they are doing, whatever they are understanding, is still and also no use having right-sided Sahaja Yogis. poor, it's not so much yet expanded as it So the main thing is to understand the could have been if they were realised souls. Even after realisation I find people power of love. Power of love is the highest have a problem. They still have the and the greatest, and if you can manage somehow or other to give up your problem of the past life which is finished, it's dead, but they still carry on with that, anger, give up your greed and also your ego if you can do that, you can and the consciousness, so much of illumination also, doesn't show what's be in Sahasrara. Now just see the sport ascent further, At ego of ego. It stops your wrong with them. For example, take the case of ego. Ego only people get lost, because at ego only is so developed. In the western countries they move to the left or to the right and where they are so developed, ego has also they can go to the too much of right side, or can go to the left side. They can go to developed. And they have to find out what's wrong with them. This ego comes from any extreme of these two. So first of all we have to correct our certain consciousness that you have been ego. For this ego, what should we dc? For something great, you are this, you are that, this ego we should watch ourselves and your parents have been great maybe, your property is great or maybe you are laugh at ourselves! What ego do we have? Of what? We are human beings now we occupying very big position, or anything. It have become Divine! And with Divine can come from anything, and this within us, with this light within us, we have consciousness is against your awareness, because it's not true. You are not anything to understand that we are a part and parcel of the Divine, just a drop in the being moulded by these outside things. ocean of love. If you can reduce your But-you are moulded by your own awareness within yourself. This awareness ego, if you can bring it to the actual 'sense' has to grow. From where? Is to understand of your being. then it will work out better I tind it, in the west, this ego is very how do we get this ego, from vhat point.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 Nov.& Dec. 2002 26 strong, very, very strong. And whatever faith in yourself that you are the people they do wrong, they think is correct who have got self realisation. You are because ego can support you in every much more powerful than they are. My way. While on the contrary, those people powers only work out when you are who are developing, the countries who are realised souls. You will be surprised, they not yet developed, there the people's work out many things which may not work out with people with ego. problem is not of ego but of superego. That can be corrected. But ego is your Like the other day I heard from Africa own enemy, created by you. So you have that people become invisible, suddenly. to fight it, and see for yourself from where There was coup-d'etat and the President it is coming. It might be country-wise, it is Sahaja Yogi-he became invisible, might be family-wise, it can be from nobody could find him. Because they are anywhere. So first of all we must watch out very much surrendered. They are so much for the ego, if it is Sahasrara we have to surrendered that they get advantage of My powers. You all should use My enter into. When I was looking out for a collective of protection. This also, powers. happening of Sahasrara opening, I found protection power is very, very strong. it was the ego of people which was specially for people who are very much 'in' keeping Me down. I had to fight the ego ot Sahaja Yoga, who are very much 'there'. people. Because I am a woman of very So you must have, first of all, completë sirmple habits, no pride, nothing, so people faith in yourself that you are Sahaja Yogis- used to suppress Me, say all kinds of but not the ego. 'Sahaja Yogis' means things to Me. But understood them you cannot have ego. because they had ego problem. And once This ego business has come from this ego evolves and tries to dominate, we various sources, you know that. But it has can have Hitiers in this country, we can to be cleansed out. Like when the river have all these horrible people all over the flows, all kinds of dirt, filth, flows into it. But world. when it meets the sea, it becomes the sea So the tirst you should In the same way you have to become that. thing understand, those who have ego-we To become the sea, what you have to do should not ever subdue to them. Of course is to forget all these tributaries which were you shouldn't start fighting, but you have coming into you and all wrong ideas which

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 27 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV isue 11 & 12 depth, then they are leaders, in the sense came to you., It can come from any source. others see them and really enjoy, really I do not know how to name them, because enjoy their being tnere. So in everything, there's a big list of these sources. People are mad sometimes with this ego. you can see for yourself. Specially i would say for the leaders, because people see So, main thing is how to watch and them and they are the ideals for them. For witness your ego, how it works, how Mother is after all Me they say that " it spoils your temperament, how it Mother, what can we achieve from spoils your relationships, how it makes you stupid. Ego is, first thing it does, is (like)Her?" But from the leaders they learn a lesson, and they understand that this is to make you very stupid, and you start behaving in such a manner that wrong, and this is not proper. First of all you should be model people start thinking that "Oh, you are the models of Sahaja Yoga. And that is what I great, stupidest person ever living." But it is of no help, because if they believe that have been always telling you, that "Get rid you are a stupid: person, what will of your ego." It's the worst thing, because happen? On the contrary, if you have the first of all it brings anger. You think you are somethig great, and you can do this, you wisdom, if you have that peace, if you have that special temperament of can do that, because you are a Sahaja enjoying everything in life, and also the Yogi. It's not true. On the contrary. become extremely humble, extremely collective temperament, it will work out. They will be impressed. Because in the humble, and you do right things. You do not become any more, any more, arrogant light they can see their own stupidity, own and also full of anger. Anger departs from falsehood, everything, and they will realise that what they think is not true. you, completely, completely. It gives you a balance, it gives you wisdom by which you "This gentleman is much deeper than me. What he has got, I haven't got it." This is see what is your job, why are you on this earth, why this energy has come to you, the main thing for all of us. In Sahaja Yoga we have people who why you are a Divine personality. It's a are leaders. That doesn't mean they very, very great responsibility. You don't have to look after yourself, no, the become really leaders, but that means Divine will look after you. Absolutely. It that they have a greater depth. If they will protect you, it will look after you, it don't have, they get out. If they have the

 28 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 will do whatever is needed for you. But, to just cross to go to Sahasrara. And to in case, in case you have this ego, you break Sahasrara is very easy otherwise. But if there is ego, you are already lost in shut out yourself from the reality, from the truth, and you become very hot-tempered that ego. So against all this, one has to and arrogant personality! This has to go understand that 'watch your self'. Is he away. Sahaja Yogis are saints, not saints, but egoistical? What does he think about they are more than saints because they itself? Ego is very limited. It makes you can express themselves better. They have limited and you don't see the purpose of powers in them which they can utilise, your life. Why have you become a realised soul? You don't understand, you just are which they can show to other people that involved in your ownn affairs, in your family, you are so powerful that you can manage in your children, in you... something like things much better than what you think. For example, say there's a problem, that. Very low. But if you have, if you have, and the whole world is upset about it. Only an ego-less temperament then you are very eftective the whole power works. thing, if you know how to witness it, it will What I have seen, the power otf disappear. It will disappear in the whole world! It cannot remain there. So, Sahasrara is so great. In some people it has worked wonders. They have worked it nowadays the world is full of turmoil, as you see, full of non-sensical people greatly. But because of ego many people coming up, full of quarrelsome people, are still not of that level that we can say dominating they are Sahaja Yogis. (who) people are Now, as it is, I am here to tell you,about overpowering. At this time, if you just see it. And in those days, when these saints this in the witness state, this will came in, nobody was there to guide them, disappear. Because you are very to tell them anything. On the contrary they powerful, you are very powerful. But you were so much destroyed by the must know first of all that you must have SO and people never the equipment to use the power. If you surroundings, understood why they don't have any ego, have that equipment within you, you can do it. But with your ego you cannot. Ego is why they are so humble. So they misused the greatest hurdle for your ascent. You (them). But now you have powers. You is at a place where you have must know how to use your powers. But

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 29 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 that should not give you by any chance We'll give up our ego.' Because there is no sense, that's an obstruction between any ego, that you have powers. On the us. When the Sahasrara wants to work, it contrary you should be humble, You have to be humble. And if you can be cannot because of ego obstruction. So power humble, and understand that these people better not to have ego of anything. You may be a good singer, you may be are not yet realised souls, they are at a anything in life, may be some big man or lower level, still their ego is catching them, anything, what is so-called-has no and they are at a lower level, they have to come up. When you understand that, then you will have not only pity, but also meaning. What we need today are people who are ego-less and who have powers understanding about them and a kind of a completely flowing in them. With the opening of Sahasrara, all help will come to you from the Divine that these powers should flow. If the will solve your problems. I find most of you have problems of Sahasrara is fully opened all these powers of love should flow. You'll be amazed, very low level sometimes. And then I am wherever I go, people just fall in love with surprised why are you bothered about these problems. You see, you are so Me! I don't know why, I don't do anything powerful. So in Sahasrara you must know to them, but just they 'feel' My love. That's what it should be, that people should feel what powers are there. There are one your love and they should know that you thousand powers, one thousand powers within you which are being enlightened. If are a loveable person. This is the thing you are made as you can understand that, then you will special people, very special, for this whole understand that 'what's the use of having ego' because you have such a lot of world's emancipation. That's your job, and not otherwise just collecting money and powers within you which you have not utilised, which you should use. But doing all kinds of nonsensical things. You because of ego you cannot. With love you are here for very, very sensible job which can. With love you can manage and you is to raise the Kundalini of people and make them aware of their greatness. can do a lot. So I would request all of you today to Human beings are not created only to war take a vow that 'We'll have no more and fight, not created here to play politics chances for our egos. We'll give it up. and do all dirty tricks. They are not made

 30 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 here to lead a life which is very, I would universe, created you and has done all the great jobs. So what are you? You are a say, filthy and dirty. But in this world we part and parcel of that Divine power. So are here to do such a great job of God who why not we use our Divine power fülly has created us. So this is possible if you are aware that within with love and with us, your Sahasraras are being opened out, understanding so that you develop this and that in this Sahasrara resides the wisdom within you. This is what is to be told to yourself, purity, not all these small little things about that 'We are realised souls. This one is which you are worried. Some people try to take advantage of Sahaja Yoga thinking something - a special personality, very much special.' In this world there are very that 'O, they can do better, they can have few people who are realised souls. But help of others-nothing of the kind. You can now we have so many, I can see them. be helped by yourself, you don't need any help. On the contrary you have to help But still, if it's lacking in us, some others. There is no need to expect any problems are there because of our ego. One should not have ego of anything. help from anywhere. Look at Me, I am an ordinary housewife otherwise, but how it everything is perishable. What is not has worked all over the world. By what? perishable is Divine love. What is not perishable is Divine personality. All the By just the power of love. Only trouble is, that I can use My power of love, but you time you see the saints and all that, don't know how to use. That's the only though they are dead, people remember them. All their poetry is remembered. problem. Though they could not do much of If you want to use your power of love, in meditation you can develop that power of Sahasrara work, they couldn't give love. With that you can capture people. realisation to people, still because of their With that you can understand. Their personality they are still respected. And problems are that they are not Sahaja people know that these people have been Yogis, they are not the people who are doing marvellous things, miraculous having all the blessings or the connection things. with the Divine. Imagine, you are In the same way, you can see your own connected with Divine. And Divine is such miracles, and you can see for yourself a great thing which has created this whole what you are capable of because now you

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 31 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 us...wrong with that." Why can't you are connected with the Divine. This is one correct yourself? If you can't correct fact you should know. Whenever there is danger, whenever there is problem, you yourself, how can you correct others? That's what it is. will say 'You'll be saved.' Many have been would say that one can see that saved out of you, no doubt. But, that is not sufficient. You are there's understanding going into your saved for what? What is the value of your understanding that 'you are great'. You life? Why are you living? What is the are not ordinary people - and this has to be practiced and to be used in a manner matter? Why God has saved you, given you all this? Because there is so much to that will show that you ate Sahaja Yogis. be done for this world! You are the, I You are no less than any Sufi or any realised soul or any saint, no less. But you should say, soldiers of truth, soldiers of goodness and all that is to be done have powers which they didn't have, of with great courage and understanding which they were not conscious. While you have these powers! Try to understand about yourself. So what you have to do is to have self what powers you have. But by knowledge. You have to know about understanding that, you should not have yourself. You must have self knowledge, pride about it or anyway, but that's your what you are. If that you don't have, what's job, you have to do it. You are there, and the use of opening the Sahasrara? Self you'll enjoy it because it is not with ego, knowledge is, it doesn't' give you any but ego-'less' work. If you can manage pride, nothing, but gives you the duty what that much it will be very good. Now ego has come down very much, I you have to do, what you have to work out. It's not only just for you, the Sahaja must say, very much. I hear from people Yoga, but you are for the whole world, that ego has come down. But sometimes. please try to understand. Sometimes we they are still quite worrying and fighting think Sahaja Yoga is there for our and this and that. But despite all that, I betterment, for our good health, this that. must say this, whatever work has been It's not so. It is for the betterment of done all these years, people have worked others! Your powers are there which you it out among themselves. are not utilising. You are still busy I get So you have to watch yourself. And see for yourself 'what ego you have, why letters saying that "This is wrong with

 32 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 should you be egoistical?' Some of the 'super-human' beings I should call them, as Sahaja Yogis. people have ego of their country, some of So our ego has to be seen, has to be the people..I mean it's all mythical! It's all mythical. What is the .. you could have watched in witness state, how it works and how it tries to dissuade us from the right been born anywhere. Though you are born in a particular country, you have that path of movement, One has to be only careful on that point because that's the ego and it is something, I must say, one last centre which has to be opened out. has to be ashamed of. Because your country, whatever it is, is not doing very Once it is completely open, you are one with the Divine and all your problems will well. It's not spiritually equipped, so why should you be so proud of your country? be solved. Because these problems are so frivolous and have no meaning; they'll When you will work it out and they wilf go away in no time as long as you work it become spiritually equipped, then of out, your Sahasrara, course you can have pride in your country. It's very nice that today is a very special But I see it is not happening. And so you day with all these stars are coming have to work it out. And I am also happy to see that so together, and it's a special blessing. It much of Sahaja Yoga is now spread out your powers increase, all these people who are very bad, who are trying to everywhere. It's spreading very fast. in capture the society with their political countries where I never expected, it's spreading out. So there are people nonsense and all that, they all will everywhere in the world who want to have disappear. They have no powers, they'll it. they want to have their realisation and all disappear. So, first of all your ego-less nature will they want to know what is beyond this human life. They don't want to waste their help-will help everyone. May God bless you all life anymore as human beings, but as

 Shri Adi Shakti Puja 23rd June, 2002, Cabella Ligure, Italy Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today it's a different day, altogether, they were made to go up to the, at the most, Agnya chakra. And then they for all of you because this is the puja of Adi Shakti and Adi Shakti is a complete collapsed into different places of complete ignorance. All these books were written personality. It's not only the left side that without understanding. That's not easy to you know. You all know only the left side, from go via right side. But best was to awaken Shri Ganesha through the ascent of your kundalini. The kundalini directly different different chakras on the left side. takes you up in the centre of all the I didn't want to tell you about the right side chakras, up to the Agya and crosses Agya to begin with because those who have and goes beyond Agya into the Sahasrara. And then it pierces through the gone through the right side got just lost. They got Gayatri mantra from the writings, Sahasrara. Now what is so important about the but they didn't know what it was about. They just used to learn it by heart. They Brahmarandhra from where it pierces? I didn't also know the real meaning of it and never told you about it. But now I think, for that is how they moved on the right side most of you, the time has come. You see and I don't know they landed up at the in the childhood, the child has a talu, is the Agya. And then they were trying for the fontannel bone area, which is pulsating Self Realization. They were promised that always. It is pulsating because the spirit if you do this right side properly, you will entered through that area and, when you reach to the ultimate goal of Self close it, it settles in the Heart. Now you Realization.. have to become the spirit-oriented person. But none of them reached (there) yet. But how to enter into the Sahasrara was Most of them got into a terrible temper, the problem. The tantrikas, who were terrible temper of cursing others, of there, they went through the left side and destroying others, all these things they they developed all the practices of black, learnt through their right side movement. we should say, the left side. So the right-sided became extremely There was no Kundalini awakening. And

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 centre. Left side, they had Jainism. Right hot tempered, extremely hot tempered, I say, extremely ambitious, side, Christianity. They were not actually should ferocious and they started killing people ascending path. They were just side on the basis of cursing. They're very good outlets, you can say, for the energy of people who were trying to seek the truth. at cursing people, to be always forward, Now this happened for ages in India. Al push back all the people and over-ride everybody's rights. They were regarded the gurus, all the sadhus, all the big tapaswis, all of them did this, But where as the most, ambitious and most powerful did they reach? Tapaswis were the people people. Now the brahmins and, to some who could give curses, shaap, to people. extent, the kshatriyas, they then took the right side. Because of the right side, they They could curse somebody. With the became very powerful, no doubt. They got kataksha, is with the glance of the eye, all the powers over the world and they they could kill somebody, they could burn were regarded as extremely powertul and something. All right-sided powers they had. But with these right-sided powers, majestic people, but they were not where did they reach? To hell, I should because they were so hot tempered. Hot say, in a way, if not in the limbo, as you tempered people cannot be spiritual. call it. There nobody got Self Realization. So they were told, You'll get your You read the old books from India, but spirituality. Don't worry. Keep moving. And even otherwise, the Greeks and then we the seven chakras were described on the had Egyptians, English and all kinds of right side. According to them there is Bhuh, Bhurvah. Bhuh is this Prithvi aggressive people, Germans. All of them were aggressive. Catholics. And also, you (Earth), is this word Bhuh. Bhurvah is the had Romans. All of them were aggressive complete cosmos or we can call it Antariksha, Swaha, swaha is consumption and were taking the land and property of other countries. at the Nabhi chakra. And swadha is the Extremely aggressive, they believed in consumption, inside is to absorption the killing of the people, extremely swaha. Then is the mind, heart. Mana, after mana came the Agnya. Vishuddhi insulting hot-tempered people. So how to the Vishuddhi is jana, collectivity, people, bring them to the normal, to the central path? One side was, as I told you, Bhuh go to the people jana. Then, at the Agnya, Bhurva, Swaha Swadha, is consumption. it is tapa. In tapa we have Christ in the

 35 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 All these people, as they were This was done by the Guru Principle. Then we have mana, jana - That is collective. aggressive and destructive, this nature is still within us, some people because they They became collective, no doubt, because they are so powerful that they are right-sided. All right-side people had had such a lot of people with them. To this problem. Temper, aggression, fight for the oppressive, with their controlling others, the growth stopped and were there was no spiritual growth. They oppressive temperament they fighting on people and were oppressing wanted to have spirituality, but with this kind of behaviour they had developed, them. All this kind of knara generation came spirituality ran away. We had so many in the history, as you know, and then it incarnations. They all disappeared. Wars were created. Then so crucified, or were finished. There was no many people were killed. We had Hitler as possibility of saving, human beings in the maximum of cruelty. They never cared general. One bad man came and he ruined the whole world. We had one Hitler, for humanity.. Then ultimately it came to the Agnya. Agnya also they killed Jesus who really hit all the people, all the Christ. They destroyed Jesus Christ. They countries, all the nations and we were all finished. All this is because we have taken destroyed so many great saints who were really sent through the central path. Some to right-sided movement, which they were incarnations and they destroyed thought was easier for spirituality, which them. All this happened since the time of was not. So they crossed all the limits and they Rama. All that has happened and, one after another, so many rakshasas came reached a stage that they became and they destroyed the peaceful culture ol absolutely devils, rakshasas. Without the world. realizing that human beings are rakshasas, that's what they become. Even Extremely arrogant, show-offs, as we can call them, very aggressive people and their gurus were like that, but they tortured this aggression came, came with such a even the incarnations. All the incarnations were tortured by them, It was really, how. great force and followed one after another. It went up to a point. When people reacted, they saved themselves remarkable. But they were killed and were destroyed. So ultimately, they couldn't produce any horrible people were created. results.

 36 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 So first thing is that you must develop So the first thing I tried was to study about the kundalini that I should be able to your sense of chastity. Respect it and raise the kundalini and I knew I had come enjoy it. That happened because of your for that, not for anything else, but only to Mooladhara being awakened. That's the raise the kundalini of people, so that they first chakra on the left side, where you take to the central path, not to the right or have Shri Ganesha. to the left. But I told you the knowledge of But on the right side also, we have deities. On every chakra we have deities the left side, plus raising your kundalini. By raising your kundalini, you broke your to compensate. For Shri Ganesha is in the Sahasrara and you entered into the realm centre and that's how we were blessed by of real joy, of reality. All these bad His powerful purity. And we started qualities started falling out. In the central understanding the beauty of purity, the power of purity. That's how our right side, path, first the Mooladhara came. By the we finished off. Right side was for fighting, awakening of the Mooladhara in the central path, you became very pure for killing, anger. There was no peace for these people. The only thing they knew. people. Your eyes became pure. Your licentiousness Your (was) how to dominate others and to be went away. cheapness went away. And you became intolerable. So then they rose to a higher level of very-very, I think we should call them the people. Unless and until that Swadisthan. In Swadisthana, they rose holy happens, you cannot be in Sahaja Yoga. and the aggressiveness of the creative You cannot be a licentious, you cannot be peopie, to create something. Even now we flirtish, you cannot be a man who wants have many. They create all kinds of all type of to grab money from others and all that or create nonsense, grotesqueness, also very, very, I should anyone who is very aggressive could be in Sahaja Yoga. say, dirty things to make a name. So this is the another thing we got it in So all such people were thrown out. Swadisthana, people who wanted to have Once they were thrown out, they were showing their teeth, I should say. They a name, a position that came from right Swadisthana. didn't like it that they were thrown out. But Then the third chakra that was there they understand now, some of them, that was the Nabhi chakra. On the Nabhi we have made mistakes.

 37 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 were horrible mothers, tried to dominate chakra, they wnet all out to make money, not Lakshmi, but money, money by any their children, dominate everyone and could not sacrifice anything for their means. And they cheated the whole world. children. We have had enough of these With this money that they got, they did all kinds of bad things. Either they cheated or women who are aggressive with their husbands, are aggressive with their they were aggressive. Cheating was very much in the left side countires like India children. And even the motherhood among men is dead and finished. and aggressiveness in the right side All that kind of lot, when I came on this countries. In the centre, what quality we have at the Swadisthana is the Earth I saw and I was shocked. What sort creativeness. Creative of art, which is very of human beings are those? What am beautiful, which is very deep, which is going to do with them? How will I awaken absolutely spiritual, that vanished and their kundalini? At the Nabhi chakra only they were lost. But now it is the Mother's people started showing even the incarnations full of dirty habits. All kinds of chakra. They had no fatherhood, no filth came in with that progress. motherhood. They drove out their Then as I told there's Nabhi. In Nabhi, children, very selfish, self-centred, dominating parents. people got after money. Left-sided people This was the Heart chakra. Then came were making money. Right-sided were aggressive with their money., If they were the collective chakra, what we call as the Vishuddhi. At the Vishuddhi chakra, they earning, they thought they were on top of the world. If they had money, they thought wanted to occupy the whole world. They nobody's better than us. All this finished wanted to occupy the whole world as their them off. Its finishing. It will come to that own, to become emperors and they formed empires and misbehaved to such point where they will realize, that money is not for destroying, but for construction, an extent that its not humanly possible to constructing of the country, constructing behave like that. They really were of the human beings together to bring rakshasas, I should say, and those peace and love among them, for helping, rakshas qualities are still there. In their behaviour, in everything you can see how for doing all kinds of good things. Then the same right-sided people were to the they behave towards people, treating chakra of the Mother. 'Han'(yes) and they them like that, creating people who are

 38 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 against spirituality and those who are how many people have you changed? What have you done? That has to be aggressive. Well these became like a, two sided world, where there are people who seen. Still, you live with your ego on the are aggressive and the people who are Agnya and you are very happy with your tortured. This-two sided world, existed peace, with everything you have got through Sahaja Yoga. even now, but is much less. Thanks to the collective understanding, there are many This is the biggest calamity that the world is facing today. That those who are good institutions that were established, but they are not working out. They are not also spiritual, those who have achieved so successful. Because the men at the great heights are least bothered. As to head of it are controlling, but controlling what good has to be done, what they are doing is to enjoy their own spirituality. You what? Not themselves. Controlling others. come to the puja, have more and more of And all their behaviour has spoiled all the work of this chakra. it, but they have done no collective work to Collectively, you have, if you see change people. Some of them are working around not today, everywhere there's war one or two, bas(that is all), the rest of them going on, fights going on, killing going on, are having a good time, enjoying themselves in such a manner that people destruction going on. How is it? There are accept them as great souls, good people, so many spiritual people now in this world. So the reason is the spiritual people have that's all. I would like you to now introspect and become very quiet. Very much enjoying their spiritual life. Have become very quiet find out how much collective work you have done, how many people you have and very peaceful people. But that doesn't bring peace. You have to be dynamic. And got like that. With whom are you, talking? you have to bring peace in the world. You How many people have you told about have to do something about it. We are Sahaja Yoga? Only so many are there. very much satisfied with our progress, but Christ had only twelve disciples. They are much more dynamic than you are. we are not bothered as to see what is the So now, you should take to the right progress others have done, how far they have gone, where can we meet them, side. And when you take to the right side, we'll create dynamic people, not just some what can we change them. At My level, I useless, patient, very quiet, peaceful can change many things, but at your level

 39 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 people. This was not the aim of Sahaja spread the Sahaja Yoga. They are more interested in running schools, in looking Yoga. The aim of Sahja Yoga is to after the destitute, doing this, doing that. change, change so many. And those who That's not your job. Your job is to create are doing that, all My blessings are with more Sahaja Yogis, more Sahaja Yoginis. them. But those who are just keeping to But that is ot there. What I find is it's not themselves, it is not a very good thing. In your country how many people have got to there. The right side is missing. You Sahaja Yoga? Just find out with how many should come to the right side. Go all ahead. Nothing will happen to you. people you have worked it out? Nobody can kill you, nobody can So yours is not a complete yoga. Yours is a partial yoga of the left side, where you disturb you, nobody can arrest you, take it are very loving, very kind, very this thing. from me. You have powers, but if you I'm not saying that you should become don't use them, you are like this. That is why we have come to the stagnated point, aggressive in any way. I have seen people that we should know we have to use our want to be leaders. They want to be something great, but how many people right side. Right side is very important. Next time l'll tell you about right side, have they given Realization? How many people have they talked about Sahaja what right-sided things you have. Now you cannot become left-sided whatever you Yoga? I have seen, in the aeroplane also may try. So you use your right side in the you go, you walk in the street, anywhere right the with direction, people talk about Sahaja Yoga. But here right we are using Sahaja Yoga for our understanding, not as some sort of, I greatness, for our understanding of should say. very arbitrary or very dominating, like Hitlers. We have had also ourselves. This is not why Sahaja Yoga has been brought to you. It has been Hitlers among Sahaja Yogis. But now, the brought to you for giving Realizations to time has come for you to do something more than what the saints have done many people. before, to work it out that way, not to keep request all the younger people, younger generation, not to waste their to yourselt, that you have a family, you have very nice children, having, enjoying, Sahaja energies on nonsense as the old all that. That's not the Sahaja Yoga for. people have done. You better go ahead Sahaja Yoga is for transforming the and talk to people about Sahaja Yoga and

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 Nov,& Dec, 2002 40 whole world. You have to think about it. just forgive, no. You go and talk to that What are you doing? Where are you? And person and tell him it is wrong. You have what have you achieved out of Sahaja to face it. If you cannot face it, then you are useless, just like any other people. Yoga? Then we come to the Agnya. In Agnya What's the use of you people getting your what has happened is Sahaja Yogis have Realization? become such that, they can bear So now, we have to understand that its anything. They can suffer anything. That's not only that we have vibrations, that we not what we want. What we want is to are all right, that you can cure some remove the sufferings of others, remove people, is the last word no. You have to the aggression of others. So we don't spread it. You have to go in the public. You have to be collective on this point and have that kind of organization, we don't have. That kind of understanding, we don't you have to spread Sahaja Yoga. With so have. And if that works out, you will be many Sahaja Yogis all over the world, we different people. have not progressed much. So now, it is So we have become like saints, you you who have to plan what you want to do, see, sitting in their hermit halls, something how you want to do it and how you want to like that, not more than that. spread Sahaja Yoga. Its very important. So better try to do something positive, Because you people are good at, say, without aggression. I know some of you talking about Sahaja Yoga, singing about are still very aggressive, are show-offs ! Sahaja Yoga, all these things are useless, v that. But if you get into the mood of know unless and untill you have concrete proof working out collectively, then you will of getting many more people in Sahaja realize what mistakes you have. Still, what Yoga. is lacking in your personality? That is very In a small country like Turkey, we have important. At Agnya chakra many Sahaja Yogis falter. I don't know what happens to twenty-five thousand Sahaja Yogis, what do you say? They are all Muslims. them. At Agnya, I have told that you must Twenty-five thousand Muslims becoming forgive. But that doesn't mean that you Sahaja Yogis. While you find that number allow people to do wrong things. Because is very small in any other country? They you want to forgive, its very easy not to are not very rich, but they care for their fight, not to say anything, just keep out, Self Realization and for giving Self

 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 Realization to others. Its very surprising country have you worked it out all over? Just think about it. And that's why, unless how it has worked out, how it has spread! So instead of thinking of your problems, and until you don't do it, you are not of your enemies, of your powers, think of sampoorna, you are not complete and the powers you have not giving power to others and making them Adi Shakti's understood in its full form. That's why I'm Sahaja Yogis. Its very important. If you are telling you today it's a very important day in Sahasrara, then you have all the powers. In Sahasrara, if you do not spread that you worship Me as Adi Shakti. But you should know that Adi Shakti has to be Sahaja Yoga, what's the use of getting a complete form. It cannot be only half left- Realization? Just for yourself? Its being sided, no. If that doesn't work out, then very selfish. Sol would say that, instead of spreading your own glory, your own fame, what's the use? its like getting any other your own name, please try to get more Realization. That's not so important. Not only that you should spread, but also you people to Sahaja Yoga. Go into a very should make them and realize it. dynamic force. So many people have complained to All My blessings, all My love, all My powers I give you. But try to understand, Me that Sahaja Yogis are nothing but dead people. Is that what you are? Only all right? single person like Me has done so much work. So why not you people? In your Thank you very much.

 Shri Mataji Cleansed Our Souls Hong-Kong- 16-19, December, 2001 Shri Mataji was here on a private visit and was accompained by Sir C.P. and suite and thanked us for making all the She was very pleased with the hotel also Kalpana-didi, who came from arrangements. She asked to see the Bombay to join them. news, as there was some events between We had made all the arrangements India and Pakistan that She wanted to follow. Her attention was very much on the weeks in advance and had secured a very current situation in that region. good suite at the Park Lane Hotel, close to the ashram in Causeway Bay, which is on Shri Mataji spent the first two days resting and watching the news. She had a Hong Kong Island. lot of attention on American President The night before Shri Mataji arrived, the George W.Bush and mentioned that She ladies transtormed the hotel suite with had written to him on various occasions beautiful flowers and decorations, so it feit and that he had taken Her advice. He was very homely. A puja was done to vibrate the suite in preparation for our Divine quoting from the letter She had written Mother. many of his speeches, It was interesting Shri Mataji arrived early in the morning that this time last year when Shri Mataji on December 16th, after a longer than came to Hong Kong She was full of praise for George Bush and said that he was usual sixteen hour flight via Taiwan, due to strong winds. A small group had gathered simple man. to welcome Shri Mataji with flowers. Who could have imagined the turn of Shri Mataji emerged with a beaming events and how this man could be the smile, looking very fresh. She was very chosen one to defeat these evil force? happy to greet us and asked hbw everyone Shri Mataji went shopping on the was. We all felt the love and compassion of Tusesday morning, December 18th, to our Holy Mother and the sweet smile buy presents for various people. She is always buying for others and I have never touched our hearts and cleansed our souls. She said that the flight had been longer seen Her buy one thing for Herself in all than expected, so we quickly took Her to the years that She has been coming to the car and back to the hotel. Hong Kong.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Voiume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 43 Nov.& Dec. 2002 Shri Mataji always comes when the Jo Yo, had come all the way from sales are on and gets an even bigger Guan-dong province to be with Shri discount on the sale price. Her eye for Mataji. She was so happy to be able to detail in the designs of things is amazing see Shri Mataji, Shri Mataji then appointed and She always picks out the best pieces two new leaders for Hong Kong. Edwin the shop is seling. The vibrations flow and Hou and Lily Chen will now look after Hong Kong and China. For me, it marked the shop assistants get their Realization. On Tuesday evening, we had arranged the end of a great chapter of my life, as I have been coordinating Sahaja Yoga a dinner for Shri Mataji, but, as She was tired from shopping, She rested and took activities in Hong Kong for the past ten Her dinner in Her room. years and seen the collective grow and After dinner, a concert was planned mature. They will now provide the foundations for Sahaja Yoga to work out in and Shri Mataji decided to come to this, as She didn't want to disappoint the yogis. It China. It was Wednesday morning and Shri was a very intimate setting in a small function room with about thirty-five yogis. Mataji wanted to buy saris, so we travelled Shri Mataji gave all the yogis a ring and to Kowloon, where there is a famous sari said it was for our protection. emporium. After the shopping, Shri Mataji One of the Chinese yoginis, Florence, gave Realization to the manager and his played the gu zheng, a traditional Chinese asistant. We got them to put their hands string instrument tuned to a model scale. towards Shri Mataji and they all telt the cool breeze, Shri Mataji was very pleased She played some of the famous Chinese folk songs and Shri Mataji really enjoyed that they got their Realization and the performance. This was followed by encouraged them to come to our some bhajans performed by the Hong programms. We had planned a last minute shopping Kong yogis. It was such a beautiful evening and all the yogis were overjoyed expedition, but unfortunately time had run to have spent time with Shri Mataji in such out. We left for the airport and Sir C.P. an intimate setting. went with old friend, Tommy Cheung, who Shri pleased has always met with Shri Mataji when She was very has come to Hong Kong. with everyone and put attention very much on the situation in China. One lady, The day was sunny and warm. We

 44 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 hostesses between Los Angeles and were all feeling sad that Shri Mataji had to Hong Kong. One of them, while Shri Mataji go so soon. A few of the yogis gathered at was holding her hand, said, "Mother I can the airport to meet Her and She spent the time receiving flowers and speaking to feel a lot of power coming from your hand." Shri Mataji smiled and replied, "I them. She thanked us all and then She went only have the power of love and through to the immigration control. We compassion." The plane made an unscheduled stop waited and watched and She finally waved at Taipei and so Shri Mataji had Her to us all as She departed to catch Her attention on Taiwan. The three air flight to Mumbai. hostesses, one from the Philippines, one We all felt sad, but, at the same time, fortunate to have been so close to Her for from Japan and the other one from China, the past four days. We knew that there brought Her attention to Sahaja Yoga and the yogis in those countries. were many of our Indian brothers and She later also had attention on sisters who were eagerly waiting for Her Malaysia and Indonesia, as it was the arrival in Mumbai. maids' day when we arrived in Hong Kong. Shri Mataji gave Realization to three air

 Shri Mataji talks to Sahaja Yogis in Hong Kong 18th December-2001 (Part and Parcel of that whole) accepted now in China and they are "I am so happy to hear all of you singing practising Tao, so we can also. So we are those beautiful songs, which are sung all Taoists." over the world. Now you have become Premier Li Peng of China was shown part and parcel of that whole. "We have Sahaja Yogis everywhere. In My photograph. "He said, "Yes, I America, I was surprised to find that three remember this lady. She has a remarkable personality.. They said, 'She is our guru' hundred Sahaja Yogis were saved" in this World Trade Center incident. Not a single and She's this and She's done this for us. He was very much touched." He told his Sahaja Yogi was hurt or lost life. It is remarkable how some of them were late attaché for cultural affairs to meet Me- "You must see Her and know about Her'- for work that day, some of them ran down to get out on time and some of them even though they were communists and all that." started running in the other direction. "All "The attaché came to see Me... closed of them are Sahaja Yogis... "It is remarkable how you are looked his eyes and then he came up. Then I told him all about it." after and saved by the Divine" About Chinese people Tao is Sahaja Yoga What I liked about Chinese people "is "I feel that we can do a lot" here in China. The Chinese "already have a that they were extremely humble, very tradition of Tao... Tao is a Sahaja Yogi respectful people." When I went to the and he describes his mental conditions United Nation Women's Conference in Beijing, "they gave us a complete floor of a and all of the problems they have in such a beautiful manner... great hotel to stay in." They sent two cars. "one for my wheelchair and one for "Somehow or other, Taoism was not practised and it has just become Myself." They arranged for so many people to look after Me. books of controversy for all the sc'iolars, that's all. But now I think they are reviving. "One of them said, 'Mother, tomorrow I I was told that...Tao religion has been won't come.' I said. 'Why, what's the

 46 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 matter? Tomorrow I am getting married.'I Yogis in these countries alone "and there will be many more... Even the president of said, "You are getting married and all the time you are with Me?" He said, 'I enjoyed the Ivory Coast is a Sahaja Yogi. being with you very much.""You see, even "Things are working out in so many when I went there, they took Me to the countries. This is the time people are conference so fast. There was no time in seeking the truth. They want to have the between. and when I came to the airport truth. That's how in every place, in every also they came. They had tears in their country, Sahaja Yoga is spreading very eyes. They were very loving, very nice fast now. "In Nigeria, I was surprised how things people. They have suffered a lot." are working out. Anywhere you go, people But here in Hong Kong, "you have been all right... You have to be connected to are now fed up with falsehood. In every have found that somehow they the mains... If you are not connected to religion I the main tree, how will you prosper? I have created some faisehood and created know who's who, what they are doing. groups." There's a "nice book by Javed Khan, what is wrong with them. I know all about them.. So we have to spread Sahaja The Koran Enlightened... What they are saying, that this Koran is Kundalini Yoga." Awakening. Now all of you have got it.. Some people who are very important are able to recognize Me. "In India, one "But thank God, I went to America and home minister, he has tremendous the war was over very fast... But it has shook the whole world. I must say, Thank respect for Me. He came to My house and he got his Realization. God now, the war is over. People have to " Muslims in Sahaja Yoga suffer the after-effects of that war. Sustained by you We have a lot of Muslims now in Sahaja "I have seen people, even in Sahaja Yoğa in India. You will be very happy to know that Yoga, become very fanatic. Fanaticism- there are countries in Africa called Benin we are against it. We are free people. We and Ivory Coast, "seven countries ruled by have Self Realization, which is a birth by French. They all were Muslims" and many your Spirit and you are not bound by anything. You will never do wrong things. of them have now become Sahaja Yogis. So far there are iwenty thousand Sahaja All bad things will drop out automatically.

 47 Nov.& Dec. 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 said the same thing. It's nothing new that I You don't have to be told. 'Don't do this, am saying... don't do that." "So it is something we have to work out. "After some time, I have seen all Sahaja Yogis become all right and they Talk to people, tell them... I was surprised when we were coming by Cathay [Pacific come to their senses. Even those people Airways]. Avinash started talking to the air who have left, I am sure, will come back hostess and to other people. They all because, you see, after all, there is came to Me, one by one. They said. 'You Kundalini. She is sitting there. She'll rise all the time, correcting them... are a very powerful person,' this, that. They all got their Self Realization. "I am very happy to see that in Hong "That's how it's going to spread. We Kong, also, Sahaja Yoga is sustained by have to tell everybody, tell everyone and you and I am sure it will grow, especially in not to teel shy about it. These guru people China... You have to do a lot for China and work it out because this is the message of have seen. They go on talking about their gurus.. We should also talk and tell people Tao. "This is not something, I would say, about it. This is the truth. You have to know the truth.... absolutly new." Only thing what I have done is to make it en masse, a mass "Of course, there are people who have been criticizing. It's all right. It's all movement. "That's what it is. It is the same. "All these great Sufis, all these great falsehood. It will all go away. saints, incarnations, all of them have said "I am very happy to see you all here. So the same thing. 'Seek yourself, find thank you very much again and again." yourself, know yourself.' All of them have

 My Heartfelt Kowtow (A Sahaja Yogini From Hong-Kong) Thank the Divine. It is out of my strong emotions or gratitude that tears dropped non-stop like beads falling from a expectation to have such a blessing to see broken thread. Later, I realized that lots of the Holy Mother in person in Hong Kong yogis had the same experience. and enjoy Her boundless love. The encounter has transformed me The Hong Kong collective even allowed from an ordinary woman to a Sahaja Yogi. someone as new as a baby, like me, to be Just for a period of several days, I have so close to Mother. It was my luck to get to found miraculous changes in life. My heart know a group of dynamic and seems opened up all of a sudden and I compassionate yogis. I remembered the first time we have a very strong desire to share with others this boundless joy and love. Before meditated. It was very quick for me to feel the kundalini up onto the top of the head. that, I used to be an introvert and did not like to talk much. It is Mother who gave me In my belly, there was strong churning but a second life and made me fully it gradually subsided. As such, all understand that the Divine chose us not problems, as well as the chakra and nadi for our individual blessings, but to spread imbalances were treated and cleared all out this love for others. together, gracefully. I felt the cool breeze The long quest for the meaning of life on the head and my hands, as well as the eventually ended up with an answer. infinite joy. Everything around turned Everything comes in such a natural, living infinitely beautiful. Before that, members of my family way and I have done nothing for it. It just happened as a result of a pure heart of brought back bits and pieces of knowledge on Sahaja Yoga. My desire. My first encounter with Mother was knowledge is merely skin deep. I did not receiving Her at the airport. We waited even know the basic techniques. Yet, with an extremely reverent mind. simply, by the heart, to surrender and Suddenly, She appeared in front of us with seek the truth, as well as the love from the most beautiful and touching smile. Mother, I did nothing. I got cleansed. I do not know whether it was out of the This experience is totally beyond words.

 49 Nov.& Dec. 2002. The Divine Cool Breeze Voglume-XIV Issue 11 & 12 could not be stopped. I only feel I have On the third night, after 10 pm, the received, just overwhelmingly, too much. unfurnished hotel function room was filled Then Mother gave each Hong Kong up by the holy yogis and some lovely children. We all sat down, got into yogi a ring as a gift. It turned out to be the first time She did that. It was also my first meditation. time in life to bow and do my heartfelt Not long after, Mother appeared at the kowtow to Mother. Right at the moment, a door with a charming smile. We all greeted strong desire to surrender spontaneously Her with hands folded in namaskar to show deep respect. At that moment, the rose. May everyone enjoy this nicest feeling of gratitude rushed out from my heart again. Her touching smile deeply blessing on Earth. After that, Florence played the Chinese moved everyone there. Mother made an hour-long speech.. I traditional instrument, the zhang. The listened with great awe, like a child, music was enjoyable, sometimes as soft as water in a small stream, sometimes watching Her face without turning my eyes. Though I could only understand dashing with great enthusiasm, thus manifesting the depth of Chinese culture. twenty percent, I could feel the strong vibrations from Mother spreading to every Finally, we sang in praise of Mother. Though I did not know the songs, I tried to one of us. follow and enjoyed the beauty of oneness It is Mother who saves us from the disturbed mind and uplifts and corrects us, and unity. What a feeling beyond words! Such an indescribable feeling of gratitude

 TH E DIVINE Co oL DIVI N E COOL BRE EZ E Published by V.J. Nalgirkar 162-A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067 Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph. : 5447291, 5170197 For subscription please write to Mr. O. P. Chandna N-463 (G-11), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi - 110034 Ph.: (011) 7013464 Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to: THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple C- 17, Qutub Institutional Area New Delhi - 110016

 If there is no contentment (Samadhan) in Sahaja yoga theh it is useless. Where ever we are Mother is with us. In the State of Connection, where ever you are Mother is there. When you realize this only then you will be considered as Sahajayogi. (Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)



----------------------

2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 NIRMALA
November - December, 2002
Volume: XIV Issue: 11 & 12
INIVERSAL
The
PURE RELIGI
Divine Cool Breeze
00
You must love others, who are not Sahaja Yogis and give them
realization.
(Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
DHARMA
VISHWA
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 The Meaning of Sahaja Yoga
14
Easter Puja - 21.04.2002
Sahasrara Puja -5.05.2002
23
Shri Adi Shakti Puja - 23.06.2002
33
42
Shri Mataji Cleansed our Souls
45
Shri Mataji's talk to Sahaja Yogis in Hong Kong
48
My Heart felt Kowtow
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The Meaning of Sahaja Yoga
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Sahaja is inside you -like a germ..
parasympathetic coming into play and
Something that is born within you, that working it out, it's a big system and
is innately built in you which sprouts by organisation that is working it out. Now if
itself, which manifests itself, like you can
you want to separate it-that digestive
see a seed sprouting into a tree. This is system is different, respiratory system is
different and your heart system is different
what is Sahaja. Now all other yogas which
or some other brain system is different or
go along with it are part and parcel of
nervous system is different. I mean you
Sahaja Yoga. They cannot be separated
can't take it out like that, your brain
from this to that. I think people are under
misunderstanding that there are four limbs hanging on one side and your digestive
system hanging on the other. It is one
of one yoga or something like that. Even
that won't be a misunderstanding as to integrated form of organisation which is a
think that they are separated or different. living organisation which understands
each other, which reacts to the demand.
When we say that we have eaten this
food, it doesn't mean like a bolt it has gone
You cannot separate the systems but, as
it is, our brains are so disintegrated or they
inside in the body and just passed out of
are good at that disintegrating everything
the body like the bolt coming out. Does it?
within us and without, that we want to
It means that you have tasted the food in
disintegrate the living thing which is Yoga.
your mouth. It means that it has secreted
some saliva in the mouth, later on it has
Yoga is not a dead organisation. It's
a living process absolutely a living
passed through the trachea, the other
places like esophagus going down into the
process. When it is a living process you
stomach part and then to the intestines cannot do anything about it. So it is
and then to the large intestines. All this
Sahaja. At the most you can little bit shift it
movement in passages and all that is here and there and push it around and all
that. If a tree is coming up, like in Japan
done through the other kind of movement
which is existing in the organs itself, like
they want to give it a shape then they'll cut
the stomach itself pushing it down, coming
one branch first and bend it a little more
from your brain, the sympathetic and
then cut another one then bend it this way,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
Kundalini starts, and the awakening
that way and give it a shape. But whatever
is living is working out spontaneously starts, it passes through various centres.
within us with many a complicated How? How will you explain a Kundalini
organisations which are living themselves which is at the base end of your spinal
cord rising upward? Now if I tell you that
and are aware of what they are doing. For
this is even more than your digestive
example your body is much more aware of
me than your rationality. Say, you are a system that the Kundalini which is an
energy, as we call it, is the one that thinks,
possessed person. You won't accept that
you are possessed. You won't accept. I understands and loves you and knows
won't say myself also because I don't want
each and everything about you in this life
and lives before. If she is so capable and if
to get any kind of a thing which is in shock
there. I know human beings that if you tell
she knows everything and she is an entity
by itself and if she has to come up to your
them something like that you can be out
for any sort of trouble: so I don't tell you.
head, is it easy? It is the most difficult
But the body knows me. When you come thing. If you have a stone lying
somewhere you can pick it up and throw it
before me the whole body shakes just like
that. Is it true or not, tell me. Because it is wherever you like, isn't it-very simple.
Even if there is a little worm, it knows how
a living body, it knows me. It's not a dead
to get out of the way of a big bull coming
body.
So whatever is living, it's so well looked
round to save itself. And a bull, if it sits
after, organised and in a living way which
anywhere, impossible to raise it. You try
you do not understand. Because we deal your level best. There are some very
with the dead. Supposing I have to start
drastic methods for that, in India. You
this instrument, then I know there must be
have to burn some chillies, red chillies and
a cord. I have to put it to the mains and
work it out, and I always say that Sahaja
put that smoke into the nose of the bull like
that. Then only the bull would rise
oir
Yoga is like that. You just take out your otherwise you try anything it won't rise. It
cord and put to the mains. I say like that.
would be sitting and settling itself nicely on
But do you think it is that simple. You the ground. So, you come across such
believe that? That you just pull out the
bulls also. Sometimes it happens like that.
Kundalini from there and put to the mains.
But, to make this Kundalini which thinks,
No it is not. When the sprouting of the
understands, is an individual mother of an
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
individual, which has been born with you They have to find out the means and
methods and the result of that probing has
all the time, who knows all about you and
brought forth other yogas, which we call
who loves you the most and she is the one
who is going to give you your realization, as 'Rajayoga' or they call it as
'Hathayoga'. Now what is the third one you
your second birth. So she is your mother.
call it, 'Kriyayoga'. I think Kriya and Raj is
This kind of a Kundalini that exists within
the same, about the same style and
us, must be the most difficult person to
rise; has to be. That's why people say 'Bhaktiyoga' and 'Gyanayoga' and
Kundalini raising is very difficult; it is Karmayoga'. All these are the methods
human beings want to employ to make the
correct. So, one has to find out the
bull rise. I mean they get frustrated. They
methods of how to make the bull rise.
want to hang themselves by the nearest
Because this Kundalini is absolute
tree. So that also is another 'frustrated
dharma, is absolute righteousness,
yoga'. Then 'sadistic yogas', then 'beating
absolute purity, idealmost personality that
yogas', then 'beating other yogas. Then it
you could think of, which doesn't tolerate
goes on like that, you see, flowering into
any nonsense, falsehood, untruth,
anything like that. She is Nirmala, you can
better and better things. Then fanaticism.
Because human beings find it difficult to
call her. She is pure, extremely pure, she
is purity personified. She doesn't accept
sit still, you see. They get a challenge oh!
This bull doesn't rise, alright, I will make it
any nonsense, no compromise. She is
rise. Moreover, they haven't got the
within you. See how beautiful you are! She
is not afraid of anyone. She cannot be authority. Even those who are self
enticed, enchanted or tempted by realised, they have no knowledge
because Kundalini is not made by them.
anything and she loves. But her love is
Like even if I get this machinery, I don't
that pure, that nothing is higher for her
know how to handle, how to use it? I may
than her own love. She never reconciles to
try it but I may burn my hands, instead.
So, such a hotch-potch of endeavour
anything and she is the one who is going
to give you your self realization.
So for human beings who know about
brings forth so many yogas in this world
it, they have to find out methods of
and everybody is baffled at it that how it is
that there are so many yogas! Whether we
pleasing her. What makes her so
should do this yoga or that yoga or
unhappy? Why doesn't she want to rise?
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
Buddha or Mahavira or Christ or this and
are wagging with that and it goes on push
that and what is it? Then 'Church yoga/ it back here at the Vishuddhi Centre. They
and Buddus' and what's wrong in 'witch
think Vishuddhi is here. The problem is.
craft', the other day somebody said, they think the Vishuddhi is here. So they
Nothing wrong but the bull will be settled push back here and they think that they
down better. It won't rise then with Buddu.
will achieve the raising of the Kundalini by
Now, so they have to try to find out what
tickling this portion.
should we do? Stand on your heads, bull
It is just the other way round we are
won't rise. No it won't. Break your necks? trying, you see. The effect cannot reach
It won't. So what should we do?
the cause. You have to go to the root of
We should know what is a Kundalini, the cause to come to the effect. Do you
that is within us. All these yogas that have
see my point? Supposing the Vishuddhi
Chakra which is here, a very subtle centre
come up have been depicted from the
experiences of people. Because some behind is spoilt then the effects are felt,
say here and your tongue gets affected,
people, when they tried to raise the
Kundalini, so called, say they started
your eyes get affected, your nose gets
jumping. So they said let us jump and the
affected, your cheeks get aftected, these
Kundalini will rise. Then some people are sixteen you see, all these things can
started taking out their clothes may be, be affected. But by tickling your nose you
some sort of a funny thing, like that. They
do not touch your Vishuddhi chakra. Isn't
felt heated up. So people thought let us
it. Do you see my point? For example
take out our clothes and we will find God.
something goes wrong at the centre from
Some people telt some sort of a grip on where the electricity is coming here. By
the stomach or some of them did see also
tickling this here you cannot cure that one
these things happening whithin. So they
there. You have to go to the roots or on a
tree you find a fruit is getting rot, all the
called it a "Moolbandha'. They said that
the bandha has taken place. Something fruits are getting rot. So, by treating the
has gripped there. So, the 'Kriyayoga' is fruit can you treat the disease? You will
that you take out your tongue from here,l have to go to the roots. So these people
mean you cut this thread of the tongue when they saw all these things happening
alright and you push it back, here. Touch
happening to human beings, they formed
this tip of the tongue here. Normally they
different types of methods. All are wrong
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
realized soul, he will say that. He doesn't
and all are right. Try to understand, its
talk of seperation. He talks of authority
very simple. After realization all of them
because he is there, he has that authority.
are right. Before realization all of them are
Those who talk of seperation, crying and
wrong. Before your car starts if you start
turning the break or using the wheel, you weeping and all that are blind like all
others. They have no buisness to lead
are spoiling the car. When the car has
you. There is no humility about It. I mean if
started and you know how to drive and
I have a red shawl, I should say, I have a
you have become a master of driving, then
red shawl. What is there to feel humble
everything is right. Otherwise the same
about it. I mean whatever you are, there is
car which has to drive you from my house
no harm in saying what you are. When you
to this Ashram will land me up
somehwere. In the same way the same
are not that, when you do not have that in
you and you say that, it is arrogance. But
thing which before realization has no
when you are that you have to say that 'I
meaning, after realization only you start
am the Light, I am the Path.' I mean he
understanding.
So let us take the case of Hathayoga'. was not trying to be arrogant about it.
What is there to feel bad about it?
It's based on centres no doubt. It is based
So, Hathayoga itself is done under a
on Ishwar Pravdhan, no doubt. All the
ashtangas, all the Pranidhan (af) person who is a realized soul, not only
realized but who knows, who has
eight sides of Hathayoga, see from human
mastered the art of Shakti Path, is the
pont of view I am saying, for them why
Hathayoga came into being is first that raising of the Kundalini, minimum.
Ofcourse Sahaja Yogis just raise it like
they should fix their attention on the
that; it is dfferent, but not any other yogis
Ishwara Pranidhana, means they must fix
their attention into the existence of God,
can do that. It's only you because you are
authorised, that you first raise the
not blind faith, but to understand that there
is God. So that you humble down yourself. Kundalini, just like this. So, what these
Hathayogis have done is that boiled it
Then you should go to a realized soul as a
down to only physical sense. So, you have
Guru. Guru means a realized soul,
to have Ishwara Pranidhana, Yama-
minimum. Any Tom, Dick & Harry
Niyama, that too before twenty-five years
becomes a guru, is a nonsense, absolute.
He has to be a realised soul and if he is a
of age, you have to discipline yourself in a
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
don't want exercise. They don't want
way, that you should understand what is
right and What is wrong. Now those who
Scouts, they want somebody to love them,
have done all the wrongs of the world to heal them, to cure them, to establish
before their fifteen years of age, now, at them. There is no word of love in
the age of twenty-five they are trying to Hathayoga these days because you pay
for it. One thing you cannot pay for, is your
learn what is yama and Niyama. How can
love. Isn't it? How can you pay for love?
you do it? Tell me now. Supposing you
That's why this modern Hathayoga is just
have spoiled the car completely, at the
a misnomer. But after realization you can
most you can ask for insurance, If
you
use hathayoga because you are purified,
have paid for it. Now, how do you expect
the car to come out absolutely, as if from you are cleansed, you are healed, your
the factory, as if its absolutely new? A wounds are airight. People are wounded.
horse which is being completely mutilated They are so much hurt. They are
cannot run a race, isn't it? That would be extremely unhappy. You touch them and
they feel it. Why talk about big things when
madness.
So, one has to understand that these they don't even have energy to sustain
themselves. It's a strain on them and none
Yama-Niyamas and all these things are
of them are realized souls nor they are
not meant for us. At least for the western
masters in shakti path. So, that's why it
people, in any case. Let us accept it.
was said that you should go to a Guru who
Whatever it is, in experimentation or
whatever it is we have committed lots of is a realized soul, go into jungles, twenty
five years of age you shauld be there and
mistakes or maybe we have been
experimenting. Again I will say the same
practice under his guidance, in complete
word. Whatever we have done, we have celebacy, with the atmosphere of
done a lot of harm to ourselves, to our complete celebacy.
Now, come to 'Kriya yoga'. When we
body, to our mind because we had nobody
to guide us, alright. We didn't want to harm
take to Kriya yoga, you see, taking out the
tongue, as I said, cutting out and putting it
ourselves but by mistake it has happened.
Now, what to do? Is a very sad affair. back into the thing here to tickle the
Vishuddhi chakra. I mean, i don't know,
People are sick. They cannot do
sometimes your rationality also goes off.
Hathayoga. The atmosphere is sick. The
whole place is sick. They want love. They By doing anything like that do you think
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
you can excite this great power within Kriya yogas have started. Even the
you, which is discrimination, which jumping has started, even the nudity has
started. All these things are the result of
understands each and every thing? You
some people who are trying to raise the
cannot befool Her like that. So, all these
Kundalini. Even in the centre when it rises
tricks that we have been trying with
all these things happen but when your
ourselves, of poking yourself here and
health is not alright, you are sick, your
poking yourself there, you are just spoiling
heart is working, labouring very hard, lo
your instrument for nothing at all. But it
look after your physical being, you try to
happens when the Kundalini rises through
make it even weaker by taking to these
the Vishuddhi Chakra, that when the
strenuous things and by using the other
dilatation of the chakra takes place, it
way round method, as I told you, you also
happens that your tongue is pulled inside,
it happens that your eyes get dilated.I spoil your instrument. Like the electricity
has to come in it. So the electricity must
hope they do not put Aptrophin to dilate
flow from there. If I start blowing from here
their eyes to get the Kundalini awakening!
or poking from here with frustration also
So, it happens like that, specially takes
place, the bandhas take place, the breaking this one here, electricity is not
going to come, only this will be finished.
stomach holds the kundalini with a
Do you follow my clear cut idea? It's very
bandha. It closes down the chakras. When
the Kundalini comes up it closes itself clear that if you try to spoil your own
instrument you are not going to get the
down automatically so that the energy is
energy to rise within you. But if he was a
kept upward, it should not be allowed to
realized soul, then he would tell you. First
fall down. All these things happen within
us, these bandhas happen, which some
of all he may raise your Kundalini,
minimum awaken your Kundalini and ask
superaconscious people might be seeing
and they want to think that if you pull your you to make way for the Kundalini to rise
stomach like this, put your tongue inside. gradualy. Human beings when they raise
the Kundalini, they raise it by every
These things happen as a result of
Kundalini awakening but by doing chakra, they bring the Kundalini, say
Muladhara, of course they cannot touch.
these things you do not awaken the
So the Kundalini will come up to say Nabhi
Kundalini. Now did you follow my point?
at the most. Then how to retain it there?
Did you? It's clear now. And that's why this
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
So they will say eat less, do not take away
the character and the personality of the
your attention too much. You must eat people. Like now in India nobody can write
very little, so that there is not much
any epic like Ramayana because we don't
attention on the food. Keep yourself have any Ramas left. We won't have
detached. This is before twenty five years perhaps. Nobody writes. They write only
of age. Do not starve too much, eat at stories. Now the poems have started
regular intervals.
coming out of India like your (who was this
Don't have much
attention anywhere outside so that lord you had, the horrible one) Byron.
attention is kept there and the Kundalini Now, Mr. Byron is born in India. I think he
doesn't drop down from the little bit an
has left your country. So, like that. So all
inch progress, it has made in twenty five
the dynamism in literature is also finished
years. They are born again and again and because there is no ideal before them.
they move at the pace of a little ant. And
They cannot think of a perfect personality.
they fix your Kundalini by means there and
So, the epics are different in the same
way. When we go to learn these things,
they say, don't lead any adharmic life. You
have to lead a very righteous life, like a
we see our gurus, so called, we see their
horse you see. When you have to train the
lives, the impression that we have within
horse you have to put these two blinds us is also just the same. And they cannot
around. So they have to train the horse teach you anything unless and until they
you see before it realy starts running the themselves are the light. Now, this
race. But with this, is important, the most kriyayoga is also the same thing. It is
important is the love of the grand parents, described by great saints in India that
who are with them, in those days used to
these Jalandhar Yoga and all these
be, to look after the children and the love
Jalandhar Bandhas and all these bandhas
of the guru and the training and disciplie
take place means the rebounding takes
of his own self. The gurus who take money
place in the stomach, in the heart and all
these granthis (knots) are broken and al
from you, what are they going to train you
in buisness management or dubious
these things are described.
up
methods or cheating. Their own lives are
Yes, it happens in you also when the
so beautifuly blended with their love and
Kundalini rises. It does happen because I
am quite a big master. I do everything
their knowledge
and their whole
myself. I don't leave anything to you till
understanding that it has a direct effect on
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
Nov.& Dec. 2002
so great that you feel you have got it. She
you have got it. Only thing what you have
rises with such a thumping joy. You get it.
to do is to be absolutely freely choosing
But again you go back to your crutches.
the path of self realization. That's the only
thing you have to do to be absolutely free.
Even when you have lost all your troubles
In all your freedom you have to accept and everything, is finished now, still you
want to have your crutches because you
Sahaja Yoga and if I find that you have
are identified with them. So you go back to
not chosen it by your freedom, you get
out of it, very fast. You won't be there. your crutches and also want to again to
become naïve. It's just acting going on for
You yourself run away, if not, I see to it
sometime but when you act for a long
that you run away.
So, one has to understand that all period then you become lame, Because
these margas, all these paths, even like you have been playing games you see
bhakti, I have told you that three types of
and now the game is over. So you have to
bhaktas are the ones who are asking for accept yourself that you are great and that
kamarthita. So many have come to me for
you have got it now within yourself. It is
say cures, so many of them. It's a good there. Now, you are a light. You have to
thing. That's a good chance for me. Then
accept that, that you are a light now. You
they get cured. Then they have that love,
are not the same as you were before and
then they are Mumukshus and they can
you are transformed into this flower. You
become very great Sahaja Yogis, In India should have faith in yourself and
there are many who have become like
confidence in you because you are being
so far identified with people like that, with
that. They just came for the treatment and
they became great Sahaja Yogis. So, they
bad experiences, indifferent experiences,
You do not want to believe that there could
can pass through all these various stages.
has to understand that this is the
So one
be an experience of that kind, you do not
time of Mahayoga, where all these Antar want to accept it. But if you little bit
Yogas, means all these happening inside, understand it, go smoothly with it,
takes place, automaticaly. I have you'll settle down with it nicely and I
something to do with your Kundalini, very
am here to make you the master of it,
much and She knows Me very well too. So
absolutly the complete mastery over all
much so, as soon as She sees me She is
this. When this Mahayoga comes in, you
up there. So happy and the first impact is
don't have to worry about anything else.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
All the yogas are at your feet. You just who gives mantras according to the age.
raise your hands just like this and the It's all nonsense, complete nonsense it is,
Kundalini will rise. It's a fact. You just try it. with age. You see even a realized soul
would not give you a mantra. That's why it
Anybody is sick you just put your hands
like this and the person is going to be was regarded as a great thing, if
somebody would give you a mantra. Now
alright. Try yourself. This is Mahayoga, it
every Tom, Dick and Harry, like a donkey
is the culmination point of Sahaja
brays in your ears and you think it's a very
Yoga. Once you achieve it then you don't
have to do anything else. Then you big mantra. I won't tell you anything what
mantra I have got.
become that because Kundalini works for
They are trying to befool you. They
the becoming and if there is something
don't know they are befooling themselves.
that just gives you the whole thing, then
Whatever they have done they will have to
why should you do it?
All things that have happened to you pay very heavily. So, mantras are never
after coming to Sahaja Yoga, I am going to given just like that. You have to know
various points of a person as to what is
give you the list of those and what are they
your 'Kuldevta', the worship of your family,
called in sanskrit language. Thousands of
what is your personal worshipping God?
years people had to work to get it but you
have got it just like that. It's a fact. Its What is your horoscope? What are the
stars you are catching? At this point giving
difficult to accept this, that you have got it.
of the mantra, time is to be determined at a
just like that, without doing any head or leg
or any exercies. Isn't it? But just wait and particular time of the horoscope. What is
the time of the horoscope that tallies with
see what you have got. Of course some
the Guru's horoscope also, That's why you
people don't get it because there is a
must know that people used to have hardly
problem, some problem is there. Doesn't
one or two people. Even a person like
matter, it will work out but those who get it
Gyaneshwara gave a name to one person
should know that you have got because of
something and that something you have to in his lifetime. Here these Toms Dicks, and
discover. That's what you have to find out Harrys are giving to people just like
for yourself. There is a reason why you distributing, I don't know what. Nothing is
easily available more than these names of
have got it like that. Like mantras also you
horrible things which have no meaning. If I
see, somebody told me that there is a guru
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 11
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 11 & 12
told these to Indians they will know. To given. It's a big ritual. Why? Because you
are so vulnerable. It's like phosphorus and
these foreigners they have given the name
of Inga, Thinga. You all know the meaning
cannot put phosphorus into
you
of it. At your command you can find your
somebody's hand. You have to make all
arangements till you put it. But supposing
own mantras. Because you have some
sort of an authority which you can use and
you become all powerful, then what. Every
every mantra that you will say will be thing becomes a child's play. Every thing is
so simple. You are raising the Kundalini,
awakened. You know that. After realization
you know that there are centres, you can
it is such a wonderful thing to say that even
raise the centres, you know how to awaken
if you are not yet out of your posessions,
them. That is why it is Mahayoga. It had to
still you work it out. Still nothing happens to
your Kundalini raising system or nothing be this way sometimes. Otherwise how are
we going to save this world? How this
happens to that. Still you can raise the
Kundalini of others. Isn't it? Still you can
creation is going to be justified? We have
to find out. I mean God had to find out
give realization to people. You may be
some method by which all of you who are
possessed. They say I am fighting with the
seeking Him, are to be blessed and that He
spirit, that's why. But here with one hand
you are raising the Kundalini automaticaly. should be manifested, so that His work
should be completed.
There are lots of these spirits trying to
Mahayoga
which
So
this
is
possess you. With one hand you are killing
them that side and from one hand you are
encompasses all the yogas. There is no
need now to go to stone ages, to come
raising the Kundalini and nothing would go
back to human stage. It is something like
wrong with the persons whose Kundalinis
that, or else you can say, if now if I have to
you are raising to that purity! Otherwise to
give mantra and to take mantra a person
go to India, I need not go like Columbus
and end up in America. Somebody who
has to starve for seven days, not to see a
man's face or a woman's face. All sorts of
knows the way, has come to you, who
vidhis are there. Then only you can get it.
knows every thing, all about it. Somebody
Here some Gurus tell the desciples to
who has done all this, who knows all the
tricks of the trade. And also knows you
wash their hands hundred and eight times
very well, though still I am learning, quit a
every day. All sorts of these netikriyas and
all that is to be done before a mantra is
lot. About human beings, I'll have to still
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 12
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
Nov.& Dec. 2002
learn, I think. So many things you know,
is the desire of God itself within you. So, it
they can be quite queer you don't know. I
can be only awakended by that desire,
isn't it, itself. It is the desire of God within
behave like this, you just can't, suddenly
you find, Oh God! what's it? It's a great you that is being raised and the desire of
God is the Shakti and the desire of God is
revelation sometimes, the way you see
that he loves you. His desire is to give you
human beings, the way they behave. It's
very interesting, very interesting all his powers, all his bounties and all his
creatures, I must say. I mean they never
loving capacities. This is his desire which
behave the same way. You cannot
is placed within you and is dormant. So
predict, most unpredictable, don't know when it rises, his desire is fulfilled in you
what they'lI come out with! Very and that's how you get your fulfillment.
interesting people. After Sahaja Yoga you
Unless and until you are God you cannot
will also enjoy very much.
command desire of God. But after
This is all about so many yogas I have realization He gives you, bestows his
told you and if you have any questions
powers that you can manoeuvre His
then ask me questions but sensible desire. You can raise the Kundalini in
questions, again l'll say. Ask me questions
other people which is the desire of God
because l've told you in a very short way
and you can make him desire., That is the
but later on l'll give you a complete idea.
greatest one can achieve. Isn't it?
Now this Lama business is all wrong. I
Q. What is Self-realisation? What is the
must tell you very frankly my child and it
has brought about lots of problems, alright
best way to save mankind? By raising
for you. Now everybody has got it, you.
other people's Kundalini? By knowing
haven't got it as yet (Shri Mataji adresses
you?
a seeker). Still little problem. Doesn't A. Shri Mataji says,
matter. You have to little bit cooperate
By Self-realisation you become the
with me and get it. It is my desire and if
light, alright. So you have to enlighten
that is your desire also, we meet on the
others also. That's one of the jobs and
same point. They do some tricks to spoil
by knowing it, you know the whole. You
this instrument. Hypnotise, all kinds of
should know the complete knowledge
things they do. Now kundalini is the desire
about it. You should know your self and
of God within you, is not desire for a God,
you should know others and try to clean
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 13
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
You see, most of the maniacs, most of
them. And by cleaning it only, by
these people who have frights, who
spreading light only you are going to
have complications and all that are
get everything enlightened. Isn't it?
because they are not secure within
What is lacking in us is knowledge, is
themselves. Most of the countries who
the awareness. And once you do that,
are fighting, are fighting because they
the whole world will be changed. This is
are not secure within themselves,
what you have been seeking. Isn't it!
known
they've
You wanted to change the world. You
because
not
themselves. If they had known
know why you wanted that. Do you
themselves they would not have been
know that. Why you did all this, do you
so unhappy. There is a treasure in you
know that? Because you have been
hidden. Isn't it? And once you know
seekers in previous lives of very great,
your own treasure, you are not going to
high quality. That's why you've been
remain unhappy and the whole world is
seeking, All right, some mistakes,
doesn't matter. But you are people of
going to become very happy. That's
what you were seeking. Isn't it? Your
very high quality. Don't forget your
own treasures, and that's what now you
calibre and don't stoop down to lower
have to know all about. For example
levels. Because you were that. That's
even if you come in this room, you don't
why you were seeking and you took
birth in this country. The whole world is
know everything about it. You are in
here. So I've to tell you all that. You find
going to change. One light can
out within yourself. You find out in
enlighten the whole room. But you keep
others. And just that, working it out.
your wits enlightened, glowing all the
May God Bless you.
time.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Easter Puja
Istanbul, Turkey, 21.4.02
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today we have come here to worship
who have applied are Muslim ladies very
Jesus Christ and His Mother.
sad. While Mohammed-Saheb has said
that 'you must look after your mother',
It's such a coincidence that the Mother
of Christ came and stayed in Turkey. Isn't despite that, all these women-some of
them have eight children, ten children-
it surprising that She should come here
after the crucifixion of Christ and stayed
have come to this destitute home, Of
here. I wonder if He also came with Her
course, we have to give them place. We
later on? But they say then He went to have to look after them because we don't
Kashmir and She was also there. Quite believe in all these small type of ideas
possible, on their way, they might have about religion. Most important is 'human'
religion.
gone there.
We have to combine all these religions
So we are here to worship Him.
According to Sahaja Yoga, She was the together. It's a terrible task because
incarnation of Mahalakshmi and She's the
respect Christians-
Muslims won't
one who sacrificed Her Son for the sake of
Christians won't respect Hindus. I mean
it's a funny thing that's going on. They all
religion. But unfortunately, nobody
understood Her value. Nobody saw that
are for God and for God's work and His
She was such a great spiritual personality. love. Despite that, there's no respect.
There's no love. On the contrary, they're
Only through Sahaja Yoga you can
understand that She was a very great all quarrelling, fighting, killing everywhere.
It's very sad that in the name of religion
personality who gave birth to Christ.
It is very unfortunate that She was not
and God, people should become so cruel
respected, specially in the Islamic world. and so absurd.
This is the only solution-is to give them
Because of that, the women in the Islamic
culture have no place. My experience is
Self Realization. It is thus, Realization was
very sad about them. We have started an
called as Miraj in the Koran, It's called as
organization for the rehabilitation of
Miraj. But they have said that nobody can
get Miraj. Mohammed-Saheb got it, but
women who are destitutes and all of them
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 15
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 11 & 12
He had to go through lots of ordeals and
nobody else-like they have banned people
then His body itself was resurrected.
from getting Self Realization, which is not
On the same lines, Sahaja Yoga is
true. All human beings can get Self
working out-that you get your Realization
Realization. Whether they are from Africa,
means your resurrection. All your wrong
England, America, India, anywhere. They
ideas disappear. All your nonsense
all can get their Miraj. One should
understand that no human being is disappears and nothing but love,
created in this world to fight, to fight each
understanding comes in.
It was difficult, I know, in the beginning
other. Even the animals don't fight. Why
to start this work in India or otherwise, also
should human beings fight-that too, in the
name of religion! In the name of God! everywhere I found people are so ignorant
Christ came on this Earth just to create
and human beings hate each other. With
oneness of religion, but even the
some excuse, with some sort of a -l don't
Christians, they only started fighting, know what ideas they have, historical
ideas, and they hate. This hating in India
dominating others. It's a big world of
turmoil, where everybody is fighting in the
has been there, but also abroad, like Hitler
name of God and in the name of religion.
came in.
So our religion is global, is one religion.
Hitler came because he hated human
We respect all the Deities, all the Gods beings. He was a satanic force who
incarnated and did all kinds of horrible
and Goddesses-respect them and
things. The way he has killed people, you
worship them. We are not so stupid, not to
understand that they are all one. Also,
can't imagine a human being can do that.
He killed children. He killed grown-up
after getting Realization, you realize that
all these exist on our central nervous people in the gas chambers and-such a
system. They exist on our chakras. They horrible thing. When I went to Germany,
they wanted Me to see all that. I said, "I
are not there just because people have
can't see. I will not be able to see it." But
told us in history and all that, but actually
that's a fact, that all of them are there My husband went there and when he
came back, he was sick for seven days.
together, working out the resurrection of
It's so sickening. It's so inhuman to
the whole world. So the greatest thing that
Christ has done is the resurrection part behave like that, to kill people, under
and in this resurrection, He suffered a lot.
some circumstances, under certain
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
16
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
And it's working out all over the world now,
conceptions and wrong ideas.
everywhere people are realizing that this
I don't know what sort of an idea this
kind of a hatred, this kind of a wrong idea
Hitler had that he got after the Jews and
started killing them. All kinds of things about others is absolutely dangerous. And
so, once large number of people know
have happened on this Earth, all in the
this, I'm sure it will all finish off.
name of religion. This is the worst part of
We have lots of incidents like that, even
it. Throughout, people have been killing in
the name of religion. Religion teaches recently. That just because you follow a
particular religion, people hate you. I
you to love, to love God and love each
I can't understand! You cannot
other. How can it teach you to hate and
mean
to kill? I mean, it's very surprising, still explain why, why it is done, but it's done
going on. This kind of a nonsense is still
and very wrong to hate any human being
in the name of God, who has created you.
going on. It's only Sahaja Yoga that can
They don't understand God and His love.
stop this nonsense and it should because,
For example, Christ's life-just see it. He
after all, we are humanı beings.
For that, you have to have your
was hardly thirty-three years of age when
He was crucified. His mother had to suffer
so much. Why? Why did they crucify Him?
resurrection, as Christ had. And this
resurrection is possible on this Earth, very
Yoga. Because He was teaching about love.
with Sahaja
easily
now
None of them liked this idea of loving each
Mohammed-saheb has called it Miraj.
He's described it very well, very clearly. other. How can you help people if you
don't love? Under what premises do you
But who wants that? They don't want to
have their Miraj. If somebody tries to work
help others? Because you love, that's why
it out, they get after that person, saying you want to enjoy others and to
that This is something ridiculous'. It's all
understand. Once you start loving others,
then this myth finishes off.
wrong. I mean this has happened with all
of them. All of them have suffered
Supposing you are born as a Christian
or a Hlindu, or whatever it is,
because of the ignorance of human
or a Muslim
what makes you think that you are
beings-all of them. And also with Me, they
are criticizing and this and that. But I am
different from others? You are born the
same way. You are conceived by your
much more powerful, because love is
much more powerful than anything else.
mother the same way. You look the same
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 11 & 12
way. Your nose, eyes, everything is the but still existing. They see it happening
same. What makes you different? I think
every day, this kind of a nonsense, but still
they are continuing with it.
it's something political about it, something
Now what can we Sahaja Yogis do
very mean to separate people in the name
about it? We should think. Let us see,
of God and religion.
On the contrary, Sahaja Yoga is to
whatever religion we are born, that's what.
You have to be born in some religion. You
unite all the people in the name of God, to
cannot drop from heaven. So whatever
make them one in the name of God.
religion you are born, you are not bound
Supposing there is somebody living, say,
in South Africa or, say, in a far-fetched by that. You are bound by the religion of
love and joy. And then you go on crying
place like Benin and all that-has become a
Sahaja Yogi. There are thousands who and weeping and teaching and... of
have become Sahaja Yogis there. They unhappiness, of fighting. How can that
are all your brothers and sisters. They're be? We are human beings. We are not
animals. Even the dogs don't do that way.
your own. You go there and they will treat
you just like their own children, their own Why should we human beings kill each
relations. They will never think what
other and make a miserable life for others
religion you come from or what sect you and for yourself? Because if you hate
come from, nothing. I was surprised the others, you will also become hateful. A will
hate the B and then the B will hate the A,
way they have love. Actually, loving is an
innate quality of human beings. Its' an so the whole human life and civilization
innate quality. Every human being has has nothing to do but to hate!
Sahaja Yoga is such a blessing to you, I
been given this treasure of loving, loving
must say, because it has given to you all
capacity. But that capacity has become so
much less, so much minimum, that with the Deities within you, enlightened, and
that capacity, people fight and kill each
now, you know you belong to the whole.
other. It's the greatest sin to kill people in
You know you are not belonging to some
the name of religion.
stupid ideas.
I don't know what-how they believe
It's very remarkable when I came here.
I knew when He lived here. I knew Mother
that, by killing each other, we can go to
heaven! They will go to the worst hell. This
Mary lived here. There is a house of
Mother Mary. That gave Me a very great
idea has now, of course, subsided a little,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 18
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
Muslims, some of them were Hindus and
joy to know that She had lived here and so
I said we must worship Her. After all, She
people sing their songs; everything's
there. But, they're worshipped separately
was the Mother of Christ! Mother is a
and people fight even in their names. They
Mother. What does it matter whether She
want to find something to fight. Real
was a Christian, Hindu, Muslim? It doesn't
fighting cocks, I tell you they are. They
matter. And for Her love, She allowed Her
haven't got a human quality within them,
son to be sacrificed for the whole world
and for the universe-what a mother! Can which is love, which is affection-must
enjoy your love for each other. That's the
you find such a mother in this world who
thing they have lost-that capacity to love.
will allow Her own son to be crucified-such
matter if sonebody is born in
a courageous. loving and global What does it
China or in India or anywhere? He is a
personality?
Here we are. It's a coincidence, as I human being, He, too, has the capacity to
love and you should also have capacity to
said, because She lived here. Why did
She come? Why did She come here? She
love.
could have gone directly. She came here
My experience is different. I went to
and lived and we have a house of Her. China with My husband In China that
Now with this house only, the Christians time, they didn't have any good feelings
cult. They'll fight with the for Indians, I don't know why. But they
were so kind to Me, you won't believe,
Muslims and the Muslims will fight with the
they were so nice to Me and the way they
Christians. Anything you do, they will fight.
That's the main character is to fight, not to treated Me, everybody was surprised
help others, not to heip each other-no, not
"What's the matter? How are they so kind
at all. They're just trying to be very, very
to you? In China they don't like Indians.
said, 'It's a myth. I don't think I have seen
funny and nasty.
In India we have had so many nice that with the Chinese. They're extremely,
people who taught that we must love each
extremely kind and respectful to Me. What
have I done for them? Nothing."
other. Despite that, in India peopte are
Well, you'll be surprised, in one of the
tighting. They have had so many Sutis in
this country. In the same way, in India hotels, one of My ankle ornament[s had
fallen down-silver. It did happen and then I
also, we have had very great saints, very
went away to a very far fetched place and
great-everywhere. Some of them were
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 19
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze olume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
an old woman, you are-young people! 'No,
they sent it in an envelope, those anklets.
no, no, no, l've enjoyed. I'll also bring my
Can you imagine? All the way-l was so
bride for You to be seen.' I tell you, tears
much full of tears. So I said, 'These
came into my eyes. I said, 'Such love,
Chinese are also very loving people,
such kindness.' I didn't do anything for
extremely loving.'
them, nothing. I didn't give them any
I went for My programme. We had a
women's conference. So I don't know why.
money, nothing. My goodness, till the end
they were so much attentive to Me-very
but at the airport only these Chinese boys
young boys, all below twenty-five years of
arrived. They took all My luggage. I was so
late! The function was at ten o'clock and I
age. And they carried My wheelchair up
reached about 8.30. They put Me in the
three storeys with their hands. I said,
'Don't do it, I don't want....' They said, 'No,
car. They put My luggage there and they
said, 'We have to directly go to the
no, no, no, we want You to see. We want
conference.' I said, 'All right.' I went there
You to come.' I said, 'Why?' [They] said, 'Iit
would be nice for all of them.' I don't know
and, in this short time, these boys were
what made them think like that. Such
really so attached to Me. When I finished
the conference, they're waiting outside- enlightened people, I tell you. With love,
can't believe it-the same Chinese people you get enlightened. With love, you get
who are against Indians! And then, after understanding. And such deep love exists
within you.
that, it didn't stop. They brought two cars-
Now the politicians will come and tell
one for My wheelchair, one for Me-and
they took Me to the best shopping places.
you a story. Then somebody else will tell
But I said, 'What will you do?' They said,
you, 'Come and fight' and all that. That's
how they have managed in Germany,
"We'll carry your wheelchair upstairs.
Can you imagine? They were no
young people. But now, now they're
relation of mine. I've never seen them changing. All this world has to change
because it has suffered a lot. This is no
before. So one of them said, 'Tomorrow,
Mother, I won't be able to come.' I said,
religion. This is not the teachings of the
"Why?' He said, I'm getting married
saints-no. It is not. It is devilish, that
tomorrow.' And I said, 'What have you
teaches you to hate others, is the worst
been doing all this day?' He said, 'I thing. I mean all the enjoyment of love, all
the enjoyment of affection, you don't know.
enjoyed your company so much'. I'm such
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
20
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
Now-a-days, you see the problem of for your own? It's not only among
the churches, this, that. I
can't Christians, Hindus, Muslims,
but
understand, stupid people. They have everywhere human beings have become
done so many laws and with those laws, very dirty and filthy. They say it is Kali
whatever it is, whatever may be the Yuga. I can't understand. How can you
lose the power to love?
causes, but what's happening is that poor
That's what Christ has talked about.
children are suffering. They have no
sense of pure love. Nobody understands He's talked about love very clearly. He
what pure love is. Which is actually their
said, 'Love thy neighbour as thyself.' Have
you found anyone like that? No. You don't
innate quality, their innate-I should say the
'property'. But they don't know how you find all such people. The Christians who
can love somebody purely! It's all followed Christ, what did they do?
something very, very wretched. It doesn't
Muslims who followed Mohammed-saheb,
behove human beings to be like that. Even what did they do? And Hindus who
the animals are not like that, but human followed Shri Rama, what did they do? Are
beings can go to any extreme. The whole they anywhere near their leaders? Are
wealth of beauty, the whole wealth of they anywhere near those Incarnations
creativity, the whole wealth of art, artistic
of the Divine? Nowhere.
The reason is-l don't blame them-
temperament, the whole wealth of
because they had no Realizaiton. They
enjoying life is finished.
If you are a fighting cock, you can't see
didn't know their spirit. If you have no
Realization, you cannot understand
anything, any good in anyone, in anything.
They will fight others and they'll fight anything, you cannot understand any
enjoyment or anything. I mean, if you go to
among themselves also-is a fact. They
might say. We must fight.' All right, fight, Germany, you can't go and see all
but then they fight among themselves the things they have done. You'll faint,
also. They will torture their own brothers if you have any human qualities. Even
mean, they don't love you go to Japan and the way they
anyone. This is the main thing. Why take
had put this Hiroshima, this-my goodness!
the name of religion? What the religion I started trembling, I couldn't bear it. I
has done? How could they learn it and
said, 'How could human beings be that
cruel?' Horrible! I mean now the days
teach you such a horrible thing like hatred
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 21
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
this time, He could not have been
have come that they're killing their own
crucified. It's only because He was not
children. Extreme is this.
born during Kali Yuga. That's a very big
The other side of it is Sahaja Yoga, in
blessing for us. Nobody can be tortured.
which you love all human beings because
they're human beings. They're born with Nobody can be troubled. Only thing, you
have to be a humble person. You have to
you in this time. You have to help each
have a good character and you have to
other and love each other. This is the main
have a very loving personality. That's all.
thing. If you can develop this, you'll be
very, very strong Sahaja Yogis and you Enjoy the loving personality. You will get
the blessing because you are a loving
will be supported and blessed by the
Divine. Divine will help you and take you personality. I mean, the way the Divine
out of all troubles and tribulations and all looks after you, there are so many
kinds of difficulties, if you are a loving miracles people tell Me. I'm not surprised
personality. This is what the blessing of because I know the Divine has become
Kali Yuga. It didn't exist like this before.
extremely alert towards human beings
Now, if you are a loving person, the who are good and nice. It will look after. It
Divine will go out of the way to help you, to
will support. It will do everything. It's very
sort out your problems, to punish those surprising that it has become so alert. Like
who are troubling you. I mean, it's My own
Mohammed-saheb suffered so much.
experience like that. I never do anything. I
Everybody suffered so much, but not now.
never curse anybody. I don't fight. I don't
Now the Sahaja Yogis won't suffer. Take it
from Me. They're looked after by the
shout. Automatically, it works. I don't even
tell the Divine to do anything. The Divine is
Divine itself. Everything is looked after. I
at the greatest, just personality, I should
will tell you, people have written letters
after letters all over the world, how they
say. That is the one who does all the
have been supported, how they have
justice. Nobody can suffer under the
been helped. Very surprising how they
guidance and love of Divine, take it from
Me. This is the blessing of Kali Yuga. I have been rescued.
So we have to have trust in ourselves
agree Kali Yuga is horrible. People are
horrible. This is that. But there's one thing and we have to really love people. We
that this Divine has become very alert. It
should be humble and love. All this love
was never that alert. If Christ was born at
will help you all your life. This is the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
two-are not so good, but mostly,
message of Christ. Christ has said,
ninetynine percent Sahaja Yogis love
Forgive them.' How lovingly He said, 'But
each other.
they don't know what they're doing." Very
lovingly He pleads for all the bad people
My blessings to you is this-on this day
who crucified Him, that 'O, Lord, please
may God give you lots of love, and loving
forgive them because they don't know
capacity within you, that you should have,
which will change your life completely and
what they are doing.' Can you imagine
such a loving character of Christ?
such a powerful
you'll become
personality, very powerful Sahaja Yogis.
And now, when we are celebrating and
You can do marvels and miracles if you
worshipping Him, we have to worship that
character within us, that we are also loving
have developed the understanding of
people. We love each other. All over the love.
world, all the Sahaja Yogis love each
May God bless you.
other. Of course, there could be one or
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Sahasrara Puja
Cabella Ligure, 5 May, 2002
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today is a very great day, I'must say, to of oneness with the Divine.
To be one with the Divine is the
Sahasrara-the Puja of
celebrate
Sahasrara. It's a very unique thing that greatest blessing for human beings. So
has happended that your Sahasraras far, they were human beings at a lower
were opened out. There were some very level of existence They had all the
problems of that level - is that jealousies,
few people in this whole world-there were
some Sufis, there were some saints, some hatred; all kinds of problems that are
other people also in China and all. But today, of fighting, of troubling others,
very few, very few got their Sahasrara destroying others and not loving others.
opened out. So whatever they said or All these problems existed because their
written was never understood by the Sahasrara was not opened.
So our main problem is to open the
people. They actually tortured them, they
Sahasrara of the people all over the world,
crucified them and did all kinds of horrible
things because they couldn't bear which is very simple, which you can all do,
and it will work better if you do it
somebody getting this realisation.
So it's a very great day because collectively. If you are collective, you can
work it out very well.
collectively this Sahasrara has been
Like that in Sahaja Yoga so many
opened. Every one of you have got it. Also
people have come whose Sahasrara was
all over the world you have many people
who have got their Sahasraras opened. Of completely opened and they felt their
course we need many more for them to depth. Firstly you must feel your depth. If
understand what is this great event of you don't feel your depth, and you are not
one with your personality which is so deep,
such a collective opening of Sahasrara.
then you cannot enjoy the Self-Realisation.
Some have grown very much, after getting
First of all you should understand
their realisation, very much. They have
understood Sahaja Yoga very weil, and yourself. If you don't understand yourself.
how can you understand other people?
they have developed their depth, and their
You cannot. So first this Sahasrara should
consciousness is really a great awareness
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
think. That must be the point, they have to
be opened out fully. Fully means complete
come back from that developed state to
oneness with the Divine. That is not
this state from where they can rise. And
difficult. Only you have to meditate a little
so, the people who have though got
bit and then it will work out. It has worked
realisation are not ascending so fast as the
out in many people. I am very happy to
out
people who are not yet so much advanced
see, and meet such people in Sahaja
and modernised. Still it has worked, it has
Yoga, who have achieved such a lot of
collectivity and also the awareness of a worked in so many people and so many
have got this ascent very well.
realised soul.
But I would say, that when you are
So what is the awreness of a realized
meditating, also outside, you should
soul? That is what we have to understand
today. It's a very important day, as I said. develop a state of witness. You should
try to find out what is the matter, what's
The awareness is such that you should
now know what is happening in this wrong with you, what's wrong with
others and how you can help it. Only
world and how you can help it. How can
you help people to get to this awareness with your vibrations you can correct so
unless you have this full, full knowledge many things in your country, in your
about yourself, complete strength about family, everywhere.
And as you see now how Sahaja Yoga
yourself, and the confidence, you cannot
do it.
is growing, that there's such a need and
such a desire to get self realisation, But
Sahasrara Day is to be celebrated just
to strengthen your bond with the Divine so
oniy thing, your approach should be full
o
of love and full of understanding. They
that your consciousness becomes
are coming from the darkness of
absolutely enlightened and you see the
ignorance and they have to go into the
right point in everything.
It has been in so many countries, I have
element, nature, of the Divine which can
seen, people have taken to it very, very be very bright for them. So slowly, slowly if
fast. Surprising, in Africa, which is not you develop this passionate kindness,
love for them, I am sure you can do much
supposed to be very developed country,
it's good, because thousands have got
more to raise them. No use getting angry
with them, because they are so ignorant,
realisation. Those who are developed
have gone beyond the point of ascent, I they don't know whal they are doing, you
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 25
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 11 & 12
Yesterday I felt there were lots of
see. As Christ has said that, "They don't
people who were having a lot of right side
know what they are doing."
So what you have to do is to make them
on them. This right side is of no help, it will
create problems for you, sickness for you,
understand whatever they are doing,
whatever they are understanding, is still and also no use having right-sided Sahaja
Yogis.
poor, it's not so much yet expanded as it
So the main thing is to understand the
could have been if they were realised
souls. Even after realisation I find people
power of love. Power of love is the highest
have a problem. They still have the and the greatest, and if you can manage
somehow or other to give up your
problem of the past life which is finished,
it's dead, but they still carry on with that, anger, give up your greed and also
your ego if you can do that, you can
and the consciousness, so much of
illumination also, doesn't show what's be in Sahasrara. Now just see the sport
ascent further, At ego
of ego. It stops your
wrong with them.
For example, take the case of ego. Ego
only people get lost, because at ego only
is so developed. In the western countries
they move to the left or to the right and
where they are so developed, ego has also
they can go to the too much of right side,
or can go to the left side. They can go to
developed. And they have to find out what's
wrong with them. This ego comes from
any extreme of these two.
So first of all we have to correct our
certain consciousness that you have been
ego. For this ego, what should we dc? For
something great, you are this, you are that,
this ego we should watch ourselves and
your parents have been great maybe, your
property is great or maybe you are laugh at ourselves! What ego do we have?
Of what? We are human beings now we
occupying very big position, or anything. It
have become Divine! And with Divine
can come from anything, and this
within us, with this light within us, we have
consciousness is against your awareness,
because it's not true. You are not anything to understand that we are a part and
parcel of the Divine, just a drop in the
being moulded by these outside things.
ocean of love. If you can reduce your
But-you are moulded by your own
awareness within yourself. This awareness
ego, if you can bring it to the actual 'sense'
has to grow. From where? Is to understand
of your being. then it will work out better
I tind it, in the west, this ego is very
how do we get this ego, from vhat point.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
Nov.& Dec. 2002
26
strong, very, very strong. And whatever faith in yourself that you are the people
they do wrong, they think is correct
who have got self realisation. You are
because ego can support you in every much more powerful than they are. My
way. While on the contrary, those people
powers only work out when you are
who are developing, the countries who are
realised souls. You will be surprised, they
not yet developed, there the people's work out many things which may not work
out with people with ego.
problem is not of ego but of superego.
That can be corrected. But ego is your
Like the other day I heard from Africa
own enemy, created by you. So you have that people become invisible, suddenly.
to fight it, and see for yourself from where
There was coup-d'etat and the President
it is coming. It might be country-wise, it is Sahaja Yogi-he became invisible,
might be family-wise, it can be from nobody could find him. Because they are
anywhere. So first of all we must watch out
very much surrendered. They are so much
for the ego, if it is Sahasrara we have to surrendered that they get advantage of
My powers. You all should use My
enter into.
When I was looking out for a collective
of protection. This
also,
powers.
happening of Sahasrara opening, I found
protection power is very, very strong.
it was the ego of people which was
specially for people who are very much 'in'
keeping Me down. I had to fight the ego ot
Sahaja Yoga, who are very much 'there'.
people. Because I am a woman of very
So you must have, first of all, completë
sirmple habits, no pride, nothing, so people
faith in yourself that you are Sahaja Yogis-
used to suppress Me, say all kinds of but not the ego. 'Sahaja Yogis' means
things to Me. But understood them
you cannot have ego.
because they had ego problem. And once
This ego business has come from
this ego evolves and tries to dominate, we
various sources, you know that. But it has
can have Hitiers in this country, we can
to be cleansed out. Like when the river
have all these horrible people all over the
flows, all kinds of dirt, filth, flows into it. But
world.
when it meets the sea, it becomes the sea
So the
tirst
you should
In the same way you have to become that.
thing
understand, those who have ego-we
To become the sea, what you have to do
should not ever subdue to them. Of course
is to forget all these tributaries which were
you shouldn't start fighting, but you have coming into you and all wrong ideas which
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
27
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV isue 11 & 12
depth, then they are leaders, in the sense
came to you., It can come from any source.
others see them and really enjoy, really
I do not know how to name them, because
enjoy their being tnere. So in everything,
there's a big list of these sources. People
are mad sometimes with this ego.
you can see for yourself. Specially i would
say for the leaders, because people see
So, main thing is how to watch and
them and they are the ideals for them. For
witness your ego, how it works, how
Mother is after all
Me they say that "
it spoils your temperament, how it
Mother, what can we achieve from
spoils your relationships, how it makes
you stupid. Ego is, first thing it does, is (like)Her?" But from the leaders they learn
a lesson, and they understand that this is
to make you very stupid, and you
start behaving in such a manner that wrong, and this is not proper.
First of all you should be model
people start thinking that "Oh, you are the
models of Sahaja Yoga. And that is what I
great, stupidest person ever living." But it
is of no help, because if they believe that
have been always telling you, that "Get rid
you are a stupid: person, what will of your ego." It's the worst thing, because
happen? On the contrary, if you have the
first of all it brings anger. You think you are
somethig great, and you can do this, you
wisdom, if you have that peace, if you
have that special temperament of can do that, because you are a Sahaja
enjoying everything in life, and also the Yogi. It's not true. On the contrary.
become extremely humble, extremely
collective temperament, it will work out.
They will be impressed. Because in the humble, and you do right things. You do
not become any more, any more, arrogant
light they can see their own stupidity, own
and also full of anger. Anger departs from
falsehood, everything, and they will
realise that what they think is not true. you, completely, completely. It gives you a
balance, it gives you wisdom by which you
"This gentleman is much deeper than me.
What he has got, I haven't got it." This is
see what is your job, why are you on this
earth, why this energy has come to you,
the main thing for all of us.
In Sahaja Yoga we have people who why you are a Divine personality. It's a
are leaders. That doesn't mean they very, very great responsibility. You don't
have to look after yourself, no, the
become really leaders, but that means
Divine will look after you. Absolutely. It
that they have a greater depth. If they
will protect you, it will look after you, it
don't have, they get out. If they have the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 28
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
will do whatever is needed for you. But,
to just cross to go to Sahasrara. And to
in case, in case you have this ego, you break Sahasrara is very easy otherwise.
But if there is ego, you are already lost in
shut out yourself from the reality, from the
truth, and you become very hot-tempered
that ego.
So against all this, one has to
and arrogant personality! This has to go
understand that 'watch your self'. Is he
away.
Sahaja Yogis are saints, not saints, but egoistical? What does he think about
they are more than saints because they itself? Ego is very limited. It makes you
can express themselves better. They have limited and you don't see the purpose of
powers in them which they can utilise, your life. Why have you become a realised
soul? You don't understand, you just are
which they can show to other people that
involved in your ownn affairs, in your family,
you are so powerful that you can manage
in your children, in you... something like
things much better than what you think.
For example, say there's a problem,
that. Very low. But if you have, if you have,
and the whole world is upset about it. Only
an ego-less temperament then you are
very eftective the whole power works.
thing, if you know how to witness it, it will
What I have seen, the power otf
disappear. It will disappear in the whole
world! It cannot remain there. So, Sahasrara is so great. In some people it
has worked wonders. They have worked it
nowadays the world is full of turmoil, as
you see, full of non-sensical people greatly. But because of ego many people
coming up, full of quarrelsome people, are still not of that level that we can say
dominating
they are Sahaja Yogis.
(who)
people
are
Now, as it is, I am here to tell you,about
overpowering. At this time, if you just see
it. And in those days, when these saints
this in the witness state, this will
came in, nobody was there to guide them,
disappear. Because you are very
to tell them anything. On the contrary they
powerful, you are very powerful. But you
were so much destroyed by the
must know first of all that you must have
SO
and people never
the equipment to use the power. If you surroundings,
understood why they don't have any ego,
have that equipment within you, you can
do it. But with your ego you cannot. Ego is why they are so humble. So they misused
the greatest hurdle for your ascent. You (them). But now you have powers. You
is at a place where you have
must know how to use your powers. But
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
29
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
that should not give you by any chance We'll give up our ego.' Because there is
no sense, that's an obstruction between
any ego, that you have powers. On the
us. When the Sahasrara wants to work, it
contrary you should be humble, You have
to be humble. And if you can be cannot because of ego obstruction. So
power
humble, and understand that these people better not to have ego of anything. You
may be a good singer, you may be
are not yet realised souls, they are at a
anything in life, may be some big man or
lower level, still their ego is catching them,
anything, what is so-called-has no
and they are at a lower level, they have to
come up. When you understand that, then
you will have not only pity, but also
meaning. What we need today are people
who are ego-less and who have powers
understanding about them and a kind of a
completely flowing in them.
With the opening of Sahasrara, all
help will come to you from the Divine that
these powers should flow. If the
will solve your problems.
I find most of you have problems of
Sahasrara is fully opened all these powers
of love should flow. You'll be amazed,
very low level sometimes. And then I am
wherever I go, people just fall in love with
surprised why are you bothered about
these problems. You see, you are so
Me! I don't know why, I don't do anything
powerful. So in Sahasrara you must know
to them, but just they 'feel' My love. That's
what it should be, that people should feel
what powers are there. There are one
your love and they should know that you
thousand powers, one thousand powers
within you which are being enlightened. If are a loveable person.
This is the thing you are made as
you can understand that, then you will
special people, very special, for this whole
understand that 'what's the use of having
ego' because you have such a lot of world's emancipation. That's your job, and
not otherwise just collecting money
and
powers within you which you have not
utilised, which you should use. But doing all kinds of nonsensical things. You
because of ego you cannot. With love you
are here for very, very sensible job which
can. With love you can manage and you is to raise the Kundalini of people and
make them aware of their greatness.
can do a lot.
So I would request all of you today to
Human beings are not created only to war
take a vow that 'We'll have no more
and fight, not created here to play politics
chances for our egos. We'll give it up.
and do all dirty tricks. They are not made
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
here to lead a life which is very, I would
universe, created you and has done all the
great jobs. So what are you? You are a
say, filthy and dirty. But in this world we
part and parcel of that Divine power. So
are here to do such a great job of God who
why not we use our Divine power fülly
has created us.
So this is possible if you are aware that
within
with
love and
with
us,
your Sahasraras are being opened out, understanding so that you develop this
and that in this Sahasrara resides the wisdom within you.
This is what is to be told to yourself,
purity, not all these small little things about
that 'We are realised souls. This one is
which you are worried. Some people try to
take advantage of Sahaja Yoga thinking something - a special personality, very
much special.' In this world there are very
that 'O, they can do better, they can have
few people who are realised souls. But
help of others-nothing of the kind. You can
now we have so many, I can see them.
be helped by yourself, you don't need any
help. On the contrary you have to help But still, if it's lacking in us, some
others. There is no need to expect any problems are there because of our ego.
One should not have ego of anything.
help from anywhere. Look at Me, I am an
ordinary housewife otherwise, but how it everything is perishable. What is not
has worked all over the world. By what? perishable is Divine love. What is not
perishable is Divine personality. All the
By just the power of love. Only trouble is,
that I can use My power of love, but you time you see the saints and all that,
don't know how to use. That's the only though they are dead, people remember
them. All their poetry is remembered.
problem.
Though they could not do much of
If you want to use your power of love, in
meditation you can develop that power of
Sahasrara work, they couldn't give
love. With that you can capture people. realisation to people, still because of their
With that you can understand. Their personality they are still respected. And
problems are that they are not Sahaja people know that these people have been
Yogis, they are not the people who are doing marvellous things, miraculous
having all the blessings or the connection
things.
with the Divine. Imagine, you are
In the same way, you can see your own
connected with Divine. And Divine is such
miracles, and you can see for yourself
a great thing which has created this whole
what you are capable of because now you
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
31
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
us...wrong with that." Why can't you
are connected with the Divine. This is one
correct yourself? If you can't correct
fact you should know. Whenever there is
danger, whenever there is problem, you yourself, how can you correct others?
That's what it is.
will say 'You'll be saved.' Many have been
would say that one can see that
saved out of you, no doubt.
But, that is not sufficient. You are there's understanding going into your
saved for what? What is the value of your
understanding that 'you are great'. You
life? Why are you living? What is the are not ordinary people - and this has to
be practiced and to be used in a manner
matter? Why God has saved you, given
you all this? Because there is so much to
that will show that you ate Sahaja Yogis.
be done for this world! You are the, I You are no less than any Sufi or any
realised soul or any saint, no less. But you
should say, soldiers of truth, soldiers of
goodness and all that is to be done have powers which they didn't have, of
with great courage and understanding
which they were not conscious. While you
have these powers! Try to understand
about yourself.
So what you have to do is to have self
what powers you have. But by
knowledge. You have to know about understanding that, you should not have
yourself. You must have self knowledge, pride about it or anyway, but that's your
what you are. If that you don't have, what's
job, you have to do it. You are there, and
the use of opening the Sahasrara? Self you'll enjoy it because it is not with ego,
knowledge is, it doesn't' give you any but ego-'less' work. If you can manage
pride, nothing, but gives you the duty what
that much it will be very good.
Now ego has come down very much, I
you have to do, what you have to work out.
It's not only just for you, the Sahaja must say, very much. I hear from people
Yoga, but you are for the whole world, that ego has come down. But sometimes.
please try to understand. Sometimes we they are still quite worrying and fighting
think Sahaja Yoga is there for our and this and that. But despite all that, I
betterment, for our good health, this that.
must say this, whatever work has been
It's not so. It is for the betterment of
done all these years, people have worked
others! Your powers are there which you
it out among themselves.
are not utilising. You are still busy I get
So you have to watch yourself. And see
for yourself 'what ego you have, why
letters saying that "This is wrong with
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 32
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
should you be egoistical?' Some of the 'super-human' beings I should call them,
as Sahaja Yogis.
people have ego of their country, some of
So our ego has to be seen, has to be
the people..I mean it's all mythical! It's all
mythical. What is the .. you could have
watched in witness state, how it works and
how it tries to dissuade us from the right
been born anywhere. Though you are
born in a particular country, you have that path of movement, One has to be only
careful on that point because that's the
ego and it is something, I must say, one
last centre which has to be opened out.
has to be ashamed of. Because your
country, whatever it is, is not doing very Once it is completely open, you are one
with the Divine and all your problems will
well. It's not spiritually equipped, so why
should you be so proud of your country?
be solved. Because these problems are
so frivolous and have no meaning; they'll
When you will work it out and they wilf
go away in no time as long as you work it
become spiritually equipped, then of
out, your Sahasrara,
course you can have pride in your country.
It's very nice that today is a very special
But I see it is not happening. And so you
day with all these stars are coming
have to work it out.
And I am also happy to see that so together, and it's a special blessing. It
much of Sahaja Yoga is now spread out
your powers increase, all these people
who are very bad, who are trying to
everywhere. It's spreading very fast. in
capture the society with their political
countries where I never expected, it's
spreading out. So there are people nonsense and all that, they all will
everywhere in the world who want to have disappear. They have no powers, they'll
it. they want to have their realisation and
all disappear.
So, first of all your ego-less nature will
they want to know what is beyond this
human life. They don't want to waste their
help-will help everyone.
May God bless you all
life anymore as human beings, but as
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Shri Adi Shakti Puja
23rd June, 2002, Cabella Ligure, Italy
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today it's a different day, altogether, they were made to go up to the, at the
most, Agnya chakra. And then they
for all of you because this is the puja of Adi
Shakti and Adi Shakti is a complete collapsed into different places of complete
ignorance. All these books were written
personality. It's not only the left side that
without understanding. That's not easy to
you know.
You all know only the left side, from go via right side. But best was to awaken
Shri Ganesha through the ascent of your kundalini. The kundalini directly
different different chakras on the left side.
takes you up in the centre of all the
I didn't want to tell you about the right side
chakras, up to the Agya and crosses Agya
to begin with because those who have and goes
beyond Agya into the
Sahasrara. And then it pierces through the
gone through the right side got just lost.
They got Gayatri mantra from the writings,
Sahasrara.
Now what is so important about the
but they didn't know what it was about.
They just used to learn it by heart. They Brahmarandhra from where it pierces? I
didn't also know the real meaning of it and
never told you about it. But now I think, for
that is how they moved on the right side
most of you, the time has come. You see
and I don't know they landed up at the
in the childhood, the child has a talu, is the
Agya. And then they were trying for the fontannel bone area, which is pulsating
Self Realization. They were promised that always. It is pulsating because the spirit
if you do this right side properly, you will
entered through that area and, when you
reach to the ultimate goal of Self close it, it settles in the Heart. Now you
Realization..
have to become the spirit-oriented person.
But none of them reached (there) yet.
But how to enter into the Sahasrara was
Most of them got into a terrible temper, the problem. The tantrikas, who were
terrible temper of cursing others, of
there, they went through the left side and
destroying others, all these things they they developed all the practices of black,
learnt through their right side movement.
we should say, the left side.
So the right-sided became extremely
There was no Kundalini awakening. And
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
centre. Left side, they had Jainism. Right
hot tempered, extremely hot tempered, I
say, extremely ambitious, side, Christianity. They were not actually
should
ferocious and they started killing people ascending path. They were just side
on the basis of cursing. They're very good outlets, you can say, for the energy of
people who were trying to seek the truth.
at cursing people, to be always forward,
Now this happened for ages in India. Al
push back all the people and over-ride
everybody's rights. They were regarded the gurus, all the sadhus, all the big
tapaswis, all of them did this, But where
as the most, ambitious and most powerful
did they reach? Tapaswis were the people
people. Now the brahmins and, to some
who could give curses, shaap, to people.
extent, the kshatriyas, they then took the
right side. Because of the right side, they They could curse somebody. With the
became very powerful, no doubt. They got kataksha, is with the glance of the eye,
all the powers over the world and they they could kill somebody, they could burn
were regarded as extremely powertul and something. All right-sided powers they
had. But with these right-sided powers,
majestic people, but they were not
where did they reach? To hell, I should
because they were so hot tempered. Hot
say, in a way, if not in the limbo, as you
tempered people cannot be spiritual.
call it. There nobody got Self Realization.
So they were told, You'll get your
You read the old books from India, but
spirituality. Don't worry. Keep moving. And
even otherwise, the Greeks and then we
the seven chakras were described on the
had Egyptians, English and all kinds of
right side. According to them there is
Bhuh, Bhurvah. Bhuh is this Prithvi aggressive people, Germans. All of them
were aggressive. Catholics. And also, you
(Earth), is this word Bhuh. Bhurvah is the
had Romans. All of them were aggressive
complete cosmos or we can call it
Antariksha, Swaha, swaha is consumption
and were taking the land and property of
other countries.
at the Nabhi chakra. And swadha is the
Extremely aggressive, they believed in
consumption, inside is to absorption
the killing of the people, extremely
swaha. Then is the mind, heart. Mana,
after mana came the Agnya. Vishuddhi insulting hot-tempered people. So how to
the Vishuddhi is jana, collectivity, people, bring them to the normal, to the central
path? One side was, as I told you, Bhuh
go to the people jana. Then, at the Agnya,
Bhurva, Swaha Swadha, is consumption.
it is tapa. In tapa we have Christ in the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 35
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
All these people, as they were
This was done by the Guru Principle. Then
we have mana, jana - That is collective.
aggressive and destructive, this nature is
still within us, some people because they
They became collective, no doubt,
because they are so powerful that they are right-sided. All right-side people had
had such a lot of people with them. To
this problem. Temper, aggression,
fight for the oppressive, with their controlling others, the growth stopped and
were there was no spiritual growth. They
oppressive temperament they
fighting on people and were oppressing wanted to have spirituality, but with this
kind of behaviour they had developed,
them.
All this kind of knara generation came spirituality ran away. We had so many
in the history, as you know, and then it incarnations. They all
disappeared. Wars were created. Then so
crucified, or were finished. There was no
many people were killed. We had Hitler as
possibility of saving, human beings in
the maximum of cruelty. They never cared general. One bad man came and he
ruined the whole world. We had one Hitler,
for humanity.. Then ultimately it came to
the Agnya. Agnya also they killed Jesus who really hit all the people, all the
Christ. They destroyed Jesus Christ. They
countries, all the nations and we were all
finished. All this is because we have taken
destroyed so many great saints who were
really sent through the central path. Some
to right-sided movement, which they
were incarnations and they destroyed thought was easier for spirituality, which
them. All this happened since the time of
was not.
So they crossed all the limits and they
Rama. All that has happened and, one
after another, so many rakshasas came
reached a stage that they became
and they destroyed the peaceful culture ol absolutely devils, rakshasas. Without
the world.
realizing that human beings are
rakshasas, that's what they become. Even
Extremely arrogant, show-offs, as we
can call them, very aggressive people and
their gurus were like that, but they tortured
this aggression came, came with such a
even the incarnations. All the incarnations
were tortured by them, It was really, how.
great force and followed one after another.
It went up to a point. When people reacted,
they saved themselves remarkable. But
they were killed and were destroyed. So ultimately, they couldn't produce any
horrible people were created.
results.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 36
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
So first thing is that you must develop
So the first thing I tried was to study
about the kundalini that I should be able to
your sense of chastity. Respect it and
raise the kundalini and I knew I had come
enjoy it. That happened because of your
for that, not for anything else, but only to Mooladhara being awakened. That's the
raise the kundalini of people, so that they first chakra on the left side, where you
take to the central path, not to the right or have Shri Ganesha.
to the left. But I told you the knowledge of
But on the right side also, we have
deities. On every chakra we have deities
the left side, plus raising your kundalini.
By raising your kundalini, you broke your
to compensate. For Shri Ganesha is in the
Sahasrara and you entered into the realm
centre and that's how we were blessed by
of real joy, of reality. All these bad His powerful purity. And we started
qualities started falling out. In the central understanding the beauty of purity, the
power of purity. That's how our right side,
path, first the Mooladhara came. By the
we finished off. Right side was for fighting,
awakening of the Mooladhara in the
central path, you became very pure for killing, anger. There was no peace for
these people. The only thing they knew.
people. Your eyes became pure. Your
licentiousness
Your (was) how to dominate others and to be
went
away.
cheapness went away. And you became intolerable.
So then they rose to a higher level of
very-very, I think we should call them the
people. Unless and until that Swadisthan. In Swadisthana, they rose
holy
happens, you cannot be in Sahaja Yoga. and the aggressiveness of the creative
You cannot be a licentious, you cannot be
peopie, to create something. Even now we
flirtish, you cannot be a man who wants have many. They create all kinds of
all type
of
to grab money from others and all that or
create
nonsense,
grotesqueness, also very, very, I should
anyone who is very aggressive could be in
Sahaja Yoga.
say, dirty things to make a name.
So this is the another thing we got it in
So all such people were thrown out.
Swadisthana, people who wanted to have
Once they were thrown out, they were
showing their teeth, I should say. They
a name, a position that came from right
Swadisthana.
didn't like it that they were thrown out. But
Then the third chakra that was there
they understand now, some of them, that
was the Nabhi chakra. On the Nabhi
we have made mistakes.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 37
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
were horrible mothers, tried to dominate
chakra, they wnet all out to make money,
not Lakshmi, but money, money by any their children, dominate everyone and
could not sacrifice anything for their
means. And they cheated the whole world.
children. We have had enough of these
With this money that they got, they did all
kinds of bad things. Either they cheated or
women who are aggressive with their
husbands, are aggressive with their
they were aggressive. Cheating was very
much in the left side countires like India children. And even the motherhood
among men is dead and finished.
and aggressiveness in the right side
All that kind of lot, when I came on this
countries. In the centre, what quality we
have at the Swadisthana is the
Earth I saw and I was shocked. What sort
creativeness. Creative of art, which is very
of human beings are those? What am
beautiful, which is very deep, which is going to do with them? How will I awaken
absolutely spiritual, that vanished and their kundalini? At the Nabhi chakra only
they were lost. But now it is the Mother's
people started showing even the
incarnations full of dirty habits. All kinds of
chakra. They had no fatherhood, no
filth came in with that progress.
motherhood. They drove out their
Then as I told there's Nabhi. In Nabhi, children, very selfish, self-centred,
dominating parents.
people got after money. Left-sided people
This was the Heart chakra. Then came
were making money. Right-sided were
aggressive with their money., If they were
the collective chakra, what we call as the
Vishuddhi. At the Vishuddhi chakra, they
earning, they thought they were on top of
the world. If they had money, they thought
wanted to occupy the whole world. They
nobody's better than us. All this finished wanted to occupy the whole world as their
them off. Its finishing. It will come to that
own, to become emperors and they
formed empires and misbehaved to such
point where they will realize, that money is
not for destroying, but for construction,
an extent that its not humanly possible to
constructing of the country, constructing behave like that. They really were
of the human beings together to bring rakshasas, I should say, and those
peace and love among them, for helping,
rakshas qualities are still there. In their
behaviour, in everything you can see how
for doing all kinds of good things. Then the
same right-sided people were to the they behave towards people, treating
chakra of the Mother. 'Han'(yes) and they them like that, creating people who are
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 38
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
against spirituality and those who are how many people have you changed?
What have you done? That has to be
aggressive. Well these became like a, two
sided world, where there are people who
seen. Still, you live with your ego on the
are aggressive and the people who are Agnya and you are very happy with your
tortured. This-two sided world, existed peace, with everything you have got
through Sahaja Yoga.
even now, but is much less. Thanks to the
collective understanding, there are many
This is the biggest calamity that the
world is facing today. That those who are
good institutions that were established,
but they are not working out. They are not
also spiritual, those who have achieved
so successful. Because the men at the great heights are least bothered. As to
head of it are controlling, but controlling what good has to be done, what they are
doing is to enjoy their own spirituality. You
what? Not themselves. Controlling others.
come to the puja, have more and more of
And all their behaviour has spoiled all the
work of this chakra.
it, but they have done no collective work to
Collectively, you have, if you see change people. Some of them are working
around not today, everywhere there's war
one or two, bas(that is all), the rest of them
going on, fights going on, killing going on,
are having a good time, enjoying
themselves in such a manner that people
destruction going on. How is it? There are
accept them as great souls, good people,
so many spiritual people now in this world.
So the reason is the spiritual people have
that's all.
I would like you to now introspect and
become very quiet. Very much enjoying
their spiritual life. Have become very quiet find out how much collective work you
have done, how many people you have
and very peaceful people. But that doesn't
bring peace. You have to be dynamic. And
got like that. With whom are you, talking?
you have to bring peace in the world. You
How many people have you told about
have to do something about it. We are Sahaja Yoga? Only so many are there.
very much satisfied with our progress, but
Christ had only twelve disciples. They are
much more dynamic than you are.
we are not bothered as to see what is the
So now, you should take to the right
progress others have done, how far they
have gone, where can we meet them,
side. And when you take to the right side,
we'll create dynamic people, not just some
what can we change them. At My level, I
useless, patient, very quiet, peaceful
can change many things, but at your level
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 39
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
people. This was not the aim of Sahaja spread the Sahaja Yoga. They are more
interested in running schools, in looking
Yoga. The aim of Sahja Yoga is to
after the destitute, doing this, doing that.
change, change so many. And those who
That's not your job. Your job is to create
are doing that, all My blessings are with
more Sahaja Yogis, more Sahaja Yoginis.
them. But those who are just keeping to
But that is ot there. What I find is it's not
themselves, it is not a very good thing. In
your country how many people have got to there. The right side is missing. You
Sahaja Yoga? Just find out with how many should come to the right side. Go all
ahead. Nothing will happen to you.
people you have worked it out?
Nobody can kill you, nobody can
So yours is not a complete yoga. Yours
is a partial yoga of the left side, where you
disturb you, nobody can arrest you, take it
are very loving, very kind, very this thing. from me. You have powers, but if you
I'm not saying that you should become don't use them, you are like this. That is
why we have come to the stagnated point,
aggressive in any way. I have seen people
that we should know we have to use our
want to be leaders. They want to be
something great, but how many people right side. Right side is very important.
Next time l'll tell you about right side,
have they given Realization? How many
people have they talked about Sahaja what right-sided things you have. Now you
cannot become left-sided whatever you
Yoga? I have seen, in the aeroplane also
may try. So you use your right side in the
you go, you walk in the street, anywhere
right
the
with
direction,
people talk about Sahaja Yoga. But here right
we are using Sahaja Yoga for our understanding, not as some sort of, I
greatness, for our understanding of should say. very arbitrary or very
dominating, like Hitlers. We have had also
ourselves. This is not why Sahaja Yoga
has been brought to you. It has been
Hitlers among Sahaja Yogis. But now, the
brought to you for giving Realizations to time has come for you to do something
more than what the saints have done
many people.
before, to work it out that way, not to keep
request all the younger people,
younger generation, not to waste their to yourselt, that you have a family, you
have very nice children, having, enjoying,
Sahaja energies on nonsense as the old
all that. That's not the Sahaja Yoga for.
people have done. You better go ahead
Sahaja Yoga is for transforming the
and talk to people about Sahaja Yoga and
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
Nov,& Dec, 2002
40
whole world. You have to think about it. just forgive, no. You go and talk to that
What are you doing? Where are you? And
person and tell him it is wrong. You have
what have you achieved out of Sahaja to face it. If you cannot face it, then you
are useless, just like any other people.
Yoga?
Then we come to the Agnya. In Agnya
What's the use of you people getting your
what has happened is Sahaja Yogis have
Realization?
become such that, they can bear
So now, we have to understand that its
anything. They can suffer anything. That's
not only that we have vibrations, that we
not what we want. What we want is to
are all right, that you can cure some
remove the sufferings of others, remove people, is the last word no. You have to
the aggression of others. So we don't spread it. You have to go in the public.
You have to be collective on this point and
have that kind of organization, we don't
have. That kind of understanding, we don't
you have to spread Sahaja Yoga. With so
have. And if that works out, you will be
many Sahaja Yogis all over the world, we
different people.
have not progressed much. So now, it is
So we have become like saints, you
you who have to plan what you want to do,
see, sitting in their hermit halls, something
how you want to do it and how you want to
like that, not more than that.
spread Sahaja Yoga. Its very important.
So better try to do something positive, Because you people are good at, say,
without aggression. I know some of you talking about Sahaja Yoga, singing about
are still very aggressive, are show-offs ! Sahaja Yoga, all these things are useless,
v that. But if you get into the mood of
know
unless and untill you have concrete proof
working out collectively, then you will of getting many more people in Sahaja
realize what mistakes you have. Still, what
Yoga.
is lacking in your personality? That is very
In a small country like Turkey, we have
important. At Agnya chakra many Sahaja
Yogis falter. I don't know what happens to
twenty-five thousand Sahaja Yogis, what
do you say? They are all Muslims.
them. At Agnya, I have told that you must
Twenty-five thousand Muslims becoming
forgive. But that doesn't mean that you Sahaja Yogis. While you find that number
allow people to do wrong things. Because is very small in any other country? They
you want to forgive, its very easy not to
are not very rich, but they care for their
fight, not to say anything, just keep out,
Self Realization and for giving Self
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
Realization to others. Its very surprising country have you worked it out all over?
Just think about it. And that's why, unless
how it has worked out, how it has spread!
So instead of thinking of your problems, and until you don't do it, you are not
of your enemies, of your powers, think of
sampoorna, you are not complete and the
powers you have not
giving power to others and making them Adi Shakti's
understood in its full form. That's why I'm
Sahaja Yogis. Its very important. If you are
telling you today it's a very important day
in Sahasrara, then you have all the
powers. In Sahasrara, if you do not spread that you worship Me as Adi Shakti. But
you should know that Adi Shakti has to be
Sahaja Yoga, what's the use of getting
a complete form. It cannot be only half left-
Realization? Just for yourself? Its being
sided, no. If that doesn't work out, then
very selfish. Sol would say that, instead of
spreading your own glory, your own fame, what's the use? its like getting any other
your own name, please try to get more Realization. That's not so important. Not
only that you should spread, but also you
people to Sahaja Yoga. Go into a
very
should make them and realize it.
dynamic force.
So many people have complained to
All My blessings, all My love, all My
powers I give you. But try to understand,
Me that Sahaja Yogis are nothing but
dead people. Is that what you are? Only all right?
single person like Me has done so much
work. So why not you people? In your
Thank you very much.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Shri Mataji Cleansed Our Souls
Hong-Kong- 16-19, December, 2001
Shri Mataji was here on a private visit
and was accompained by Sir C.P. and suite and thanked us for making all the
She was very pleased with the hotel
also Kalpana-didi, who came from arrangements. She asked to see the
Bombay to join them.
news, as there was some events between
We had made all the arrangements India and Pakistan that She wanted to
follow. Her attention was very much on the
weeks in advance and had secured a very
current situation in that region.
good suite at the Park Lane Hotel, close to
the ashram in Causeway Bay, which is on
Shri Mataji spent the first two days
resting and watching the news. She had a
Hong Kong Island.
lot of attention on American President
The night before Shri Mataji arrived, the
George W.Bush and mentioned that She
ladies transtormed the hotel suite with
had written to him on various occasions
beautiful flowers and decorations, so it feit
and that he had taken Her advice. He was
very homely. A puja was done to vibrate
the suite in preparation for our Divine quoting from the letter She had written
Mother.
many of his speeches, It was interesting
Shri Mataji arrived early in the morning that this time last year when Shri Mataji
on December 16th, after a longer than
came to Hong Kong She was full of praise
for George Bush and said that he was
usual sixteen hour flight via Taiwan, due to
strong winds. A small group had gathered
simple man.
to welcome Shri Mataji with flowers.
Who could have imagined the turn of
Shri Mataji emerged with a beaming events and how this man could be the
smile, looking very fresh. She was very
chosen one to defeat these evil force?
happy to greet us and asked hbw everyone
Shri Mataji went shopping on the
was. We all felt the love and compassion of
Tusesday morning, December 18th, to
our Holy Mother and the sweet smile buy presents for various people. She is
always buying for others and I have never
touched our hearts and cleansed our souls.
She said that the flight had been longer seen Her buy one thing for Herself in all
than expected, so we quickly took Her to the years that She has been coming to
the car and back to the hotel.
Hong Kong.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Voiume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
43
Nov.& Dec. 2002
Shri Mataji always comes when the Jo Yo, had come all the way from
sales are on and gets an even bigger Guan-dong province to be with Shri
discount on the sale price. Her eye for Mataji. She was so happy to be able to
detail in the designs of things is amazing
see Shri Mataji, Shri Mataji then appointed
and She always picks out the best pieces two new leaders for Hong Kong. Edwin
the shop is seling. The vibrations flow and Hou and Lily Chen will now look after
Hong Kong and China. For me, it marked
the shop assistants get their Realization.
On Tuesday evening, we had arranged
the end of a great chapter of my life, as I
have been coordinating Sahaja Yoga
a dinner for Shri Mataji, but, as She was
tired from shopping, She rested and took
activities in Hong Kong for the past ten
Her dinner in Her room.
years and seen the collective grow and
After dinner, a concert was planned mature. They will now provide the
foundations for Sahaja Yoga to work out in
and Shri Mataji decided to come to this, as
She didn't want to disappoint the yogis. It
China.
It was Wednesday morning and Shri
was a very intimate setting in a small
function room with about thirty-five yogis.
Mataji wanted to buy saris, so we travelled
Shri Mataji gave all the yogis a ring and to Kowloon, where there is a famous sari
said it was for our protection.
emporium. After the shopping, Shri Mataji
One of the Chinese yoginis, Florence,
gave Realization to the manager and his
played the gu zheng, a traditional Chinese asistant. We got them to put their hands
string instrument tuned to a model scale.
towards Shri Mataji and they all telt the
cool breeze, Shri Mataji was very pleased
She played some of the famous Chinese
folk songs and Shri Mataji really enjoyed that they got their Realization and
the performance. This was followed by encouraged them to come to our
some bhajans performed by the Hong programms.
We had planned a last minute shopping
Kong yogis. It was such a beautiful
evening and all the yogis were overjoyed
expedition, but unfortunately time had run
to have spent time with Shri Mataji in such
out. We left for the airport and Sir C.P.
an intimate setting.
went with old friend, Tommy Cheung, who
Shri
pleased
has always met with Shri Mataji when She
was
very
has come to Hong Kong.
with everyone and put attention very
much on the situation in China. One lady,
The day was sunny and warm. We
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 44
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
hostesses between Los Angeles and
were all feeling sad that Shri Mataji had to
Hong Kong. One of them, while Shri Mataji
go so soon. A few of the yogis gathered at
was holding her hand, said, "Mother I can
the airport to meet Her and She spent the
time receiving flowers and speaking to feel a lot of power coming from your
hand." Shri Mataji smiled and replied, "I
them.
She thanked us all and then She went only have the power of love and
through to the immigration control. We compassion."
The plane made an unscheduled stop
waited and watched and She finally waved
at Taipei and so Shri Mataji had Her
to us all as She departed to catch Her
attention on Taiwan. The three air
flight to Mumbai.
hostesses, one from the Philippines, one
We all felt sad, but, at the same time,
fortunate to have been so close to Her for
from Japan and the other one from China,
the past four days. We knew that there brought Her attention to Sahaja Yoga and
the yogis in those countries.
were many of our Indian brothers and
She later also had attention on
sisters who were eagerly waiting for Her
Malaysia and Indonesia, as it was the
arrival in Mumbai.
maids' day when we arrived in Hong Kong.
Shri Mataji gave Realization to three air
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Shri Mataji talks to Sahaja Yogis in Hong Kong
18th December-2001
(Part and Parcel of that whole)
accepted now in China and they are
"I am so happy to hear all of you singing
practising Tao, so we can also. So we are
those beautiful songs, which are sung all
Taoists."
over the world. Now you have become
Premier Li Peng of China was shown
part and parcel of that whole.
"We have Sahaja Yogis everywhere. In My photograph. "He said, "Yes, I
America, I was surprised to find that three
remember this lady. She has a remarkable
personality.. They said, 'She is our guru'
hundred Sahaja Yogis were saved" in this
World Trade Center incident. Not a single
and She's this and She's done this for us.
He was very much touched." He told his
Sahaja Yogi was hurt or lost life. It is
remarkable how some of them were late attaché for cultural affairs to meet Me-
"You must see Her and know about Her'-
for work that day, some of them ran down
to get out on time and some of them even though they were communists and
all that."
started running in the other direction. "All
"The attaché came to see Me... closed
of them are Sahaja Yogis...
"It is remarkable how you are looked
his eyes and then he came up. Then I told
him all about it."
after and saved by the Divine"
About Chinese people
Tao is Sahaja Yoga
What I liked about Chinese people "is
"I feel that we can do a lot" here in
China. The Chinese "already have a
that they were extremely humble, very
tradition of Tao... Tao is a Sahaja Yogi respectful people." When I went to the
and he describes his mental conditions United Nation Women's Conference in
Beijing, "they gave us a complete floor of a
and all of the problems they have in such a
beautiful manner...
great hotel to stay in." They sent two cars.
"one for my wheelchair and one for
"Somehow or other, Taoism was
not practised and it has just become Myself." They arranged for so many
people to look after Me.
books of controversy for all the sc'iolars,
that's all. But now I think they are reviving.
"One of them said, 'Mother, tomorrow I
I was told that...Tao religion has been
won't come.' I said. 'Why, what's the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-47.txt 
 46
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
matter? Tomorrow I am getting married.'I Yogis in these countries alone "and there
will be many more... Even the president of
said, "You are getting married and all the
time you are with Me?" He said, 'I enjoyed
the Ivory Coast is a Sahaja Yogi.
being with you very much.""You see, even
"Things are working out in so many
when I went there, they took Me to the
countries. This is the time people are
conference so fast. There was no time in
seeking the truth. They want to have the
between. and when I came to the airport truth. That's how in every place, in every
also they came. They had tears in their country, Sahaja Yoga is spreading very
eyes. They were very loving, very nice fast now.
"In Nigeria, I was surprised how things
people. They have suffered a lot."
are working out. Anywhere you go, people
But here in Hong Kong, "you have been
all right... You have to be connected to
are now fed up with falsehood. In every
have found that somehow they
the mains... If you are not connected to religion I
the main tree, how will you prosper? I have created some faisehood and created
know who's who, what they are doing. groups."
There's a "nice book by Javed Khan,
what is wrong with them. I know all about
them.. So we have to spread Sahaja The Koran Enlightened... What they are
saying, that this Koran is Kundalini
Yoga."
Awakening. Now all of you have got it..
Some people who are very important
are able to recognize Me. "In India, one
"But thank God, I went to America and
home minister, he has tremendous the war was over very fast... But it has
shook the whole world. I must say, Thank
respect for Me. He came to My house and
he got his Realization.
God now, the war is over. People have to
"
Muslims in Sahaja Yoga
suffer the after-effects of that war.
Sustained by you
We have a lot of Muslims now in Sahaja
"I have seen people, even in Sahaja
Yoğa in India.
You will be very happy to know that Yoga, become very fanatic. Fanaticism-
there are countries in Africa called Benin
we are against it. We are free people. We
and Ivory Coast, "seven countries ruled by
have Self Realization, which is a birth by
French. They all were Muslims" and many your Spirit and you are not bound by
anything. You will never do wrong things.
of them have now become Sahaja Yogis.
So far there are iwenty thousand Sahaja All bad things will drop out automatically.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-48.txt 
 47
Nov.& Dec. 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
said the same thing. It's nothing new that I
You don't have to be told. 'Don't do this,
am saying...
don't do that."
"So it is something we have to work out.
"After some time, I have seen all
Sahaja Yogis become all right and they Talk to people, tell them... I was surprised
when we were coming by Cathay [Pacific
come to their senses. Even those people
Airways]. Avinash started talking to the air
who have left, I am sure, will come back
hostess and to other people. They all
because, you see, after all, there is
came to Me, one by one. They said. 'You
Kundalini. She is sitting there. She'll rise
all the time, correcting them...
are a very powerful person,' this, that.
They all got their Self Realization.
"I am very happy to see that in Hong
"That's how it's going to spread. We
Kong, also, Sahaja Yoga is sustained by
have to tell everybody, tell everyone and
you and I am sure it will grow, especially in
not to teel shy about it. These guru people
China... You have to do a lot for China and
work it out because this is the message of
have seen. They go on talking about their
gurus.. We should also talk and tell people
Tao.
"This is not something, I would say, about it. This is the truth. You have to
know the truth....
absolutly new." Only thing what I have
done is to make it en masse, a mass
"Of course, there are people who have
been criticizing. It's all right. It's all
movement. "That's what it is. It is the same.
"All these great Sufis, all these great
falsehood. It will all go away.
saints, incarnations, all of them have said
"I am very happy to see you all here. So
the same thing. 'Seek yourself, find thank you very much again and again."
yourself, know yourself.' All of them have
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-49.txt 
 My Heartfelt Kowtow
(A Sahaja Yogini From Hong-Kong)
Thank the Divine. It is out of my strong emotions or gratitude that tears
dropped non-stop like beads falling from a
expectation to have such a blessing to see
broken thread. Later, I realized that lots of
the Holy Mother in person in Hong Kong
yogis had the same experience.
and enjoy Her boundless love.
The encounter has transformed me
The Hong Kong collective even allowed
from an ordinary woman to a Sahaja Yogi.
someone as new as a baby, like me, to be
Just for a period of several days, I have
so close to Mother. It was my luck to get to
found miraculous changes in life. My heart
know a group of dynamic and
seems opened up all of a sudden and I compassionate yogis.
I remembered the first time we
have a very strong desire to share with
others this boundless joy and love. Before
meditated. It was very quick for me to feel
the kundalini up onto the top of the head.
that, I used to be an introvert and did not
like to talk much. It is Mother who gave me
In my belly, there was strong churning but
a second life and made me fully it gradually subsided. As such, all
understand that the Divine chose us not problems, as well as the chakra and nadi
for our individual blessings, but to spread imbalances were treated and cleared all
out this love for others.
together, gracefully. I felt the cool breeze
The long quest for the meaning of life
on the head and my hands, as well as the
eventually ended up with an answer. infinite joy. Everything around turned
Everything comes in such a natural, living
infinitely beautiful.
Before that, members of my family
way and I have done nothing for it. It just
happened as a result of a pure heart of brought back bits and pieces of
knowledge on Sahaja Yoga. My
desire.
My first encounter with Mother was knowledge is merely skin deep. I did not
receiving Her at the airport. We waited even know the basic techniques. Yet,
with an extremely reverent mind.
simply, by the heart, to surrender and
Suddenly, She appeared in front of us with
seek the truth, as well as the love from
the most beautiful and touching smile.
Mother, I did nothing. I got cleansed.
I do not know whether it was out of the
This experience is totally beyond words.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-50.txt 
 49
Nov.& Dec. 2002.
The Divine Cool Breeze Voglume-XIV Issue 11 & 12
could not be stopped. I only feel I have
On the third night, after 10 pm, the
received, just overwhelmingly, too much.
unfurnished hotel function room was filled
Then Mother gave each Hong Kong
up by the holy yogis and some lovely
children. We all sat down, got into yogi a ring as a gift. It turned out to be the
first time She did that. It was also my first
meditation.
time in life to bow and do my heartfelt
Not long after, Mother appeared at the
kowtow to Mother. Right at the moment, a
door with a charming smile. We all greeted
strong desire to surrender spontaneously
Her with hands folded in namaskar to
show deep respect. At that moment, the
rose.
May everyone enjoy this nicest
feeling of gratitude rushed out from my
heart again. Her touching smile deeply blessing on Earth.
After that, Florence played the Chinese
moved everyone there.
Mother made an hour-long speech.. I traditional instrument, the zhang. The
listened with great awe, like a child, music was enjoyable, sometimes as soft
as water in a small stream, sometimes
watching Her face without turning my
eyes. Though I could only understand dashing with great enthusiasm, thus
manifesting the depth of Chinese culture.
twenty percent, I could feel the strong
vibrations from Mother spreading to every
Finally, we sang in praise of Mother.
Though I did not know the songs, I tried to
one of us.
follow and enjoyed the beauty of oneness
It is Mother who saves us from the
disturbed mind and uplifts and corrects us, and unity.
What a feeling beyond words!
Such an indescribable feeling of gratitude
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-51.txt 
 TH E DIVINE Co oL
DIVI N
E COOL
BRE EZ E
Published by
V.J. Nalgirkar
162-A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph. : 5447291, 5170197
For subscription please write to
Mr. O. P. Chandna
N-463 (G-11), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi - 110034
Ph.: (011) 7013464
Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artwork to:
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple
C- 17, Qutub Institutional Area
New Delhi - 110016
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-53.txt 
 If there is no contentment (Samadhan) in Sahaja yoga theh it is useless.
Where ever we are Mother is with us. In the State of Connection, where ever
you are Mother is there. When you realize this only then you will be
considered as Sahajayogi.
(Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
