NIRMALA Juiy-August, 2002 Volume : XIV Issue :7& 8 IVERSAL PUE RELIGIC The Divine Cool Breeze VII FA My simple desire is that everybody must love, .. pure love will change your life. It will change the whole world. ..lf you have love, you can correct people without saying anything to them because love is supreme intelligence. It gives you all the correct methods. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Birthday Felicitation, 23-3-2002 DHARMA YMHSIN

 - XIV 7 & 8 July The Divine Gool Breeze Volume August 2002 NEW YEAR PUJA, KALWE, 31-12-01 8 MAKAR SANKRANTI PUJA, PUNE, 14-1-2002 10 FEED BACK FROM THE COMMUNITY 11 SHIVRATRI PUJA, 17-3-2002 22 BIRTHDAY PUJA, NIRMAL DHAM, DELHI, 21-3-2002 30 FROM THE PEN OF LITTLE SAHAJA YOGINI 31 TALK TO GROOMS, CABELLA, 23-9-2001 36 TALK TO BRIDES, CABELLA, 23-9-2001 38 THE BEAM OF LIGHT (A POEM)

 Co oL BREEZE THE DIVINE Published by V.J. Nalgirkar 162 - A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067 Printed at Print-O-Graphics New Delhi For subscription please write to Mr. O.P. Chandna N- 463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi - 110034 Ph. : (011) 7013464 Please send your experience, miracle photographs and artwork to: THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple C-17, Qutub Institutional Area New Delhi - 110016

 NEWYEAR PUJA Kalwe - 31.12.2001 Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Translated from Hindi) the to you. The Divine has given you I am late today but the power of second birth. Now you should see what further steps you are taking. What your love has brought me here. Your Mother was slightly unwell but Her will power is tremendous. Everything is progress are you making that entitles being managed with this will power. I you to confine this power to yourself wish you all also get the similar and to your children? It is very tremendous will power. essential because I have seen even after getting self-realization people are not fully cleansed. Perfection should be there. Until you work for Sahaja Yoga in collectivity you cannot know the negativities that are still left in you. What efforts you have made in this direction? You have to think yourself. Look within and see how much hard work you have put to achieve it. All of you should meditate, attain depth in meditation and think that It's surprising that people come in Sahaja Yoga and make money in it! There are so many such people who do? you are a saint. What should you Mother has made you a Saint. Now what steps you have to take to go into depth? You have to cleanse yourself. There is no doubt in it, but what more is to be done? You have corrected yourself, cleansing has been worked- come to Sahaja Yoga and make money! No doubt, they get exposed later on and are put in trouble. So what's the use? You have not come here to make money. You have come to attain your out and you have reached the state of ascent. So you must follow 'Dharma'. perfection. After that what are you doing? Even after that you only go for meditation and attend Sahaja Yoga I heard that many Adharmas (sins) are dominating the Mumbai City. programmes and everything is confined to that only. What have you done ahead of it? It is a boon of the Divine These Adharmas were not there during last 20/25 years. Present day Cinema is responsible for it. No purity is left in

 July - August 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 push you in the trap of anger, but I say, the films and we should not see them. If all of you do not see these movies what is the use? There is no use of getting angry. Today I have to tell you that look within and see yourself that then they will flop. Otherwise too these are not successful. People do not like which are the weaknesses still left in indecent films. They prefer family movies. This is one factor. In addition you. This is what we say, Cleanse your self' so that 'Nirmal Tatwam to it people read nasty and indecent (Element of Purity) awakens in you. This Nirmal Tatwam will destroy all the literature. I know you Sahaja Yogis do not do that. Many obscene articles are published in newspapers. negativities that still exist. What is the use of clinging on to these negativities? None has so for benefitted from the So first and foremost thing is that we should purify ourselves. People negativities. Most of the negative keep on staring all around very people landed in jails and those who shamelessly. Those who stare escaped, somehow, people spit at shamelessly are not Sahaja Yogis. Eyes them. should be stable and pure. This is So I have to tell you that do not the first sign of a Sahaja Yogi. If the look at the faults of others. Look at eyes are not yet stable, if these are still your own faults. "What negativities still adulterous then such a person should linger in me? Do I get angry? Is there lust in my eyes? Am I still attracted to be told that you are not a Sahaja Yogi. Second is greed. If you are still material objects? Do I want to buy greedy then you cannot become a this, buy that? I should bring this, that!" This tendency was paramount in Sahaja Yogi and this greed will America, but America is now under the definitely expose you one day. You should get rid of this enemy-greed. But pressure of the severe blow. Otherwise they used to shop like mad people. Shri Krishna has said that the first They used to go to the houses of different people! If at all you have to buy, then buy hand-made things which have imaginativeness and which exhibit your creative power. But no one buys the artistic objects made by poor negativity to be got rid of is 'Anger'. So long as you get angry, you are not a Sahaja Yogi. No one has ever seen me getting angry. People say, 'Shri Mataji, You never get angry'. Some times certain incidents are enough to

 July-August 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 7 & 8 artisans. People go on buying useless things. Buying of these useless objects dignified way then he is useless. He should dress up nicely, talk nicely, behave nicely and decorate his house will neither do good to you nor benefit the fine craftsmen. I wish your outlook with things aesthetically made. One could decorate the house with flowers becomes artistic, and you bring home artistic objects only! People will have as well. You could have a small garden in your house. I mean to say, Sahaja half a century utensils but not a single Yogi should have the knowledge of one is artistic! Articles made by artisans should be respected. If you are a Sahaja Yogi, you should not go in for meaningless unartistic objects. I have seen women purchasing saris. Sari after aesthetics. Generally people fill their houses with useless things because markets are full with those objects. It will be better if you burn down all such useless objects and make a fine Holi sari they buy, but all useless! Funny designs are made in them-all ghostly. Two beautiful artistically made saris are of them. Plastic is much in vogue now- a- better than having fifty saris. days. Even the glasses are made of plastics! That is too much. I cannot use In our country people still appreciate art. We have to know it, plastic. Sarees are being made of understand it. I find that people paint plastics, everything of plastic! Plastic their houses with strange ghostly colours. There are ghostly decorations. is so much in use that there is every possibility that it affects the health of You are Sahaja Yogis; you should know what object is full of beauty. You human beings. Children die because of this plastic. So we should try to avoid should have the knowledge of aesthetics. Only then you could make your lives beautiful and whosoever plastics as far as possible. But plastic is dominating the whole scene today. In Mumbai people get their sofa sets made of plastics. Plastic to sit upon, comes across you will say, "Oh, what a fine gentleman! Very aesthetic"! The plastic to wear, plastic to walk upon and now in a short time they will make cars of plastic! You are Sahaja Yogis. way you make yourself aesthetic you will also decorate your houses and the You have nothing to do with plastic. I whole atmosphere. This is the first sign do not mean that you should move in a of a Sahaja Yogi. If a Sahaja yogi cloak. Sahaja Yogis should not do that. does not maintain himself in a

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July-August 2002 They should dress up properly and live state of connection, where ever you nicely. There is absolutely no need of are, Mother is there. When you hypocritically looking like Sanyasin or realize this, only then you will be Sadhu Babas. But do not use anything considered as a Sahaja Yogi. An which is not beneficial to you. You established person has no need of should avoid such things and protect coming before me or coming to the stage. I know about everybody. But your children also. with faith you could attain me in your depth and I can identify you. I wish you all attain that state of ascent and get established. Get established by your efforts. Be active in Sahaja Yoga and work it out. You will get established and will not feel like The second point is that everyone wishes me to come to his house. Have you done any extraordinary thing that I should come to your house? The other point is that everyone wants to come to my house. Where ever I may go, people do not let me live in peace. Still you have not done any thing extra- or always stand before the Mother. ordinary. So let this desire be there and Often I have seen that those who ask yourself, "What is my state, what always try to keep themselves in is my desire?" Why should you have bothering the Mother with everything the forefront are either thieves or such a desire which makes your dishonest people. Those who are clear-hearted and established in love, just try to impose yourself on me. Why enjoy their state. You all receive should you do like that? Any where vibrations from me, so now it is my Mother uncomfortable? You should not you come from, you just stand before me! Please do not do that. cleansed. If you are not cleansed If there is no contentment (zaEI) then your negativities affect my in Sahaja Yoga then it is useless. health. So tonight you have to request that you should keep yourself Where ever we are, Mother is with us. That should be the state of faith in us. It will help you ascend. Faith contains everything essential for resolve that we shall get so much evolved that our evolution pleases the Mother and transforms the whole world. progress. There is absolutely no Today you have been sitting for use if you are not established and a long time. Some of you might have yield to all sorts of pressures. In the

 July- August 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 Now you are sitting so peacefully! This left. This is the sign of a Sahaja Yogi. You are sitting here very peacefully. In the beginning there used to be lots of noise. People used to talk very loudly. is very heartening to me. May God Bless You. Pravachana delivered in English-Kalwe Puja I am telling them that how a Sahaja doing about Sahaja Yoga? Only meditation is not the point. Meditation for what? For equipping yourself to help others. We need it very much in this Yogi should feel. You should be satisfied people. Firstly and foremost you have to be satisfied. You just see within yourself if you are satisfied or not. You got the highest that you wanted. You have got Kaliyuga, people who will go all out to help. On the contrary I find that they are very anxious just to meet me, to see me. I have seen all the Indians who come to the peace, you have got the joy and all the blessings of the Divine. Despite that if you are dissatisfied, you want to do something always that is disturbing! Cabella must meet me, must-see me, as if they have the special right! What is the need? What is the need to meet me? But Always some people want to show this is the trouble of say our conditioning me off or to come forward, or they want that supposing there is some leader, some Minister coming. Everybody will go and to escape Sahaja Yoga. Firstly you must spread Sahaja Yoga. How many people have you brought to Sahaja Yoga? Just think of it. You are Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja show off, that to meet him and talk to him but not a Sahaja Yogi. You must have self esteem, self esteem by which you Yoginis-means what? You are saints. In should know what is your dignity and this world all the saints, who became how you should be. There are Sahaja saints with very great difficulty, going Yogis who are excellent, who are very through lots of tortures, have done so good, who are very self satisfied. I know much work. One single Saint has so who they are and you have to be like many people whom he has attracted. Of that, otherwise you cannot enjoy Sahaja course he could not get them realization because I have not taught him how to do that. But you just find out what you are Yoga. You are like all other people trying to indulge into all non-sensical activities. Now, today it was a real test because I

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July-August 2002 example so many girls wanted to marry, just could not come earlier. You know there are 4 times more, 5 times more than what is the traffic now a days! Ijust could all the boys but if they are not married, not arrive and still you are sitting here! It gives me great satisfaction that they they feel unhappy about that. Does not really love me and that they are really matter. You are now connected to God. Sahaja Yogis. If you really love me, Marriage is not always a very great bliss, you must love others who are not I tell you. It's not. On the contrary it can Sahaja Yogis and try to give be very binding. Could be very them realization. Because you know troublesome. So better not feel bad. If my age is quite a lot and how far can I you feel bad then you cannot give realization. How many people you have go. I am not going now to many countries but Sahaja Yoga is growing fast, though I am not there. It is growing, why? given realization? Just think about that. All the time like all ordinary people thinking about marriage and this and that, is not going to help you. You are something special and what speciality do you have? What are you doing about it? Because people of that country understand their responsibility. You should know what is your responsibility. It is not only towards yourself but it is I am sorry at the end of this our great for the rest of the world. You have to Ganapatipule, I have to tell you this. But work it out and do something. Whatever somewhat some times one has to tell. people you can approach or whatever people you can meet, go all out. I have also said before that I have seen people I know you are all very good Sahaja Yogis. Also that you have achieved so who go to some horrible gurus, go on much, but what is my desire is that all of you should become like a light and start spreading Sahaja Yoga. In some countries it has happened. It is working out and people feel so responsible. I am talking about their guru, describing their guru. Anybody who meets them, they go on telling, not the Sahaja Yogis. I don't know, may be they want to preserve their realization? They think that if they amazed at them that how they are tell somebody their realization will drop spreading Sahaja Yoga! Now the same request I have to make that please look at yourself. Introspect. What have you done? What have you achieved in Sahaja off. If you don't spread Sahaja Yoga what is the use of getting your realization? All my labour is wasted on such people who are for themselves. They want Yoga? Such a satisfaction lies when you something for themselves. Now for

 7 July-August 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 that next year you must give self really-really work hard to spread Sahaja Yoga. Many people think that coming nearer to me, I feel pleased. I am not. That's no recognition. You should never do that. On the contrary when realization to many people. How many people you have given self realization, that's the main thing. Just find out what you have done throughout the year? I you grow really. I will know myself. Today is not the day I should have said all this because it is the day for New Year. But only good decisions are to be taken on the new year's day. That's the custom with human beings. So today you all have don't know how to count it. But you yourself count what have we done all these years? What have we achieved? Attending my puja is no favour to me or doing anything for the puja is no favour to me. My greatest puja is that of human beings and if you can to take the decision that what are we achieve and spread Sahaja Yoga that fast, I will be very-very grateful to you. I worked very hard. I have really worked very hard. This body, this mind, doing for Sahaja Yoga? What are we giving Sahaja Yoga? What is our achievement and what are we sharing with others? It is the greatest truth you all my health, everything I have done for saving people and you please also tonight have got. Nobody got it. People worked so hard, did so much. Nobody could give realization. It's only you who can give realization. Very surprising! decide and take a view that what Mother is saying is very important and precious. We have to, we have to rise and give Kabira could not give realization to realization to people but which is not so common. I am surprised why people are anybody. Gyanadeva could not give realization to anybody. All of them behaving in this manner who are realized have been great-great saints of great value system and with great understanding. Whatever poetry they have given, people are singing, that's all. But they cannot give self realization which can do. With all that power if you souls! All my blessings for the new year. For all of you happy new year, but the next year should be full of many Sahaja Yogis who have done work and who have achieved something great. you are not giving realization, what's the use of giving power to someone like that? May God Bless You. So today's new year's message is

 MAKAR SANKRANTI PUJA 14-1-2002 Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Adishakti, the Earth element gets calmed The meaning of Makar Sankranti down and human beings thrive. is Samkaraman i.e. the day when the Sun passes from one sign of the Zodiac to another. On this day the Sun starts The festival of Sankranti has cultural significance too. It is celebrated all over the country with joy and gaiety. equator. In India the dates of all the festivals are decided according to the position of the Moon. That's why their dates change every year. Makar Sankranti is based on the position of the Sun and that is the reason that this festival is celebrated always on 14th of It is celebrated in some other countries also but it has special significance in India. The climate here is neither too hot nor too cold. It is quite balanced. It is the grace of the Adishakti. In other countries the climatic balance is absent3; there either it is extreme cold or extreme January. hot. Makar Sankranti indicates that It is not proper for us to change with the change in climate and nature. from this day the Sun will get warmer and warmer. The heat of Sun is There is no justification if with the heat beneficial for mankind. All our of the Sun we get heated-up or enraged. There is no justification for anger. Anger is the worst of the Shudripus (Six enemies). We are Sahaja Yogis, movements depend on this heat. But the impact of the heat could also excite anger in us. That is the reason that on this day we eat jaggary (Gud) so that we become soft-spoken. awakened people. Our Kundalini has been awakened. So we must learn how to remain peaceful. Mostly Sahaja Yogis are evolved beings, they are quite good. Very few, only one percent, however, Because of the warmth of the Sun all vegetation and wealth grows on the earth. Fruits and vegetables are offered are still running after the Alakshmi. It is to the Goddess, on this day, to invoke very natural to get annoyed over this Her blessings. By the blessings of the

 July-August 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 sort of behaviour. But it is not your job You could also control the to correct them, it is the Adishakti's job. You have to evolve very calmly. Every thing works-out by the grace of the God. We have always to be mindful of situation in the same way. But for this you have to be in the subtle state of Chaitanya-in the state of vibratory awareness. Everything else is insignificant. this fact. Some people are negative, money is all to them. Such people have nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga. We should have no worldly desires. Sahaja Yogis have still to go a But you have no remedy for it. long way. They have still to work out Adishakti Harself will take care of many things. God Almighty will work- out everything. Don't worry, maintain them. American President Mr. George your peace. Bush is also reverent to me. Recently I wrote a letter to him and the whole equation was changed. Also there were changes in General Musharraf and he addressed his nation and Islam in the spirit of the letter I wrote to George Sankranti means the Energy of the Suni.e. self-confidence. Sun is energy, it is effulgence. Now it depends on us, whether we have to burn ourselves in this effulgence or gain self-confidence from it and become radiant. Bush. Every thing that I wrote in my Many Many Blessings to all of you. letter was heard in his speech.

 FEEDBACK FROM THE COMMUNITY Some of the organizations in USA who "The utilization of meditation for the adopted Sahaja Yoga had this to say after detoxification process is new at Su Casa. practicing Sahaja Yoga Meditation for some We are surprised and pleased with the consistent voluntary attendance that the meditation program has attracted. While the therapeutic community approach often makes use of mandatory participation of groups, this group has carried it's own weight and we intend to continue the positive collaboration at our place of residential care." Denise Donovant, MA, Assistant Director, time. United Earth Organization Shri Mataji's discovery brings genuine hope to humanity. Claes Nobel Chairman of United Earth Organization, Grandnephew of Alfred Nobel, Nobel Prize Founder Rikers Island MTAR .the inmate population would constantly approach me regarding the stress level being reduced due to their learned meditation. You Lower Eastside Service Centre, New York City William Cullen Bryant High School "Your commitment to raise the students" were very reliable and an asset to my facility." Maria Gerena, Captain R.A.P. Unit Rikers Island Correctional Facility, New York City, Department of Corrections The National Institutes of Health awareness about the ills of stress as a deterrent to drug use was very evident as students and staff reached out and actively participated to learn more about Sahaja Yoga Meditation...Thank you for enhancing our school community with a very positive way: to stay stress free." Thalia Stylianou William Cullen Bryant High School, New York City City of Rockville, Maryland "Many people return week after week and everyone reports a sense of relaxation following the classes. People are thrilled that such a program is offered to them free of charge!..an opportunity to learm how to have self-awareness regarding their physical, mental, and emotional balance. Thanks again for agreeing to work with us to bring such a quality program to the City of Rockville. I look forward to our continued partnership". Mandy Bendersly Youth, Family, and Community Specialist, City of Rockville, MD "I want you to know that many of our patients who serve as research participants in our Clinical Centre have benefited from practicing Sahaja Yoga. We have been graced by a couple of excellent teachers in this last year... in introducing your meditative techniques to our patients on Wednesdays and many of our staff have been weekly participants on Fridays. I thank you for making available this effective method for enhancing health and peacefulness.' George Patrick, Ph.D. Chief, Recreation Therapy, Rehabilitation Department, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD US Department of Health and Human Services: Su Casa, Methadone To Abstinence Residence

 SHIVRATRI PUJA Pune, 17.3.2002 Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Tonight we have gathered here to do Shri Shiva Puja. Those people who have a clean heart, can only do Shiva Puja. Those whose heart is not clean cannot do Shiva Puja. It's a simple principle of Shri which are the snakes. It's a symbolic thing, to say, very symbolic. But I must say that animals understand Divine force much better than human beings, much better. Because they have a clean heart. Whatever is their lifestyle built by nature, Shivaratri. they carry on with it. But there's no malice, there's no jealousy, there are not all these mean things in their heart. They As you have seen yesterday, we have snakes, or, these are horrible snakes guiding behind the Shiva Linga. The do it because it is supposed to be. significance is this - those who are clean in heart, who are full of love for others, But the quality of human beings is only one - and that is how much they love are always guarded by the power of Shiva,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July-August 2002 12 and forgive. Loving capacity of human There is such a difference between Shiva and Shakti. In their whole attitude. beings are such by which they conquer all their negative forces- they can, easily, see that it's not good to have all these qualities, or maybe that they understand it's not noble to indulge into all these Because Shiva is absolutely a liberated personality, he's not t othered. If the people are indulging into wrong things, he'll destroy-finished! He doesn't want to cure, He doesn't want to improve, nothing of the kind. But for the Shakti it is important, because this is Her child, this inhuman behaviour. They are not bound to indulge into all these things. Neither they are asked to be, but suddenly they get lured by such things which has got universe is Her child. All this is created by Her, so naturally She is worried and She doesn't like people who try to take hatred, jealously and greed. You see how Shiva lives. He lives to mean things and nonsense. in the Himalayas. See what clothes He wears, what He eats? He has no demand First of all it was human beings started indulging in power. They moved for anything because He is complete, He is perfect. Such a personality is Shiva's. from country to country to empower And if you are worshipping Him, you themselves. Where is that power gone? Finished. Then, after that, what happened with them is that they left their style with should find out within your heart, what sort of feelings you have, what sort of malice you nurture. others. And now it seems it is very common to see people shamelessly being These days in India, greed has become the main point. They are so mean greedy. For them, the solution, is Shiva. All such people will be destroyed. First and so low! It's impossible to understand that they think money is everything, which of all they will be exposed and then they is not in the culture of Indians, no, no. In will be destroyed, to the last bit of it. no way. But somehow they have picked Another thing is that Shiva respects it up, in the foreign countries perhaps, and it is spreading very much now, that money is the most important thing. a person who has a good character; a person with a good character. And if anyone is a bad character or indulges into bad things, Shiva won't spare them. So the Shakti creates, protects, looks after Think of Shiva. He never thought of money. He never wanted any money. them, brings them up. But Shiva is sitting He never wanted to show off himself.

 July-August 2002 13 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & B warned you, so many incarnations have warned you; but I tell you if you don't listen to them, then Shiva is not going to listen. He doesn't listen to anyone. If He's angry, He's angry. Whatever it is, very there, just to destroy! Very important, this destruction is very important. The Shakti doesn't show those qualities. She may destroy some rakshasas, but He can destroy nations after nations. difficult to convince Him that 'Please First of all the ego you have – who will destroy that? That is He. Shiva is in your Sahasrara. He is sitting in the Sahasrara; now remember, on top of everything. The other day, I saw one gentleman from the Broadcasting, a newsman, who was very, very stupid and was talking very harshly. And I saw his Ekadasha Rudra, "My God," I said, "This spare this person, it's alright. Forgive.' But His basic quality is forgiveness, can you imagine. His basic quality is forgiveness. But if He doesn't forgive, then you are finished. Up to a point maybe He might forgive, but after that.. It's a very, very difficult situation. And I find that people don't realise what Shiva is. In the South we have two one is now going to be in trouble." What types of people-worshipers. One are shaivaites, another vaishnavaites. They are having a big fight between them. Now is Ekadasha is nothing but the eleven powers of Shiva. They build up here and give you all kinds of diseases; the worst it is less, much less. What is the work of of all is cancer. And I knew that this Vishnu is to give you realisation, fellow is going to have a very bad time. emancipation of human beings, evolution of human beings. But if you fail in your goodness, in your dharma, then Shiva comes in your life. He is not a Sahaja Yogi, how am I to tell him? How anybody has to tell him? But it comes from this Ekadasha Rudra. Now these are eleven powers of Shiva, very well described. Now these powers start working on people, even on Sahaja Yogis, if they do not follow the principle of Sahaja Yoga. He is, I should We have to understand that we are all surrounded by their powers, we are all made by their powers, is the Shakti who is protecting you. But to an extent. She cannot go above Shiva, She cannot say, watching everything. Every part of your life, He watches. How you behave, cross Him. what you do, what is your dharma – He These days you find so many watches all that. And so many saints have

 14 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July-August 2002 Shiva, I can't go beyond Him. It's such a power of Shiva, it's such an authority of Shiva. And to worship Him means to worship goodness. The goodness could be compassion, could be love, could be forgiveness, anything. He likes only good people, and He will protect only good people indulging into politics- it's all money-making propositions. They all try to make money, it's not politics! They don't do any good to the whole communities, nowhere. Either under fear or under abandonment, they behave in such a manner that they are not afraid of God, they are not afraid of His own people. attention on them. Perhaps they don't For example, some people are very know that they are under the attention of power oriented, some are money oriented Shiva. He's watching each and every person, whether you are Australian, and some are power oriented. And the English or Indian. Whatever religion you power oriented also do it for money sometimes, that's the aim. They'll not may follow, He's watching them. stay in Sahaja. They will be displaced. This is a thing one has to understand. They do it, and then come and ask for And once you understand this, you will forgiveness, "Oh Mother forgive us, we accept that you have to be good and dharmic people. You have to be good character people. Why people talk of good character? Try to understand! It's have done it". But try not to do anything of that kind. I, of course, forgive you, but Shiva, He won't, He won't. He will take you to task and then stupidity these days when people don't believe in it. People are doing all kinds of things, they are drinking, they are playing the money business. All kinds of things they are doing without having any fear of the wrath of God. And that wrath you will come to Me “Mother, You must save us!" It's very difficult. From His clutches it is very difficult. Also He's a very forgiving person. He forgives you, many things. Because of Me also He forgives. But, after some time when He takes over, there's no appeal, there's no comes from Shiva. safety. I would like to warn you all, though I do not want to frighten you, but I you are all my children - be careful! Try to weigh every step that you take. Of course I am there to support you, to help want to tell you the truth, it is the truth. You have to try to be good people. You you, to protect you. But, not beyond have to try to be really good charactered

 July-August 2002 15 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 to the Self which is destructive is the people. I am told some people who are power of Shiva. What we call the Self here, is the power of Shiva. in Sahaja Yoga, indulge in money laundering and all that. Also some of them have very bad characters, they run after He destroys by many ways, by girls and they try to look at the girls and all sorts of things. Now this has ruined many ways. You can lose your reputation, you can lose your health, you can lose your wealth, everything can happen to the west especially. Also our Indians are learning from it. As it is, we have to you till you are completely finished and packed. I have known people on the death-bed also, start talking about money, What should she get, money, how will he get money, and this and that'. Instead of talking about God or Self Realisation, they are talking like this. It's such a normal thing. But if you see Shiva, He doesn't respect ourselves. If we don't respect ourselves, and we try to misbehave, I can only help you with your Kundalini. But if you go too much beyond it, Ekadasha Rudra will catch, no doubt. It's a very big barrier on your forehead. Eka-dasha Rudra, and it is so effective nowadays, so much active! All kinds of diseases possess anything, He doesn't want which are coming out, is all incurable, are anything. Whatever you give to him, as a because of Ekadasha. And also those samarpana or anything, that He doesn't accept, and He passes on to the Shakti, "You do whatever you want to do." who are suffering from possessions. The other day I met somebody who was very much caught-up. And the Ekadasha was working. I found out that he is very fanatically influenced by everything to benefit you, to make you She's the one who is working out something. I don't want to name it, but happy. He's not bothered. In this case, these, we have found out, are not correct you have to please Shiva! He will not try things. In every religion we have people to please you, you have to go all the way to please Him. It is a very difficult personality of Shiva. In the Koran, it is not written separately for Allah or for who are spreading nonsensical ideas. Now if you don't have discretion about it, nobody can help you. You should have a full discretion as to what is right and what Shiva, it is not differentiated. Because the is wrong. Then Shiva is with you. But if people with whom He had to deal were all uneducated, stupid people. So He you indulge into all such nonsensical things, it is self-destructive, I must say. But didn't give all the details that God is in

 July- August 2002 16 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 different forms. So there is only one Allah give me, half of it?" He said, "All right, you can have it. You can have the whole." Because he said this, "My house is here, they know. But they don't do anything that shows the differentiations of their jobs and work. It is the Shakti who loves, I I'll just wear my clothes." What he did was not to show that nudity is a very great thing. But if you see the Jains, what to agree. But She too, can get angry very much. And once She gets angry, there is do? They make big, big statues of no end to it! Mahavira, showing Him completely nude! I mean, this is the perversion of human Now I have to tell you, as Sahaja Yogis, that you develop your qualities to please Shiva. It's too much of hankering, too much of "wants'. All this is not necessary. Of course I want you to live well, and beautifully, not stupidly-to go into jungles or to behave like hippies – mind. Why He did it, we should know. He was so detached, so detached, to give away the clothes, what is the harm? It was not to show-off or anything. But the generosity, people don't understand. And the Jainis are the least generous! that's not the point. The point is, from So the quality of all these great your heart, the attachment to things incarnations is also not understood. must go away. A person who is a Shiva bhakta - he doesn't care for money, he doesn't know about money. example, Shiva is always with very few He is a very generous person, extremely. clothes, very few. And what does he eat? He's just generous. People say he is No-one knows. What is His desire and stupid, the way he goes on, the way he what does he want? No-one knows. A goes on. But I don't think so. That's not person with a great knowledge of music at all the description; the description of a will sing before him, He's alright. Oreven man who is a bhakta of Shiva has no any madcap comes and sings, He's interest in money, is very generous. alright. For Him it doesn't matter, He's Anything you ask from that, he'll give. Because a kind of an illusion is there. For not meticulous about how the music is and what the notes are, whether it is alright or not, no. He is beyond all these things. Mahavira was like that. Mahavira He is beyond all these formalities that we have about everything, He is beyond. He is spirituality itself, he is beyond had gone for his meditation in his own garden and Vishnu as Shri Krishna came and told him that, "See, I have no clothes. You have got this cloth, why don't you all these things. Whether you are a

 July- August 2002 17 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 So, what I am saying, that if you have to worship Shiva, you should de- condition yourself. You are living in the world of Sahasrara. Now, somebody is not properly dressed - finished! Somebody is over-popularly dressed - finished! Human beings have a capacity to criticise everyone. And to criticise musician or you are an artist, whatever it is you are, He'll enjoy. He's the enjoyer, and He'll enjoy - whatever is simple, whatever is given with the heart, He'll enjoy. Whatever is expressed with the heart, He'll enjoy. He is not a conditioned person, that it should be modern, it should be such and such. He is not conditioned. everyone, this is nothing fundamental because if you do it on vibrations, one can understand. But not on vibrations, just He doesn't think that way like human beings who will sit down and make a meticulous everything, does it fit into it or because this is not the fashion, that is not not. Even, even for art, even for anything that is created out of somebody's heart, they will try to discourage that person. the fashion'. What is the fashion of Shiva, tell me. I have seen people, they have such conditioning. And one thing about Shiva, Has He any fashions? Anything you give Him, He's happy. Whatever you give he has no conditioning of anything, nothing. That's why they call him a mast- Him, He eats that. He is full of such appreciation because He is personified as Joy. He is peace and He is joy. If you are worshippers of Shiva, then you should not have any conditioning of any kind. maulaa - He is not at all conditioned. If you have any conditioning in your mind, then you are not a Shivabhakta. It's all right, you should dress up well, you should I mean, normally I also wear simple do this ... but you should not have saris, very simple. And it happens that people think I am a very poor woman. I am poor because I don't care for money, conditioning that 'If you don't do that, you are being out of cast, out of fashion, out of this-that'. It is very difficult for people I don't bother. So, we should know that not to accept. All kinds of fashions are Shiva is the poorest man, poorest God. He doesn't wear any alankaraas, He doesn't wear anything, just He lives with His own body. Because He is nothing but embodiment of enjoyment, nothing but coming nowadays, all kinds. I tell them, "What is this?" "Oh this is the fashion." Is it some God behind this fashion, or is there some deity who is telling you these fashions? Today it comes, tomorrow it will disappear. complete form of enjoyment and joy.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July- August 2002 18 So another quality of Shivabhakta this kind of a dress, to wear this kind of a is that he should be joy. You should be joyous about everything- whatever you see, whatever type of person you see. So the only way you can do, is give up human quality of criticism-to criticise others. Like if the English go into the Indian house, they say "We don't like it." "Yes, what, what you don't like?" "We cherrot. All kinds of things have a conditioning. Now-a-days the hairstyle has become very funny with women. Because they don't put oil in their hair. They will not have any grease in their hair. If somebody's going to meet them they will wash their hair. I don't think it looks very nice. Of course I don't say that you need to have so much of oil on your face and ears. But, what is so important? didn't like that carpet." I don't like it' - itself is against your Shakti. Then, if supposing an American goes to an English home, he'll say, "I don't like it." It's very 33 In life, also there is another thing that 11 common. All the people say "I don't like it", "I didn't like that". Who are you to say I don't like it' or 'I like it'. People don't realise that by saying all these things, we are very self-centred. We want to impress people. If I wear a dress or anything, it should impress. I mean, even it impresses- so what? Ifa snake comes along, he will bite you, whatever dress you might be wearing, whatever country you you are showing that you have no Shiva principle in you. might be from. I can understand somebody who All this kind of identification, it doesn't behove a Shivabhakta. A Shivabhakta has to be just absolutely lost cannot walk, alright, for such a person is allowed to use some sticks or something, allowed. But if he says “I don't like that person because he doesn't use the stick," shows that he is such an egoistical fellow. Himself he is using the stick and he wants to create what, warts or what, in a democratic country, that people should walk with the sticks in their hands. It is in the raptures of joy. Very particular about hairdress, very particular about dresses - I don't know what they are particular about! With all that, what do they gain? Nothing. Do they become popular? And this kind of popularity, which is so skin-deep, what's the use? very difficult. You must have respect, respect of your being. As not only human beings, but as Sahaja Yogis. You are Sahaja In the west it is very common, you see, to have this kind of a hat, to have

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July August 2002 19 Yogis. We are Shiva's bhaktas, we don't pujas. Because they have got work. Altogether there are eleven pujas, but they don't come. Because they are very busy. At least to one puja you should come. But those who are Shivabhaktas only enjoy nothing but pujas. Nothing else. Their whole being is absolutely vibrated by care. We are not bothered. Whatever it is, Shiva is there within us and we shine with that power within us that is of Kundalini. You may be very well dressed, you may be anything. If your vibrations are bad, what's the use? If you cannot judge people by their vibrations, by nonsensical things like dress and moustaches, is it of any value? Shiva bhakti. To them, that's the most important thing to do. Also there are people in Sahaja In Sahaja Yoga your value system has to be Sahaja. I have seen many people, "I don't like their house, I didn't Yoga who are trying to make money out of Sahaja Yoga. Very wrong, very wrong, very wrong. Sahaja Yoga is to give you punyas, to give you blessings, and if that is not in your mind, better give up Sahaja Yoga. You can join some business or something of malpractices very easily, very easily. Till you end up in the jail you are there. But to enjoy your spiritual powers like this..." 'I don't like' is the sentence, is nishiddha, is to be given up by Sahaja Yogis. If you don't like anything, you are not a Sahaja Yogi. Now, of course if there is somebody who is anti-Sahaja and all that, but still by saying 'I don't like', what you must learn certain things. And one of are you going to gain? It's a waste of energy. Because of this, in Sahaja Yoga I have seen, people have created problems them is de-condition yourself-'I don't like it' or I like it'-this sentence must for Me, so many problems. Only because go away from your tongue! they are so much 'self' oriented. "This Likes and dislikes are only for man is bad, that woman is bad, he is this, that ..." Sometimes I am surprised. people who have limited vision. You Because when those people come to me, should learn to appreciate. Your power I am amazed that they are very nice of appreciation will show how spiritually you are endowed. And your power of people. observation will show what do you observe. For example, some people will come and tell me, "I didn't like that lady, she was wearing a funny sari." I mean, But people are very self-centred, also. Like I have seen people who are not bothered to come to meetings, to

 July August 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 20 what is this? "I didn't like her, because of dresses, all variety of families and so many countries you are here. To Me you are nothing but Sahaja Yogis, my children, that's all. NowI don't go on judging you she was putting her hand on her head". So what? Because you make your own images of people, and you want everybody to be like that, otherwise you don't like it. Whether you like it or don't like it, nobody's going to change. Why on your dress, or on what your hairstyle is, no. All modern things are extremely conditioned. And they condition you so much that you get irresponsible. As waste your energy? Sahaja Yogis you get irresponsible. Sometimes there are musicians who foremost Your first and are not so good. I remember, once I went responsibility is Sahaja Yoga. Because home and I asked my father, "How does you should know what a work it is. It is this musician sing?" He says, "He's very such a great work, to transform the whole world- that is My vision! And this old age I think the same. Now, if that is My courageous, very courageous." I said, "Why, what happened?" He said, "He sings without bothering about it and he vision, what should be your attitude? That we should go all out to spread Sahaja Yoga. That's the main thing. I call you for these pujas just to renovate, I should say, to give you more of energy goes out of tune sometimes, he goes out of taala, doesn't matter, but he sings. He's very courageous, himmatvala." So, that's how he used to appreciate, I have seen. When this fellow started singing, I saw he was like that, but my father was saying "Wa-wa, wa-wa" and encouraging him. You see, I have seen in father these divine qualities, how he and all that. But if you are just taking it as a great blessings and sitting at home, it's of no use. You must spread Sahaja Yoga! my used to tolerate, how he used to-I mean I was surprised that they said in not tolerance also, just appreciation. Of any kind of thing he used to appreciate. Lucknow there are only two hundred Sahaja Yogis. How can that be? First time I went to Lucknow, there were at least three thousand Sahaja Yogis and we had not fixed any hall or anything. And can you imagine, suddenly I find so many That's what, if the Sahaja Yogis have that condition of appreciation they will enjoy everything. Because you kill your enjoyment, do you know that? You are all variety of people here, all variety people [gone]. How is it there can be

 July-August 2002 21 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 all-out. Say, for in England I travelled from two hundred Sahaja Yogis? Either you are telling lies, or you are good for nothing. north to south, east to west in all the directions. We have very poor, very poor Sahaja Yogis there. You have to go to universities, to younger people. If hippy- ism can spread, why not Sahaja Yoga? It spread like wild-fire, why not Sahaja So the responsibility of all the Sahaja Yogis, first and foremost, is to spread Sahaja Yoga. How many people have you given realisation? Where have you talked about Sahaja Yoga? I have seen even in the plane, if you are travelling, anyone who is there will tell Me "My guru Yoga? All these things are there, which I have to warn you – be careful! If you is this, you know, such a great guru, this that." Openly, shamelessly, about horrible gurus! While you people are very shy to talk about Sahaja Yoga. Never publicly, unless and until you have a programme, have got Realisation, you have a responsibility - to give realisation to others, and to spread Sahaja Yoga. If you can't do it, then God save and public programme and all that. You have no time, also, for Sahaja Yoga, very you. I have nothing to say. You have to introspect, 'What have I done for Sahaja Yoga? What have I got from Sahaja busy people! Yoga?' And I am sure after this So, if you have to follow Shiva and Shivpuja, you will dedicate yourself to Shiva principle within you. Shiva principle doesn't 'stir out'; it's very, very stern, it's very powerful. You have to dedicate, and you have to surrender. Above every other His blessings all the time, His protection to you, then you have to be Sahaja Yogis of very high quality. It shows when you go all out to spread Sahaja Yoga. That is the thing missing. I am very happy that in Australia Sahaja Yoga has spread so much. I don't know what has happened. In a far fetched place like Australia. In job, above every other performance, the highest is this. So, with this, I ask Shiva to give you the beginning I had some set-backs but blessings, complete blessings, so that you now it has spread. Also in Austria it has spread. And also in Italy. But otherwise. just doesn't spread. What's the matter? The matter is the leaders are not going get transformed into the personality of Shiva. May God bless you all.

 BIRTHDAY PUJA Nirmal Dham, Delhi 21-3-2002 Pravachana by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (English Part of the Talk) We had people in our country, I'm telling them about love, all- pervading love of God Almighty. He's created this whole thing. The whole atmosphere is there. The whole feeling is there of love. But it's possible only for which is a very, supposed to be a very sober country, a very peaceful country, we had people who just believe in killing -kill this, kill that. people who are innocent, like children. If So even in this country, which didn't you are very mature in your hatred, no one can save you. You'll have ten believe in all these things, indulged into all kinds of violence since long. But basically arguments to show that your hatred is justifiable. Then you'll go to any extent to justify it. we are people who believe in peace, because without peace no growth can

 July- August 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 23 So forgiveness is a very good take place. There has to be complete peace. If there is peace in your heart, if there is peace surrounding you, you grow into a beautiful nation. Not out of fear, not out of pressure, but from inside, if you are a person who has method of understanding the pain of others; troubles of others, but this depth you have to develop. Instead of getting angry, getting revengeful, if you can develop that peace within yourself, if you complete peace within the heart, not that he is not afraid of anything, but can manage to have the peace of your mind through divine love, there's no need for you to do anything extra. It's just the he emits peace. He gives peace. Anybody who goes near such a peace that you have, now, in your heart. Just feel it. You are a peaceful person. You person, gets the peace, the feeling of peacefulness. are not a person who is easily disturbed. You will never give explanations for getting angry, for spoiling the mood of people. You will not do that. You are the one who rises above all this anger and this stupid You all are Sahaja Yogis. You all have got your Realisation. That is, your spirit is now emitting vibrations of peace and joy. Wherever you are, you will emit peaceful vibrations. You will create peace. revengefulness. You'll find out ways of creating peace; It is difficult to explain to those how to establish peaceful atmosphere. It's people who are not realised souls. because if I talk, they won't like it. If they very important that we have to grow in such a manner that we create peace and get their realisation, we can talk to them. give peace to others and become examples of it. So best thing is that you should spread Sahaja Yoga. Spread it among Sikhs, among Muslims, among Christians, throughout; and specially among Hindus because nowadays I find Hindus have I cannot believe in this Delhi that I could have so many people who are realised souls. I never expected. First of all, I had to wait until people got into a proper mind to understand My work, because we had partition and so many people lost their lives, lost their properties also, lost their grip over their understanding of our country and its culture. And that's how they just revenge, and I have faced all that. I have seen it they take revenge. I don't understand this Myself. And they just couldn't, couldn't forgive other people. kind of revenge. But what to do? People are already on that level, on that low level,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 24 July-August 2002 where they don't understand many things. What will happen to them if a temple is built there? I mean, it is just a question of respect and feelings about it. I also take Rama's name. Everybody takes His name because it is such a solace and such a For example now, they do not want people to build a temple of Shri Rama at a particular point. Because they are not Sahaja Yogis, I can't talk to them that that is the place where He was born. So we comfort! But the way people look at things it's difficult, you can't talk to them. must pay full respect to this incarnation. If that is the place He was born, we can Now they are talking about another feel it with the vibrations, then why deny the fact and the truth just because you don't want it to be done? It's very difficult nonsense that that we have one hair of Mohammed-Saheb in Kashmir. Now somebody said that it is not His hair. How to talk to them. do you know? What is your criteria to decide whose hair it is? Actually, you will be amazed, when I went to Kashmir, we What to understand is that, what has Babar done for us? Who was Babar? were going somewhere in the car and suddenly I felt tremendous vibrations. So He was a foreigner and this one was not even built by Babar. No, it was not. It I was somebody who was his - one of the military man who went and built it and that's why they call it a Babri Masjid. I asked the driver, "Why don't you take the car on this side?" He said, "Why?" "Because I want to go." He said "It is an old road and there are some few people living there." "It doesn't matter. Take it." we went nearer and nearer and there But let us find out what happened to this Mr. Babar. He died, but he came were some houses of Muslims. So we from abroad. He was not even an Indian. And doesn't matter, he was not born there. I mean, he had nothing to do with that place, but definitely I know and you all will know, can feel it all on your hands called them and asked them, "What is here going on?" They said, "It is Hazrat Bal." Even the name gives you such peace. It was the hair of Mohammed- Saheb. just now, that Babri Masjid is the place where Shri Rama was born. Now Hindus don't want to know about Him and Muslims don't want to know about Shri Rama. It's very Now, if you want to build a temple there, what will go wrong with people? surprising. They are all having their own

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July August 2002 25 shops and selling there own things, but they don't understand that whatever they are selling is the same which the other you could have talked to them. But they are all-what should I say?-absolutely blocked people. How to tell them that people are selling. For example, they say, this quarrel is a nonsense? It is perfectly all right to build a temple of Shri Rama. "Allah." Who is Allah?" According to Sahaja Yog, Allah is nobody else but Vishnu and Vishnu who came also as Shri But whatever you may say, the trouble is first they all should get their Self Realisation. Rama. So whatever they call as Allah is Shri Rama Himself. Only a Sahaja Yogi can understand that. If you put up your hands now when I am talking, you will be surprised what vibrations are there because it is Shri Rama, who is Allah, whom you are trying to insult by your Just now, at the time when we are talking, see, there are not sufficient people who have got Self Realisation. You are all realised souls. There was another one who told Me, who was giving Realisation to these mahantas – mahantas are the stupidity. people who are supposed to be saints and every one of them, when they got Realisation, they got exposed! So he didn't know what to do with them. That So it could be stupidity on the part of Muslims or on the part of the Hindus. Hindus are also not understanding. Somehow they know that is the birthplace of Shri Rama. Somehow, I don't know, somebody must have told them. Or maybe -I don't know how they know-they may happen with anyone, even in Christian churches or you go to Jews-everywhere you'll find this is the problem. If you give them Realisation, they will get exposed. So what's their theory of disturbing all the people who have such faith in them and don't know vibrations. I haven't yet met many Hindus who have vibrations-I mean those who are what you can call fundamentalists, they never have vibrations. So I used to wonder, how do they know this is the janma bhoomi of Shri Rama. Maybe, somehow they come to know. But they have no point to prove. think they're very great people. Now only way you can judge them is through vibrations. But out of love, I can't tell them that "You are not realised souls. You have no business to talk about Shri Rama or about Mohammed-Saheb. The problem is, if they were realised souls, They're much beyond." if our high court judges were realised So the problem now is between the souls, if our cabinet were realised souls,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July August 2002 26 people who are not knowledgeable and those who are knowledgeable. It was a epidemic-epidemic of corruption has started – epidemic. It's not simple. very big gap before. Only one person used to be a realised soul; so they used to stone him, beat him, do all kinds of Anybody you see, after every third person, there's an epidemic of corruption. Now why? Because they want money. All right. Then what do they do with their things. Now you are so many. So, if you money? They don't know how to hide, put up your case anywhere, even at this stage, nobody is going to listen to you. so they put it in some sort of a pot or whatever it is and the money gets lost. If I would request you only one thing. Give Realisation to people, as many as not, they are caught up. That's not so important. What's important is Why have possible, and not to any 'spiritual' so- called people. Because they get exposed, what's the use? this greed?' People who are rich are more greedy than the people who are poor, because the poor people at least have some fear of God. But the rich are very greedy. They're running after this, running after that. There's no end to it. It is very This is a common thing. So many people have told Me, "We gave Realisation to one priest. He got exposed." "Means, what happened?" "He was exposed, Mother. He was put in jail." "Why? This is too much. After getting Realisation, he goes to jail!" surprising that in this country of ours this new disease has started. With this disease, even in Sahaja Yoga, there are some people who have made a business out of So this is the problem. In love, you Sahaja Yoga and are making money. So cannot be hypocritical about it. Love - greed is something that comes to you from you have to be a pure personality. Strive the right side and you start justifying it. to purify yourself. You have to change. If There's no place for love for the right side. you are still angry, if you are still greedy, if you have all these things, love won't the whole country is getting ruined. We Now this greed has gone so far that work out. It won't work out. can never progress. We can never achieve anything because everywhere there's So to love someone in a Divine way is to first understand the value of greed when people are just taking it. But innocence. Why I love children? Because if you love your country, if you have love they're innocent. They don't have all these things. Like in our country these days, the for your country, you won't do it. But that love is missing. They love-I don't know

 July-August 2002 27 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 In India is the worst, I think. They whom do they love. They love their children in such a way that they ruin their say that India is the most corrupt country, but I don't know. I have never seen that lives. kind of thing, but must be true. On such an occasion, it's very auspicious that you should think that money is of no value to Love is not limited. Love has to be unlimited. Unlimited love which binds the whole world. There is this force, there is has no value, and you will be amazed, you, already acting this force; only thing you have to become the agents of that, to become the people who can communicate that love. You have every right to that great wealth of love and you can spread that all around. But I find that even here you will have never dirth of money absolutely. This is one thing in Sahaja Yoga you have to get, that money is of no value. There's no interest in money. Your money is in getting how many people you have in Sahaja Yoga, how many people people think in terms of money. Money is you have brought in Sahaja Yoga, how many people have got this joy? You have the enemy of love. I assure you that if you have interest in money, you can never not purchased it. Nobody has to purchase it. It's free, flowing everywhere. It's so joy-giving. What else do you want with money? Nothing. Just with money headaches, fear and all kinds of problems. progress in Sahaja Yoga. I'm hopeless, I agree. I don't know how to take interest even. What is so interesting about it? And people laugh at Me that "You don't know simple things, So, parallel to our Sahaja Yoga, it should be the life of freedom, complete even to count the money." I said, "I freedom and enjoyment, nothing to worry about. Nothing is dependent on money. I have seen people living in very poor conditions, extremely happy and joyous; know." I can tell you like this, how much money is there, but I'm not interested. There's so many other things to be interested. You see the children. You see nice, nice people. In the whole world, there are so many beautiful people, specially in the foreign countries, are rich beautiful things. Why pay so much people. They have depression, all kinds attention to this useless stuff, which comes while those who have lots of money, of funny, funny situations there. They commit suicides. Why? If money was and goes? But that is what is the most everything, why all the rich country people commit suicide? What is the gain they I should say-gripping thing that is also there.

 28 July-August 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 work? Looking after the poor or have? See, and all the time what they are thinking, how to get into a kind of a fashion. Fashion, because if you have no something like that. Now, when your love, which is so money, you cannot get into those fashions. The fashions are so common now, great, which is so effective, that starts so common, that for that people hanker. If working, you feel you should do they cannot get to the fashions, they think something, then you'll be amazed how your Sahaja Yoga will be understood! that something has gone wrong with them. something is- But not you because you So far Sahaja Yoga is all right, people are very nice, excellent, saintly and are Sahaja Yogis. all. But effect of that must be seen and people should see the effect of that, of Now you see these things happening, so what have you to do? Have pity for such people-no contempt, but pity - and you have to tell them that "What are you doing? Why are you your love. First is forgiveness. You have to forgive people. They are utterly stupid. I have just now explained to you how stupid they are. So, nothing to worry wasting your time? This is the best time about that. If you are such a wise personality, you should try to judge everything with wisdom and don't fall a for you to reach the highest goal of your life, of Self Realisation and why are you so much running after all these things? What is it that makes you run this rat- trap into things where you feel that you have to do it like some fashion or some sort of a-I should say what?-some race?" grouping. No need, we are Sahaja Yogis. We are self-sufficient. We don't need I think it's a breaking point everywhere and people are thinking, but you are the people who should provide. anything. If you are one, we are all right. If you are many, we are all right. In a very large scale, you can work it out. Now you must know that you have I mean, I have seen people who reached a very high state and you have have nothing in them. They are not touched that love, that universal love of God. spiritual. They are not the ones who can So express more of that love in your daily life. Express more of that love in give Realisation or anything. But just because they are doing some social work, they are very famous. What is the social dealing with others. Express your love in

 July August 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 29 a way that others are made happy. It's all something to be thought of. How can you quarrel if you are real Sahaja Yogis? How can you put down others if they are Sahaja Yogis? How can you deceive others if you that blessing, otherwise - can't help it. Your loving nature. That's why Christ has said that you have to be like children to enter into the kingdom of God. You are already in the kingdom of God, but you have to be like children; how innocent they are, how simple they are and they're happy with small, small things. They don't want something very extraordinary. It's are Sahaja Yogis? Not possible. You should have no interest in all these things. That means now you are clarified and you are clear and you are now nirmal. Nobody can touch you. very surprising how our love, which is actually, is enlightened by divine love, can change the whole world. How I had this idea and how it has prospered, If you all help Me in this, I'm sure Sahaja Yoga can do so many things, which have not been This sort of attitude, should have respect for yourself. This kind of understanding you should have about yourself. What is your role? What is your position? You should know that you are realised souls and what you should do as achieved. Now you go home and think realised soul, that you should know. You're not another sort of madman running whatever I have told you. Think about it. What you need is introspection. What you need is understanding. "What have I done out of my life as Sahaja Yogi?" And then the rat-race or also you're not in competition, You're not competitive. You are just progressing by your own love and blessings. I know how the blessings work. you will find out that you can do a lot, a lot. And that has to be done. But first of all, you have to be worthy of May God bless you.

 FROM THE PEN OF A LITTLE SAHAJA YOGINI A SAHAJA YOGI I got the light, which will lead me to your lotus feet. When I know I am a Sahaja Yogi, Anyone how could I deceive? How could I shout, Or materialistic I be? Cannot I harm anyone, Nor aggressive I could be. At every step of my life I remember, That I am a Sahaja Yogi. ILOVEYOU MOTHER Oh! Mother Adishakti I have to do your bhakti That is why I love you Mother3B You are my joy You are the calmness of my life That is why I love you Mother; LOTUS FEET OFTHE MOTHER Flowers blossom beneath your feat, Beneath your feet devils get transformed. The Sun rises beneath your feet, And there it sets in the evening. The ocean lie beneath your feet, To soothe you comes there the spring. Beneath your feet the world lies, So why not me O Mother Divine? You are my guru You are my guide That is why I love you MotherB You are my Rama You are my Krishna That is why I love you Mother3B You are the mother of the whole world That is why I love you Mother. LEAD ME MOTHER! O Mother! Lead Me LET ME HOLDYOUR HAND MOTHER O! Mother Divine! Let me hold your hand Let me climb the ladder And lead me to heavenly bliss. Lead me from untruth to truth From darkness to light From anger to love From death to life From impatience to patience Beneath your Lotus Feet Lies my destination To be your child That is my goal, All those who are Sahaja Yogis That is my family, That is my life Which begins from your love And ends in your lotus feet O Mother Divine! The fragrance of you love Fills the whole universe. Lead me Mother Lead me; to your lotus feet Let me follow the light That leads me to You, The light full of vibrations, The light full of love. Yes, I can feel, Feel the Beam of Chaitanya Flowing in my body Yes Mother!

 TALK TO GROOMS SHRI GANESHA PUJA Cabella Ligure, 23-09-2001 Pravachana by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi .I have already talked to the brides love is the most important thing for men, I think. Otherwise, you see, you'll take it and made them understand what is their for granted that you're married. That's not duty and what that is supposed to mean. Specially I have told them that men are a so. So first come home and talk to her little bit-always excited, they get excited nicely. Ask her what she has been doing, with marriage. So you should be more sensible and they will be, I am sure- they looked very sensible girls. But still you does she need anything. Now in Sahaja Yoga we have a custom, or we can call it a law, that all the money that you earn should be kept with in Sahaja Yoga, not for 'marriage', but for a Sahaja Yoga marriage. It's very important- very important that you have to show that you have a very successful your wife and you should not spend any money without asking her and she should also not spend any money without asking you. Money is a very big problem. So if marriage. you want money, you have every right. It's a common property. But the wife Of course, the responsibility of the household and children, is that of -I agree should know how much money there is, she cannot also spend without asking you and you also cannot spend without her. that it has to be done by girls and we can say the bride. But also your responsibility is to pay attention to her, not to neglect Now this is because of mutual understanding. You have to have complete her, because the whole thing, you're busy, youjustify it. But you have to give some time to your wife. It's not that you should be negligent. That is first thing. For example, when you come back from work, I know you are tired, but just see what she is doing. Enquire. If she's busy, try to help her. It's what you show in your understanding as to the love, what love you are expressing. If you doubt her, it's wrong. Or if you think, All this is mine. Who is she to ask me?"-I don't like women to work; but if they have to work, they will work. And if they're working, I have told them already, that they have to

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July- August 2002 32 are. If you think from this angle, that the marriage is between two souls who are, be careful that they are housewives to begin with. We just don't want to have 'marriages', we want to have Sahaja Yogis who are married, who will have nice say, left and right and there should be a complete understanding. The emotional part of it-but I find that in the marriages, children, nice families. We want to have beautiful family. people don't have much understanding about emotional side. If she feels sad, if she cries, just a little, few words of love and loving the person is the greatest thing. So a domination of a husband and a domination of a wife is a wrong idea. If you can fall in love with each other, it's heavenly. For small, small things, I feel, people fight, for clothes and for food, for this and that. But if you love somebody, There cannot be anything better than loving the person. You are not married here for just a your life becomes so much beautiful. All these little, little things are of no use. common experience of marriage, but for enjoying love. So do not judge them. Do not It's a very, very great blessings and a divine thing to love. If you can do that, then you won't find faults. You will find a dominate them. If they ask for your guidance, all right. But all the time say, if the husband is all the time saying 'do this' and 'do that', then he becomes boring, isn't it. And you should see that you don't way how you can enjoy your married life. So I have called you here to tell you bore your life and her life because there that you have to enjoy your married life are so many ways of enjoying life. Even and then one thing you have to remember sitting together you can. Talking together you can. But if you don't understand this art, then maybe you might have problems, she might have problems. -alone you cannot. Alone you cannot. So she's your companion. She's your friend. She's everything to you. Have beautiful feeling about it. I mean some If she has some serious problem, then, of course, we'll cancel the marriage. people are very overly romantic and some We'll find out what sort of a thing. But people are not at all romantic. So there's no need to be extremely 'something', but, as a Sahaja Yogi, you should appreciate the qualities of your wife and a Sahaja normally, try to understand that why, if she is working in the house, she's equally important, even more important than you

 July - August 2002 33 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 were very close. See how touching it is. Yoga marriage. He came down, I saw this and I was The best thing is to trust each other, amazed - in the Prime Minister of India%; not to doubt. There's another problem with many marriages, that they start look at him, how he was concerned about doubting and then they separate. So her. So he came down and then he had tea with her. I just hid myself, I said ſto myself] 'I don't want to interfere'. nothing to doubt. Nothing to be frightened about married life. It's a beautiful thing you All these sweet, sweet things, you are entering into. It's a beautiful, I should say, evolution of yours that you're sharing your life with somebody. But there are many people who fail. Why? Because they see, help you so much and, though Shri Shastriji, was such a busy man, he always used to think about her and also the family. But then whenI was there, I was surprised. He told his daughters, "You look after your children. My wife is not going to be think they are men and these are women. But both of them can be beautifully joined together and live very happily. I have seen some very good like a maidservant. I'm not going to make husbands, they are so hardworking they her an aya. You just look out!" So what have no time for their wives, so they a deference was given to her, compared telephone again. They'll find out how are to the children. That should be the case. you. I'll give you an example of Lal You see, that's how we learn to live with Bahadur Shastri. He was so fond of this another person. Always if you are thinking wife. His wife was an ordinary woman, about yourself, What comfort I have got. This food was not good', you are not living not educated, nothing, from a very like Sahaja Yogis. ordinary family. But once I was in their A Sahaja Yogi lives for others, not for himself, starting with your wife. Of course, if you have problems or anything, house, you see. So in the morning, about say ten o'clock I was there, and he sent a letter to her from the office that, "I woke up early and as is usual my routine, I had a bath and everything and you were still sleeping, so I didn't want to disturb you. Because you didn't sleep last night, soI didn't want to disturb you. I'm very sorry, but I haven't taken my tea as yet, so can I come down to take tea with you?' We that can be sorted out. You can write to Me. We can find out. But first thing is you must see, you have to have emotional balance. That has to be understood. If the wife is unhappy, you should ask her, "Why, what's the matter?" Always stand by her always, whether it is your

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July - August 2002 34 and compassion. If you cannot love your own wife, who are you going to love? More than your children, more than anybody else! You share your love a little and you'll be amazed. mother, father or anyone, stand by her and then tell her what is the right thing. But if you take an opposite position, she won't understand. But if you take her side and tell everybody that "Let's find out". And then establish her self-respect. Let her feel that she will not be insulted by anyone. Anybody insults your wife, you should stand by her [at] that time. Later on, you can sort it out. Nobody dare say anything to your wife, do anything to your wife, but take the side of your wife all the time For small, small things also I've seen, Sahaja Yogis get angry with their wives. For example now, supposing, I'm supposed to be your Mother and everything. But sometimes your wife does some mistake in puja, in something she does not try to understand. I don't mind. because, after all, she's a Sahaja Yogini also. And you can talk to her later on and ask her what's the matter. You can take her in the bedroom and ask, "What is the Later on you tell her that "It was a mistake and you should not have done it; that's our Mother," and they will respect it. But if you go on shouting, you see, there will be a gap between them. If you talk to them like that, their whole life will change. Be kind to them. Be gentle. Very much, matter, what has happened?" But, in the presence of others, you shouldn't shout at her. And you should it's necessary. Specially I've seen that in not correct her. Moreover, no husband the western life, people have no training should shout at their wives. That is something I can't understand, why should husbands shout. It shows a very bad upbringing. We're all Sahaja Yogis. You are brought up by Me. I am your Mother. And please never shout at your wives, never show your temper. I mean, some things are so simple and can be solved by showing love. As you love Me, I love you, how to deal with their wife. There's no arrangement like that but in India we have. When they first meet the husband or the wife, there's a big ceremony and the gentle way of handling everything. So, though the relationship is there, you have to establish it. You should move slowly, gently, in a simple manner, not to just to jump on the woman and start shouting at them. Really, it's not proper. and if there's anything wrong with you also, I will never shout at you, never. What l'll do, I'll take you in a very loving manner. We've had three, four cases like that, not many, I should say, for so many years [of You have such a great power of love

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July August 2002 35 marriages]. but still to handle her gently, talk to her gently. Talk to her in a way the Indians, you people have better husbands, no doubt. But sometimes, some that she feels that you're her husband and husbands, like in India, I think, (Shri that she is your wife. It's something, that's Mataji asks to someone nearby "Are there any English people here? No, I mean to be married?"). an art. And because you are Sahaja Yogis, you have to show to the world that "because of Sahaja Yoga, our marriage So, you see, in England I have seen has been very successful.' Don't listen to your mother. Don't listen to anybody. Listen to her first and find out what is the problem. Otherwise, such marriages collapse. When you are already married, men are very docile – very docile because of the law. Law is so funny and that's why they are left-sided. They are docile and not only docile but they spoil their women, because of the law that is you should show no interest in any other there. But now we have international woman-no interest whatsoever. First, marriages and here in Italy also, if you are marrying under Italian law, it's not so bad. is your wife, because that puts them of - But still, you must remember that whatever Linnecessary interest in other women. There's no need. You've got your woman. you are doing is according to Divine Laws. Divine Laws must be obeyed and that's You've got your wife. Why should you have interest in other women? how you should make very successful Despite all this, if they are marriages. troublesome, let Me know. I am sitting here to know about it. But you don't get you become very happy with these I'm very anxious to see that, that desperate. And things can be improved, we can make them alright. If you're not marriages – something very special, exceptional, that you will have the sensible, then it will be problematic. blessings of the Divine and you will enjoy must say that I think, compared to your love. May God bless you.

 TALK TO BRIDES SHRI GANESHA PUJA Cabella Ligure, 23-09-2001 Pravachana by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi You are going to marry. I am going to just tell you that you have to do it with full understanding. that you will make a very, very happy marriage. Now it is more the responsibility It's very important to understand your role in Sahaja Yoga as married women. We have had very funny types of the woman somehow, because marriage is her responsibility and she has to make a happy marriage. If any of you now don't want to marry a particular person, you can say no. But now if you are marrying, then please think of the way a Sahaja Yogini who is getting married. The responsibility of bringing good name to Sahaja Yoga is on you. of women who got married because they wanted to marry, and they saw to it that the marriage is not successful. And they have been of such a trouble to Me that I don't understand that before marriage why don't they see that what they have to do. We are not marrying you because I mean, some sort of a social event, no, because you are Sahaja Yoginis, You have to make a successful marriage in Sahaja Yoga. It's not an ordinary marriage. And for that, it's not because you're sensible women and you'll bring a lot of glory to Sahaja Yoga. sacrifice, but joyful understanding, You may have to withstand many troubles also. Financially maybe somebody's not so well off. Maybe, though he's all right, he's not looking after you financially, I must say that so far ninety-nine percent marriages have been successful ninety-nine percent. Now this is a new group that has come and I have to he's not giving you money or maybe he's very dominating - it's possible. Everything is possible. As you could be see now how it works out. If you have some ideas in your head, some sort of a models you have the same. So in Sahaja Yoga we have selected you to be married and we think in your head, then take it out. We have to deal with reality. We have to see

 July-August 2002 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7. & 8 37 what reality is, not our imaginary ideas. So you should not get shocked, nor the man should be shocked. But supposing he is, then the understanding should be in you. Spirit of understanding has to be in you and not expect that from men. or the misunderstandings to your husband. But for that, you have to have special woman's charm, I should say, special woman's understanding. I'll give you one example of My life, there are many, but one I can give you: that from My husband's office, oe gentleman came to see Me. And he said Men have a responsibility as far as earning is concerned. They have other responsibilities, but women have responsibility to understand, again I say understand, the husband, the family life that "I'm sorry I did a wrong thing is to give up his organisation and join another öne. But I now feel that I cannot be and everything that is connected with happy in the other one and I want to come back." So My husband said, "You your family life. have no place here. It is not disciplinary. It is not good. Why did you do it? Why The spirit of understanding of women only make very good families. did you join another organisation?" So It's the woman who does all the things that are needed to smooth the family relations, they understand the husband he said, "Sir, but I want to come back. I want to beg of you," pleading every day. But once the men take something also and they also help the husband with their understanding. Once it is into their heads, they don't change immediately. So he came to Me and he established in the mind of the husbands told Me, "I want to be back in the same that you are sensible, that you care for Sahaja Yoga, that you're dignified, all your problems will be solved. That's organisation."I know my husband very well, so I said, "All right, let's see about it." So when My husband came, I told him, "Why don't you take back this very important to have a very deep, deep understanding of your responsibility. And I'm sure you all will man?" "Oh, so he has come to you now, has he? The best man (person), he be successful because you are all Sahaja Yogis. knows where to go. "No," I said, 'Maybe he thinks I am more generous Never to dominate – there's no than you are." That was too much need to dominate. But if you are challenging! *"That's why he came to me. intelligent, you can convey the mistakes You should be generous." Then he took

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8 July-August 2002 38 him back. And I must say, all his life without saying anything harsh, without this man helped My husband very much. . being rude to anyone. Now, that is the So this is what it is. There's a way of doing things. You have to learn that and you have to master it, by which do good things without hurting anyone, mänagement you have to see. That is something special you have to learn, so all the conflicts will be finished. Alright? you May God bless you. I bless you all from My heart. THE BEAM OF LIGHT O Mother Divine! The panorama of the world today is full of darkness. Impatience, materialism and untruth fullness Dominate the scene, Wars shake the peace of our minds, Negativity and Pessimism being thrust all over. But like the oasis in the desert, And the soothing beam of sunrise, Beautiful light of patience and satisfaction Dawns upon us from your lotus feet, And fills us with positivity and optimism, What else could we yearn for, O, Dear Shri Mataji! Thou art the most precious treasure, To be held in the softest groove of our hearts! Radhika



----------------------

2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 NIRMALA
Juiy-August, 2002
Volume : XIV Issue :7& 8
IVERSAL PUE RELIGIC
The Divine Cool Breeze
VII
FA
My simple desire is that everybody must love, .. pure love will change
your life. It will change the whole world. ..lf you have love, you can
correct people without saying anything to them because love is
supreme intelligence. It gives you all the correct methods.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Birthday Felicitation, 23-3-2002
DHARMA
YMHSIN
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 - XIV 7 & 8 July
The Divine Gool Breeze Volume
August 2002
NEW YEAR PUJA, KALWE, 31-12-01
8
MAKAR SANKRANTI PUJA, PUNE, 14-1-2002
10
FEED BACK FROM THE COMMUNITY
11
SHIVRATRI PUJA, 17-3-2002
22
BIRTHDAY PUJA, NIRMAL DHAM, DELHI, 21-3-2002
30
FROM THE PEN OF LITTLE SAHAJA YOGINI
31
TALK TO GROOMS, CABELLA, 23-9-2001
36
TALK TO BRIDES, CABELLA, 23-9-2001
38
THE BEAM OF LIGHT (A POEM)
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Co oL BREEZE
THE
DIVINE
Published by
V.J. Nalgirkar
162 - A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067
Printed at
Print-O-Graphics
New Delhi
For subscription please write to
Mr. O.P. Chandna
N- 463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi - 110034
Ph. : (011) 7013464
Please send your experience, miracle photographs and artwork to:
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple
C-17, Qutub Institutional Area
New Delhi - 110016
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 NEWYEAR PUJA
Kalwe - 31.12.2001
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(Translated from Hindi)
the
to you. The Divine has given you
I am late today but the power of
second birth. Now you should see
what further steps you are taking. What
your love has brought me here. Your
Mother was slightly unwell but Her will
power is tremendous. Everything is progress are you making that entitles
being managed with this will power. I you to confine this power to yourself
wish you all also get the similar and to your children? It is very
tremendous will power.
essential because I have seen even
after getting self-realization people are
not fully cleansed. Perfection should be
there. Until you work for Sahaja Yoga
in collectivity you cannot know the
negativities that are still left in you.
What efforts you have made in
this direction? You have to think
yourself. Look within and see how
much hard work you have put to
achieve it. All of you should meditate,
attain depth in meditation and think that
It's surprising that people come
in Sahaja Yoga and make money in it!
There are so many such people who
do?
you are a saint. What should you
Mother has made you a Saint. Now
what steps you have to take to go into
depth? You have to cleanse yourself.
There is no doubt in it, but what more
is to be done? You have corrected
yourself, cleansing has been worked-
come to Sahaja Yoga and make money!
No doubt, they get exposed later on
and are put in trouble. So what's the
use? You have not come here to make
money. You have come to attain your
out and you have reached the state of
ascent. So you must follow 'Dharma'.
perfection. After that what are you
doing? Even after that you only go for
meditation and attend Sahaja Yoga
I heard that many Adharmas
(sins) are dominating the Mumbai City.
programmes and everything is confined
to that only. What have you done
ahead of it? It is a boon of the Divine
These Adharmas were not there during
last 20/25 years. Present day Cinema
is responsible for it. No purity is left in
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 July - August 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
push you in the trap of anger, but I say,
the films and we should not see them.
If all of you do not see these movies what is the use? There is no use of
getting angry. Today I have to tell you
that look within and see yourself that
then they will flop. Otherwise too these
are not successful. People do not like
which are the weaknesses still left in
indecent films. They prefer family
movies. This is one factor. In addition you. This is what we say, Cleanse
your self' so that 'Nirmal Tatwam
to it people read nasty and indecent
(Element of Purity) awakens in you.
This Nirmal Tatwam will destroy all the
literature. I know you Sahaja Yogis do
not do that. Many obscene articles are
published in newspapers.
negativities that still exist. What is the
use of clinging on to these negativities?
None has so for benefitted from the
So first and foremost thing is that
we should purify ourselves. People
negativities. Most of the negative
keep on staring all around very people landed in jails and those who
shamelessly. Those who stare escaped, somehow, people spit at
shamelessly are not Sahaja Yogis. Eyes them.
should be stable and pure. This is
So I have to tell you that do not
the first sign of a Sahaja Yogi. If the
look at the faults of others. Look at
eyes are not yet stable, if these are still
your own faults. "What negativities still
adulterous then such a person should
linger in me? Do I get angry? Is there
lust in my eyes? Am I still attracted to
be told that you are not a Sahaja Yogi.
Second is greed. If you are still material objects? Do I want to buy
greedy then you cannot become a this, buy that? I should bring this, that!"
This tendency was paramount in
Sahaja Yogi and this greed will
America, but America is now under the
definitely expose you one day. You
should get rid of this enemy-greed. But
pressure of the severe blow. Otherwise
they used to shop like mad people.
Shri Krishna has said that the first
They used to go to the houses of
different people! If at all you have to
buy, then buy hand-made things which
have imaginativeness and which exhibit
your creative power. But no one buys
the artistic objects made by poor
negativity to be got rid of is 'Anger'.
So long as you get angry, you are not
a Sahaja Yogi. No one has ever seen
me getting angry. People say, 'Shri
Mataji, You never get angry'. Some
times certain incidents are enough to
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 July-August 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV issue 7 & 8
artisans. People go on buying useless
things. Buying of these useless objects
dignified way then he is useless. He
should dress up nicely, talk nicely,
behave nicely and decorate his house
will neither do good to you nor benefit
the fine craftsmen. I wish your outlook
with things aesthetically made. One
could decorate the house with flowers
becomes artistic, and you bring home
artistic objects only! People will have
as well. You could have a small garden
in your house. I mean to say, Sahaja
half a century utensils but not a single
Yogi should have the knowledge of
one is artistic! Articles made by
artisans should be respected. If you are
a Sahaja Yogi, you should not go in for
meaningless unartistic objects. I have
seen women purchasing saris. Sari after
aesthetics. Generally people fill their
houses with useless things because
markets are full with those objects. It
will be better if you burn down all such
useless objects and make a fine Holi
sari they buy, but all useless! Funny
designs are made in them-all ghostly.
Two beautiful artistically made saris are
of them.
Plastic is much in vogue now- a-
better than having fifty saris.
days. Even the glasses are made of
plastics! That is too much. I cannot use
In our country people still
appreciate art. We have to know it, plastic. Sarees are being made of
understand it. I find that people paint plastics, everything of plastic! Plastic
their houses with strange ghostly
colours. There are ghostly decorations.
is so much in use that there is every
possibility that it affects the health of
You are Sahaja Yogis; you should
know what object is full of beauty. You
human beings. Children die because of
this plastic. So we should try to avoid
should have the knowledge of
aesthetics. Only then you could make
your lives beautiful and whosoever
plastics as far as possible. But plastic
is dominating the whole scene today.
In Mumbai people get their sofa sets
made of plastics. Plastic to sit upon,
comes across you will say, "Oh, what
a fine gentleman! Very aesthetic"! The
plastic to wear, plastic to walk upon
and now in a short time they will make
cars of plastic! You are Sahaja Yogis.
way you make yourself aesthetic you
will also decorate your houses and the
You have nothing to do with plastic. I
whole atmosphere. This is the first sign
do not mean that you should move in a
of a Sahaja Yogi. If a Sahaja yogi
cloak. Sahaja Yogis should not do that.
does not maintain himself in a
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July-August 2002
They should dress up properly and live state of connection, where ever you
nicely. There is absolutely no need of are, Mother is there. When you
hypocritically looking like Sanyasin or realize this, only then you will be
Sadhu Babas. But do not use anything considered as a Sahaja Yogi. An
which is not beneficial to you. You established person has no need of
should avoid such things and protect coming before me or coming to the
stage. I know about everybody. But
your children also.
with faith you could attain me in
your depth and I can identify you. I
wish you all attain that state of ascent
and get established. Get established by
your efforts. Be active in Sahaja Yoga
and work it out. You will get
established and will not feel like
The second point is that everyone
wishes me to come to his house. Have
you done any extraordinary thing that
I should come to your house? The other
point is that everyone wants to come
to my house. Where ever I may go,
people do not let me live in peace. Still
you have not done any thing extra- or always stand before the Mother.
ordinary. So let this desire be there and Often I have seen that those who
ask yourself, "What is my state, what always try to keep themselves in
is my desire?" Why should you have
bothering the Mother with everything
the forefront are either thieves or
such a desire which makes your
dishonest people. Those who are
clear-hearted and established in love,
just try to impose yourself on me. Why enjoy their state. You all receive
should you do like that? Any where vibrations from me, so now it is my
Mother uncomfortable? You should not
you come from, you just stand
before me! Please do not do that. cleansed. If you are not cleansed
If there is no contentment (zaEI) then your negativities affect my
in Sahaja Yoga then it is useless. health. So tonight you have to
request that you should keep yourself
Where ever we are, Mother is with
us. That should be the state of faith
in us. It will help you ascend. Faith
contains everything essential for
resolve that we shall get so much
evolved that our evolution pleases
the Mother and transforms the
whole world.
progress. There is absolutely no
Today you have been sitting for
use if you are not established and
a long time. Some of you might have
yield to all sorts of pressures. In the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 July- August 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
Now you are sitting so peacefully! This
left. This is the sign of a Sahaja Yogi.
You are sitting here very peacefully. In
the beginning there used to be lots of
noise. People used to talk very loudly.
is very heartening to me.
May God Bless You.
Pravachana delivered in English-Kalwe Puja
I am telling them that how a Sahaja
doing about Sahaja Yoga? Only
meditation is not the point. Meditation
for what? For equipping yourself to help
others. We need it very much in this
Yogi should feel. You should be satisfied
people. Firstly and foremost you have to
be satisfied. You just see within yourself
if you are satisfied or not. You got the
highest that you wanted. You have got
Kaliyuga, people who will go all out to
help. On the contrary I find that they are
very anxious just to meet me, to see me.
I have seen all the Indians who come to
the peace, you have got the joy and all
the blessings of the Divine. Despite that
if you are dissatisfied, you want to do
something always that is disturbing!
Cabella must meet me, must-see me, as
if they have the special right! What is the
need? What is the need to meet me? But
Always some people want to show
this is the trouble of say our conditioning
me off or to come forward, or they want
that supposing there is some leader, some
Minister coming. Everybody will go and
to escape Sahaja Yoga. Firstly you must
spread Sahaja Yoga. How many people
have you brought to Sahaja Yoga? Just
think of it. You are Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja
show off, that to meet him and talk to
him but not a Sahaja Yogi. You must have
self esteem, self esteem by which you
Yoginis-means what? You are saints. In should know what is your dignity and
this world all the saints, who became how you should be. There are Sahaja
saints with very great difficulty, going Yogis who are excellent, who are very
through lots of tortures, have done so good, who are very self satisfied. I know
much work. One single Saint has so who they are and you have to be like
many people whom he has attracted. Of that, otherwise you cannot enjoy Sahaja
course he could not get them realization
because I have not taught him how to do
that. But you just find out what you are
Yoga. You are like all other people trying
to indulge into all non-sensical activities.
Now, today it was a real test because I
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July-August 2002
example so many girls wanted to marry,
just could not come earlier. You know
there are 4 times more, 5 times more than
what is the traffic now a days! Ijust could
all the boys but if they are not married,
not arrive and still you are sitting here! It
gives me great satisfaction that they they feel unhappy about that. Does not
really love me and that they are really matter. You are now connected to God.
Sahaja Yogis. If you really love me, Marriage is not always a very great bliss,
you must love others who are not I tell you. It's not. On the contrary it can
Sahaja Yogis and try to give be very binding. Could be very
them realization. Because you know troublesome. So better not feel bad. If
my age is quite a lot and how far can I you feel bad then you cannot give
realization. How many people you have
go. I am not going now to many countries
but Sahaja Yoga is growing fast, though
I am not there. It is growing, why?
given realization? Just think about that.
All the time like all ordinary people
thinking about marriage and this and that,
is not going to help you. You are
something special and what speciality do
you have? What are you doing about it?
Because people of that country
understand their responsibility. You
should know what is your responsibility.
It is not only towards yourself but it is
I am sorry at the end of this our great
for the rest of the world. You have to
Ganapatipule, I have to tell you this. But
work it out and do something. Whatever
somewhat some times one has to tell.
people you can approach or whatever
people you can meet, go all out. I have
also said before that I have seen people
I know you are all very good Sahaja
Yogis. Also that you have achieved so
who go to some horrible gurus, go on
much, but what is my desire is that all of
you should become like a light and start
spreading Sahaja Yoga. In some
countries it has happened. It is working
out and people feel so responsible. I am
talking about their guru, describing their
guru. Anybody who meets them, they go
on telling, not the Sahaja Yogis. I don't
know, may be they want to preserve
their realization? They think that if they
amazed at them that how they are
tell somebody their realization will drop
spreading Sahaja Yoga! Now the same
request I have to make that please look
at yourself. Introspect. What have you
done? What have you achieved in Sahaja
off. If you don't spread Sahaja Yoga
what is the use of getting your realization?
All my labour is wasted on such people
who are for themselves. They want
Yoga? Such a satisfaction lies when you
something for themselves. Now for
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 7
July-August 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
that next year you must give self
really-really work hard to spread Sahaja
Yoga. Many people think that coming
nearer to me, I feel pleased. I am not.
That's no recognition. You should
never do that. On the contrary when
realization to many people. How many
people you have given self realization,
that's the main thing. Just find out what
you have done throughout the year? I
you grow really. I will know myself.
Today is not the day I should have said
all this because it is the day for New Year.
But only good decisions are to be taken
on the new year's day. That's the custom
with human beings. So today you all have
don't know how to count it. But you
yourself count what have we done all
these years? What have we achieved?
Attending my puja is no favour to me
or doing anything for the puja is no
favour to me. My greatest puja is that
of human beings and if you can
to take the decision that what are we
achieve and spread Sahaja Yoga that
fast, I will be very-very grateful to
you. I worked very hard. I have really
worked very hard. This body, this mind,
doing for Sahaja Yoga? What are we
giving Sahaja Yoga? What is our
achievement and what are we sharing
with others? It is the greatest truth you
all my health, everything I have done for
saving people and you please also tonight
have got. Nobody got it. People worked
so hard, did so much. Nobody could
give realization. It's only you who
can give realization. Very surprising!
decide and take a view that what Mother
is saying is very important and precious.
We have to, we have to rise and give
Kabira could not give realization to
realization to people but which is not so
common. I am surprised why people are
anybody. Gyanadeva could not give
realization to anybody. All of them
behaving in this manner who are realized
have been great-great saints of great
value system and with great
understanding. Whatever poetry they
have given, people are singing, that's all.
But they cannot give self realization which
can do. With all that power if you
souls!
All my blessings for the new year.
For all of you happy new year, but the
next year should be full of many Sahaja
Yogis who have done work and who
have achieved something great.
you
are not giving realization, what's the use
of giving power to someone like that?
May God Bless You.
So today's new year's message is
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 MAKAR SANKRANTI PUJA
14-1-2002
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Adishakti, the Earth element gets calmed
The meaning of Makar Sankranti
down and human beings thrive.
is Samkaraman i.e. the day when the
Sun passes from one sign of the Zodiac
to another. On this day the Sun starts
The festival of Sankranti has
cultural significance too. It is celebrated
all over the country with joy and gaiety.
equator. In India the dates of all the
festivals are decided according to the
position of the Moon. That's why their
dates change every year. Makar
Sankranti is based on the position of the
Sun and that is the reason that this
festival is celebrated always on 14th of
It is celebrated in some other countries
also but it has special significance in
India. The climate here is neither too hot
nor too cold. It is quite balanced. It is
the grace of the Adishakti. In other
countries the climatic balance is absent3;
there either it is extreme cold or extreme
January.
hot.
Makar Sankranti indicates that
It is not proper for us to change
with the change in climate and nature.
from this day the Sun will get warmer
and warmer. The heat of Sun is There is no justification if with the heat
beneficial for mankind. All our
of the Sun we get heated-up or enraged.
There is no justification for anger. Anger
is the worst of the Shudripus (Six
enemies). We are Sahaja Yogis,
movements depend on this heat. But the
impact of the heat could also excite
anger in us. That is the reason that on
this day we eat jaggary (Gud) so that
we become soft-spoken.
awakened people. Our Kundalini has
been awakened. So we must learn how
to remain peaceful. Mostly Sahaja Yogis
are evolved beings, they are quite good.
Very few, only one percent, however,
Because of the warmth of the Sun
all vegetation and wealth grows on the
earth. Fruits and vegetables are offered
are still running after the Alakshmi. It is
to the Goddess, on this day, to invoke
very natural to get annoyed over this
Her blessings. By the blessings of the
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 July-August 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
sort of behaviour. But it is not your job
You could also control the
to correct them, it is the Adishakti's job.
You have to evolve very calmly. Every
thing works-out by the grace of the
God. We have always to be mindful of
situation in the same way. But for this
you have to be in the subtle state of
Chaitanya-in the state of vibratory
awareness. Everything else is
insignificant.
this fact. Some people are negative,
money is all to them. Such people
have nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga.
We should have no worldly
desires. Sahaja Yogis have still to go a
But you have no remedy for it.
long way. They have still to work out
Adishakti Harself will take care of
many things. God Almighty will work-
out everything. Don't worry, maintain
them.
American President Mr. George
your peace.
Bush is also reverent to me. Recently I
wrote a letter to him and the whole
equation was changed. Also there were
changes in General Musharraf and he
addressed his nation and Islam in the
spirit of the letter I wrote to George
Sankranti means the Energy of the
Suni.e. self-confidence. Sun is energy,
it is effulgence. Now it depends on us,
whether we have to burn ourselves in
this effulgence or gain self-confidence
from it and become radiant.
Bush. Every thing that I wrote in my
Many Many Blessings to all of you.
letter was heard in his speech.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 FEEDBACK FROM THE COMMUNITY
Some of the organizations in USA who "The utilization of meditation for the
adopted Sahaja Yoga had this to say after detoxification process is new at Su Casa.
practicing Sahaja Yoga Meditation for some We are surprised and pleased with the
consistent voluntary attendance that the
meditation program has attracted. While the
therapeutic community approach often
makes use of mandatory participation of
groups, this group has carried it's own weight
and we intend to continue the positive
collaboration at our place of residential care."
Denise Donovant, MA, Assistant Director,
time.
United Earth Organization
Shri Mataji's discovery brings genuine hope
to humanity.
Claes Nobel Chairman of United Earth
Organization,
Grandnephew of Alfred Nobel, Nobel Prize
Founder
Rikers Island
MTAR
.the inmate population would constantly
approach me regarding the stress level being
reduced due to their learned meditation. You
Lower Eastside Service Centre, New York
City
William Cullen Bryant High School
"Your commitment to raise the students"
were very reliable and an asset to my
facility."
Maria Gerena, Captain
R.A.P. Unit Rikers Island
Correctional Facility, New York City,
Department of Corrections
The National Institutes of Health
awareness about the ills of stress as a
deterrent to drug use was very evident as
students and staff reached out and actively
participated to learn more about Sahaja Yoga
Meditation...Thank you for enhancing our
school community with a very positive way:
to stay stress free."
Thalia Stylianou
William Cullen Bryant High School, New
York City
City of Rockville, Maryland
"Many people return week after week and
everyone reports a sense of relaxation
following the classes. People are thrilled that
such a program is offered to them free of
charge!..an opportunity to learm how to have
self-awareness regarding their physical,
mental, and emotional balance. Thanks again
for agreeing to work with us to bring such a
quality program to the City of Rockville. I
look forward to our continued partnership".
Mandy Bendersly
Youth, Family, and Community Specialist, City
of Rockville, MD
"I want you to know that many of our
patients who serve as research participants
in our Clinical Centre have benefited from
practicing Sahaja Yoga. We have been
graced by a couple of excellent teachers in
this last year... in introducing your meditative
techniques to our patients on Wednesdays
and many of our staff have been weekly
participants on Fridays. I thank you for
making available this effective method for
enhancing health and peacefulness.'
George Patrick, Ph.D.
Chief, Recreation Therapy, Rehabilitation
Department, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD US Department of Health and
Human Services:
Su Casa, Methadone To Abstinence
Residence
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 SHIVRATRI PUJA
Pune, 17.3.2002
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Tonight we have gathered here to
do Shri Shiva Puja. Those people who
have a clean heart, can only do Shiva Puja.
Those whose heart is not clean cannot do
Shiva Puja. It's a simple principle of Shri
which are the snakes. It's a symbolic
thing, to say, very symbolic. But I must
say that animals understand Divine force
much better than human beings, much
better. Because they have a clean heart.
Whatever is their lifestyle built by nature,
Shivaratri.
they carry on with it. But there's no
malice, there's no jealousy, there are not
all these mean things in their heart. They
As you have seen yesterday, we
have snakes, or, these are horrible snakes
guiding behind the Shiva Linga. The
do it because it is supposed to be.
significance is this - those who are clean
in heart, who are full of love for others,
But the quality of human beings is
only one - and that is how much they love
are always guarded by the power of Shiva,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July-August 2002
12
and forgive. Loving capacity of human
There is such a difference between Shiva
and Shakti. In their whole attitude.
beings are such by which they conquer
all their negative forces- they can, easily,
see that it's not good to have all these
qualities, or maybe that they understand
it's not noble to indulge into all these
Because Shiva is absolutely a liberated
personality, he's not t othered. If the
people are indulging into wrong things,
he'll destroy-finished! He doesn't want
to cure, He doesn't want to improve,
nothing of the kind. But for the Shakti it
is important, because this is Her child, this
inhuman behaviour. They are not bound
to indulge into all these things. Neither
they are asked to be, but suddenly they
get lured by such things which has got
universe is Her child. All this is created
by Her, so naturally She is worried and
She doesn't like people who try to take
hatred, jealously and greed.
You see how Shiva lives. He lives
to mean things and nonsense.
in the Himalayas. See what clothes He
wears, what He eats? He has no demand
First of all it was human beings
started indulging in power. They moved
for anything because He is complete, He
is perfect. Such a personality is Shiva's.
from country to country to empower
And if you are worshipping Him, you
themselves. Where is that power gone?
Finished. Then, after that, what happened
with them is that they left their style with
should find out within your heart, what
sort of feelings you have, what sort of
malice you nurture.
others. And now it seems it is very
common to see people shamelessly being
These days in India, greed has
become the main point. They are so mean
greedy. For them, the solution, is Shiva.
All such people will be destroyed. First
and so low! It's impossible to understand
that they think money is everything, which of all they will be exposed and then they
is not in the culture of Indians, no, no. In will be destroyed, to the last bit of it.
no way. But somehow they have picked
Another thing is that Shiva respects
it up, in the foreign countries perhaps, and
it is spreading very much now, that money
is the most important thing.
a person who has a good character; a
person with a good character. And if
anyone is a bad character or indulges into
bad things, Shiva won't spare them. So
the Shakti creates, protects, looks after
Think of Shiva. He never thought
of money. He never wanted any money.
them, brings them up. But Shiva is sitting
He never wanted to show off himself.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 July-August 2002
13
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & B
warned you, so many incarnations have
warned you; but I tell you if you don't
listen to them, then Shiva is not going to
listen. He doesn't listen to anyone. If He's
angry, He's angry. Whatever it is, very
there, just to destroy! Very important, this
destruction is very important. The Shakti
doesn't show those qualities. She may
destroy some rakshasas, but He can
destroy nations after nations.
difficult to convince Him that 'Please
First of all the ego you have – who
will destroy that? That is He. Shiva is in
your Sahasrara. He is sitting in the
Sahasrara; now remember, on top of
everything. The other day, I saw one
gentleman from the Broadcasting, a
newsman, who was very, very stupid and
was talking very harshly. And I saw his
Ekadasha Rudra, "My God," I said, "This
spare this person, it's alright. Forgive.' But
His basic quality is forgiveness, can you
imagine. His basic quality is forgiveness.
But if He doesn't forgive, then you are
finished. Up to a point maybe He might
forgive, but after that.. It's a very, very
difficult situation.
And I find that people don't realise
what Shiva is. In the South we have two
one is now going to be in trouble." What
types of people-worshipers. One are
shaivaites, another vaishnavaites. They
are having a big fight between them. Now
is Ekadasha is nothing but the eleven
powers of Shiva. They build up here and
give you all kinds of diseases; the worst
it is less, much less. What is the work of
of all is cancer. And I knew that this
Vishnu is to give you realisation,
fellow is going to have a very bad time.
emancipation of human beings, evolution
of human beings. But if you fail in your
goodness, in your dharma, then Shiva
comes in your life.
He is not a Sahaja Yogi, how am I to tell
him? How anybody has to tell him? But
it comes from this Ekadasha Rudra.
Now these are eleven powers of
Shiva, very well described. Now these
powers start working on people, even on
Sahaja Yogis, if they do not follow the
principle of Sahaja Yoga. He is, I should
We have to understand that we are
all surrounded by their powers, we are
all made by their powers, is the Shakti
who is protecting you. But to an extent.
She cannot go above Shiva, She cannot
say, watching everything. Every part of
your life, He watches. How you behave,
cross Him.
what you do, what is your dharma – He
These days you find so many
watches all that. And so many saints have
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 14
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July-August 2002
Shiva, I can't go beyond Him. It's such a
power of Shiva, it's such an authority of
Shiva. And to worship Him means to
worship goodness. The goodness could
be compassion, could be love, could be
forgiveness, anything. He likes only good
people, and He will protect only good
people indulging into politics- it's all
money-making propositions. They all try
to make money, it's not politics! They
don't do any good to the whole
communities, nowhere. Either under fear
or under abandonment, they behave in
such a manner that they are not afraid of
God, they are not afraid of His own
people.
attention on them. Perhaps they don't
For example, some people are very
know that they are under the attention of
power oriented, some are money oriented
Shiva. He's watching each and every
person, whether you are Australian, and some are power oriented. And the
English or Indian. Whatever religion you power oriented also do it for money
sometimes, that's the aim. They'll not
may follow, He's watching them.
stay in Sahaja. They will be displaced.
This is a thing one has to understand. They do it, and then come and ask for
And once you understand this, you will forgiveness, "Oh Mother forgive us, we
accept that you have to be good and
dharmic people. You have to be good
character people. Why people talk of
good character? Try to understand! It's
have done it". But try not to do
anything of that kind. I, of course,
forgive you, but Shiva, He won't, He
won't. He will take you to task and then
stupidity these days when people don't
believe in it. People are doing all kinds
of things, they are drinking, they are
playing the money business. All kinds of
things they are doing without having any
fear of the wrath of God. And that wrath
you will come to Me “Mother, You must
save us!" It's very difficult. From His
clutches it is very difficult. Also He's a
very forgiving person. He forgives you,
many things. Because of Me also He
forgives. But, after some time when He
takes over, there's no appeal, there's no
comes from Shiva.
safety.
I would like to warn you all, though
I do not want to frighten you, but I
you are all my children - be careful! Try
to weigh every step that you take. Of
course I am there to support you, to help
want to tell you the truth, it is the truth.
You have to try to be good people. You
you, to protect you. But, not beyond have to try to be really good charactered
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 July-August 2002
15
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
to the Self which is destructive is the
people. I am told some people who are
power of Shiva. What we call the Self
here, is the power of Shiva.
in Sahaja Yoga, indulge in money
laundering and all that. Also some of them
have very bad characters, they run after
He destroys by many ways, by
girls and they try to look at the girls and
all sorts of things. Now this has ruined
many ways. You can lose your reputation,
you can lose your health, you can lose
your wealth, everything can happen to
the west especially. Also our Indians are
learning from it. As it is, we have to
you till you are completely finished and
packed. I have known people on the
death-bed also, start talking about money,
What should she get, money, how will
he get money, and this and that'. Instead
of talking about God or Self Realisation,
they are talking like this. It's such a normal
thing. But if you see Shiva, He doesn't
respect ourselves. If we don't respect
ourselves, and we try to misbehave, I can
only help you with your Kundalini. But if
you go too much beyond it, Ekadasha
Rudra will catch, no doubt. It's a very
big barrier on your forehead. Eka-dasha
Rudra, and it is so effective nowadays,
so much active! All kinds of diseases
possess anything, He doesn't want
which are coming out, is all incurable, are
anything. Whatever you give to him, as a
because of Ekadasha. And also those
samarpana or anything, that He doesn't
accept, and He passes on to the Shakti,
"You do whatever you want to do."
who are suffering from possessions.
The other day I met somebody who
was very much caught-up. And the
Ekadasha was working. I found out that
he is very fanatically influenced by everything to benefit you, to make you
She's the one who is working out
something. I don't want to name it, but
happy. He's not bothered. In this case,
these, we have found out, are not correct
you have to please Shiva! He will not try
things. In every religion we have people
to please you, you have to go all the way
to please Him. It is a very difficult
personality of Shiva. In the Koran, it is
not written separately for Allah or for
who are spreading nonsensical ideas.
Now if you don't have discretion about
it, nobody can help you. You should have
a full discretion as to what is right and what
Shiva, it is not differentiated. Because the
is wrong. Then Shiva is with you. But if
people with whom He had to deal were
all uneducated, stupid people. So He
you indulge into all such nonsensical
things, it is self-destructive, I must say. But
didn't give all the details that God is in
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 July- August 2002
16
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
different forms. So there is only one Allah
give me, half of it?" He said, "All right,
you can have it. You can have the whole."
Because he said this, "My house is here,
they know. But they don't do anything
that shows the differentiations of their jobs
and work. It is the Shakti who loves, I
I'll just wear my clothes." What he did
was not to show that nudity is a very great
thing. But if you see the Jains, what to
agree. But She too, can get angry very
much. And once She gets angry, there is
do? They make big, big statues of
no end to it!
Mahavira, showing Him completely nude!
I mean, this is the perversion of human
Now I have to tell you, as Sahaja
Yogis, that you develop your qualities to
please Shiva. It's too much of hankering,
too much of "wants'. All this is not
necessary. Of course I want you to live
well, and beautifully, not stupidly-to go
into jungles or to behave like hippies –
mind. Why He did it, we should know.
He was so detached, so detached, to give
away the clothes, what is the harm? It
was not to show-off or anything. But the
generosity, people don't understand. And
the Jainis are the least generous!
that's not the point. The point is, from
So the quality of all these great
your heart, the attachment to things
incarnations is also not understood.
must go away. A person who is a
Shiva bhakta - he doesn't care for
money, he doesn't know about money. example, Shiva is always with very few
He is a very generous person, extremely. clothes, very few. And what does he eat?
He's just generous. People say he is No-one knows. What is His desire and
stupid, the way he goes on, the way he what does he want? No-one knows. A
goes on. But I don't think so. That's not person with a great knowledge of music
at all the description; the description of a will sing before him, He's alright. Oreven
man who is a bhakta of Shiva has no any madcap comes and sings, He's
interest in money, is very generous. alright. For Him it doesn't matter, He's
Anything you ask from that, he'll give.
Because a kind of an illusion is there. For
not meticulous about how the music is and
what the notes are, whether it is alright or
not, no. He is beyond all these things.
Mahavira was like that. Mahavira
He is beyond all these formalities that we
have about everything, He is beyond.
He is spirituality itself, he is beyond
had gone for his meditation in his own
garden and Vishnu as Shri Krishna came
and told him that, "See, I have no clothes.
You have got this cloth, why don't you all these things. Whether you are a
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 July- August 2002
17
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
So, what I am saying, that if you have
to worship Shiva, you should de-
condition yourself. You are living in the
world of Sahasrara. Now, somebody is
not properly dressed - finished!
Somebody is over-popularly dressed -
finished! Human beings have a capacity
to criticise everyone. And to criticise
musician or you are an artist, whatever it
is you are, He'll enjoy. He's the enjoyer,
and He'll enjoy - whatever is simple,
whatever is given with the heart, He'll
enjoy. Whatever is expressed with the
heart, He'll enjoy. He is not a conditioned
person, that it should be modern, it should
be such and such. He is not conditioned.
everyone, this is nothing fundamental
because if you do it on vibrations, one can
understand. But not on vibrations, just
He doesn't think that way like human
beings who will sit down and make a
meticulous everything, does it fit into it or
because this is not the fashion, that is not
not. Even, even for art, even for anything
that is created out of somebody's heart,
they will try to discourage that person.
the fashion'.
What is the fashion of Shiva, tell me.
I have seen people, they have such
conditioning. And one thing about Shiva,
Has He any fashions? Anything you give
Him, He's happy. Whatever you give
he has no conditioning of anything,
nothing. That's why they call him a mast-
Him, He eats that. He is full of such
appreciation because He is personified as
Joy. He is peace and He is joy. If you
are worshippers of Shiva, then you should
not have any conditioning of any kind.
maulaa - He is not at all conditioned. If
you have any conditioning in your mind,
then you are not a Shivabhakta. It's all
right, you should dress up well, you should
I mean, normally I also wear simple
do this ... but you should not have
saris, very simple. And it happens that
people think I am a very poor woman. I
am poor because I don't care for money,
conditioning that 'If you don't do that, you
are being out of cast, out of fashion, out
of this-that'. It is very difficult for people
I don't bother. So, we should know that
not to accept. All kinds of fashions are
Shiva is the poorest man, poorest God.
He doesn't wear any alankaraas, He
doesn't wear anything, just He lives with
His own body. Because He is nothing but
embodiment of enjoyment, nothing but
coming nowadays, all kinds. I tell them,
"What is this?" "Oh this is the fashion."
Is it some God behind this fashion, or is
there some deity who is telling you these
fashions? Today it comes, tomorrow it will
disappear.
complete form of enjoyment and joy.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July- August 2002
18
So another quality of Shivabhakta
this kind of a dress, to wear this kind of a
is that he should be joy. You should be
joyous about everything- whatever you
see, whatever type of person you see. So
the only way you can do, is give up
human quality of criticism-to criticise
others. Like if the English go into the
Indian house, they say "We don't like it."
"Yes, what, what you don't like?" "We
cherrot. All kinds of things have a
conditioning. Now-a-days the hairstyle
has become very funny with women.
Because they don't put oil in their hair.
They will not have any grease in their hair.
If somebody's going to meet them they
will wash their hair. I don't think it looks
very nice. Of course I don't say that you
need to have so much of oil on your face
and ears. But, what is so important?
didn't like that carpet." I don't like it' -
itself is against your Shakti. Then, if
supposing an American goes to an English
home, he'll say, "I don't like it." It's very
33
In life, also there is another thing that
11
common. All the people say "I don't like
it", "I didn't like that". Who are you to
say I don't like it' or 'I like it'. People
don't realise that by saying all these things,
we are very self-centred. We want to
impress people. If I wear a dress or
anything, it should impress. I mean, even
it impresses- so what? Ifa snake comes
along, he will bite you, whatever dress you
might be wearing, whatever country you
you are showing that you have no Shiva
principle in you.
might be from.
I can understand somebody who
All this kind of identification, it
doesn't behove a Shivabhakta. A
Shivabhakta has to be just absolutely lost
cannot walk, alright, for such a person is
allowed to use some sticks or something,
allowed. But if he says “I don't like that
person because he doesn't use the stick,"
shows that he is such an egoistical fellow.
Himself he is using the stick and he wants
to create what, warts or what, in a
democratic country, that people should
walk with the sticks in their hands. It is
in the raptures of joy. Very particular
about hairdress, very particular about
dresses - I don't know what they are
particular about! With all that, what do
they gain? Nothing. Do they become
popular? And this kind of popularity,
which is so skin-deep, what's the use?
very difficult.
You must have respect, respect of
your being. As not only human beings,
but as Sahaja Yogis. You are Sahaja
In the west it is very common, you
see, to have this kind of a hat, to have
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July August 2002
19
Yogis. We are Shiva's bhaktas, we don't pujas. Because they have got work.
Altogether there are eleven pujas, but they
don't come. Because they are very busy.
At least to one puja you should come. But
those who are Shivabhaktas only enjoy
nothing but pujas. Nothing else. Their
whole being is absolutely vibrated by
care. We are not bothered. Whatever it
is, Shiva is there within us and we shine
with that power within us that is of
Kundalini. You may be very well
dressed, you may be anything. If your
vibrations are bad, what's the use? If you
cannot judge people by their vibrations,
by nonsensical things like dress and
moustaches, is it of any value?
Shiva bhakti. To them, that's the most
important thing to do.
Also there are people in Sahaja
In Sahaja Yoga your value system
has to be Sahaja. I have seen many
people, "I don't like their house, I didn't
Yoga who are trying to make money out
of Sahaja Yoga. Very wrong, very wrong,
very wrong. Sahaja Yoga is to give you
punyas, to give you blessings, and if that
is not in your mind, better give up Sahaja
Yoga. You can join some business or
something of malpractices very easily, very
easily. Till you end up in the jail you are
there. But to enjoy your spiritual powers
like this..." 'I don't like' is the sentence,
is nishiddha, is to be given up by Sahaja
Yogis. If you don't like anything, you are
not a Sahaja Yogi. Now, of course if there
is somebody who is anti-Sahaja and all
that, but still by saying 'I don't like', what
you must learn certain things. And one of
are you going to gain? It's a waste of
energy. Because of this, in Sahaja Yoga I
have seen, people have created problems
them is de-condition yourself-'I don't
like it' or I like it'-this sentence must
for Me, so many problems. Only because
go away from your tongue!
they are so much 'self' oriented. "This
Likes and dislikes are only for
man is bad, that woman is bad, he is this,
that ..." Sometimes I am surprised. people who have limited vision. You
Because when those people come to me, should learn to appreciate. Your power
I am amazed that they are very nice of appreciation will show how spiritually
you are endowed. And your power
of
people.
observation will show what do you
observe. For example, some people will
come and tell me, "I didn't like that lady,
she was wearing a funny sari." I mean,
But people are very self-centred,
also. Like I have seen people who are
not bothered to come to meetings, to
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 July August 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
20
what is this? "I didn't like her, because
of dresses, all variety of families and so
many countries you are here. To Me you
are nothing but Sahaja Yogis, my children,
that's all. NowI don't go on judging you
she was putting her hand on her head".
So what? Because you make your own
images of people, and you want
everybody to be like that, otherwise you
don't like it. Whether you like it or don't
like it, nobody's going to change. Why
on your dress, or on what your hairstyle
is, no. All modern things are extremely
conditioned. And they condition you so
much that you get irresponsible. As
waste your energy?
Sahaja Yogis you get irresponsible.
Sometimes there are musicians who
foremost
Your first and
are not so good. I remember, once I went
responsibility is Sahaja Yoga. Because
home and I asked my father, "How does
you should know what a work it is. It is
this musician sing?" He says, "He's very
such a great work, to transform the whole
world- that is My vision! And this old
age I think the same. Now, if that is My
courageous, very courageous." I said,
"Why, what happened?" He said, "He
sings without bothering about it and he
vision, what should be your attitude?
That we should go all out to spread
Sahaja Yoga. That's the main thing. I
call you for these pujas just to renovate, I
should say, to give you more of energy
goes out of tune sometimes, he goes out
of taala, doesn't matter, but he sings.
He's very courageous, himmatvala."
So, that's how he used to appreciate, I
have seen. When this fellow started
singing, I saw he was like that, but my
father was saying "Wa-wa, wa-wa" and
encouraging him. You see, I have seen in
father these divine qualities, how he
and all that. But if you are just taking it
as a great blessings and sitting at home,
it's of no use. You must spread Sahaja
Yoga!
my
used to tolerate, how he used to-I mean
I was surprised that they said in
not tolerance also, just appreciation. Of
any kind of thing he used to appreciate.
Lucknow there are only two hundred
Sahaja Yogis. How can that be? First
time I went to Lucknow, there were at
least three thousand Sahaja Yogis and we
had not fixed any hall or anything. And
can you imagine, suddenly I find so many
That's what, if the Sahaja Yogis
have that condition of appreciation they
will enjoy everything. Because you kill
your enjoyment, do you know that? You
are all variety of people here, all variety
people [gone]. How is it there can be
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 July-August 2002
21
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
all-out. Say, for in England I travelled from
two hundred Sahaja Yogis? Either you
are telling lies, or you are good for nothing.
north to south, east to west in all the
directions. We have very poor, very poor
Sahaja Yogis there. You have to go to
universities, to younger people. If hippy-
ism can spread, why not Sahaja Yoga? It
spread like wild-fire, why not Sahaja
So the responsibility of all the
Sahaja Yogis, first and foremost, is to
spread Sahaja Yoga. How many people
have you given realisation? Where have
you talked about Sahaja Yoga? I have
seen even in the plane, if you are travelling,
anyone who is there will tell Me "My guru
Yoga?
All these things are there, which I
have to warn you – be careful! If you
is this, you know, such a great guru, this
that." Openly, shamelessly, about horrible
gurus! While you people are very shy to
talk about Sahaja Yoga. Never publicly,
unless and until you have a programme,
have got Realisation, you have a
responsibility - to give realisation to
others, and to spread Sahaja Yoga.
If you can't do it, then God save
and public programme and all that. You
have no time, also, for Sahaja Yoga, very
you. I have nothing to say. You have to
introspect, 'What have I done for Sahaja
Yoga? What have I got from Sahaja
busy people!
Yoga?' And I am sure after this
So, if you have to follow Shiva and
Shivpuja, you will dedicate yourself to
Shiva principle within you. Shiva principle
doesn't 'stir out'; it's very, very stern, it's
very powerful. You have to dedicate, and
you have to surrender. Above every other
His blessings all the time, His protection
to you, then you have to be Sahaja Yogis
of very high quality. It shows when you
go all out to spread Sahaja Yoga. That is
the thing missing. I am very happy that
in Australia Sahaja Yoga has spread so
much. I don't know what has happened.
In a far fetched place like Australia. In
job, above every other performance, the
highest is this.
So, with this, I ask Shiva to give you
the beginning I had some set-backs but
blessings, complete blessings, so that you
now it has spread. Also in Austria it has
spread. And also in Italy. But otherwise.
just doesn't spread. What's the matter?
The matter is the leaders are not going
get transformed into the personality of
Shiva.
May God bless you all.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 BIRTHDAY PUJA
Nirmal Dham, Delhi 21-3-2002
Pravachana by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(English Part of the Talk)
We had people in our country,
I'm telling them about love, all-
pervading love of God Almighty. He's
created this whole thing. The whole
atmosphere is there. The whole feeling is
there of love. But it's possible only for
which is a very, supposed to be a very
sober country, a very peaceful country,
we had people who just believe in killing
-kill this, kill that.
people who are innocent, like children. If
So even in this country, which didn't
you are very mature in your hatred, no
one can save you. You'll have ten
believe in all these things, indulged into all
kinds of violence since long. But basically
arguments to show that your hatred is
justifiable. Then you'll go to any extent to
justify it.
we are people who believe in peace,
because without peace no growth can
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 July- August 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
23
So forgiveness is a very good
take place. There has to be complete
peace. If there is peace in your heart,
if there is peace surrounding you, you
grow into a beautiful nation. Not out
of fear, not out of pressure, but from
inside, if you are a person who has
method of understanding the pain of
others; troubles of others, but this depth
you have to develop. Instead of getting
angry, getting revengeful, if you can
develop that peace within yourself, if you
complete peace within the heart, not
that he is not afraid of anything, but
can manage to have the peace of your
mind through divine love, there's no need
for you to do anything extra. It's just the
he emits peace. He gives peace.
Anybody who goes near such a
peace that you have, now, in your heart.
Just feel it. You are a peaceful person. You
person, gets the peace, the feeling of
peacefulness.
are not a person who is easily disturbed.
You will never give explanations for getting
angry, for spoiling the mood of people.
You will not do that. You are the one who
rises above all this anger and this stupid
You all are Sahaja Yogis. You all
have got your Realisation. That is, your
spirit is now emitting vibrations of peace
and joy. Wherever you are, you will emit
peaceful vibrations. You will create peace.
revengefulness.
You'll find out ways of creating peace;
It is difficult to explain to those
how to establish peaceful atmosphere. It's
people who are not realised souls.
because if I talk, they won't like it. If they
very important that we have to grow in
such a manner that we create peace and
get their realisation, we can talk to them.
give peace to others and become
examples of it.
So best thing is that you should
spread Sahaja Yoga. Spread it among
Sikhs, among Muslims, among Christians,
throughout; and specially among Hindus
because nowadays I find Hindus have
I cannot believe in this Delhi that I
could have so many people who are
realised souls. I never expected. First of
all, I had to wait until people got into a
proper mind to understand My work,
because we had partition and so many
people lost their lives, lost their properties
also, lost their grip over their
understanding of our country and its
culture. And that's how they just revenge,
and I have faced all that. I have seen it
they take revenge. I don't understand this
Myself. And they just couldn't, couldn't
forgive other people.
kind of revenge. But what to do? People
are already on that level, on that low level,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
24
July-August 2002
where they don't understand many things.
What will happen to them if a temple is
built there? I mean, it is just a question of
respect and feelings about it. I also take
Rama's name. Everybody takes His name
because it is such a solace and such a
For example now, they do not want
people to build a temple of Shri Rama at
a particular point. Because they are not
Sahaja Yogis, I can't talk to them that that
is the place where He was born. So we
comfort! But the way people look at
things it's difficult, you can't talk to them.
must pay full respect to this incarnation.
If that is the place He was born, we can
Now they are talking about another
feel it with the vibrations, then why deny
the fact and the truth just because you
don't want it to be done? It's very difficult
nonsense that that we have one hair of
Mohammed-Saheb in Kashmir. Now
somebody said that it is not His hair. How
to talk to them.
do you know? What is your criteria to
decide whose hair it is? Actually, you will
be amazed, when I went to Kashmir, we
What to understand is that, what
has Babar done for us? Who was Babar?
were going somewhere in the car and
suddenly I felt tremendous vibrations. So
He was a foreigner and this one was not
even built by Babar. No, it was not. It I
was somebody who was his - one of
the military man who went and built it and
that's why they call it a Babri Masjid.
I asked the driver, "Why don't you take
the car on this side?" He said, "Why?"
"Because I want to go." He said "It is an
old road and there are some few people
living there." "It doesn't matter. Take it."
we went nearer and nearer and there
But let us find out what happened
to this Mr. Babar. He died, but he came
were some houses of Muslims. So we
from abroad. He was not even an Indian.
And doesn't matter, he was not born
there. I mean, he had nothing to do with
that place, but definitely I know and you
all will know, can feel it all on your hands
called them and asked them, "What is
here going on?" They said, "It is Hazrat
Bal." Even the name gives you such
peace. It was the hair of Mohammed-
Saheb.
just now, that Babri Masjid is the place
where Shri Rama was born.
Now Hindus don't want to know
about Him and Muslims don't want to
know about Shri Rama. It's very
Now, if you want to build a temple
there, what will go wrong with people?
surprising. They are all having their own
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July August 2002
25
shops and selling there own things, but
they don't understand that whatever they
are selling is the same which the other
you could have talked to them. But they
are all-what should I say?-absolutely
blocked people. How to tell them that
people are selling. For example, they say,
this quarrel is a nonsense? It is perfectly
all right to build a temple of Shri Rama.
"Allah." Who is Allah?" According to
Sahaja Yog, Allah is nobody else but
Vishnu and Vishnu who came also as Shri
But whatever you may say, the trouble is
first they all should get their Self
Realisation.
Rama. So whatever they call as Allah is
Shri Rama Himself. Only a Sahaja Yogi
can understand that. If you put up your
hands now when I am talking, you will be
surprised what vibrations are there
because it is Shri Rama, who is Allah,
whom you are trying to insult by your
Just now, at the time when we are
talking, see, there are not sufficient people
who have got Self Realisation. You are
all realised souls. There was another one
who told Me, who was giving Realisation
to these mahantas – mahantas are the
stupidity.
people who are supposed to be saints
and every one of them, when they got
Realisation, they got exposed! So he
didn't know what to do with them. That
So it could be stupidity on the part
of Muslims or on the part of the Hindus.
Hindus are also not understanding.
Somehow they know that is the birthplace
of Shri Rama. Somehow, I don't know,
somebody must have told them. Or maybe
-I don't know how they know-they
may happen with anyone, even in Christian
churches or you go to Jews-everywhere
you'll find this is the problem. If you give
them Realisation, they will get exposed.
So what's their theory of disturbing all the
people who have such faith in them and
don't know vibrations. I haven't yet met
many Hindus who have vibrations-I
mean those who are what you can call
fundamentalists, they never have
vibrations. So I used to wonder, how do
they know this is the janma bhoomi of
Shri Rama. Maybe, somehow they come
to know. But they have no point to prove.
think they're very great people.
Now only way you can judge them
is through vibrations. But out of love, I
can't tell them that "You are not realised
souls. You have no business to talk about
Shri Rama or about Mohammed-Saheb.
The problem is, if they were realised souls,
They're much beyond."
if our high court judges were realised
So the problem now is between the
souls, if our cabinet were realised souls,
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July August 2002
26
people who are not knowledgeable and
those who are knowledgeable. It was a
epidemic-epidemic of corruption has
started – epidemic. It's not simple.
very big gap before. Only one person
used to be a realised soul; so they used
to stone him, beat him, do all kinds of
Anybody you see, after every third
person, there's an epidemic of corruption.
Now why? Because they want money. All
right. Then what do they do with their
things. Now you are so many. So, if you
money? They don't know how to hide,
put up your case anywhere, even at this
stage, nobody is going to listen to you.
so they put it in some sort of a pot or
whatever it is and the money gets lost. If
I would request you only one thing.
Give Realisation to people, as many as
not, they are caught up. That's not so
important. What's important is Why have
possible, and not to any 'spiritual' so-
called people. Because they get exposed,
what's the use?
this greed?' People who are rich are more
greedy than the people who are poor,
because the poor people at least have
some fear of God. But the rich are very
greedy. They're running after this, running
after that. There's no end to it. It is very
This is a common thing. So many
people have told Me, "We gave
Realisation to one priest. He got exposed."
"Means, what happened?" "He was
exposed, Mother. He was put in jail."
"Why? This is too much. After getting
Realisation, he goes to jail!"
surprising that in this country of ours this
new disease has started. With this disease,
even in Sahaja Yoga, there are some
people who have made a business out of
So this is the problem. In love, you Sahaja Yoga and are making money. So
cannot be hypocritical about it. Love - greed is something that comes to you from
you have to be a pure personality. Strive the right side and you start justifying it.
to purify yourself. You have to change. If There's no place for love for the right side.
you are still angry, if you are still greedy,
if you have all these things, love won't the whole country is getting ruined. We
Now this greed has gone so far that
work out. It won't work out.
can never progress. We can never achieve
anything because everywhere there's
So to love someone in a Divine way
is to first understand the value of
greed when people are just taking it. But
innocence. Why I love children? Because
if you love your country, if you have love
they're innocent. They don't have all these
things. Like in our country these days, the
for your country, you won't do it. But that
love is missing. They love-I don't know
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 July-August 2002
27
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
In India is the worst, I think. They
whom do they love. They love their
children in such a way that they ruin their
say that India is the most corrupt country,
but I don't know. I have never seen that
lives.
kind of thing, but must be true. On such
an occasion, it's very auspicious that you
should think that money is of no value to
Love is not limited. Love has to be
unlimited. Unlimited love which binds the
whole world. There is this force, there is
has no value, and you will be amazed,
you,
already acting this force; only thing you
have to become the agents of that, to
become the people who can communicate
that love. You have every right to that
great wealth of love and you can spread
that all around. But I find that even here
you will have never dirth of money
absolutely. This is one thing in Sahaja
Yoga you have to get, that money is of no
value. There's no interest in money. Your
money is in getting how many people you
have in Sahaja Yoga, how many people
people think in terms of money. Money is
you have brought in Sahaja Yoga, how
many people have got this joy? You have
the enemy of love. I assure you that if you
have interest in money, you can never
not purchased it. Nobody has to purchase
it. It's free, flowing everywhere. It's so
joy-giving. What else do you want with
money? Nothing. Just with money
headaches, fear and all kinds of problems.
progress in Sahaja Yoga.
I'm hopeless, I agree. I don't know
how to take interest even. What is so
interesting about it? And people laugh at
Me that "You don't know simple things,
So, parallel to our Sahaja Yoga, it
should be the life of freedom, complete
even to count the money." I said, "I
freedom and enjoyment, nothing to worry
about. Nothing is dependent on money. I
have seen people living in very poor
conditions, extremely happy and joyous;
know." I can tell you like this, how much
money is there, but I'm not interested.
There's so many other things to be
interested. You see the children. You see
nice, nice people. In the whole world,
there are so many beautiful people, specially in the foreign countries, are rich
beautiful things. Why pay so much people. They have depression, all kinds
attention to this useless stuff, which comes
while those who have lots of money,
of funny, funny situations there. They
commit suicides. Why? If money was
and goes? But that is what is the most
everything, why all the rich country people
commit suicide? What is the gain they
I should say-gripping thing that is also
there.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 28
July-August 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
work? Looking after the poor or
have? See, and all the time what they are
thinking, how to get into a kind of a
fashion. Fashion, because if you have no
something like that.
Now, when your love, which is so
money, you cannot get into those fashions.
The fashions are so common now,
great, which is so effective, that starts
so
common, that for that people hanker. If working, you feel you should do
they cannot get to the fashions, they think
something, then you'll be amazed how
your Sahaja Yoga will be understood!
that something has gone wrong with them.
something is- But not you because you
So far Sahaja Yoga is all right,
people are very nice, excellent, saintly and
are Sahaja Yogis.
all. But effect of that must be seen and
people should see the effect of that, of
Now you see these things
happening, so what have you to do? Have
pity for such people-no contempt, but
pity - and you have to tell them that
"What are you doing? Why are you
your love. First is forgiveness. You have
to forgive people. They are utterly stupid.
I have just now explained to you how
stupid they are. So, nothing to worry
wasting your time? This is the best time about that. If you are such a wise
personality, you should try to judge
everything with wisdom and don't fall a
for you to reach the highest goal of your
life, of Self Realisation and why are you
so much running after all these things?
What is it that makes you run this rat-
trap into things where you feel that you
have to do it like some fashion or some
sort of a-I should say what?-some
race?"
grouping. No need, we are Sahaja Yogis.
We are self-sufficient. We don't need
I think it's a breaking point
everywhere and people are thinking, but
you are the people who should provide.
anything. If you are one, we are all right.
If you are many, we are all right.
In a very large scale, you can work it out.
Now you must know that you have
I mean, I have seen people who reached a very high state and you have
have nothing in them. They are not
touched that love, that universal love of
God.
spiritual. They are not the ones who can
So express more of that love in your
daily life. Express more of that love in
give Realisation or anything. But just
because they are doing some social work,
they are very famous. What is the social
dealing with others. Express your love in
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 July August 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
29
a way that others are made happy. It's all
something to be thought of. How can you
quarrel if you are real Sahaja Yogis? How
can you put down others if they are Sahaja
Yogis? How can you deceive others if you
that blessing, otherwise - can't help it.
Your loving nature. That's why Christ has
said that you have to be like children
to enter into the kingdom of God. You
are already in the kingdom of God, but
you have to be like children; how innocent
they are, how simple they are and they're
happy with small, small things. They don't
want something very extraordinary. It's
are Sahaja Yogis? Not possible. You
should have no interest in all these things.
That means now you are clarified and you
are clear and you are now nirmal.
Nobody can touch you.
very surprising how our love, which is
actually, is enlightened by divine love, can
change the whole world. How I had this
idea and how it has prospered, If you all
help Me in this, I'm sure Sahaja Yoga can
do so many things, which have not been
This sort of attitude, should have
respect for yourself. This kind of
understanding you should have about
yourself. What is your role? What is your
position? You should know that you are
realised souls and what you should do as
achieved.
Now you go home and think
realised soul, that you should know.
You're not another sort of madman running
whatever I have told you. Think about it.
What you need is introspection. What you
need is understanding. "What have I done
out of my life as Sahaja Yogi?" And then
the rat-race or also you're not in
competition, You're not competitive. You
are just progressing by your own love and
blessings. I know how the blessings work.
you will find out that you can do a lot, a
lot. And that has to be done.
But first of all, you have to be worthy of
May God bless you.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 FROM THE PEN OF A LITTLE SAHAJA YOGINI
A SAHAJA YOGI
I got the light, which will lead me to
your lotus feet.
When I know I am a Sahaja Yogi,
Anyone how could I deceive?
How could I shout,
Or materialistic I be?
Cannot I harm anyone,
Nor aggressive I could be.
At every step of my life I remember,
That I am a Sahaja Yogi.
ILOVEYOU MOTHER
Oh! Mother Adishakti
I have to do your bhakti
That is why I love you Mother3B
You are my joy
You are the calmness of my life
That is why I love you Mother;
LOTUS FEET OFTHE MOTHER
Flowers blossom beneath your feat,
Beneath your feet devils get transformed.
The Sun rises beneath your feet,
And there it sets in the evening.
The ocean lie beneath your feet,
To soothe you comes there the spring.
Beneath your feet the world lies,
So why not me O Mother Divine?
You are my guru
You are my guide
That is why I love you MotherB
You are my Rama
You are my Krishna
That is why I love you Mother3B
You are the mother of the whole world
That is why I love you Mother.
LEAD ME MOTHER!
O Mother!
Lead Me
LET ME HOLDYOUR HAND MOTHER
O! Mother Divine!
Let me hold your hand
Let me climb the ladder
And lead me to heavenly bliss.
Lead me from untruth to truth
From darkness to light
From anger to love
From death to life
From impatience to patience
Beneath your Lotus Feet
Lies my destination
To be your child
That is my goal,
All those who are Sahaja Yogis
That is my family,
That is my life
Which begins from your love
And ends in your lotus feet
O Mother Divine!
The fragrance of you love
Fills the whole universe.
Lead me Mother
Lead me; to your lotus feet
Let me follow the light
That leads me to You,
The light full of vibrations,
The light full of love.
Yes, I can feel,
Feel the Beam of Chaitanya
Flowing in my body
Yes Mother!
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 TALK TO GROOMS
SHRI GANESHA PUJA
Cabella Ligure, 23-09-2001
Pravachana by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
.I have already talked to the brides
love is the most important thing for men, I
think. Otherwise, you see, you'll take it
and made them understand what is their
for granted that you're married. That's not
duty and what that is supposed to mean.
Specially I have told them that men are a
so. So first come home and talk to her
little bit-always excited, they get excited
nicely. Ask her what she has been doing,
with marriage. So you should be more
sensible and they will be, I am sure- they
looked very sensible girls. But still you
does she need anything.
Now in Sahaja Yoga we have a
custom, or we can call it a law, that all the
money that you earn should be kept with
in Sahaja Yoga, not for 'marriage', but
for a Sahaja Yoga marriage. It's very
important- very important that you have
to show that you have a very successful
your wife and you should not spend any
money without asking her and she should
also not spend any money without asking
you. Money is a very big problem. So if
marriage.
you want money, you have every right.
It's a common property. But the wife
Of course, the responsibility of the
household and children, is that of -I agree
should know how much money there is,
she cannot also spend without asking you
and you also cannot spend without her.
that it has to be done by girls and we can
say the bride. But also your responsibility
is to pay attention to her, not to neglect
Now this is because of mutual
understanding. You have to have complete
her, because the whole thing, you're busy,
youjustify it. But you have to give some
time to your wife. It's not that you should
be negligent. That is first thing. For
example, when you come back from
work, I know you are tired, but just see
what she is doing. Enquire. If she's busy,
try to help her. It's what you show in your
understanding as to the love, what love
you are expressing. If you doubt her, it's
wrong. Or if you think, All this is mine.
Who is she to ask me?"-I don't like
women to work; but if they have to work,
they will work. And if they're working, I
have told them already, that they have to
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July- August 2002
32
are. If you think from this angle, that the
marriage is between two souls who are,
be careful that they are housewives to
begin with. We just don't want to have
'marriages', we want to have Sahaja
Yogis who are married, who will have nice
say, left and right and there should be a
complete understanding. The emotional
part of it-but I find that in the marriages,
children, nice families. We want to have
beautiful family.
people don't have much understanding
about emotional side. If she feels sad, if
she cries, just a little, few words of love
and loving the person is the greatest thing.
So a domination of a husband and
a domination of a wife is a wrong idea. If
you can fall in love with each other, it's
heavenly. For small, small things, I feel,
people fight, for clothes and for food, for
this and that. But if you love somebody,
There cannot be anything better than
loving the person.
You are not married here for just a
your life becomes so much beautiful. All
these little, little things are of no use.
common experience of marriage, but for
enjoying love.
So do not judge them. Do not
It's a very, very great blessings and
a divine thing to love. If you can do that,
then you won't find faults. You will find a
dominate them. If they ask for your
guidance, all right. But all the time say, if
the husband is all the time saying 'do this'
and 'do that', then he becomes boring,
isn't it. And you should see that you don't
way how you can enjoy your married life.
So I have called you here to tell you
bore your life and her life because there
that you have to enjoy your married life
are so many ways of enjoying life. Even
and then one thing you have to remember
sitting together you can. Talking together
you can. But if you don't understand this
art, then maybe you might have problems,
she might have problems.
-alone you cannot. Alone you cannot.
So she's your companion. She's
your friend. She's everything to you. Have
beautiful feeling about it. I mean some
If she has some serious problem,
then, of course, we'll cancel the marriage.
people are very overly romantic and some
We'll find out what sort of a thing. But
people are not at all romantic. So there's
no need to be extremely 'something', but,
as a Sahaja Yogi, you should appreciate
the qualities of your wife and a Sahaja
normally, try to understand that why, if she
is working in the house, she's equally
important, even more important than you
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-36.txt 
 July - August 2002
33
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
were very close. See how touching it is.
Yoga marriage.
He came down, I saw this and I was
The best thing is to trust each other,
amazed - in the Prime Minister of India%;
not to doubt. There's another problem
with many marriages, that they start look at him, how he was concerned about
doubting and then they separate. So
her. So he came down and then he had
tea with her. I just hid myself, I said ſto
myself] 'I don't want to interfere'.
nothing to doubt. Nothing to be frightened
about married life. It's a beautiful thing you
All these sweet, sweet things, you
are entering into. It's a beautiful, I should
say, evolution of yours that you're sharing
your life with somebody. But there are
many people who fail. Why? Because they
see, help you so much and, though Shri
Shastriji, was such a busy man, he always
used to think about her and also the family.
But then whenI was there, I was surprised.
He told his daughters, "You look after
your children. My wife is not going to be
think they are men and these are women.
But both of them can be beautifully joined
together and live very happily.
I have seen some very good like a maidservant. I'm not going to make
husbands, they are so hardworking they her an aya. You just look out!" So what
have no time for their wives, so they a deference was given to her, compared
telephone again. They'll find out how are to the children. That should be the case.
you. I'll give you an example of Lal You see, that's how we learn to live with
Bahadur Shastri. He was so fond of this another person. Always if you are thinking
wife. His wife was an ordinary woman,
about yourself, What comfort I have got.
This food was not good', you are not living
not educated, nothing, from a very
like Sahaja Yogis.
ordinary family. But once I was in their
A Sahaja Yogi lives for others, not
for himself, starting with your wife. Of
course, if you have problems or anything,
house, you see. So in the morning, about
say ten o'clock I was there, and he sent a
letter to her from the office that, "I woke
up early and as is usual my routine, I had
a bath and everything and you were still
sleeping, so I didn't want to disturb you.
Because you didn't sleep last night, soI
didn't want to disturb you. I'm very sorry,
but I haven't taken my tea as yet, so can
I come down to take tea with you?' We
that can be sorted out. You can write to
Me. We can find out. But first thing is you
must see, you have to have emotional
balance. That has to be understood. If the
wife is unhappy, you should ask her,
"Why, what's the matter?" Always stand
by her always, whether it is your
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July - August
2002
34
and compassion. If you cannot love your
own wife, who are you going to love?
More than your children, more than
anybody else! You share your love a little
and you'll be amazed.
mother, father or anyone, stand by her and
then tell her what is the right thing. But if
you take an opposite position, she won't
understand. But if you take her side and
tell everybody that "Let's find out". And
then establish her self-respect. Let her feel
that she will not be insulted by anyone.
Anybody insults your wife, you should
stand by her [at] that time. Later on, you
can sort it out. Nobody dare say anything
to your wife, do anything to your wife,
but take the side of your wife all the time
For small, small things also I've seen,
Sahaja Yogis get angry with their wives.
For example now, supposing, I'm
supposed to be your Mother and
everything. But sometimes your wife does
some mistake in puja, in something she
does not try to understand. I don't mind.
because, after all, she's a Sahaja Yogini
also. And you can talk to her later on and
ask her what's the matter. You can take
her in the bedroom and ask, "What is the
Later on you tell her that "It was a mistake
and you should not have done it; that's
our Mother," and they will respect it. But
if you go on shouting, you see, there will
be a gap between them. If you talk to
them like that, their whole life will change.
Be kind to them. Be gentle. Very much,
matter, what has happened?"
But, in the presence of others, you
shouldn't shout at her. And you should
it's necessary. Specially I've seen that in
not correct her. Moreover, no husband
the western life, people have no training
should shout at their wives. That is
something I can't understand, why should
husbands shout. It shows a very bad
upbringing. We're all Sahaja Yogis. You
are brought up by Me. I am your Mother.
And please never shout at your wives,
never show your temper. I mean, some
things are so simple and can be solved by
showing love. As you love Me, I love you,
how to deal with their wife. There's no
arrangement like that but in India we have.
When they first meet the husband or the
wife, there's a big ceremony and the gentle
way of handling everything.
So, though the relationship is there,
you have to establish it. You should move
slowly, gently, in a simple manner, not to
just to jump on the woman and start
shouting at them. Really, it's not proper.
and if there's anything wrong with you also,
I will never shout at you, never. What l'll
do, I'll take you in a very loving manner.
We've had three, four cases like that, not
many, I should say, for so many years [of
You have such a great power of love
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July August 2002
35
marriages]. but still to handle her gently,
talk to her gently. Talk to her in a way
the Indians, you people have better
husbands, no doubt. But sometimes, some
that she feels that you're her husband and husbands, like in India, I think, (Shri
that she is your wife. It's something, that's
Mataji asks to someone nearby "Are
there any English people here? No, I
mean to be married?").
an art. And because you are Sahaja
Yogis, you have to show to the world that
"because of Sahaja Yoga, our marriage
So, you see, in England I have seen
has been very successful.' Don't listen to
your mother. Don't listen to anybody.
Listen to her first and find out what is the
problem. Otherwise, such marriages
collapse. When you are already married,
men are very docile – very docile
because of the law. Law is so funny and
that's why they are left-sided. They are
docile and not only docile but they spoil
their women, because of the law that is
you should show no interest in any other
there. But now we have international
woman-no interest whatsoever. First,
marriages and here in Italy also, if you are
marrying under Italian law, it's not so bad.
is your wife, because that puts them of
-
But still, you must remember that whatever
Linnecessary interest in other women.
There's no need. You've got your woman.
you are doing is according to Divine Laws.
Divine Laws must be obeyed and that's
You've got your wife. Why should you
have interest in other women?
how you should make very successful
Despite all this, if they are marriages.
troublesome, let Me know. I am sitting
here to know about it. But you don't get you become very happy with these
I'm very anxious to see that, that
desperate. And things can be improved,
we can make them alright. If you're not
marriages – something very special,
exceptional, that you will have the
sensible, then it will be problematic.
blessings of the Divine and you will enjoy
must say that I think, compared to
your love.
May God bless you.
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-39.txt 
 TALK TO BRIDES
SHRI GANESHA PUJA
Cabella Ligure, 23-09-2001
Pravachana by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
You are going to marry. I am going
to just tell you that you have to do it
with full understanding.
that you will make a very, very happy
marriage.
Now it is more the responsibility
It's very important to understand
your role in Sahaja Yoga as married
women. We have had very funny types
of the woman somehow, because
marriage is her responsibility and she has
to make a happy marriage. If any of you
now don't want to marry a particular
person, you can say no. But now if you
are marrying, then please think of the
way a Sahaja Yogini who is getting
married. The responsibility of bringing
good name to Sahaja Yoga is on you.
of women who got married because
they wanted to marry, and they saw to
it that the marriage is not successful.
And they have been of such a trouble
to Me that I don't understand that
before marriage why don't they see that
what they have to do.
We are not marrying you because I
mean, some sort of a social event, no,
because you are Sahaja Yoginis,
You have to make a successful
marriage in Sahaja Yoga. It's not an
ordinary marriage. And for that, it's not
because you're sensible women and
you'll bring a lot of glory to Sahaja
Yoga.
sacrifice, but joyful understanding, You
may have to withstand many troubles
also. Financially maybe somebody's not
so well off. Maybe, though he's all right,
he's not looking after you financially,
I must say that so far ninety-nine
percent marriages have been successful
ninety-nine percent. Now this is a
new group that has come and I have to
he's not giving you money or maybe he's
very dominating - it's possible.
Everything is possible. As you could be
see now how it works out.
If you have some ideas in your
head, some sort of a models you have
the same.
So in Sahaja Yoga we have
selected you to be married and we think
in your head, then take it out. We have
to deal with reality. We have to see
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-40.txt 
 July-August 2002
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7. & 8
37
what reality is, not our imaginary ideas.
So you should not get shocked, nor the
man should be shocked. But supposing
he is, then the understanding should be
in you. Spirit of understanding has to
be in you and not expect that from men.
or the misunderstandings to your
husband. But for that, you have to have
special woman's charm, I should say,
special woman's understanding.
I'll give you one example of My
life, there are many, but one I can give
you: that from My husband's office, oe
gentleman came to see Me. And he said
Men have a responsibility as far
as earning is concerned. They have
other responsibilities, but women have
responsibility to understand, again I say
understand, the husband, the family life
that "I'm sorry I did a wrong thing is to
give up his organisation and join another
öne. But I now feel that I cannot be
and everything that is connected with
happy in the other one and I want to
come back." So My husband said, "You
your family life.
have no place here. It is not disciplinary.
It is not good. Why did you do it? Why
The spirit of understanding of
women only make very good families.
did you join another organisation?" So
It's the woman who does all the things
that are needed to smooth the family
relations, they understand the husband
he said, "Sir, but I want to come back.
I want to beg of you," pleading every
day. But once the men take something
also and they also help the husband with
their understanding. Once it is into their heads, they don't change
immediately. So he came to Me and he
established in the mind of the husbands
told Me, "I want to be back in the same
that you are sensible, that you care for
Sahaja Yoga, that you're dignified, all
your problems will be solved. That's
organisation."I know my husband very
well, so I said, "All right, let's see about
it." So when My husband came, I told
him, "Why don't you take back this
very important to have a very deep,
deep understanding of your
responsibility. And I'm sure you all will
man?" "Oh, so he has come to you now,
has he? The best man (person), he
be successful because you are all Sahaja
Yogis.
knows where to go. "No," I said,
'Maybe he thinks I am more generous
Never to dominate – there's no than you are." That was too much
need to dominate. But if you are challenging! *"That's why he came to me.
intelligent, you can convey the mistakes
You should be generous." Then he took
 2002_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XIV Issue 7 & 8
July-August 2002
38
him back. And I must say, all his life without saying anything harsh, without
this man helped My husband very much. . being rude to anyone. Now, that is the
So this is what it is. There's a way
of doing things. You have to learn that
and you have to master it, by which
do good things without hurting anyone,
mänagement you have to see. That is
something special you have to learn, so
all the conflicts will be finished. Alright?
you
May God bless you.
I bless you all from My heart.
THE BEAM OF LIGHT
O Mother Divine!
The panorama of the world today is full of darkness.
Impatience, materialism and untruth fullness
Dominate the scene,
Wars shake the peace of our minds,
Negativity and Pessimism being thrust all over.
But like the oasis in the desert,
And the soothing beam of sunrise,
Beautiful light of patience and satisfaction
Dawns upon us from your lotus feet,
And fills us with positivity and optimism,
What else could we yearn for,
O, Dear Shri Mataji!
Thou art the most precious treasure,
To be held in the softest groove of our hearts!
Radhika
