January-February, 2003 Volume: XV Issue :1 & 2 VESSA The Divine CoolBreeze It is best to discuss only Sahaja Yoga even amongst each other. Attention should always be kept going deeper within. Forget outside as much as possible. Have confidence that everything about it is taken care of. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi ट

 xV 1 & 2 January The Divine Cool Bre eze Volume - XV 1 & 2 January - February 2003 1 DUST (Poem) LETTER BY SHRI MATAJI ON MITHYA 6. GURU PUJA, Cabella Ligure, Sunday, July 21st, 2002 16 GURU PURNIMA, July 24, 2002 News from Cabella 18 GURU PURNIMA TALK, Cabella Ligure, 24/07/2002 23 MOUNTAIN (Poem) 24 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA, 18, August, 2002, Canajoharie USA 34 WHAT IS A SAHAJA YOGI, 17-05-1980 46 ISTANBUL PUBLIC PROGRAM, 23rd April, 2002 JOY OF SPREADING 49 2.

 T HE DIVINE Co OL BRE EZE COOL Published by V.J. Nalgirkar 162- A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067 Printed at Print-O-Graphics New Delhi For subscription please write to Mr. O.P. Chandna N - 463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi - 110034 Ph. : (011) 7013464 Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artworks to: THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Clo Sahaja Yoga Temple C - 17, Qutub Institutional Area New Delhi - 110016

 Dust I:want to be sTmaller, Like a dust particle Which moves with the wind I goes everywhere, Cango. Sit on the liead of a king Orean go And fall at the feet of someone Andit can g And sit everywhere utI want to be Bu A particle of dust Thal ts tragrant Thatis nourishing That is enlightening Malaji Shri Nirmala Divi

 Shri Mataji 11 Here is a translation of an old letter by Shri Mataji on the subject of Mithya, i.e. what is unreal. "My Dear Damle. of inner being are opened. But before this grace descends in, there should be Many blessings. Received your letter. It is a very good sign to feel a a pull in Sahasrara. We understand the pull of heart, which is also silent, but pull on the Sahasrara, because only through Sahasrara endless rays are lopsided, that is emotional. But pull of Sahasrara becomes all round. There poured in man's heart and new doors

 Unveils Mithya Brahmarandhra is closed, many types of illusory ideas, become a part of your mind. False thoughts like 'its mine or they are mine', identify with outside man is in integral state, in that Dharma (righteousness) and awareness implores for Chaitanya (Divine consciousness) that is God's love. This happens spontancously. Although it is objects! Besides, man made bindings the skill of your Kundalini, your such as "My body should be healthy personality should strengthen the and beautiful" are inculcated. Then Kundalini. You earned that quality in unreal relationships like, he is my previous lives and hence this life is father, he is my brother, she is my great that gems of person are available mother, are on your head. As ego for My work. If you understand that develops, foolish ideas such as 'I am although My physical being is here I poor, I am helpless or I belong to high am all over, it should also be realized family etc. come in your head. Many that even this body is an unreal officials and politicians, become (Mithya) appearance. It is difficult to egoists (Donkeys). Then there is anger, come to this stage but if gradually hatred, forbearance, separation, unreal is discerned, the truth will be sorrow, attachment under the cover of established effortlessly and waves of love and temptations in the guise of great bliss will envelop your being. I social status. Man with great affection am explaining, in this letter, what is keeps clinging to this unreal way of unreal (Mithya). It should be read out life. If you think of getting rid of all to all and assimilated by all. these, and make efforts, what you get Unreal starts soon after the birth is illusory knowledge, because the in this world. Your name, village. attention (Chitta) moves along the country, horoscope, forecasts, many Pingla Channel, and then you are involved in Siddhis (Powers) and such things get attached to you or others other temptations. A vision of Once them to attach you.

 2003 January - February The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 Kundalini and the Chakras is also should not be afraid of Maya and should recognize her so that She will illusory because there is no gain from it; on the contrary it is harmful. illuminate your path. A cloud hides and the Sun, as also makes it seen. The Sun self-controls Whatever is always there but what is the purpose mortification you insist or practising, of the cloud? Because of the cloud you effectively, all of them add to the limitations on your Chitta (attention). have an urge to see the Sun which shines for a moment and again hides somewhere. It gives strength and courage to your sight to see the Sun As such, there is no way for liberation. But all unreal does not fall off with the Self-Realisation. It can be broken Man has been created with such great off gradually. If, with firm conviction, you deny from your heart all that is efforts, only one step on his feet and unreal (Mithya), you will have the all is successful. But, still it is not Realisation of the Self (Atman) in its becoming possible. Hence, I have pure form. Thereafter it is established come as your mother. Write your problems to Me in a letter. Sit down in meditation. It is best to discuss only within you. Albeit, the same mortal human Chitta is drenched in that which is of the nature of love, truth having Sahaja Yoga even amongst each other. no beginning and end, verily the Shiva. Attention (Chitta) should always be Human Chitta is meant for realising kept going deeper within. Forget outside as much as possible. Have that reality. This Chitta must become confidence that everything about it is one with that Atman. Only that Chitta, taken care of. There are many instances which progresses renouncing all unreal to prove it. Then, in whatever you do, (Mithya), breaks all known and unknown bindings and becomes verily your Chitta (attention) remains in oneness with the Self. All binding of the Self. sins (Papas) and merit (Punyas) are Atma is never disturbed nor snapped. Distinctions like wordily and destroyed. Only human attention non-wordily vanish, because that (Chitta), in pursuit of desires, leaves wicked darkness, which has created all its inner path. This is Maya (the the discrimination, ends. Everything illusion). She has been intentionally becomes auspicious in the light of the created. Without her the attention true knowledge, whether it is the (Chitta) would not have developed. You destruction done by Shri Krishna or the

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue 1 & 2 January - February 2003 case of the holy land of India, and cross of Shri Jesus. All this will not be understood by explaining. Just when fully developed, it will spread showing the path will not help. The in all countries and directions. When path will be known only after walking on it. When I get your letter I fix the targets. After sometime, even that will not be necessary. But for the present, all should write their own experiences Sahasrara day was celebrated in London today, i.e. 5th May, I invited only about 20-25 people and decided further course of action. Many blessings and infinite love to all. and progress. When I come, we will Ever yours, see how many Virata's channels "Your Mother Nirmala" (Nadis) you have awakened. It appears, this work will come up in the

 GURU PUJA Cabella Ligure, Sunday, July 21st, 2002 (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) In India, they're all waiting for surprised at the quick behaviour and obedience of the the monsoons and they're so rain. much worried Today is a because the rain great day for all of us because we did not come. So I was giving are celebrating bandhan to the the Guru Puja and rain and it came remembering all here. And now the great gurus also they have who came on this told on the Earth to teach the television that it world about the is going to be truth. So many of rain in India, them were here but first in Italy. and they tried I was told that their level best to in Italy you explain humanity what is to needed rain very much and the first rain you had, few days back, spirituality, but it's such a disparity that people never understood that spirituality is the most and now this is the second one. important thing we need, that we have Because all the understanding of to be one with the Divine Power. the problems of our powers is there and the rain, you see, is so kind that it works at the right time. I am in the wrong direction. First, of All their endeavours have been

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January February 2003 course, they were very intelligent, you. That's why in India, Agni was more than animals, and started worshipped, this light seeking, not the truth, but some sort worshipped, the fire was worshipped. of a self emancipation, I should say, I That was worshipped first. They must was don't know what to say about it-self have discovered that the fire knows progress. And in that, they forgot that they have to first seek spirituality, which is the most important thing. everything. So the inner awareness of all these elements, they knew about it and But, we had two types of that's why they worshipped those journeys. One is through the left side elements. So before the puja, they and another through the right side. In used to call all the Deities who India, I don't know why, we had lots belonged to those elements to witness of people who went into the jungles their puja, but that turned out to be and became saints, but they were right sided movement. Without the left doing right side tapasya-that is, Side, right side is very dangerous. If going into the five elements, one after you don't have right side, of course, it's a big dangerous thing also, but first you must have development of your left side. That is what, to begin with, another, and mastering the five elements. Of course, there is truth in it, no we had in Sahaja Yoga. doubt. You have seen how a candle Left side is compassion, is love, tells you as to what is your position is. If you are possessed or if you are universal feeling. All we can say is not, a candle can tell you. Can you the blessings of the Devi, which are imagine? Candle is so much described, you know in Devi knowledgeable. Supposing you have Mahatmya, that the Goddess resides a heart, heart trouble, the candle will within you as so many things. She show and if you treat yourself with resides in you as Shraddha, She the candle, you can cure yourself. resides in you as Sleep. She resides in you as Illusion, Bhranti. All kinds So it is so sensitive, not that it of things are there on the left-hand side, which are already described and when I told you about Sahaja Yoga, I can cure, but also so competent. Not that it shows that you are sick and have wanted to make your left side very problem, but it is competent to cure

 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January - February incurable. Even some people, right- strong. sided, some people can get a kind of Those people who took to right side became very aggressive people a cancer called blood cancer and this blood cancer now we have cured it, and they had mastered the essence of but even if it is cured, you can go back these five elements. That's all right, to that kind of aggressiveness, thinking but they were extremely hot- that you are very right. Such people tempered, so much so that they used always try to find faults with others, that such-and-such person is not good, he's doing harm. Any way, they can to curse people, curse them. They used to say things which were not kind and they didn't believe in the universality. find faults with others, but not with themselves. Their attention is outside, It was such a dangerous thing that they took. not on themselves. They never see In Indian shastras, you can see what's wrong with them, but they always see what's wrong with others. in many incidents where people give a curse, Shraap-very common. All By doing that, you see, they are climbing the ladder of a horrible right side, which can give you horrible these gurus used to curse a person because they had no compassion, no love, nothing but their powers of the diseases. right side. But we have seen now that As I told you, first is the blood those people who have right side, who go only on the right side without the bhakti, without the blessings of the problem. Nowadays, there's a very Divine can become rakshasas famous disease called Alzheimer's. cancer. If you get rid of the blood cancer, then you can get into another actually, can become a great danger This is also the part of the right side, [thunder sounds] for humanity. This is because if you don't have that bhakti, a very serious thing. Through your intelligence, through your thinking Goddess, you can develop all such that humility, that blessings of the power your ego can go to any limit horrible diseases, which are not only and create problems within you. fatal, but also very injurious to others. Now, the ultimate of this So, by being right-sided, you do problem is we have seen in are many not progress. You can become a big diseases, which are absolutely ascetic, they call it, who can curse

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue1 & 2 January-February 2003 achieved your left side mastery. others, who can put them into troubles, think that that is a great Kundalini awakening is there. You are one with the Divine. Now you can power. It is not. It is not at all because, though you are not come to the right side and know about right side and try to express your right side. You can express it not by dominating others, but by dominating yourself. By self-examination, by understanding what's wrong with you. Why do you behave like that? Why do suppressed by other powers, negative powers, but your own power takes your life. So kundalini, when it is risen, the best thing is to go to the left side, not criticizing others, not talking ill you trouble others? Why do you of others, but seeing within you what's wrong. Find out what is the matter always, I have seen, organize and overpower others? Such people will with you. First it starts with self arrange and do this and do that. Instead of organising themselves, important person'. And, with this self they'll organise others. These things importance, you go on troubling complicate, but if you have love and everyone and torturing everyone and if you have bhakti, you can very, very all that. But, because of your right side easily dominate others in a very importance, that I am a very movement, you can become very different manner. successful. Hitler was the climax of It is not that you dominate by that. And that's how people start cruelty, by oppression, but you dominate with your love. And you taking to very, very cruel things. Nowadays, I think that some don't want to dominate, but easily people are ruling everywhere with people get very much succumbed to their right side. We do not have love and to magnanimity, to people who are using their left side generosity. and whenever they use their left side, So all these qualities you must they're called as saints. Now you all first develop within yourself-is the have the powers of the left side. Some of you do have little bit right side left side problem that you should be very peaceful. You should give love also-doesn't matter. to others. You should be generous. You should be kind and see how much it Now I would say that you have

 January - February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 10 to him. What was so great, though he pays. was a king, he was living so lavishly and he had so many of ornaments and I have seen some people who are extremely rude. They can be rude to anyone. That's their nature which they also conveyances and all that? Because nothing was above him. He should overcome with their left side. was so detached with everything. He Rudeness is not the sign of a saint. A had everything, but he was so saint is extremely peaceful and never detached. That's a very good example gets rude with others. of a person who had mastered his left and now who was the king. Raja So the introspection should work first of all. 'Where are we wrong? Janaka was. What wrong things are we doing? What is our style?' Once you Like that, we had many people discover later on also, one after another, who that your style is already left side, then you should take to right side and were extremely, extremely rich, extremely, I should say, powerful as possess the power of the right side. kings, but inside they were absolutely like divine personality. Nothing What are the powers of right side now, which are achieved through disturbed them. Nothing made them the left side perfection? We have feel greater or happier. No position, no power was, to them, great. This is a complete emancipation of human some very great gurus on this line. One of them was Raja Janaka. He was a ruler of a country and a very well beings, that you are realised souls. known ruler and everything, but still, You should be fully equipped with though he was so generous and good compassion and everything, but, at the same time, understanding, but, at the same time, he was a great monarch, great king of it should be expressed in the right those days, very much known for his way. and love and impartiality, for his statesmanship and all kinds of beautiful things he did for For example, you can say Christ is another example. Though He was his subjects. That is Raja Janaka. He could not get disturbed with anything. And people never understood why the an incarnation, still, the amount of forgiveness and love He has for people is tremendous. But at the same greatest of greatest saints used to bow time, He used to go onto mountains

 January February 2003 11 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 and preach about spirituality. Those got. It's very easy to feel, 'Oh, now we have got Realisation, now what is were not very safe times because people didn't like anybody talking like there? We are on top of the world.' that. They hated you because He That's not so. talked about God (thunder) and what You have to go out, talk to they did to Him, you know very well. people. They will insult you. They'll trouble you. They will do all kinds of Doesn't matter, though they crucified Him, still we all respect things, but you are already a person- already a realised soul. You can listen to them, what they are saying. You will Him as a great personality. Reason is He was-He was, no doubt, an not ask for it. What you'd like to do, incarnation, but still He went all out to give His achievements or, I can say, [be] good to them. This is also a whatever powers He had, to others. compassion that you don't want to He went all over the places. He had keep your Realisation to yourself, but you want to do it for others also, so no facilities, but still He went out to that they also get Realisation. It's very many people and tried to save them. important. If you do not feel that way, the pity for the people who haven't got side right This the was movement. That means Sahaja Yogis can also become right-sided, but like Christ. Otherwise, if they are right- Realisation, think of the times you were not realised. These people are also not realised and they are having sided. They'll organise, they'll do all kinds of things and have problems of a bad time. They can be in for any trouble. the right side. So now, it is not that if you have Realisation, you settle down with it. That's why I want you to avoid No, that's not the way, but you should the right side, but once you are fully go all out to see that you give a left-sided master of Sahaja Yoga, then it's very, very much needed to be a complete personality of spirituality that you should take to right side movement. And what is the right side movement is the collectivity. Should Realisation to others and save them. You all have got Realisation not for your self. It's not limited for you, but it is meant for others, that you have to give it to others. And as soon as you'll start giving it to others, you'll be not be satisfied with what you have

 January - February 12 2003 & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 amazed, so many qualities in you will him, say all kinds of things. It's all come up. Because, when you see right. Is a part of the game, but he others, you find that what is lacking doesn't mind. He doesn't mind in them, what do they need, what you anything. Anything that comes his have to give, how you have to give. way, he doesn't mind. But what is the You can become anything. You can main thing is that he has compassion, his compassion that he had before from the left side is now expanded become a poet. You can become a writer. Anything you can become in and he wants to save the people. case you face others, then it comes as a reaction within you. All these People don't have food, is all right, qualities develop and you become a is a big complication, if people are starving it is another. But if they do very good, I should say, artist. not get spirituality, what's the use of This is only possible if you meet other people and talk to them about Sahaja Yoga and tell them about your their human life? Why did they evolve to this state? They are evolved from Self Realisation. I know there will be animal state, from the worst possible problems. I know that is true. There conditions to a human state and now, will be people who'll oppose you, if they do not get their Realisation, that means this is worse than starving, worse than all kinds of poverty, worse who'll say anything, all kinds of things against you and they'll try to stop your than all kinds of diseases and troubles. activities and do all kinds of harm. So why not try to give them Doesn't matter. But that's the thing you realisation? Why not see that you give them realisation. But first and should achieve, is to meet people, talk to them and start telling them about foremost thing, as I said, that in the left you should be very strong. You Self Realisation. You have to save them. That's important. But first of all, you should know that you should shouldn't start doing it because have no right-sided complications, you've got your Realisation. You can otherwise they'll all run away. A give Realisation, so you should not person who is spiritual is supposed or accepted to be a very humble strengthened your left side. start doing it unless and until you have Such a person is extremely person. Of course, because he's humble, extremely straight, doesn't humble, people will take advantage of

 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January-February 2003 important. If you can do that, then you grudge about anything, doesn't grumble about anything and can adjust himself into any circumstances. It's not attached to anything. It's an automatic will do full justice to this life, which is a spiritual life. Without that, you cannot achieve, cannot achieve the strength of spirituality. For that, you have to understand that it's very, very important that you should give Sahaja Yoga a full chance through your detachment. It doesn't have to detach. You may do anything for that person, you may try to get anything for that person, it's all right. That person will accept, no doubt, but without any wisdom. attachment to anything. Such a What I receive mostly, the letters detached person is the one who can are, that this person is troublesome, that person is troublesome, that person work it out, all kinds of propagation of Sahaja Yoga. is doing like that. Forget it. All such Today that is the greatest need persons are not important for Sahaja of the world, that we have to have Yoga. But if you start on proper lines, more Sahaja Yogis. Now people are you will be amazed, you'l11 meet so so shy to do that. It's very surprising, many people who want peace of mind, but I've seen people who don't have peace of heart and a complete oneness any truth, who have all kinds of bad with the Divine. gurus, get after others, try to spread their false ideas, but Sahaja Yogis, They may not accept. They may why should they feel-why should not say. They might have gone to the they feel shy I don't understand. So wrong people also-possible. But, despite everything, they would like to have a real spiritual peace within talk about this to everyone. Bring them to Sahaja Yoga. themselves. It is a very common a very important day desire nowadays among people, but because, on a Guru Puja day, they say to oppose that and to reach that, you that a guru cannot give anything to you, have to take to a life of a very simple Today is but I can give you the advice and the personality. advice is that you enlarge your heart, you become humble and try to spread Sahaja Yoga with humility, not with See, if you are so much interested in money or if you are so aggressiveness. That is extremely much interested in your so-called

 2003 14 January - February The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Isue 1 & 2 powers, or in your ambitions, then Sahaja Yoga cannot do anything. But is important, but is absolutely them about Sahaja Yoga. Not only that if you are interested in your immediate need of the world. compassion and understanding about today's world, how it is in a turmoil- why? Because of the human beings If you understand this point, that at this time why are you in this world and what is the need of the world, you being in the wrong. What we have to will immediately start feeling the do is pass them the knowledge of the responsibility. Whether you are man Divine. That should be your desire or a woman is not important. Go all and that is what you'll feel very much out to preach this thing, make people understand about Sahaja Yoga. comfortable with. All other desires, all other wants In every way that is possible and are, as you say, such transitory. One desire is to spread Sahaja Yoga is so I think then you will become complete beautiful that you go on working on it as gurus. and every time you do that you will be so joyous and happy, you'll have you cannot be a guru. Guru also no problems of any kind. That's the doesn't mean that you go on preaching If Sahaja Yoga is just with you, about Sahaja Yoga, talking about Sahaja Yoga, giving lectures about Sahaja yoga-no. It means the one sign of greatness of Sahaja Yoga and I want you all to become like that. As today's day is great because we are thinking of all the great saints who gives Realisations to others. How many people you give who came on to this Earth and who tried to lead us. What they did, all of Realisation is the thing not to be them, tried to spread the truth all over counted, but to be felt within like the world. They suffered a lot, they ripples, waves of the ocean of love in your heart. So beautiful it is to see had problems, so many problems, but they worked very hard in every way that people get Realisation and are to spread Sahaja Yoga and talk about immersed in the joy of spirituality. God and divinity. That's what I want-you to do. That's why I'm on this Earth. All that is that today you have to give Me, a promise that whenever you get any other human being, you can tell I had to suffer also quite a lot. It doesn't matter, so called suffering. I

 The Divine Cool Breeze Voiume-XV Issue1&2 January - Febuary 2003 15 was watching it just like a drama, so started becoming Islamic. it's over. As long as you don't pay much attention to all these suffering. that a man who was so great and so So this is also a very wrong thing what is so great about it? much full of spirituality was not Now you have seen yesterday a accepted and somebody who killed beautiful drama about Mohammed- him is now accepted. It can happen in Saheb. I always used to think there anything. But the worst, it has was such pain about him that how happened is in the Islamic world, people have misunderstood and have which is very dangerous and that, you gone astray. Why they are doing all see, that in the name of God how many wrong things now? I am happy that at bad things they are doing. least you people have realised his greatness and have understood and the fate of Mohammed-Saheb, it has made such a beautiful drama out of it. happened. It's not the fate of reality So try to understand that it is not I don't know how far we can it has happened, but it's an eye-opener propagate this, but it's a fact that for all of us to see that the truth is Mohammed-Saheb himself was always challenged by untruth and we finished. Then also his daughter. should stand by the truth whatever may grand daughter, children were happen and a day will come when finished. His son-in-law was finished people realise that this was wrong and after that, by finishing them, they thing they were all the time following started another horrible thing called and have been doing all kinds of nonsensical things. Sunnis. All this will work out Im sure Now the suna religion is not at all near the truth. It's some sort of a very soon. If My desire is that very aggressive and a very cruel powerful, I'm sure that they will religion and that started spreading realise that to be kind, to be nice, to everywhere, but the real Islam be compassionate is the best way to religion of Mohammed-Saheb was not feel happy, nothing more that that. there. Those people who killed him, May God Bless You.

 Guru Purnima July 24, 2002 News from Cabella It started as a part of a French seminar in the hangar at Cabella. Our brothers and sisters from France wanted to do puja and then go to the Castle and offer a music programme to the Adi Shakti. When Mother received this request she said that they had chosen the day of Guru Purnima and if there were to be a puja, it would be better if She were present! At about 5 p.m. this news came from the Castle, and it spread like wildfire. Telephone calls and SMS messages flew around Italy. Yogis leapt into cars and set off. The people who were in the hangar still, after Guru Puja, just three days before, couldn't believe their luck! The French yogis calmly prepared for the puja. At eight p.m. there were nearly three hundred people in the hangar, including Daglio Camp, and then Shri Mataji arrived. It was so incredible for many of us who had never been so close to Mother before during puja. She spoke about this being the real day of the Guru (It was a full moon) but that for the convenience of the yogis we had performed puja at the weekend. Also she spoke about fanaticism in religion and how we had to spread Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. She mentioned the death of Kabira and the miracle of the two kinds of flowers, then She said there is no place for cruelty amongst us. She blessed us saying that She was giving those present a boon of being able to spread Sahaja Yoga. Shri Mataji spoke of several other subjects. Luckily a yogi had the foresight to bring a video camera, and then She invited the children onto the stage to wash her feet. At this point every child in the hangar converged on the stage, there seemed to be even more than during Guru Puja! As there was no age limit specified there were some rather grown up children on the stage

 17 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January - February 2003 and it was beautiful to see the joy on the faces of teenagers who probably had thought they would never have had such an opportunity again. After this some presents were given, alongwith flowers from various collectives, and then the French Yogis asked permission to start their concert. Already there was such a lovely family atmosphere in the hangar, and incredibly strong vibrations, but when the yuva shakti started singing we felt like we were being lifted into another dimension! This was followed by two beautiful kawalis that had everyone dancing. The singing was of an extraordinarily high quality and was followed by flute music and a violin raga, both of which were absolutely wonderful. At midnight Shri Mataji left us after nearly four truly unforgettable hours. The French finished a perfect evening by making a delicious meal for all their brothers and sisters. Many, many heartfelt thanks to them, and thank you, Shri Mataji, for so graciously consenting to this magical occasion. With Love From Italy

 GURU PURNIMA TALK Cabella Ligure, 24/07/2002 The Purnima is the day when the moon is full. I knew this, but for Sahaja Yogis we have to arrange Friday, Saturday, Sunday. Whenever either it is on the date or not, we have to arrange it in that case. This time, it was, I think, two days before. So it doesn't matter, after all, moon is there for us and we are for moon, so it can't be something that would have very wrong in it. I have already told you such a lot about the Guru Principle. And the Guru Principle, we have seen people who came on this Earth, they were all mostly born realised, actually, and they never gave Realisation to anyone. It is a very big difference. They were all born as realised souls and they became Sufis. And they are called by different names, but they were not given Self

 January - February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 19 Realisation. They had it and because of their Self Realisation, as they had, they have so much of knowledge and that is what they try to impart to people. They knew all about chakras. Everything they knew. Somehow, must be in their past life achievements that they knew it. Perhaps some of them were disciples of other very great people. I don't know how they had full ideas about what Self Realisation is and what do we achieve after Self Realisation. Now the only person, I think, Mohammed-Saheb is the one who has talked about miraj - it is the ascent through our kundalini. Of course, in India they did talk about it, but in any other country they didn't say it so clearly that there is something called miraj. And not only that, He talked of miraj, but also he talked of the resurrection when your hands will speak. Two things He said-first that your hands will speak when you will have your Realisation. It's a very great thing to say because that is how you can ascertain and you can be sure that you got your Realisation. That's the sign He gave. And the second thing He talked about miraj and the white horse He said was nothing but the kundalini. He didn't use the word kundalini, but He said it's a white horse. So He is the one who knew what should happen to the people when they got their Self Realisation. That's the great revelation to all of you and of such a help to Sahaja Yoga. You are all realised souls because you can feel the vibrations, one thing, and, secondly, how you have become, He explained it very clearly. We have so many saints in India, so many of them, one better than the other, and whatever they talked, whatever they said, is so remarkable, is so remarkable. But actually, human beings, I think, are very dumb, that they never realised that we have so many saints here. Even in Turkey, we had Sufis, where it's a Sunni religion, there too. We had so many Sufis all over the world. We had realised souls. They were not incarnations, but they were born realised souls. So you see, their explanation and everything is very good because they were human beings and whatever they said was very much good for human

 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 20 January - February beings to understand. Because an incarnation said something, it is something from the beyond and this new, I should say, advance of the people, who were really human beings and had become realised souls and how they have talked about the various things, is very remarkable. Firstly most of them were poets and this-we had Kabir in India. We don't know how he was born, where he was from, who were his parents. It's absolutely not known, despite that you can only make out from their poetry that he was the great, great Sahaja Yogi and how he has described things- very interesting! He brought forth so many fundamental truths in his poetry and he talked about it. He didn't belong to any religion, as such. When he died there was a fight between Hindus and Muslims, "What should we do with his body?" And they say when they had lifted the sheet, which was covering his body, they found flowers, two types of flowers, one for Hindus and one for Muslims. So that's how he has solved the problems of this stupid fight people were having. In Sahaja Yoga we are not belonging to any such stupid religion. We belong to one religion, that is Vishwa Nirmala Dharma and all the stupidity of all these religions we should really throw away because what you just see now today everywhere, every religious group is fighting each other, beating each other, finishing each other. It is not the way a religious person should be like, but they are killing each other! I mean, all kinds of horrible things they are doing, unbelievable how they can do that-such cruelty? And first thing for a yogi or for a saint is that cruelty is absolutely not there. They will sacrifice their lives. They will do anything, but they will not be cruel to any other person. Now, those who, in the name of God and in the religion, are cruel are actually not at all, by any chance, religious people. So this is what the perversion of religion is. We all should understand, if we belong to Sahaja Yoga then for us kindness, sweetness, compassion and love are the main qualities that we should have and if you don't have that, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. So we are a different clan, I should say, different personalities, who have vibrations. But as I said that now you must spread it because I have

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January-February 2003 21 come on this Earth just for people to get their emancipation, get their Realisation and unless and until all the people who believe in their emancipation get it, I won't be happy. There are many people who do believe, but not yet got their Realisation, so you have to work and you will be amazed, you will find people who are very anxious to get their Realisation. It will work out on this Guru Purnima day. It is a very auspicious day. I bless you with a special power that you can give Realisation to others. Don't get involved in your own problems. That's not important. That will all be solved. Mostly, what I get letters about is their own personal problems or some sort of other problems. What you should do is to see what is your problem within you, what is happening within you, why we are having a problem within, what is our duty, why we have got our Self Realisation, why we have got this wealth of spirituality and what should we do with it. I tell you, really think about it every day, even for half an hour and you will realise that you are very well equipped people. Saints have done so much. They have written so many things, they have fought the people. They did everything. You don't have to do anything like that, but one thing is that you must spread Sahaja Yoga. Even now Sahaja Yoga is not so much accepted everywhere. People don't know about it. It's surprising, while all kinds of horrible gurus are very well known. So we have to do it by our behaviour, by our understanding, by our whole life. People should say that these are something rare people and different people. I am happy, today is another day of Guru Purnima, which is a very auspicious day and to be regarded as a very big blessing for you because this gives you-I mean, this is a certificate, that you all are capable of being gurus. You have to become that. Becoming is important in Sahaja Yoga. Becoming is important. All other things are really of no use. You have to become. Specially ladies are shy. I think. They can do a lot and they should work it out. They are shy for nothing at all. What is the need to be shy? They

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January -February 2003 22 are very shy, ladies, and they just don't get into the whole working of Sahaja Yoga. You should. If the ladies start talking about it, I think it will work much faster. I bless you all to do this work, which was left half done by the saints. It's your duty to complete it. May God Bless You.

 Mountain I see a mountain from my window Standing like an ancient sage Desireless, full of love. So many trees and so màny flowers They plunder the mountain all the time. It's attention is not disturbed And when the rain pours like Many pitchers of elouds bursting And it fills the mountain with greenery. The storms may come soarmg. Filling the lake with compassion . And the rivers flow running down Towards the calling sea. The sun will create clouds and Wind carries on its feathery wings The rain on to the mountain. This is the eternal play The mountain sees Without desires. Mataji Skri Nirmala Devi

 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 18, August, 2002, Canajoharie USA Today we are going to worship Shri Krishna as a very great personality and you know why He came on this Earth, to establish this, is the new form of-not Virata, not Virata, but a form by which this country became so prosperous and, by His Advent only, He created a beautiful mentality among the people, how to develop this country with dharma. And you had very great leaders, who followed Him and who worshipped Him in a way and created a new world of this America, But, unfortunately, as the time passed on, His form vanished from the minds of the people. The reason was Krishna was represented here by very, very wrong type of people, who had no idea about Shri Krishna, that He was a great master of wealth, that he knew how to use the wealth and how to create the wealth with dharma, not with adharma. They all forgot about it completely, and gradually started using manoeuvring powers, all kinds of-all kinds of adharmic things- cheating, grabbing money, spending their money in absolutely useless things. He's Kubera. He doesn't need any money, of course. He achieves money and not only that – He lived in money. They said that He created a golden house for Him, absolutely made with gold in Dwarika, but it's submerged in the water, in the sea and nobody believed that it is true. But now they have found out this under the waters, in very deep waters. So all their conjecture about Him was wrong, all false, that He was definitely a man who made lots of money by dharma. Also was a son of a king and He built this Dwarika out of gold. It is still there and people have fo it, but under the sea. Thousands of years have passed, but still exists. Only nd because perhaps it belongs to Shri Krishna, it is still existing. That's what it

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January - February 2003 25 Sahaja Yogi has his own spirit to enjoy. More than anything else, he doesn't want to possess anything. It's a headache to possess things also. is, because He was the one who was for satya, for truth. He was for truth and He worked out everything on the principle of truth. Whatever was not truth, He tried to finish it off. Whatever was destructive, He tried to remove that and He established Himself through truth only. He's the one who represents the truth, absolute truth and how the truth can prevail in everything. I'm just the opposite of Him because I don't understand money at all, but He's looking after that part in My life. I'm so hopelessly bad. I don't understand banking. I don't understand money. I can't even count money. Now what can you say to that? But He's there to look after me and I never have a dearth of money, never a dearth of any wealth. It's all full of it. Also it comes through your sense of satisfaction. If you have that sense of satisfaction, you don't look for money. What happened in your country that some people got money. If you got little money, then you get the taste of money. They're not satisfied people, so, like mad, they went on spending on nonsensical things. It is something very much human. After human evolution, after you have reached a certain state of enlightenment, then all these demeaning things like greed all disappear from your character. You don't have that greed in you any more and you become extremely a satisfied person. To you, money is there, all right, but it's not so important. It is just that

 26 January-February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 you think you don't need it and you get it-all done by Shri Krishna all over. Can you imagine? He's doing all this looking after you and helping you with money. It started .. Sahaja Yoga without a single penny. I never had any problem. So one thing, as Kubera, He's the supplier of wealth. He looks after people who don't have money. He gives money to people who stand by truth, who enjoy the life of truth. It is His work that people enjoy wealth, otherwise they don't. They have this much. They want to have more. That means they don't enjoy the wealth. They have a little, they want to get much more. Why? Because they are not enjoying whatever they have. But after Self Realisation, you will see that you enjoy whatever you have. You enjoy it full, absolutely and you do not hanker after something that is not there. Doesn't matter if you don't have. Many a times, people have asked Me, 'Mother, why not we have the puja of Krishna as Kubera?" I said, 'All right.' Just now, everybody's trying to become Kubera., Let them learn a lesson. And then we'll have the puja of Kubera and that's why today, I've agreed to have this puja. Because now you have seen what happens if you have greed. You go on committing all kinds of sins, all kinds of wrong things, which can destroy your country. Such a rich country has now become a poor country. Where is that money gone? They're very clever. Somebody told Me today, it's money is with the insurance. "My God," I said, 'the law is such that you can't get out that money.' Secondly they said that it is in offshore and all that. I said, 'But see now, they were never afraid that they would be caught and they continued for so many years, but I'm sure one day they'll be all exposed by Kubera Himself. So, today, by worshipping Kubera, what we are doing we are going to establish the truth of money. What lies behind the money? What is the point of having money? This country had money. As a result, so many good people came here to work and you had so many complementary things. You had lots of people who complemented because, I think, in certain things Americans were a little less -not in intelligence, but in brilliance, I think they were a

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 27 January Febuary 2003 little bit lacking, so they got very brilliant people from abroad. And also they were very focused people, so they worked it out very well. Also they respected people who came with brains. So this is what happens when you forget that truth is the main point. If you don't have the truth, no use having money, because what you did was to go around with this thing, that thing, I mean all kinds of things to just get money. The other day I was travelling through Las Vegas, last week and when we stopped at that airport, so many people walked into the aeroplane and they all were looking like somebody's dead in their family, What has happened?" First I couldn't understand. Then they said, Mother, they have lost all their money." So when they have money, they are jumping. Next moment they are crying because they have lost the money. What's the use of such a money, which is so temporary, which is so useless, But that is human nature to run after maya and this is the quality of money that he gives you maya-maya like this, that they get a little money somehow. With that little money, they buy something, then they think money is very important. You can buy lots of things. You can buy cars. You can buy aeroplanes, this, that. So this is where maya plays on you and you start running after that mad money, which makes you mad. It's nice that at this juncture they have discovered the falsehood of this maya money and I am so happy that they were all handcuffed and all their power of money was finished. So this Kubera is working out all these tricks. Krishna is a very tricky, extremely tricky personality. He puts the tricks, every action after every action. Now money matters, He first befools you, that you run after it and then you just discover that it was stupidity. We have a story in our country called Sheikhchilly. He got little money and he got into the grab of this maya. So he thought I can do very well, so he started dreamning as to what he could do. So he went and bought lots of eggs and he said, 'Now these eggs will have little little chicks, which will grow, which I'll sell and I'll have so much money. It was like that he was talking.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January - February 28 2003 And while thinking about it in his mind, went off to sleep and then in his sleep he fell on the eggs and all the eggs broke. So the maya was over. This should happen early, but if it doesn't happen, then you end up in the jail or something like that. Sahaja Yoga is one thing which gives you a complete vision, complete vision of the destruction that can follow this maya business. It is something such an insight that you don't have to do anything with it. I am different. I told you I don't understand it at all, but even if you understand the value of money, even if you understand that money can bring lots of things to you, despite that, you don't look at it, just turn your face. That is the sign of a real Sahaja Yogi. To him it doesn't matter, temperamentally. It's not that he does something for that or tells 'that's mine.' Temperamentally, he doesn't care for money just because he is above it. The one who is above money is a real Sahaja Yogi. The one who is engulfed in the nonsense and the maya of money is not a Sahaja Yogi. Of course, I have seen most of the Sahaja Yogis are extremely have honest, especially in the West. But in India there's a disease. As you here some viruses, we have certain viruses in India also, so they still go on running after money. To them money's important. But in the evolutionary process, if you reach a certain stage where you rise above your Nabhi Chakra, then money's not so important. It's not so important. To Me, I find I cannot buy things unnecessarily. Of course, I mean, there were so many unnecessary things they are giving me, give presents this, that. But Myself, you will be amazed, I'm so nervous or, I should say, hesitant or whatever you want to call it, absolutely absent from the spot where they are doing any business, any purchasing. All this is you have to fix it. That is the point. In the same way, Sahaja Yogis have to fix their mind to their spirit and enjoy the powers in your spirit, your own. That enjoyment, once you get it, you don't fall to your greed. This is something very, very simple, but sometimes you don't do it. You get

 Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 29 January February 2003 enamoured by something, maybe a car, maybe aeroplanes. I don't know what whatever it is. It's a headache to have too many cars, isn't it. But people have. They think, by that, people are impressed and they think no end of themselves or not. Nothing. If they are impressed, what is the use to us? What do you get out of it? Sahaja Yogi has his own spirit to enjoy. More than anything else, he doesn't want to possess anything. It's headache to possess things also. The other side of it is a Mahalakshmi. If that principle is within you, Mahalakshmi principle, you'll never have a problem of money. On the contrary, you will know how to stop it. So far, as I am concerned, I get fed up of My Mahalakshmi principle because I don't know from where it works out, how it works out, without any effort! But temperamentally, I have no interest at all- temperamentally. But it is there-I don't know what is the cause of this effect. Now supposing I buy some small thing, just like that, it will sell atleast ten times more. It will be of value at least ten times more, I don't know how! It's very surprising. Automatically, I'll buy something very small and I find it's very expensive. How it works, that must be miracles of Mahalakshmi, I think. So what I have to tell you is this- that you should not worry about your financial situations at all. Do not go on calculating. Do not see how much money you have in the bank, what you have to do with your money, where you should invest. I have seen people going mad, planning the whole thing. There's no need to do that once you are a Sahaja Yogi. It all works automatically. The greed is within you, just like any other disease. As you have diseases, greed is also there. As your diseases can get cured with Sahaja Yoga, your diseases - as much as your greed is -it vanishes. Don't know what a greed is. The only way to counter-balance is to become extremely generous. If you are extremely generous, greed will run away. That may be another way of doing it. Supposing you get something in your house and you think it is to much, how to get rid of it, but just to think it's too much, you should give it to

 30 January- February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 someone. You just start thinking whom can you and immediately you'll remember, 'Oh, that person doesn't have this. Let me give him this.' And if you give him, he will be so thankful, so thankful and he'll say all kinds of nice things to you, which normally nobody would say to you, nobody. And it's surprising how joy-giving it is, how people like your generosity. So you have to be generous, just generous, not with yourself, but with others. As much as possible, be generous. Generosity is very love-giving, one of the expressions of your love. Many a times it has happened with Me that I saw somebody needed something and kept it in My mind and I bought that thing and gave it to that person and the amount of love that person gave Me was thousand times more than what I would have got joy out of buying it, buying that thing. It was so insipid for Me, but for him it was not. He told so many people, 'Mother gave me this. Mother gave me.' I was surprised. Then they asked me, 'Mother, how did you give him?" I said, 'Just out of love.' Many people took to Sahaja Yoga, thinking what a generosity is, so to be generous is the best way to live in this world. After all, it's a headache to have too many things. Better to get rid of them, but out of love. If you do that, you'll know how much they will be appreciative of you. Another thing is to get rid of greed, you should try to do some sort of a collective social work. Supposing you go to a place where lots of poor people are there, I tell you, your greed will just drop. Be amazed how these people are living, in what conditions! Why do I care for all this, wealth and everything? That will be just shocking. Sometimes, you see, you see people, in India also, in a very bad condition. Once I went to Calcutta and by chance, I happened to be in places where people were living in a very great poverty, even the children, and you'll be amazed, for days together I wouldn't eat My food. I was crying and not eating My food. I just didn't know what to do because I felt, 'What is this? Why these people are so?' And I was so helpless, so I was crying, that one day I should try to do something for them. It is really remarkable at a very young age of Mine, I started a leper home, I started an infirmary, refugee home, all kinds of things and I never even thought that whatever money I have, if I give to these people, I may have

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January - February 2003 31 to give up somethings. I also sold some of My things because it is so pleasure- giving, I tell you, so pleasure-giving, so joy-giving to be generous. It is so paying in every way that you should be generous. That is the quality of Kubera. He's an extremely generous personality and that's what personality you should be. I've seen that Sahaja Yogis are very generous. So far, nobody has told me that somebody is a miserly fellow- so far, so far. But I am sure one day will come when we'll have people of very high quality. In Sahaja Yoga, we don't say, like other cults say, that you give up your clothes, you give up your family, you stay in a forest or in a hut or anything nothing of the kind. Don't give up anything. You have to give up from your heart. Just it should happen in your personality. Don't have to give up. And if you have that well built in spirituality, you'll not even think of grabbing someone. On the contrary, you will like to give up everything. My father was even worse than Me, I should say. He always used to leave the house open, all doors open. He said no thief will come if you keep the doors open. So one day a thief came and he took away his gramophone. In the old times, like these big horn ones, he took away. The next day My father was sitting very sad. So My mother asked, 'Why are you sad? Because of the gramophone?" 'No, I'm only sad because it seems a connoisseur of music has taken the gramophone, but no records.' So My mother said, 'All right, what should we do? Should we advertise in the newspaper that you take away the records?" I mean such a beauty that even after so many years, I am telling you and you are enjoying. What a beautiful character it was of generosity, but if you force it through religion, through any such ideas that you give up that - you don't have to give up. You give up from within. If you are not attached to it, you have given up. That should be there and if you all enjoy your generosity and charity - nothing like it. I have known people who are very rich and all that, but they lack generosity. That is another quality of Kubera. Apart from that, he perhaps understands banking, perhaps. That time, there were no banks, but I think must be because the way he manages banks,

 32 January - February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 you know, it seems to Me that he's sitting on top of them and that's why still in the banks there is no problem. I don't know, but he is a very clever person, very intelligent, very alert, which is important if you have to deal with money. Though He was absolutely detached from money, and just see His life, what He did. He lived a childhood with His guru and He used to take, what do you call, the cows and herds outside in the jungles. That is how He lived in His childhood and later on He was playing with the boys who were looking after the cows in a very, I mean, ordinary family. He never hankered after money. He used to steal ... He used to steal the butter because these ladies used to sell that (butter) to Kansa's military people. So He used to eat that, so that these ladies should not give it to them. Just imagine such a little boy like Him. So actually how He was teaching them a lesson, those ladies were greedy, wanted to give that to these horrible soldiers and He would eat all that butter Himself. In everything that He did, what you see is extreme generosity, extreme generosity. With all His intelligence, He was so good and He killed His own uncle, I should say. For Him, it was not important.... so-called relations were not important. What you see in our India especially, that relations are very important. The father is a thief. His son is thief, his grandson is a thief, all of them are thieves. Can you imagine? I haven't seen in a family, if there's one person who is a thief, any one (of ) his progeny are honest. It's a very funny thing, but such greed crawls into their minds, that they don't think it is important. They just think that stealing is the only way one can live, though in India there are people who are extremely honest. I've seen our servants. They never steal nothing, never. I don't know, they have no reasoning for it. It's a matter of fact. They never steal anything very surprising. Why? Why don't they steal? They're happy with their lives. They don't want to change it. They don't want to have this horrible thing that can put them in jail. But they don't know. They don't even think about it. They just don't do it. Why? Because they have a sense of shame. In the poorer people, sense of shame is very, very developed. In that society, they have a great respect for people who are honest and they're all honest.

 33 January-February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 &2 One of them may be not, but they have no respect for such a person because they think self-respect is the biggest thing. Can you imagine these poor people? They have food once a day, but to them their self respect is above everything. So the third solution for this kind of a nonsensical greed is your self-respect. Why should you steal? Why should you have anything that is stolen or why should you have anything that belongs to another person? If you have that self-respect within you, you won't touch anything that is not yours. When the servants can do that, why not people who are not that badly off. It is the temperament of a higher level, I think, which they develop, where their self-respect is much more important than all kinds of other things that may satisfy their greed. One thing about greed is (that) it is never satisfied. It is never satisfied. I've seen people who were very rich once upon a time became very, very poor. So, to them, life has become hell. They can't live without their greed, I should say, pomp and show. But they don't understand that it was false. They just go on feeling extremely downtrodden when they lose their money. Then there are people who want to have money. They'll do anything to get money. It's a very funny thing, but also power is the same as that. If you have your own powers, you don't hanker after these powers. But they want to have power because they want to have money and they get power with money. Can you imagine? Where are human beings? At what level? At what level of evolution they are? They are going round and round the circle of this money. This is Nabhi Chakra, which has to improve, which gives you satisfaction. If your Nabhi Chakra is satisfied, you have achieved the state of Kubera. That's very important to see that your Nabhi should be satisfied. There're so many other kinds of things we have, but now I think the worst is this greed and this, if it is managed somehow or other, brought to its own level, then I think world will be improved very much. May God Bless You.

 WHAT IS A SAHAJA YOGI Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi 17-05-1980 It is when you think of becoming then the preparation is done to become something and on the whole when you know that it is your ego and super ego which are loading you up, you have to scan them out with vibratory awareness. Now there are two types of attention. First is the constant attention that is the routine of a Sahaja Yogi and the second one is the emergency attention. I have been seeing that all the Sahaja Yogis must start writing their diaries- one with everyday's experiences. If you know that you have to write a diary,

 January - February 2003 35 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 you will keep your mind alert, and I? Then any special path or any another one wherever you get any special movement in the centre or left special idea of the past or of the future or right also should be mentioned, so also to jot it down. So like that you that you keep a watch on your should have two diaries. For your It's a very good thing to maintain a mind. constant attention you have to fix up diary. your mind on certain facts. The first keep one, as I said, is that if you keep a progressively how your ideas are diary then you will know that you changed? How new priorities are Also will you have to remember what important settling down? How you give more things have happened. So, your importance to real things and very attention will be alert and you will little to unreal things. I think this is a be looking out for such points where very-very practical side of human what is the thing you see. And you will beings that one should have a diary be amazed if you make your attention Same diaries after some time will alert, what new things come to you. become historical things and people Very brilliant ideas and the miracles would like to see what you all have of life and the miracles of god's written, not to be hypocritical about beauty and his auspiciousness, his it or deceptive about it but quite greatness, his kindness, his blessings. truthful and understanding you should How to work out if you start writing jot down few lines just before everyday even two lines about it sleeping. which will make your mind constantly Now, we have to see that we have problems for super ego and ego. involved within. That's a human style of doing things. Now, superego is the left side, is Also you can mention in the darkness, tamoguna and our past. diary, what happened with you? Could Those who have left side problems you do your meditation? Did you get should think of the future to give them your time for meditation or not. A balance. If they think of the future, for. little bit as if you are appearing for example, a person who is lethargic some sort of a examination or should take to working. Put your mind something prepare a little note like that. Did I get up in the morning? Did into working for the future planning. What to do, Where to go, How to do?

 January - February 36 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 That will keep you away from the drag will you get up? Even puja is a good of the left side and gradually then you idea, home is a good idea. Do can balance yourself also. Now, the something like that so that you have right side of a person when it is to do something what you call the Kriya, is the action, get into the action. Some sort of an action you go into in Sahaja Yoga as well as in your activated very much, he has to balance it not with the left side but with the centre, that is, a person who is very hard-working must develop a witness daily life, you will be able to do change that mood and come to the right state. You try to do a work, any work, side and then your movement should be towards the satvaguna, is to watch everything. Now, at the satvaguna indulge into work in thoughtless awareness, as a witness. Whatever work you are doing, you just say that I am not doing it. This you can do it point, when you are in the centre, you become have to see, how much you are realisation, after thoughtlessly aware and start doing misidentified. Say, supposing you are your work. So, the compensation of at the first stage of left side then you the left side is done by movement to will just do day dreaming. Oh! this the right and of the right side person is so much identified, that one movement to the centre. Left side is is so much identified as if you are the the Tamogeuna', right side is the best. It is just the human nature, you see. Oh that person is like that, he is 'Rajoguna' and the centre is the like that, this is very bad in the society, 'Satvaguna'. But, still these are three that is going bad in the society. It's better, then we can also go to this limit gunas. That's not the state which you have to achieve. About this I will tell you tomorrow more, how to go further to that guru is very bad and that as is with it. After scanning out which side another madcap, like that you see all is weak, you should plan out your is going on. How far it is affecting you? How far you are improving by that? That is not. It is just getting, style of life. For example if you are extremely thinking, analysing. It is a lazy style, lethargic, you cannot get up in the morning, you feel very sleepy in the night, you do not feel alert, then start sitting down and just analysing, it's a lazy style! The second thing could be when planning as to what will you do? How

 37 January - February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1& 2 you come to the second side of it is you should take, to jump on to the Kriya. Then what happens when Satvaguna. On Satvaguna you start accepting it. You become extremely mild. You become a mild personality. At that time you do not discuss as to, you start doing it, then at least your attention is on what you are doing. It's not allowed to drift into something Oh I don't like it. This was wrong this and which goes into any nonsense and can, I mean, then you don't know from where the funny thoughts are coming. So, you start doing something, you should not have been. All these things do not come to you in Satvaguna. You start seeing it. That time you see. Alright doesn't matter, you understand On the contrary, you feel hurt, if you are a Satoguni that by any suggestion you have suggested your being? Can you get that point? You feel ashamed of your ego, I mean to say, if you are a Satoguni. For example even to say that this is my car, you will feel shy. That's a Satoguni or even to say why did you spoil my carpet. In India can go and plant some trees or you can go and plant some flowers or if you want you can do some cooking you can do some work. Take to work. That will help you, any work but while doing the work the problem will be, you'll develop ego. That's why when you are developing the ego you have to tell yourself you are not doing mister, this you are not doing. you are not doing. If you go on nobody will say. I can tell you, this is suggesting to your self then ego will regarded bad manners, absolute bad not come up and many things you see which normally trouble you and house and a carpet is spoiled, they trouble others – like you have will say let it be, does not matter. cleaned the room, alright. Then somebody comes and spoils this, you you burnt'? They will never say that get angry with that person. Naturally you have burnt my carpet, you have because you think you had done it. done anything to my, it is regarded bad First of all you don't clean the room. manners. Like here you see somebody If you clean the room then you be is sleeping and some body makes the prepared, it will be dirty, otherwise noise. The person, who is sleeping why should you clean? Now, if it is will never say that you are making dirty, well and good, if it is not dirty, noise and I had to get up. He will just well and good. This type of an attitude get up and ask 'do you need anything?" manners. If anybody comes to your Even if it is burnt, they will say, tare

 38 January - February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 even if you do something, any work you do or anything you are doing, you That's difficult for people here to understand because ego is just sitting on them. But is bad manners there, but are just doing it because you want to you will find when you will go to do it. That is how you come on to India. You will find these are bad Satoguna. But normally it doesn't happen. It happens the other way manners, to say that. How to say oh I feel very comfortable, I mean to say round. For example a person is, say, *I feel comfortable' is bad manners, I doing something by any chance he feels hurt or he thinks that whatever mean they never say. I like it, so what. he has done is no good, people don't All these words are not to be said. If you are a Satoguni, then you just don't appreciate or may be he might think say. You say, do you like it? Is it that, oh it's not upto the point or whatever it is. Then the reaction for comfortable? Would you like to have him is not that he does not try to rise it? The whole attention goes from your side. Do you understand that? That is the style one has to develop. Tamoguna. He says, all right I will not to Satoguna but he goes back to Then you are a Satoguni. Otherwise do it, I will sleep over it, let them do you are still on ego trip. You see it, why should I do it. So the training that you have to have through your whatever you may feel, I don't like that, I, who are you? First of all ask Rajoguna goes a waste. It's just the question who are you? If God training period that you are with I don't like, I can understand, Rajoguna. You are doing something. Now, in the training period you have says, but for you to say, I don't like it, after to learn only how to come in the all, how did you come on this earth? How did you get the human birth? centre? For example now water is How did you get all these things? required for you to shave. If there is Now, think like that. Who am I? I am no water you cannot shave, alright? In the same way Rajoguna is required nothing. for you, to come to Satoguna. If you Anybody who thinks I am do not do any work, you cannot come something, he should know that he is nothing, makes no difference to God to Satoguna. So you are just working just to train yourself to be a witness. weather he exists or does not exist. Now, do you follow that point? You So, this point if you understand that are not doing it because you like a

 January February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 39 particular thing, you are used to a pleasure only you will get when you particular thing, because you want to be deep. This is not the way it is. You it's the training period. You are better are just doing it to learn how to be trained than the other one was, You patient, to practice your patience, to are at a higher class than the other one. see how much patient you are? Once So we have to be at a higher class. you start doing it you will be amazed For that this is just a training on and that you will never feel the burden of that's how we can really put our the work, but it never happens. Most preparation into practice into all of the people, if they find their work details to see how we work out our will do it with the understanding that is not effective they will go back to ego and superego. Today, in the Tamoguna. There are many attitudes. morning I have told you that your say, somebody is working. Then he intellect must imbibe this within thinks, why should I do all the work, itself, alright. And now I am telling others are not doing? He will go back you that your action. Action that you to their state. But those who are not do must be everytime branded by you working will not think that this person as just your training, any action you is working, let me also work. It's other do. Supposing you have to drive for way round, you see. This can be an miles together, you are trying your attitude of some people that if this patience. It is you who could do person is working, let him work. This is even a meaner style. Avoid just that, you go to a restaurant and somebody everything. Supposing you have to drop down from a helicopter or if they have takes out the purse, others start to drop from the parachute, you go on looking this side. It's very mean. doing it again and again, you practice it, you drop many a times. You break your legs, you break your hands, you do this, you do that, till you become a master. Do you understand my point? Driving same way. Till you become a master, you go on. In the same way Everybody should come forward and once you have paid you have paid its finished. Then you just don't start counting why did I pay? One should try. Any work has to be done, go forward with it. Do it with your heart. Don't worry if others are not doing you are doing this just to master your it. Just do it for its pleasure and the ego. Isn't it?

 40 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January-February 2003 To know how these clouds are not alright, then Mataji must come up coming into us and that how we go and say, what do you mean by that? into our complete analysis. How these clouds are coming to us, you find Why should you say like that? What's wrong? about our different chakras. What are When you say that to yourself, the chakras we are catching? Here which is outside, then the attention comes the other constant attention starts moving towards your self which is Mataji and you start becoming that and you start feeling through your towards our chakras. Are our vibrations alright or not. Are we getting our vibrations? If not, what chakra am I catching, what must be the heart. So your Atma is to be satisfied by your Atma. There is nothing in between. It is you only in this dual cateh? I must raise my Kundalini, see for myself where is the catch. Do I do my meditation or not? If I do it, One is ingorance and the other is personality, has to satisfy yourself. am I doing it just dosingly or am I really in it? Am I really feeling it or knowledge. Now try to identify yourself with that Mataji call it or any not? Am I alert or not? All this is to be asiduously, sincerely, absolutely, xyz, whatever you call it, Atma. Just a drama, say. You just think that you are the Self-Spirit. So how will you address yourself? Let's see. Supposing you have to sit in my seat, truthfully worked out. Because, it is a process between yourself- Atamanyeva Atmanajayte. See it is so funny relationship that it is the Atman take it like that, and then you are is satisfied with Atma. You have sitting in front of me also, alright? So you are sitting here and sitting there. to be satisfied with yourself. There is nobody, Mataji is not concerned, Take a position like that, now you put nobody is concerned. It is you who is up yourself in the drama and you start concerned with yourself. For addressing yourself. "So Bala, how I example, you ask somebody. Says, I am like this Mother. Now think that are you?' And Bala says 'better!' If you are identified now with you are Mother – one personality. Another is say Mr. Don or Kingslay Mataji, gradually Bala will diminish, two alright? But if you are still identified You or someone. are personalities. So when you are telling with Bala, he will grow on this illusion. yourself in front of Mataji that I am

 41 January-February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 You have to try to address For example, if you have a Prime yourself as if you are Mataji. It's a Minister and a Deputy Prime Minister drama. You sit before the mirror. In and a Minister three persons, airight? Now, if the Prime Minister is your Self and the Minister has to the mirror you see this outside of yours and here you are sitting, whatever you are, Mr. Don, for example. become the Prime Minister. So, he has to first become Deputy Prime Minister. Now Mr. Don is addressing the other Don there. Let him take up a role that I am the spirit. He'll say, I am After becoming Deputy Prime Minister he has to become Prime Minister. First Deputy Prime Minister the spirit and I am eternal. I am this. Nobody can destroy me. I am above and then the Prime Minister. But everything. That thing will go down. Supposing this fellow starts to jump over this, this will come up and hit I am a realised soul. I know what him and say, I am the one. And this spirit is. What are you talking? It will go down. This is how you start one is Ego. moving. That is only possible when first you become a Satoguni. If you are You understand the point. So you cannot surpass it. You have to merge not a Satoguni, with ego-I am this, this into this and then this into this. and you become a guru and sStart The movement has to be like that but minting money. if you try to just become this, actually First the ego is to be brought you will become this, not this. Because you cannot become this. You down, if there is still ego then without becoming Atma you become an ego. understand my point. So, even when So, first this journey should be doing this if you try sitting before brought in to the centre of Satoguna. mirror and telling yourself that you are That is why I say that when you are the spirit, who are the part of Virata, talking or doing anything, you must that you are the ocean because your know that it is your spirit which is drop has fallen into the ocean, then doing it. That's how you put your you must know that your drop has spirit in charge or say at the pedestal- fallen into the ocean. That's how first stage. Then when the spirit is you've become an ocean. If that stage there then from this stage to that stage, is missing then your saying that you are an ocean is absolutely bombastic. then you say that now I am the spirit.

 January - February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 42 And that's why one has to be very This perhaps I'll never catch also, to be very frank. But if I want to. know where I am catching I can find out but I don't want to. So, what I say, steady and careful absolutely steady as far as dealing with oneself. Because you know how this intelligence can cheat you. So, be very-very careful and when you are dealing with you, you must know you have to first overcome this ego. The alright I'll tell you where is the catch. At that time one's attitude could be that I must tell otherwise Mataji won't know, you see very funny! The second thing to overcome ego is to change one could be that I know where She your language, style, is to speaking the is catching and I must tell and Mataji also knows but she wants to test me. third person. [It] is a very good way. Like you must say, when you are should be careful. At this point people talking about yourself, this Mataji make mistakes. won't listen to me. This Mataji won't If I ask them where is it catching. do this. You see, so what happens. This Mataji will tell you part of it. I am catching on left heart but very Once you start separating this Mataji mild finished then, you get less away from yourself then that ego marks, you get less marks. You can get Mataji disappears. You understand? whatever it is because at least you're Like you can say, this Bala is like that. honest. Whatever it is. Supposing the fellow is not catching heart but you He won't listen. So whatever real Bala is left within you is alright. are feeling the heart, you will say heart. That's being honest. Then I will That's how you get rid of your ego and by understanding your centre, what tell you, who is catching the heart. But if you are. perhaps, yes Mataji, No Mataji then you get less marks, not very good art. I am not alright, I don't know. that's not a good art. You have you are catching, where you are catching, how you are catching, it would be really easy, for you to get rid of your ego. Now, see what Sahaja to tell who is catching. Then you pay more attention that you have to pass Yogis do. Supposing there are five Sahaja Yogis sitting. I mean you know that I know about everyone, through the test. This is just testing. Why? Because tomorrow you have to everything. I don't have to ask, what give realisation, you have to become is fact? Now, why do I ask? I show the gurus, you have to know all these complete ignorance.

 January-February 2003 43 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 things. So, this is all training period. but if you don't get a taxi it's very I am just training you by asking you but I have seen people even getting difficult, better come to Hertz Green. He said, where? I said, Hertz Green. egoistie. It's surprising sometimes. That also gives ego to people that I saying blue to green, I don't know. I say alright tell me where I am said no it's Herts green. He said what catching, where do I catch? I told did you say. I said Herts green. So he So he said, Herts Blue? How he is correctly, finished. It is just a very couldn't understand. What is the foolish thing that you have said. second one? I said, what is the colour Everyone has to see clearly. So, be a of the leaf. He said, blue. Gregoire was there. I said, now listen to him, simple person like children are. They what is he saying colour of the leaf is blue! So, Gregoire lifted the phone just come. They try, this one, that one, finished. Then they work untired, I'll say. They are not bothered that we and he said, alright you come to Herts should, they must say something or blue. So, he said now, atleast now he something to show off, nothing. won't come Mother, that botheration Whatever they see, they say. But only is gone. It was such a confused personality, thinking between blue grown-ups will say, that may be I am catching, maybe it is his. I don't know. All this is done by grown up people. Because still the sensitivity is alright and green. You are fighting with that. That's what it is. The attention should be there to try to see, if you are but they are not sure of themselves. confused there is confusion, clear it out, by clearing out your chakras. Now, every chakra, let's have a little testing, alright? You are going to answer the question. Children are very sure. They are cock sure of everything. You ask them anything they will tell you, yes this is this, this is this. But you ask anyone what is the colour of this thing. They Now, say Hamsa Chakra is will say maybe green may be red. Like we had one old gentleman, not very catching what should we do? Answer old, as old as myself but he was to the question. come to my house and he telephoned Hamsa Chakras is catching what to me. He said, I want to come to your should we do? house. How should I come? I say this This is Hamsa Chakra, so you place is Oxtead, you can come there,

 44 January February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue1& 2 the left side, left side catching is. have to say. there, then for left side Hamsa what Aum tvameva sakshat, Hamsa should you do? Tell me. Chakra swamini sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devyai It is the Ida Nadi. It comes from Namo-Namah. the left and goes to the right. So, you ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात् श्री हंस चक्र have to say Mahakali or Ida Nadi, lda स्वामिनी साक्षात् श्री आदिशक्ति Nadi Swamini. Now. Say it, just now माताजी श्री निर्मला देवी नमो नमः । you are catching on the left. Aum tvameva sakshat, Ida Nadi So, it is opened up. Now fill it, all of you. swamini sakshat. Shri Adi Shakti Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devyai Namo- Now put your finger like this and Namah. say it. ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात् श्री ईड़ा नाड़ी Say it three times- (Everyone स्वामिनी साक्षात् श्री आदिशक्ति says the mantra) माताजी श्री निर्मला देवी नमो नमः । Now, what happens in this (3times). centre that both the Nadis 'Ha' and *Tha', Ida and Pingla, they come and Now, there is another thing, that meet and they cross over. So, from the supposing your right side is catching right Nadi, right side, this one the left or you have a liver problem then what Nadi flows and from the right side the should we use light, Sun's rays or one which comes from the right side what? See, right side is heat, is Surya flows into left side. These two centres Nadi. So you have problem of Surya meet here, I mean two Nadi's meet Nadi -right side. So, to neutralize here, actually, below the Agya. It's it, you have to use something like below the Agya at Hamsa, you see. [cold]. At that time what you have to And the problems come to you either say? You can take the name of from the right or from the left, most "Chandra'. You will cool down if of you catch on Hamsa, here, because there is heat on the right hand side, of cold or whatever it is. Now I have you should take the name of Chandra. If it is the left side catching then you told you many things by which you have to take the name of Surya', for control your cold. But if it is due to

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January - February 45 2003 example you are possessed then go person then go and sit in the and sit in the Sun. All the bhoots will moonlight. May be you will be little lunatic. (Everyone laughs) run away. They run away from the Sun. But supposing you are egoistical

 ISTANBUL PUBLIC PROGRAM 23rd April, 2002 On the day of the public program on April 23rd, the whole should follow their common sense and auditorium was as full as was last not undergo the French influence, She said that Turkish people which is spread around and labelled year. as culture. There were approximately seven After that, maybe fifty people thousand people – one thousand yogis and maybe six thousand left. Then She said that people should seekers. First, there was a brief not do the things that they don't introduction, then Shri Mataji Spoke. understand. She was referring to Shri Mataji pointed out the parallel specific false practices. Another fifty between Sufism and Sahaja Yoga, as people left. in last year's talk. A surprise was that Shri Mataji invited the audience this time Shri Mataji blamed French to ask Her question before Self people, their eating, drinking of Realisation. alcohol and some of their other habits She answered them with honesty and their influence on some African countries and Turkey. She said that and simplicity. Here are some of them: French playwright Moliere wrote about their stupidity. Question : Mauvlana Jelalettin Rumi the great Islamis Sufis said, "If I reveal the secret, I'll get burned as "Some French people try to influence you, your TVs. Be careful. They do just the opposite of Christ." She also said that we should keep our well as well the humans." Shri Mataji : It's true. That was culture. "The Mother of Christ came the time the people were not aware. to Turkey and I came also because the They crucified Christ, They tortured people are so good here." Mohammed-Sahib. I am not afraid. Let

 January - February The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 2003. them burn Me. I don't care. Then came the Self Realisation Question : All you said about session, a very short one, not even French people acting against world taking off shoes. Shri Mataji said that peace, does it concern the whole of the French people? ten thousand people got their Realisation. The audience celebrated this Shri Mataji : Of course not, rebirth by listening and dancing with there are execptions. the joyful qawwali music of the Allahu song for twenty-five minutes. Question : What about death? Shri Mataji : That we'll discuss The next day all the TV channels broadcast many scenes from the later. You are very young. Don't think of death. Think of the present. So much publie program, all very positively has to be doe in the present. Thinking except one, but these others were of death is trying to escape the enough to spread the message and the vibrations of Shri Mataji. Also one present. TV channel, Star TV, broadcast online Question : Why do people lie? a part of the Self Realisation session. Shri Mataji : Because they don't know the truth and the power of Shri Mataji left Istanbul on Saturday, the 27th. Yogis were a bit truth. sad because She was leaving us and Question : Is yoga attained by also because of this hostile TV the power of the mind? coverage. But surprisingly, one of the customs officers said to a yogini, Shri Mataji : It's beyond the "Don't worry about the TV programs. She is a very spiritual person. We mind. You'll see this when you'll get Realisation. know that." We were surprised and all the lost joy came back again. Question : Where did you get your Realisation? Do you see yourself Another surprise was that a as a prophet? Where is your place police chief, a bit impressed by this near God? same TV program, was at the airport Shri Mataji : Don't worry about trying to create some difficulties, Me. Worry about yourself. asking about Shri Mataji. He was

 48 2003 January - February The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 invited to get his Self Realisation. By embarrassingly, "What's happening to Shri Mataji's simple right hand me?" So everything was switched to gesture, he was surprised by the the positive. He found out who She strong cool breeze he felt, asking, is.

 THE JOY OF SPREADING I hope you all people understand the importance of spreading Sahaja WORK You have to be not egoistical, but Yoga. proud. Proud that you are Sahaja Yogis, proud that If you don't do that, you have been are you absolutely born in sucha time, when you useless. The greatest thing for Me, as you have have to carry on the duties of God's work, that so many lights here, we should God has chosen you. So first, you should come up have many more Sahaja Yogis all to that level. Like over the world, if you want to change this world and if you some people I find suddenly become morose, recluse in Sahaja want to avoid Yoga. They will all the trials and be tribulations of пever forgiven because God has given the useless life they are leading, you have to save them. You have to you so much. Supposing somebody gives salvage them. That's your job. That's you a diamond. You are proud. You put it on and show off. But when you have been what you have to pay for Sahaja Yoga. given your Spirit, you should be proud 25th December, 2001

 January -February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 50 are in Sahaja Yoga. It should show. I am a woman Myself. Single-handed, I've done all this work. And why shouldn't you do it? Because it's a tremendous test to transform people all over the world. and not behave like recluse. Some people feel, "I shall not take any job now. I'll not go out. I'll sit at home and meditate." The word "can't" should go away from the dictionary of people who are supposed to be Sahaja yogis. But it's very easy for you. If I can do it, why can't you do it? 21st March, 1983 But put your complete attention to I'm working twenty-four hours. Not it, that "We are going to work out Sahaja a single minute I waste. And in the same way, I hope you will dedicate your Yoga, not for ourselves, but for the twenty-four hours for your emancipation and the emancipation of the whole betterment of humanity." We need it. We need it very much. Your compassion, your love, is all being wasted if you just think universe. about yourself, your family. What's the use? People do that even before 4th May, 1985 In this world, everybody has to do Realisation. So what is the use of something. But then what about Sahaja completely getting attached to your family, Yogis? It's such a rare thing to happen attached to all other things? You should that you have got your Realisation. So get attached to the whole world. You where should we waste out attention? belong to the whole world now... Why should we neglect our meditation? Why? We have to grow. We are a different people. We are a different race altogether in this world. We are realised souls. Now, as I said, the drop has become the ocean. Identity yourself with the ocean. The ocean is the lowest, if you have seen, the lowest so much that the zero There were hardly any number during the point starts from the ocean. The ocean is time of Christ, practically I mean. And even before that I was surprised that in China and other places, in one age there used to be one guru, one master. While you are so many masters, but your don't so humble. It's at the lowest point it lives, but all the rivers flow into it. And the ocean does the work of throwing clouds in the sky. And these then burst and become rain falling into the same ocean. want to use your powers as a master. They come back to the same ocean. Why not the women use it also? I So those who are humble will find women are more lethargic than men attract more Sahaja Yogis. Those who are

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January-February 2003 51 relate to others? How do I talk to others, who are Sahaja Yogis....? kind will attract many more Sahaja Yogis. 31st December, 2000 So now there is no time for lethargy. Now you have to rise and awake. Today is the day when I hope you have to jump into nirvikalpa. But only by effort, you will stay there, otherwise you will again BECOMINGDYNAMIC You have to surrender fully from your heart. I am what I am. I have been that. I'll be that. I'm not going to grow any more or less. This is an eternal personality. It is now for you to get out of slip down. So go through this lecture again and again and do not think about it. Don't think that it is for somebody else. It is for you. For all of you, each of you and you must Me whatever is possible, to make the use of your birth in these modern times, to grow to your full maturity, to be able to work out the complete design that the Divine wants to do through you. As soon know yourself how far you are going as the dedication starts, you become every day. dynamic, clinging on to that. For this, meditation is the only way, I should say. 3rd May, 1986 HOW ARE WE GOING TO SPREAD THIS MESSAGE OF LOVE Of course, rationally you can do many things. You can rationally accept Me, Emotionally, you may feel closer to Me in your heart, but through meditation, surrender, Meditation is nothing but TO PEOPLE? In two ways you can work it out- how individually you can do it and how collectively you can do it. So I have to surrendering, is complete surrendering. make one suggestion to the leaders, that 31st July, 1982 whatever suggestion comes to you from the people, you must accept. You are just the leader there. Because you have to just communicate with each other, you are not to dominate anybody. You are not to sort Now you may say, "What should we do?" Face yourself every day. In reality, see how much time you spend on mundane worries and how much on your ascent. of dictate anything to anybody, but you have to be a communication person for Have you left everything, all your worries to God Almighty? Have you completely jumped out of your background?Have you come out all the way, leaving everything Me and them. So now you should see that how that was nonsensical? And how do I these people are giving you new ideas,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 January-Febnuary 2003 52 not put them down. Don't think you are to do the job. the only one who has ideas. Get ideas Another quality of Hanumana is He was beyond time.. He was doing everything very fast.. One of the qualities from them. They might get ideas from the customs. They may tell you something which should be done and should be noted of Shri Hanumana was that he was a fast down and recorded that, "yes, this was said. This was to be done." And then try person. He would do it before anybody could do it... to follow whatever is possible. It's very good to go to Trafalgar and beat Napoleon, but in the field of dharma, I think, people don't understand the importance of time. We are delayed If you are in doubt, you can always telephone to Me and find out. But involve them in this dynamism. Everybody is involved. masters and delayed habits we have. "All right, I'll telephone, I find out.. It will Ist December, 1988 happen." That's one of the greatest defects SPEED we have... Better do it quickly immediately. The powers that we have are for That's the time to do it. "But next year, Sahaja Yoga. As Mother has powers to work for Sahaja Yoga, we too have Mother, we'll see, you know, after powers to work for Sahaja Yoga and, as Ganapatipule we can consider. We'll She works, we also have to work. But have discussions and then we'll have arguments and this and that." That's one there is attachment like this. "Mother is thing about His character. One has to know that today, when we are worshipping doing everything. What can we do?" No, you have to do it. This is a very important detachment Hanumana, we should have that quick I am telling you. You have to do it Vividness in us. It is to be done now. We yourself. It's not that "Mother will do. After all, She is doing everything." It's cannot postpone it anymore. Already we are very much delayed. .. To see the results, you have to correct. That's correct in a way. But you are the instrument. So the source may be there, but the instruments deliver the become quick people, not to linger and be satisfied with other things, but positive things, what we are doing.. goods and, like Hanumana, you are the instrument and you have to work. You have So attention should be on the job.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2 HJanuary-February 2003 53 And that's what we are doing about it.... their jobs... You just start it. You'll get it. You have powers. Everything will be synchronized You are not aware that you are angels, that you have to do this and nothing properly. We just e4 else is important. But if we behave like human beings. first thing, then plan it out and then cancel it, it's not going to work out. Though it is Hanumana, is running on the Pingala I hope that by today's puja that enthusiasm, that venturesome nature will vibrate your Pingala and, without feeling any ego about it, in the most humble Nadi, all the time, what He does is to manner. As Hanumana was, we'll do the spoil our plan because, instead of Him, we run on the Pingala. This is all right. You are running it. I'll put you right. jobs. So much dynamism and so much of humility, what a combination it was. And that you have to manifest. The more you work, the more you'll assert yourself. You'll find that humility is the only thing that helps. Obedience is the only thing that helps to carry out your work and you'll So He sidetracks all our plans all the time. That's how all our planning fails. We are particular about timing, about things of not importance. But we are not particular about timing about our progress in Sahaja Yoga. We must have targets. We become humbler and humbler. must have fixed times. But if you are thinking that "I am You have to do Sahaja Yoga. You already this," then finished. But if you have to spread it. You have to bring it to know that it's done by the Divine, a level where people can see it. "Paramchaitanya is doing everything, I'm You have to venture. You have to just an instrument," then humility will be venture without any fear, collectively and there and you'll be an effective individually forgetting as to what will instrument... happen. I mean, you won't go to jails, you'll not be crucified, be sure on that. I mean, if you lose your job, you get another. And if you don't get a job, you can get a dole, all right. So you don't have If you are doing God's work, your worries are taken over. You don't have to worry about anything, just takes over. But it's not self-propagation. It's not. It's propagation of the collective. to worry about the useless things human beings sit down and normally worry. But, Inner Dynamo When you see something, it reacts, despite that, they achieve work, they do

 54 January -February 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1& 2 you have red also." He said. "Where? Do it reacts. The difference between My looking at anything is that-that reacts. you know, Mother?" I said, "We passed When I look at you, your kundalini reacts. that way about eight years back and I know When I look at this, it gets vibrated - there are red stones." kataksha. Kataksha - every glance- every So everything I see gets vibrated and alsoI note what is there and is already there to be used at the proper time... glance makes the thing react. And nireekshana means "I know what it is." Just looking at a person, I know what it is. Looking at a thing, I know what it is - nireekshana. But the whole thing is So when you have that kind of a temperament, you will be amazed the amount of dynamism that will work it out. in the memory there. You don't have to create a dynamo. It is inside you. Let it work out. Like we were going and they said, "We have only black stones. I said, "No, 22nd April, 1984

 1014 WP



----------------------

2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 January-February, 2003
Volume: XV Issue :1 & 2
VESSA
The Divine CoolBreeze
It is best to discuss only Sahaja Yoga even amongst each other. Attention
should always be kept going deeper within. Forget outside as much as
possible. Have confidence that everything about it is taken care of.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
ट
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 xV 1 & 2 January
The Divine Cool Bre eze Volume - XV 1 & 2 January - February 2003
1
DUST (Poem)
LETTER BY SHRI MATAJI ON MITHYA
6.
GURU PUJA, Cabella Ligure, Sunday, July 21st, 2002
16
GURU PURNIMA, July 24, 2002 News from Cabella
18
GURU PURNIMA TALK, Cabella Ligure, 24/07/2002
23 MOUNTAIN (Poem)
24
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA, 18, August, 2002, Canajoharie USA
34
WHAT IS A SAHAJA YOGI, 17-05-1980
46
ISTANBUL PUBLIC PROGRAM, 23rd April, 2002
JOY OF SPREADING
49
2.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 T HE DIVINE Co OL BRE EZE
COOL
Published by
V.J. Nalgirkar
162- A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067
Printed at
Print-O-Graphics
New Delhi
For subscription please write to
Mr. O.P. Chandna
N - 463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi - 110034
Ph. : (011) 7013464
Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artworks to:
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Clo Sahaja Yoga Temple
C - 17, Qutub Institutional Area
New Delhi - 110016
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Dust
I:want to be sTmaller,
Like a dust particle
Which moves with the wind
I goes everywhere,
Cango.
Sit on the liead of a king
Orean go
And fall at the feet of someone
Andit can g
And sit everywhere
utI want to be
Bu
A particle of dust
Thal ts tragrant
Thatis nourishing
That is enlightening
Malaji Shri Nirmala Divi
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Shri Mataji
11
Here is a translation of an old letter by Shri Mataji
on the subject of Mithya, i.e. what is unreal.
"My Dear Damle.
of inner being are opened. But before
this grace descends in, there should be
Many blessings. Received your
letter. It is a very good sign to feel a
a pull in Sahasrara. We understand the
pull of heart, which is also silent, but
pull on the Sahasrara, because only
through Sahasrara endless rays are lopsided, that is emotional. But pull
of Sahasrara becomes all round. There
poured in man's heart and new doors
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Unveils
Mithya
Brahmarandhra is closed, many types
of illusory ideas, become a part of your
mind. False thoughts like 'its mine or
they are mine', identify with outside
man is in integral state, in that Dharma
(righteousness) and awareness
implores for Chaitanya (Divine
consciousness) that is God's love. This
happens spontancously. Although it is objects! Besides, man made bindings
the skill of your Kundalini, your such as "My body should be healthy
personality should strengthen the and beautiful" are inculcated. Then
Kundalini. You earned that quality in unreal relationships like, he is my
previous lives and hence this life is father, he is my brother, she is my
great that gems of person are available mother, are on your head. As ego
for My work. If you understand that develops, foolish ideas such as 'I am
although My physical being is here I poor, I am helpless or I belong to high
am all over, it should also be realized
family etc. come in your head. Many
that even this body is an unreal officials and politicians, become
(Mithya) appearance. It is difficult to egoists (Donkeys). Then there is anger,
come to this stage but if gradually hatred, forbearance, separation,
unreal is discerned, the truth will be
sorrow, attachment under the cover of
established effortlessly and waves of love and temptations in the guise of
great bliss will envelop your being. I social status. Man with great affection
am explaining, in this letter, what is keeps clinging to this unreal way of
unreal (Mithya). It should be read out life. If you think of getting rid of all
to all and assimilated by all.
these, and make efforts, what you get
Unreal starts soon after the birth is illusory knowledge, because the
in this world. Your name, village. attention (Chitta) moves along the
country, horoscope, forecasts, many Pingla Channel, and then you are
involved in Siddhis (Powers) and
such things get attached to you or others
other temptations. A vision of
Once
them to
attach
you.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 2003
January - February
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
Kundalini and the Chakras is also should not be afraid of Maya and
should recognize her so that She will
illusory because there is no gain from
it; on the contrary it is harmful. illuminate your path. A cloud hides
and
the Sun, as also makes it seen. The Sun
self-controls
Whatever
is always there but what is the purpose
mortification you insist or practising,
of the cloud? Because of the cloud you
effectively, all of them add to the
limitations on your Chitta (attention). have an urge to see the Sun which
shines for a moment and again hides
somewhere. It gives strength and
courage to your sight to see the Sun
As such, there is no way for liberation.
But all unreal does not fall off with
the Self-Realisation. It can be broken
Man has been created with such great
off gradually. If, with firm conviction,
you deny from your heart all that is efforts, only one step on his feet and
unreal (Mithya), you will have the all is successful. But, still it is not
Realisation of the Self (Atman) in its becoming possible. Hence, I have
pure form. Thereafter it is established come as your mother. Write your
problems to Me in a letter. Sit down
in meditation. It is best to discuss only
within you. Albeit, the same mortal
human Chitta is drenched in that which
is of the nature of love, truth having
Sahaja Yoga even amongst each other.
no beginning and end, verily the Shiva. Attention (Chitta) should always be
Human Chitta is meant for realising kept going deeper within. Forget
outside as much as possible. Have
that reality. This Chitta must become
confidence that everything about it is
one with that Atman. Only that Chitta,
taken care of. There are many instances
which progresses renouncing all unreal
to prove it. Then, in whatever you do,
(Mithya), breaks all known and
unknown bindings and becomes verily your Chitta (attention) remains in
oneness with the Self. All binding of
the Self.
sins (Papas) and merit (Punyas) are
Atma is never disturbed nor snapped. Distinctions like wordily and
destroyed. Only human attention non-wordily vanish, because that
(Chitta), in pursuit of desires, leaves wicked darkness, which has created all
its inner path. This is Maya (the the discrimination, ends. Everything
illusion). She has been intentionally becomes auspicious in the light of the
created. Without her the attention
true knowledge, whether it is the
(Chitta) would not have developed. You
destruction done by Shri Krishna or the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue 1 & 2
January - February
2003
case of the holy land of India, and
cross of Shri Jesus. All this will not
be understood by explaining. Just when fully developed, it will spread
showing the path will not help. The in all countries and directions. When
path will be known only after walking
on it. When I get your letter I fix the
targets. After sometime, even that will
not be necessary. But for the present,
all should write their own experiences
Sahasrara day was celebrated in
London today, i.e. 5th May, I invited
only about 20-25 people and decided
further course of action. Many
blessings and infinite love to all.
and progress. When I come, we will
Ever yours,
see how many Virata's channels
"Your Mother Nirmala"
(Nadis) you have awakened. It
appears, this work will come up in the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 GURU PUJA
Cabella Ligure, Sunday, July 21st, 2002
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
In India, they're all waiting for
surprised at the quick behaviour and
obedience of the
the monsoons
and they're so
rain.
much worried
Today is a
because the rain
great day for all
of us because we
did not come.
So I was giving
are celebrating
bandhan to the
the Guru Puja and
rain and it came
remembering all
here. And now
the great gurus
also they have
who came on this
told
on the
Earth to teach the
television that it
world about the
is going to be
truth. So many of
rain in India,
them were here
but first in Italy.
and they tried
I was told that
their level best to
in Italy you
explain
humanity what is
to
needed rain
very much and
the first rain you had, few days back,
spirituality, but
it's such a disparity that people never
understood that spirituality is the most
and now this is the second one.
important thing we need, that we have
Because all the understanding of
to be one with the Divine Power.
the problems of our powers is there
and the rain, you see, is so kind that
it works at the right time. I am in the wrong direction. First, of
All their endeavours have been
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January February 2003
course, they were very intelligent, you. That's why in India, Agni was
more than animals, and started worshipped, this light
seeking, not the truth, but some sort worshipped, the fire was worshipped.
of a self emancipation, I should say, I That was worshipped first. They must
was
don't know what to say about it-self have discovered that the fire knows
progress. And in that, they forgot that
they have to first seek spirituality,
which is the most important thing.
everything.
So the inner awareness of all
these elements, they knew about it and
But, we had two types of that's why they worshipped those
journeys. One is through the left side elements. So before the puja, they
and another through the right side. In used to call all the Deities who
India, I don't know why, we had lots belonged to those elements to witness
of people who went into the jungles their puja, but that turned out to be
and became saints, but they were right sided movement. Without the left
doing right side tapasya-that is, Side, right side is very dangerous. If
going into the five elements, one after you don't have right side, of course,
it's a big dangerous thing also, but first
you must have development of your
left side. That is what, to begin with,
another, and mastering the five
elements.
Of course, there is truth in it, no
we had in Sahaja Yoga.
doubt. You have seen how a candle
Left side is compassion, is love,
tells you as to what is your position
is. If you are possessed or if you are universal feeling. All we can say is
not, a candle can tell you. Can you the blessings of the Devi, which are
imagine? Candle is so much described, you know in Devi
knowledgeable. Supposing you have Mahatmya, that the Goddess resides
a heart, heart trouble, the candle will within you as so many things. She
show and if you treat yourself with resides in you as Shraddha, She
the candle, you can cure yourself.
resides in you as Sleep. She resides
in you as Illusion, Bhranti. All kinds
So it is so sensitive, not that it of things are there on the left-hand
side, which are already described and
when I told you about Sahaja Yoga, I
can cure, but also so competent. Not
that it shows that you are sick and have
wanted to make your left side very
problem, but it is competent to cure
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January - February
incurable. Even some people, right-
strong.
sided, some people can get a kind of
Those people who took to right
side became very aggressive people
a cancer called blood cancer and this
blood cancer now we have cured it,
and they had mastered the essence of
but even if it is cured, you can go back
these five elements. That's all right,
to that kind of aggressiveness, thinking
but they were extremely hot-
that you are very right. Such people
tempered, so much so that they used
always try to find faults with others,
that such-and-such person is not good,
he's doing harm. Any way, they can
to curse people, curse them. They used
to say things which were not kind and
they didn't believe in the universality.
find faults with others, but not with
themselves. Their attention is outside,
It was such a dangerous thing that they
took.
not on themselves. They never see
In Indian shastras, you can see what's wrong with them, but they
always see what's wrong with others.
in many incidents where people give
a curse, Shraap-very common. All By doing that, you see, they are
climbing the ladder of a horrible right
side, which can give you horrible
these gurus used to curse a person
because they had no compassion, no
love, nothing but their powers of the
diseases.
right side. But we have seen now that
As I told you, first is the blood
those people who have right side,
who go only on the right side without
the bhakti, without the blessings of the problem. Nowadays, there's a very
Divine can become rakshasas famous disease called Alzheimer's.
cancer. If you get rid of the blood
cancer, then you can get into another
actually, can become a great danger This is also the part of the right side,
[thunder sounds] for humanity. This is
because if you don't have that bhakti,
a very serious thing. Through your
intelligence, through your thinking Goddess, you can develop all such
that humility, that blessings of the
power your ego can go to any limit horrible diseases, which are not only
and create problems within you.
fatal, but also very injurious to others.
Now, the ultimate of this
So, by being right-sided, you do
problem is we have seen in are many not progress. You can become a big
diseases, which are absolutely ascetic, they call it, who can curse
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue1 & 2
January-February 2003
achieved your left side mastery.
others, who can put them into
troubles, think that that is a great Kundalini awakening is there. You are
one with the Divine. Now you can
power. It is not. It is not at all
because, though you are not
come to the right side and know about
right side and try to express your right
side. You can express it not by
dominating others, but by dominating
yourself. By self-examination, by
understanding what's wrong with you.
Why do you behave like that? Why do
suppressed by other powers, negative
powers, but your own power takes
your life.
So kundalini, when it is risen,
the best thing is to go to the left side,
not criticizing others, not talking ill
you trouble others? Why do you
of others, but seeing within you what's
wrong. Find out what is the matter always, I have seen, organize and
overpower others? Such people will
with you. First it starts with self
arrange and do this and do that.
Instead of organising themselves,
important person'. And, with this self they'll organise others. These things
importance, you go on troubling complicate, but if you have love and
everyone and torturing everyone and if you have bhakti, you can very, very
all that. But, because of your right side easily dominate others in a very
importance, that I am a very
movement, you can become very
different manner.
successful. Hitler was the climax of
It is not that you dominate by
that. And that's how people start
cruelty, by oppression, but you
dominate with your love. And you
taking to very, very cruel things.
Nowadays, I think that some
don't want to dominate, but easily
people are ruling everywhere with people get very much succumbed to
their right side. We do not have love and to magnanimity, to
people who are using their left side generosity.
and whenever they use their left side,
So all these qualities you must
they're called as saints. Now you all
first develop within yourself-is the
have the powers of the left side. Some
of you do have little bit right side left side problem that you should be
very peaceful. You should give love
also-doesn't matter.
to others. You should be generous. You
should be kind and see how much it
Now I would say that you have
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 January - February
2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
10
to him. What was so great, though he
pays.
was a king, he was living so lavishly
and he had so many of ornaments and
I have seen some people who are
extremely rude. They can be rude to
anyone. That's their nature which they also conveyances and all that?
Because nothing was above him. He
should overcome with their left side.
was so detached with everything. He
Rudeness is not the sign of a saint. A
had everything, but he was so
saint is extremely peaceful and never
detached. That's a very good example
gets rude with others.
of a person who had mastered his left
and now who was the king. Raja
So the introspection should work
first of all. 'Where are we wrong? Janaka was.
What wrong things are we doing?
What is our style?' Once you
Like that, we had many people
discover later on also, one after another, who
that your style is already left side,
then you should take to right side and
were extremely, extremely rich,
extremely, I should say, powerful as
possess the power of the right side.
kings, but inside they were absolutely
like divine personality. Nothing
What are the powers of right
side now, which are achieved through disturbed them. Nothing made them
the left side perfection? We have feel greater or happier. No position,
no power was, to them, great. This is
a complete emancipation of human
some very great gurus on this line.
One of them was Raja Janaka. He was
a ruler of a country and a very well beings, that you are realised souls.
known ruler and everything, but still, You should be fully equipped with
though he was so generous and good compassion
and everything, but, at the same time, understanding, but, at the same time,
he was a great monarch, great king of it should be expressed in the right
those days, very much known for his way.
and
love
and
impartiality, for his statesmanship and
all kinds of beautiful things he did for
For example, you can say Christ
is another example. Though He was
his subjects. That is Raja Janaka. He
could not get disturbed with anything.
And people never understood why the
an incarnation, still, the amount of
forgiveness and love He has for
people is tremendous. But at the same
greatest of greatest saints used to bow
time, He used to go onto mountains
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 January February 2003
11
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
and preach about spirituality. Those got. It's very easy to feel, 'Oh, now
we have got Realisation, now what is
were not very safe times because
people didn't like anybody talking like there? We are on top of the world.'
that. They hated you because He That's not so.
talked about God (thunder) and what
You have to go out, talk to
they did to Him, you know very well.
people. They will insult you. They'll
trouble you. They will do all kinds of
Doesn't matter, though they
crucified Him, still we all respect
things, but you are already a person-
already a realised soul. You can listen
to them, what they are saying. You will
Him as a great personality. Reason is
He was-He was, no doubt, an
not ask for it. What you'd like to do,
incarnation, but still He went all out
to give His achievements or, I can say, [be] good to them. This is also a
whatever powers He had, to others. compassion that you don't want to
He went all over the places. He had keep your Realisation to yourself, but
you want to do it for others also, so
no facilities, but still He went out to
that they also get Realisation. It's very
many people and tried to save them.
important. If you do not feel that way,
the pity for the people who haven't got
side
right
This
the
was
movement. That means Sahaja Yogis
can also become right-sided, but like
Christ. Otherwise, if they are right-
Realisation, think of the times you
were not realised. These people are
also not realised and they are having
sided. They'll organise, they'll do all
kinds of things and have problems of
a bad time. They can be in for any
trouble.
the right side.
So now, it is not that if you have
Realisation, you settle down with it.
That's why I want you to avoid
No, that's not the way, but you should
the right side, but once you are fully
go all out to see that you give
a left-sided master of Sahaja Yoga,
then it's very, very much needed to be
a complete personality of spirituality
that you should take to right side
movement. And what is the right side
movement is the collectivity. Should
Realisation to others and save them.
You all have got Realisation not for
your self. It's not limited for you, but
it is meant for others, that you have to
give it to others. And as soon as you'll
start giving it to others, you'll be
not be satisfied with what you have
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 January - February
12
2003
& 2
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1
amazed, so many qualities in you will
him, say all kinds of things. It's all
come up. Because, when you see right. Is a part of the game, but he
others, you find that what is lacking doesn't mind. He doesn't mind
in them, what do they need, what you anything. Anything that comes his
have to give, how you have to give. way, he doesn't mind. But what is the
You can become anything. You can main thing is that he has compassion,
his compassion that he had before
from the left side is now expanded
become a poet. You can become a
writer. Anything you can become in
and he wants to save the people.
case you face others, then it comes as
a reaction within you. All these People don't have food, is all right,
qualities develop and you become a is a big complication, if people are
starving it is another. But if they do
very good, I should say, artist.
not get spirituality, what's the use of
This is only possible if you meet
other people and talk to them about
Sahaja Yoga and tell them about your
their human life? Why did they evolve
to this state? They are evolved from
Self Realisation. I know there will be animal state, from the worst possible
problems. I know that is true. There conditions to a human state and now,
will be people who'll oppose you,
if they do not get their Realisation,
that means this is worse than starving,
worse than all kinds of poverty, worse
who'll say anything, all kinds of things
against you and they'll try to stop your
than all kinds of diseases and troubles.
activities and do all kinds of harm.
So why not try to give them
Doesn't matter. But that's the thing you
realisation? Why not see that you give
them realisation. But first and
should achieve, is to meet people, talk
to them and start telling them about
foremost thing, as I said, that in the
left you should be very strong. You
Self Realisation. You have to save
them. That's important. But first of
all, you should know that you should shouldn't start doing it because
have no right-sided complications, you've got your Realisation. You can
otherwise they'll all run away. A give Realisation, so you should not
person who is spiritual is supposed
or accepted to be a very humble strengthened your left side.
start doing it unless and until you have
Such a person is extremely
person. Of course, because he's
humble, extremely straight, doesn't
humble, people will take advantage of
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January-February 2003
important. If you can do that, then you
grudge about anything, doesn't grumble
about anything and can adjust himself
into any circumstances. It's not
attached to anything. It's an automatic
will do full justice to this life, which
is a spiritual life. Without that, you
cannot achieve, cannot achieve the
strength of spirituality. For that, you
have to understand that it's very, very
important that you should give Sahaja
Yoga a full chance through your
detachment. It doesn't have to detach.
You may do anything for that person,
you may try to get anything for that
person, it's all right. That person will
accept, no doubt, but without any wisdom.
attachment to anything. Such a
What I receive mostly, the letters
detached person is the one who can
are, that this person is troublesome,
that person is troublesome, that person
work it out, all kinds of propagation
of Sahaja Yoga.
is doing like that. Forget it. All such
Today that is the greatest need persons are not important for Sahaja
of the world, that we have to have Yoga. But if you start on proper lines,
more Sahaja Yogis. Now people are you will be amazed, you'l11 meet so
so shy to do that. It's very surprising, many people who want peace of mind,
but I've seen people who don't have peace of heart and a complete oneness
any truth, who have all kinds of bad with the Divine.
gurus, get after others, try to spread
their false ideas, but Sahaja Yogis,
They may not accept. They may
why should they feel-why should not say. They might have gone to the
they feel shy I don't understand. So wrong people also-possible. But,
despite everything, they would like to
have a real spiritual peace within
talk about this to everyone. Bring them
to Sahaja Yoga.
themselves. It is a very common
a very important day desire nowadays among people, but
because, on a Guru Puja day, they say to oppose that and to reach that, you
that a guru cannot give anything to you, have to take to a life of a very simple
Today is
but I can give you the advice and the
personality.
advice is that you enlarge your heart,
you become humble and try to spread
Sahaja Yoga with humility, not with
See, if you are so much
interested in money or if you are so
aggressiveness. That is extremely much interested in your so-called
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 2003
14
January - February
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Isue 1 & 2
powers, or in your ambitions, then
Sahaja Yoga cannot do anything. But is important, but is absolutely
them about Sahaja Yoga. Not only that
if you are interested in your immediate need of the world.
compassion and understanding about
today's world, how it is in a turmoil-
why? Because of the human beings
If you understand this point, that
at this time why are you in this world
and what is the need of the world, you
being in the wrong. What we have to
will immediately start feeling the
do is pass them the knowledge of the
responsibility. Whether you are man
Divine. That should be your desire
or a woman is not important. Go all
and that is what you'll feel very much
out to preach this thing, make people
understand about Sahaja Yoga.
comfortable with.
All other desires, all other wants
In every way that is possible and
are, as you say, such transitory. One
desire is to spread Sahaja Yoga is so I think then you will become complete
beautiful that you go on working on it as gurus.
and every time you do that you will
be so joyous and happy, you'll have you cannot be a guru. Guru also
no problems of any kind. That's the doesn't mean that you go on preaching
If Sahaja Yoga is just with you,
about Sahaja Yoga, talking about
Sahaja Yoga, giving lectures about
Sahaja yoga-no. It means the one
sign of greatness of Sahaja Yoga and
I want you all to become like that.
As today's day is great because
we are thinking of all the great saints
who gives Realisations to others.
How many people you give
who came on to this Earth and who
tried to lead us. What they did, all of Realisation is the thing not to be
them, tried to spread the truth all over counted, but to be felt within like
the world. They suffered a lot, they ripples, waves of the ocean of love
in your heart. So beautiful it is to see
had problems, so many problems, but
they worked very hard in every way that people get Realisation and are
to spread Sahaja Yoga and talk about immersed in the joy of spirituality.
God and divinity.
That's what I want-you to do. That's
why I'm on this Earth.
All that is that today you have to
give Me, a promise that whenever you
get any other human being, you can tell
I had to suffer also quite a lot. It
doesn't matter, so called suffering. I
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Voiume-XV Issue1&2
January - Febuary
2003
15
was watching it just like a drama, so started becoming Islamic.
it's over. As long as you don't pay
much attention to all these suffering. that a man who was so great and so
So this is also a very wrong thing
what is so great about it?
much full of spirituality was not
Now you have seen yesterday a accepted and somebody who killed
beautiful drama about Mohammed- him is now accepted. It can happen in
Saheb. I always used to think there anything. But the worst, it has
was such pain about him that how happened is in the Islamic world,
people have misunderstood and have which is very dangerous and that, you
gone astray. Why they are doing all see, that in the name of God how many
wrong things now? I am happy that at bad things they are doing.
least you people have realised his
greatness and have understood and the fate of Mohammed-Saheb, it has
made such a beautiful drama out of it. happened. It's not the fate of reality
So try to understand that it is not
I don't know how far we can
it has happened, but it's an eye-opener
propagate this, but it's a fact that for all of us to see that the truth is
Mohammed-Saheb himself was always challenged by untruth and we
finished. Then also his daughter. should stand by the truth whatever may
grand daughter, children were happen and a day will come when
finished. His son-in-law was finished people realise that this was wrong
and after that, by finishing them, they
thing they were all the time following
started another horrible thing called and have been doing all kinds of
nonsensical things.
Sunnis.
All this will work out Im sure
Now the suna religion is not at
all near the truth. It's some sort of a very soon. If My desire is that
very aggressive and a very cruel powerful, I'm sure that they will
religion and that started spreading realise that to be kind, to be nice, to
everywhere, but the real Islam be compassionate is the best way to
religion of Mohammed-Saheb was not
feel happy, nothing more that that.
there. Those people who killed him,
May God Bless You.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Guru Purnima
July 24, 2002 News from Cabella
It started as a part of a French seminar in the hangar at Cabella. Our
brothers and sisters from France wanted to do puja and then go to the Castle
and offer a music programme to the Adi Shakti.
When Mother received this request she said that they had chosen the day
of Guru Purnima and if there were to be a puja, it would be better if She were
present! At about 5 p.m. this news came from the Castle, and it spread like
wildfire. Telephone calls and SMS messages flew around Italy. Yogis leapt
into cars and set off. The people who were in the hangar still, after Guru
Puja, just three days before, couldn't believe their luck! The French yogis
calmly prepared for the puja.
At eight p.m. there were nearly three hundred people in the hangar,
including Daglio Camp, and then Shri Mataji arrived. It was so incredible for
many of us who had never been so close to Mother before during puja. She
spoke about this being the real day of the Guru (It was a full moon) but that
for the convenience of the yogis we had performed puja at the weekend.
Also she spoke about fanaticism in religion and how we had to spread
Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. She mentioned the death of Kabira and the miracle
of the two kinds of flowers, then She said there is no place for cruelty amongst
us. She blessed us saying that She was giving those present a boon of being
able to spread Sahaja Yoga.
Shri Mataji spoke of several other subjects. Luckily a yogi had the
foresight to bring a video camera, and then She invited the children onto the
stage to wash her feet. At this point every child in the hangar converged on
the stage, there seemed to be even more than during Guru Puja! As there was
no age limit specified there were some rather grown up children on the stage
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 17
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January - February
2003
and it was beautiful to see the joy on the faces of teenagers who probably had
thought they would never have had such an opportunity again.
After this some presents were given, alongwith flowers from various
collectives, and then the French Yogis asked permission to start their concert.
Already there was such a lovely family atmosphere in the hangar, and
incredibly strong vibrations, but when the yuva shakti started singing we felt
like we were being lifted into another dimension! This was followed by two
beautiful kawalis that had everyone dancing. The singing was of an
extraordinarily high quality and was followed by flute music and a violin
raga, both of which were absolutely wonderful. At midnight Shri Mataji left
us after nearly four truly unforgettable hours.
The French finished a perfect evening by making a delicious meal for
all their brothers and sisters. Many, many heartfelt thanks to them, and thank
you, Shri Mataji, for so graciously consenting to this magical occasion.
With Love From Italy
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 GURU
PURNIMA
TALK
Cabella Ligure,
24/07/2002
The Purnima is the day when the moon is full. I knew this, but for Sahaja
Yogis we have to arrange Friday, Saturday, Sunday. Whenever either it is on
the date or not, we have to arrange it in that case. This time, it was, I think,
two days before. So it doesn't matter, after all, moon is there for us and we
are for moon, so it can't be something that would have very wrong in it.
I have already told you such a lot about the Guru Principle. And the
Guru Principle, we have seen people who came on this Earth, they were all
mostly born realised, actually, and they never gave Realisation to anyone. It
is a very big difference. They were all born as realised souls and they became
Sufis. And they are called by different names, but they were not given Self
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 January - February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
19
Realisation. They had it and because of their Self Realisation, as they had,
they have so much of knowledge and that is what they try to impart to people.
They knew all about chakras. Everything they knew. Somehow, must be
in their past life achievements that they knew it. Perhaps some of them were
disciples of other very great people. I don't know how they had full ideas
about what Self Realisation is and what do we achieve after Self Realisation.
Now the only person, I think, Mohammed-Saheb is the one who has talked
about miraj - it is the ascent through our kundalini. Of course, in India they
did talk about it, but in any other country they didn't say it so clearly that
there is something called miraj. And not only that, He talked of miraj, but
also he talked of the resurrection when your hands will speak. Two things He
said-first that your hands will speak when you will have your Realisation.
It's a very great thing to say because that is how you can ascertain and you
can be sure that you got your Realisation. That's the sign He gave. And the
second thing He talked about miraj and the white horse He said was nothing
but the kundalini. He didn't use the word kundalini, but He said it's a white
horse.
So He is the one who knew what should happen to the people when they
got their Self Realisation. That's the great revelation to all of you and of such
a help to Sahaja Yoga. You are all realised souls because you can feel the
vibrations, one thing, and, secondly, how you have become, He explained it
very clearly.
We have so many saints in India, so many of them, one better than the
other, and whatever they talked, whatever they said, is so remarkable, is so
remarkable. But actually, human beings, I think, are very dumb, that they never
realised that we have so many saints here. Even in Turkey, we had Sufis,
where it's a Sunni religion, there too. We had so many Sufis all over the
world. We had realised souls. They were not incarnations, but they were born
realised souls.
So you see, their explanation and everything is very good because they
were human beings and whatever they said was very much good for human
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
20
January - February
beings to understand. Because an incarnation said something, it is something
from the beyond and this new, I should say, advance of the people, who were
really human beings and had become realised souls and how they have talked
about the various things, is very remarkable.
Firstly most of them were poets and this-we had Kabir in India. We
don't know how he was born, where he was from, who were his parents. It's
absolutely not known, despite that you can only make out from their poetry
that he was the great, great Sahaja Yogi and how he has described things-
very interesting! He brought forth so many fundamental truths in his poetry
and he talked about it. He didn't belong to any religion, as such. When he
died there was a fight between Hindus and Muslims, "What should we do
with his body?" And they say when they had lifted the sheet, which was
covering his body, they found flowers, two types of flowers, one for Hindus
and one for Muslims. So that's how he has solved the problems of this stupid
fight people were having.
In Sahaja Yoga we are not belonging to any such stupid religion. We
belong to one religion, that is Vishwa Nirmala Dharma and all the stupidity
of all these religions we should really throw away because what you just see
now today everywhere, every religious group is fighting each other, beating
each other, finishing each other. It is not the way a religious person should be
like, but they are killing each other! I mean, all kinds of horrible things they
are doing, unbelievable how they can do that-such cruelty? And first thing
for a yogi or for a saint is that cruelty is absolutely not there. They will
sacrifice their lives. They will do anything, but they will not be cruel to any
other person. Now, those who, in the name of God and in the religion, are
cruel are actually not at all, by any chance, religious people. So this is what
the perversion of religion is. We all should understand, if we belong to Sahaja
Yoga then for us kindness, sweetness, compassion and love are the main
qualities that we should have and if you don't have that, then you are not a
Sahaja Yogi.
So we are a different clan, I should say, different personalities, who
have vibrations. But as I said that now you must spread it because I have
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January-February 2003
21
come on this Earth just for people to get their emancipation, get their
Realisation and unless and until all the people who believe in their
emancipation get it, I won't be happy.
There are many people who do believe, but not yet got their Realisation,
so you have to work and you will be amazed, you will find people who are
very anxious to get their Realisation. It will work out on this Guru Purnima
day. It is a very auspicious day.
I bless you with a special power that you can give Realisation to others.
Don't get involved in your own problems. That's not important. That will all
be solved. Mostly, what I get letters about is their own personal problems or
some sort of other problems. What you should do is to see what is your problem
within you, what is happening within you, why we are having a problem within,
what is our duty, why we have got our Self Realisation, why we have got this
wealth of spirituality and what should we do with it.
I tell you, really think about it every day, even for half an hour and you
will realise that you are very well equipped people. Saints have done so
much. They have written so many things, they have fought the people. They
did everything. You don't have to do anything like that, but one thing is that
you must spread Sahaja Yoga.
Even now Sahaja Yoga is not so much accepted everywhere. People
don't know about it. It's surprising, while all kinds of horrible gurus are very
well known. So we have to do it by our behaviour, by our understanding, by
our whole life. People should say that these are something rare people and
different people.
I am happy, today is another day of Guru Purnima, which is a very
auspicious day and to be regarded as a very big blessing for you because this
gives you-I mean, this is a certificate, that you all are capable of being
gurus. You have to become that. Becoming is important in Sahaja Yoga.
Becoming is important. All other things are really of no use. You have to
become. Specially ladies are shy. I think. They can do a lot and they should
work it out. They are shy for nothing at all. What is the need to be shy? They
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January -February 2003
22
are very shy, ladies, and they just don't get into the whole working of Sahaja
Yoga. You should. If the ladies start talking about it, I think it will work much
faster.
I bless you all to do this work, which was left half done by the saints.
It's your duty to complete it.
May God Bless You.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Mountain
I see a mountain from my window
Standing like an ancient sage
Desireless, full of love.
So many trees and so màny flowers
They plunder the mountain all the time.
It's attention is not disturbed
And when the rain pours like
Many pitchers of elouds bursting
And it fills the mountain with greenery.
The storms may come soarmg.
Filling the lake with compassion
.
And the rivers flow running down
Towards the calling sea.
The sun will create clouds and
Wind carries on its feathery wings
The rain on to the mountain.
This is the eternal play
The mountain sees
Without desires.
Mataji Skri Nirmala Devi
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
18, August, 2002, Canajoharie USA
Today we are going to worship Shri Krishna as a very great personality
and you know why He came on this Earth, to establish this, is the new form
of-not Virata, not Virata, but a form by which this country became so
prosperous and, by His Advent only, He created a beautiful mentality among
the people, how to develop this country with dharma. And you had very great
leaders, who followed Him and who worshipped Him in a way and created a
new world of this America, But, unfortunately, as the time passed on, His
form vanished from the minds of the people.
The reason was Krishna was represented here by very, very wrong type
of people, who had no idea about Shri Krishna, that He was a great master of
wealth, that he knew how to use the wealth and how to create the wealth with
dharma, not with adharma.
They all forgot about it completely, and gradually started using
manoeuvring powers, all kinds of-all kinds of adharmic things- cheating,
grabbing money, spending their money in absolutely useless things. He's
Kubera. He doesn't need any money, of course. He achieves money and not
only that – He lived in money.
They said that He created a golden house for Him, absolutely made with
gold in Dwarika, but it's submerged in the water, in the sea and nobody
believed that it is true. But now they have found out this under the waters, in
very deep waters.
So all their conjecture about Him was wrong, all false, that He was
definitely a man who made lots of money by dharma. Also was a son of a king
and He built this Dwarika out of gold. It is still there and people have fo
it, but under the sea. Thousands of years have passed, but still exists. Only
nd
because perhaps it belongs to Shri Krishna, it is still existing. That's what it
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January - February 2003
25
Sahaja Yogi has
his own spirit to
enjoy. More than
anything else, he
doesn't want to
possess anything.
It's a headache to
possess things
also.
is, because He was the one who was for satya, for truth. He was for truth and
He worked out everything on the principle of truth. Whatever was not truth,
He tried to finish it off. Whatever was destructive, He tried to remove that
and He established Himself through truth only. He's the one who represents
the truth, absolute truth and how the truth can prevail in everything.
I'm just the opposite of Him because I don't understand money at all,
but He's looking after that part in My life. I'm so hopelessly bad. I don't
understand banking. I don't understand money. I can't even count money. Now
what can you say to that? But He's there to look after me and I never have a
dearth of money, never a dearth of any wealth. It's all full of it. Also it comes
through your sense of satisfaction. If you have that sense of satisfaction, you
don't look for money. What happened in your country that some people got
money. If you got little money, then you get the taste of money. They're not
satisfied people, so, like mad, they went on spending on nonsensical things. It
is something very much human. After human evolution, after you have reached
a certain state of enlightenment, then all these demeaning things like greed all
disappear from your character. You don't have that greed in you any more and
you become extremely a satisfied person.
To you, money is there, all right, but it's not so important. It is just that
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 26
January-February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
you think you don't need it and you get it-all done by Shri Krishna all over.
Can you imagine? He's doing all this looking after you and helping you with
money.
It started .. Sahaja Yoga without a single penny. I never had any problem.
So one thing, as Kubera, He's the supplier of wealth. He looks after people
who don't have money. He gives money to people who stand by truth, who
enjoy the life of truth. It is His work that people enjoy wealth, otherwise they
don't. They have this much. They want to have more. That means they don't
enjoy the wealth. They have a little, they want to get much more. Why? Because
they are not enjoying whatever they have.
But after Self Realisation, you will see that you enjoy whatever you
have. You enjoy it full, absolutely and you do not hanker after something that
is not there. Doesn't matter if you don't have.
Many a times, people have asked Me, 'Mother, why not we have the
puja of Krishna as Kubera?" I said, 'All right.' Just now, everybody's trying
to become Kubera., Let them learn a lesson. And then we'll have the puja of
Kubera and that's why today, I've agreed to have this puja.
Because now you have seen what happens if you have greed. You go on
committing all kinds of sins, all kinds of wrong things, which can destroy
your country. Such a rich country has now become a poor country. Where is
that money gone? They're very clever. Somebody told Me today, it's money is
with the insurance. "My God," I said, 'the law is such that you can't get out
that money.' Secondly they said that it is in offshore and all that. I said, 'But
see now, they were never afraid that they would be caught and they continued
for so many years, but I'm sure one day they'll be all exposed by Kubera
Himself.
So, today, by worshipping Kubera, what we are doing we are going to
establish the truth of money. What lies behind the money? What is the point of
having money? This country had money. As a result, so many good people
came here to work and you had so many complementary things. You had lots
of people who complemented because, I think, in certain things Americans
were a little less -not in intelligence, but in brilliance, I think they were a
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
27
January Febuary 2003
little bit lacking, so they got very brilliant people from abroad. And also they
were very focused people, so they worked it out very well. Also they respected
people who came with brains.
So this is what happens when you forget that truth is the main point. If
you don't have the truth, no use having money, because what you did was to
go around with this thing, that thing, I mean all kinds of things to just get
money.
The other day I was travelling through Las Vegas, last week and when
we stopped at that airport, so many people walked into the aeroplane and
they all were looking like somebody's dead in their family, What has
happened?" First I couldn't understand. Then they said, Mother, they have
lost all their money."
So when they have money, they are jumping. Next moment they are crying
because they have lost the money. What's the use of such a money, which is so
temporary, which is so useless, But that is human nature to run after maya and
this is the quality of money that he gives you maya-maya like this, that they
get a little money somehow. With that little money, they buy something, then
they think money is very important. You can buy lots of things. You can buy
cars. You can buy aeroplanes, this, that.
So this is where maya plays on you and you start running after that mad
money, which makes you mad. It's nice that at this juncture they have discovered
the falsehood of this maya money and I am so happy that they were all
handcuffed and all their power of money was finished.
So this Kubera is working out all these tricks. Krishna is a very tricky,
extremely tricky personality. He puts the tricks, every action after every action.
Now money matters, He first befools you, that you run after it and then you
just discover that it was stupidity.
We have a story in our country called Sheikhchilly. He got little money
and he got into the grab of this maya. So he thought I can do very well, so he
started dreamning as to what he could do. So he went and bought lots of eggs
and he said, 'Now these eggs will have little little chicks, which will grow,
which I'll sell and I'll have so much money. It was like that he was talking.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January - February
28
2003
And while thinking about it in his mind, went off to sleep and then in his sleep
he fell on the eggs and all the eggs broke. So the maya was over.
This should happen early, but if it doesn't happen, then you end up in the
jail or something like that.
Sahaja Yoga is one thing which gives you a complete vision, complete
vision of the destruction that can follow this maya business. It is something
such an insight that you don't have to do anything with it.
I am different. I told you I don't understand it at all, but even if you
understand the value of money, even if you understand that money can bring
lots of things to you, despite that, you don't look at it, just turn your face. That
is the sign of a real Sahaja Yogi. To him it doesn't matter, temperamentally.
It's not that he does something for that or tells 'that's mine.' Temperamentally,
he doesn't care for money just because he is above it. The one who is above
money is a real Sahaja Yogi.
The one who is engulfed in the nonsense and the maya of money is not a
Sahaja Yogi. Of course, I have seen most of the Sahaja Yogis are extremely
have
honest, especially in the West. But in India there's a disease. As
you
here some viruses, we have certain viruses in India also, so they still go on
running after money. To them money's important.
But in the evolutionary process, if you reach a certain stage where you
rise above your Nabhi Chakra, then money's not so important. It's not so
important.
To Me, I find I cannot buy things unnecessarily. Of course, I mean, there
were so many unnecessary things they are giving me, give presents this, that.
But Myself, you will be amazed, I'm so nervous or, I should say, hesitant or
whatever you want to call it, absolutely absent from the spot where they are
doing any business, any purchasing.
All this is you have to fix it. That is the point. In the same way, Sahaja
Yogis have to fix their mind to their spirit and enjoy the powers in your spirit,
your own. That enjoyment, once you get it, you don't fall to your greed. This
is something very, very simple, but sometimes you don't do it. You get
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
29
January February 2003
enamoured by something, maybe a car, maybe aeroplanes. I don't know what
whatever it is. It's a headache to have too many cars, isn't it. But people
have. They think, by that, people are impressed and they think no end of
themselves or not. Nothing. If they are impressed, what is the use to us? What
do you get out of it?
Sahaja Yogi has his own spirit to enjoy. More than anything else, he
doesn't want to possess anything. It's headache to possess things also.
The other side of it is a Mahalakshmi. If that principle is within you,
Mahalakshmi principle, you'll never have a problem of money. On the contrary,
you will know how to stop it.
So far, as I am concerned, I get fed up of My Mahalakshmi principle
because I don't know from where it works out, how it works out, without any
effort! But temperamentally, I have no interest at all- temperamentally. But
it is there-I don't know what is the cause of this effect.
Now supposing I buy some small thing, just like that, it will sell atleast
ten times more. It will be of value at least ten times more, I don't know how!
It's very surprising. Automatically, I'll buy something very small and I find
it's very expensive. How it works, that must be miracles of Mahalakshmi, I
think.
So what I have to tell you is this- that you should not worry about your
financial situations at all. Do not go on calculating. Do not see how much
money you have in the bank, what you have to do with your money, where you
should invest. I have seen people going mad, planning the whole thing. There's
no need to do that once you are a Sahaja Yogi. It all works automatically. The
greed is within you, just like any other disease. As you have diseases, greed
is also there. As your diseases can get cured with Sahaja Yoga, your diseases
- as much as your greed is -it vanishes. Don't know what a greed is.
The only way to counter-balance is to become extremely generous. If
you are extremely generous, greed will run away. That may be another way of
doing it. Supposing you get something in your house and you think it is to
much, how to get rid of it, but just to think it's too much, you should give it to
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 30
January- February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
someone. You just start thinking whom can you and immediately you'll
remember, 'Oh, that person doesn't have this. Let me give him this.' And if
you give him, he will be so thankful, so thankful and he'll say all kinds of
nice things to you, which normally nobody would say to you, nobody. And it's
surprising how joy-giving it is, how people like your generosity.
So you have to be generous, just generous, not with yourself, but with
others. As much as possible, be generous. Generosity is very love-giving,
one of the expressions of your love. Many a times it has happened with Me
that I saw somebody needed something and kept it in My mind and I bought
that thing and gave it to that person and the amount of love that person gave
Me was thousand times more than what I would have got joy out of buying it,
buying that thing. It was so insipid for Me, but for him it was not. He told so
many people, 'Mother gave me this. Mother gave me.' I was surprised. Then
they asked me, 'Mother, how did you give him?" I said, 'Just out of love.'
Many people took to Sahaja Yoga, thinking what a generosity is, so to be
generous is the best way to live in this world. After all, it's a headache to
have too many things. Better to get rid of them, but out of love. If you do that,
you'll know how much they will be appreciative of you.
Another thing is to get rid of greed, you should try to do some sort of a
collective social work. Supposing you go to a place where lots of poor people
are there, I tell you, your greed will just drop. Be amazed how these people
are living, in what conditions! Why do I care for all this, wealth and
everything? That will be just shocking. Sometimes, you see, you see people,
in India also, in a very bad condition. Once I went to Calcutta and by chance,
I happened to be in places where people were living in a very great poverty,
even the children, and you'll be amazed, for days together I wouldn't eat My
food. I was crying and not eating My food. I just didn't know what to do
because I felt, 'What is this? Why these people are so?' And I was so helpless,
so I was crying, that one day I should try to do something for them.
It is really remarkable at a very young age of Mine, I started a leper
home, I started an infirmary, refugee home, all kinds of things and I never
even thought that whatever money I have, if I give to these people, I may
have
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January - February
2003
31
to give up somethings. I also sold some of My things because it is so pleasure-
giving, I tell you, so pleasure-giving, so joy-giving to be generous.
It is so paying in every way that you should be generous. That is the
quality of Kubera. He's an extremely generous personality and that's what
personality you should be.
I've seen that Sahaja Yogis are very generous. So far, nobody has told
me that somebody is a miserly fellow- so far, so far. But I am sure one day
will come when we'll have people of very high quality.
In Sahaja Yoga, we don't say, like other cults say, that you give up your
clothes, you give up your family, you stay in a forest or in a hut or anything
nothing of the kind. Don't give up anything. You have to give up from your
heart. Just it should happen in your personality. Don't have to give up. And if
you have that well built in spirituality, you'll not even think of grabbing
someone. On the contrary, you will like to give up everything.
My father was even worse than Me, I should say. He always used to
leave the house open, all doors open. He said no thief will come if you keep
the doors open. So one day a thief came and he took away his gramophone. In
the old times, like these big horn ones, he took away. The next day My father
was sitting very sad. So My mother asked, 'Why are you sad? Because of the
gramophone?" 'No, I'm only sad because it seems a connoisseur of music has
taken the gramophone, but no records.' So My mother said, 'All right, what
should we do? Should we advertise in the newspaper that you take away the
records?"
I mean such a beauty that even after so many years, I am telling you and
you are enjoying. What a beautiful character it was of generosity, but if you
force it through religion, through any such ideas that you give up that - you
don't have to give up. You give up from within. If you are not attached to it,
you have given up. That should be there and if you all enjoy your generosity
and charity - nothing like it. I have known people who are very rich and all
that, but they lack generosity. That is another quality of Kubera.
Apart from that, he perhaps understands banking, perhaps. That time,
there were no banks, but I think must be because the way he manages banks,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 32
January - February
2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
you know, it seems to Me that he's sitting on top of them and that's why still
in the banks there is no problem. I don't know, but he is a very clever person,
very intelligent, very alert, which is important if you have to deal with money.
Though He was absolutely detached from money, and just see His life, what
He did. He lived a childhood with His guru and He used to take, what do you
call, the cows and herds outside in the jungles. That is how He lived in His
childhood and later on He was playing with the boys who were looking after
the cows in a very, I mean, ordinary family. He never hankered after money.
He used to steal ... He used to steal the butter because these ladies used to
sell that (butter) to Kansa's military people. So He used to eat that, so that
these ladies should not give it to them. Just imagine such a little boy like
Him. So actually how He was teaching them a lesson, those ladies were greedy,
wanted to give that to these horrible soldiers and He would eat all that butter
Himself.
In everything that He did, what you see is extreme generosity, extreme
generosity. With all His intelligence, He was so good and He killed His own
uncle, I should say. For Him, it was not important.... so-called relations were
not important. What you see in our India especially, that relations are very
important.
The father is a thief. His son is thief, his grandson is a thief, all of them
are thieves. Can you imagine? I haven't seen in a family, if there's one person
who is a thief, any one (of ) his progeny are honest. It's a very funny thing, but
such greed crawls into their minds, that they don't think it is important. They
just think that stealing is the only way one can live, though in India there are
people who are extremely honest.
I've seen our servants. They never steal nothing, never. I don't know,
they have no reasoning for it. It's a matter of fact. They never steal anything
very surprising. Why? Why don't they steal? They're happy with their
lives. They don't want to change it. They don't want to have this horrible
thing that can put them in jail. But they don't know. They don't even think
about it. They just don't do it. Why? Because they have a sense of shame. In
the poorer people, sense of shame is very, very developed. In that society,
they have a great respect for people who are honest and they're all honest.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 33
January-February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 &2
One of them may be not, but they have no respect for such a person because
they think self-respect is the biggest thing. Can you imagine these poor people?
They have food once a day, but to them their self respect is above everything.
So the third solution for this kind of a nonsensical greed is your self-respect.
Why should you steal? Why should you have anything that is stolen or why
should you have anything that belongs to another person? If you have that
self-respect within you, you won't touch anything that is not yours.
When the servants can do that, why not people who are not that badly
off. It is the temperament of a higher level, I think, which they develop, where
their self-respect is much more important than all kinds of other things that
may satisfy their greed.
One thing about greed is (that) it is never satisfied. It is never satisfied.
I've seen people who were very rich once upon a time became very, very
poor. So, to them, life has become hell. They can't live without their greed, I
should say, pomp and show. But they don't understand that it was false. They
just go on feeling extremely downtrodden when they lose their money.
Then there are people who want to have money. They'll do anything to
get money. It's a very funny thing, but also power is the same as that. If you
have your own powers, you don't hanker after these powers. But they want to
have power because they want to have money and they get power with money.
Can you imagine? Where are human beings? At what level? At what level of
evolution they are? They are going round and round the circle of this money.
This is Nabhi Chakra, which has to improve, which gives you satisfaction. If
your Nabhi Chakra is satisfied, you have achieved the state of Kubera.
That's very important to see that your Nabhi should be satisfied.
There're so many other kinds of things we have, but now I think the
worst is this greed and this, if it is managed somehow or other, brought to its
own level, then I think world will be improved very
much.
May God Bless You.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 WHAT IS A SAHAJA YOGI
Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
17-05-1980
It is when you think of becoming then the preparation is done to become
something and on the whole when you know that it is your ego and super ego
which are loading you up, you have to scan them out with vibratory awareness.
Now there are two types of attention. First is the constant attention that
is the routine of a Sahaja Yogi and the second one is the emergency attention.
I have been seeing that all the Sahaja Yogis must start writing their diaries-
one with everyday's experiences. If you know that you have to write a diary,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 January - February
2003
35
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
you will keep your mind alert, and I? Then any special path or any
another one wherever you get any special movement in the centre or left
special idea of the past or of the future or right also should be mentioned, so
also to jot it down. So like that you that you keep a watch on your
should have two diaries. For your It's a very good thing to maintain a
mind.
constant attention you have to fix up
diary.
your mind on certain facts. The first
keep
one, as I said, is that if you keep a progressively how your ideas are
diary then you will know that you changed? How new priorities are
Also
will
you
have to remember what important settling down? How you give more
things have happened. So, your importance to real things and very
attention will be alert and you will little to unreal things. I think this is a
be looking out for such points where very-very practical side of human
what is the thing you see. And you will beings that one should have a diary
be amazed if you make your attention Same diaries after some time will
alert, what new things come to you. become historical things and people
Very brilliant ideas and the miracles
would like to see what you all have
of life and the miracles of god's written, not to be hypocritical about
beauty and his auspiciousness, his it or deceptive about it but quite
greatness, his kindness, his blessings. truthful and understanding you should
How to work out if you start writing
jot down few lines just before
everyday even two lines about it sleeping.
which will make your mind constantly
Now, we have to see that we
have problems for super ego and ego.
involved within. That's a human style
of doing things.
Now, superego is the left side, is
Also you can mention in the darkness, tamoguna and our past.
diary, what happened with you? Could Those who have left side problems
you do your meditation? Did you get should think of the future to give them
your time for meditation or not. A balance. If they think of the future, for.
little bit as if you are appearing for example, a person who is lethargic
some sort of a examination or should take to working. Put your mind
something prepare a little note like
that. Did I get up in the morning? Did
into working for the future planning.
What to do, Where to go, How to do?
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 January - February
36
2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
That will keep you away from the drag will you get up? Even puja is a good
of the left side and gradually then you idea, home is a good idea. Do
can balance yourself also. Now, the something like that so that you have
right side of a person when it is to do something what you call the
Kriya, is the action, get into the
action. Some sort of an action you go
into in Sahaja Yoga as well as in your
activated very much, he has to balance
it not with the left side but with the
centre, that is, a person who is very
hard-working must develop a witness daily life, you will be able to do
change that mood and come to the right
state. You try to do a work, any work,
side and then your movement should
be towards the satvaguna, is to watch
everything. Now, at the satvaguna
indulge into work in thoughtless
awareness, as a witness. Whatever
work you are doing, you just say that
I am not doing it. This you can do it point, when you are in the centre, you
become have to see, how much you are
realisation,
after
thoughtlessly aware and start doing misidentified. Say, supposing you are
your work. So, the compensation of at the first stage of left side then you
the left side is done by movement to will just do day dreaming. Oh! this
the right and of the right side person is so much identified, that one
movement to the centre. Left side is is so much identified as if you are the
the Tamogeuna', right side is the
best. It is just the human nature, you
see. Oh that person is like that, he is
'Rajoguna' and the centre is the
like that, this is very bad in the society,
'Satvaguna'. But, still these are three
that is going bad in the society. It's
better, then we can also go to this limit
gunas. That's not the state which you
have to achieve. About this I will tell
you tomorrow more, how to go further to that guru is very bad and that as is
with it. After scanning out which side another madcap, like that you see all
is weak, you should plan out your is going on. How far it is affecting
you? How far you are improving by
that? That is not. It is just getting,
style of life.
For example if you are extremely
thinking, analysing. It is a lazy style,
lethargic, you cannot get up in the
morning, you feel very sleepy in the
night, you do not feel alert, then start
sitting down and just analysing, it's a
lazy style!
The second thing could be when
planning as to what will you do? How
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-40.txt 
 37
January - February
2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1& 2
you come to the second side of it is you should take, to jump on to
the Kriya. Then what happens when Satvaguna. On Satvaguna you start
accepting it. You become extremely
mild. You become a mild personality.
At that time you do not discuss as to,
you start doing it, then at least your
attention is on what you are doing. It's
not allowed to drift into something
Oh I don't like it. This was wrong this
and which goes into any nonsense and
can, I mean, then you don't know from
where the funny thoughts are coming.
So, you start doing something, you
should not have been. All these things
do not come to you in Satvaguna. You
start seeing it. That time you see.
Alright doesn't matter, you understand
On the contrary, you feel hurt, if you
are a Satoguni that by any suggestion
you have suggested your being? Can
you get that point? You feel ashamed
of your ego, I mean to say, if you are
a Satoguni. For example even to say
that this is my car, you will feel shy.
That's a Satoguni or even to say why
did you spoil my carpet. In India
can go and plant some trees or you
can go and plant some flowers or if
you want you can do some cooking
you can do some work. Take to work.
That will help you, any work but
while doing the work the problem
will be, you'll develop ego. That's
why when you are developing the ego
you have to tell yourself you are not
doing mister, this you are not doing.
you are not doing. If you go on nobody will say. I can tell you, this is
suggesting to your self then ego will regarded bad manners, absolute bad
not come up and many things you see
which normally trouble you and house and a carpet is spoiled, they
trouble others – like you have will say let it be, does not matter.
cleaned the room, alright. Then
somebody comes and spoils this, you you burnt'? They will never say that
get angry with that person. Naturally you have burnt my carpet, you have
because you think you had done it. done anything to my, it is regarded bad
First of all you don't clean the room. manners. Like here you see somebody
If you clean the room then you be is sleeping and some body makes the
prepared, it will be dirty, otherwise noise. The person, who is sleeping
why should you clean? Now, if it is will never say that you are making
dirty, well and good, if it is not dirty, noise and I had to get up. He will just
well and good. This type of an attitude get up and ask 'do you need anything?"
manners. If anybody comes to your
Even if it is burnt, they will say, tare
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-41.txt 
 38
January - February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
even if you do something, any work
you do or anything you are doing, you
That's difficult for people here to
understand because ego is just sitting
on them. But is bad manners there, but are just doing it because you want to
you will find when you will go to do it. That is how you come on to
India. You will find these are bad Satoguna. But normally it doesn't
happen. It happens the other way
manners, to say that. How to say oh I
feel very comfortable, I mean to say round. For example a person is, say,
*I feel comfortable' is bad manners, I doing something by any chance he
feels hurt or he thinks that whatever
mean they never say. I like it, so what.
he has done is no good, people don't
All these words are not to be said. If
you are a Satoguni, then you just don't appreciate or may be he might think
say. You say, do you like it? Is it that, oh it's not upto the point or
whatever it is. Then the reaction for
comfortable? Would you like to have
him is not that he does not try to rise
it? The whole attention goes from
your side. Do you understand that?
That is the style one has to develop. Tamoguna. He says, all right I will not
to Satoguna but he goes back to
Then you are a Satoguni. Otherwise do it, I will sleep over it, let them do
you are still on ego trip. You see it, why should I do it. So the training
that you have to have through your
whatever you may feel, I don't like
that, I, who are you? First of all ask Rajoguna goes a waste. It's just
the question who are you? If God training period that you are with
I don't like, I can understand, Rajoguna. You are doing something.
Now, in the training period you have
says,
but for you to say, I don't like it, after
to learn only how to come in the
all, how did you come on this earth?
How did you get the human birth? centre? For example now water is
How did you get all these things? required for you to shave. If there is
Now, think like that. Who am I? I am
no water you cannot shave, alright?
In the same way Rajoguna is required
nothing.
for you, to come to Satoguna. If you
Anybody who thinks I am
do not do any work, you cannot come
something, he should know that he is
nothing, makes no difference to God
to Satoguna. So you are just working
just to train yourself to be a witness.
weather he exists or does not exist.
Now, do you follow that point? You
So, this point if you understand that
are not doing it because you like a
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-42.txt 
 January February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
39
particular thing, you are used to a pleasure only you will get when you
particular thing, because you want to
be deep. This is not the way it is. You it's the training period. You are better
are just doing it to learn how to be trained than the other one was, You
patient, to practice your patience, to are at a higher class than the other one.
see how much patient you are? Once So we have to be at a higher class.
you start doing it you will be amazed For that this is just a training on and
that you will never feel the burden of that's how we can really put our
the work, but it never happens. Most preparation into practice into all
of the people, if they find their work details to see how we work out our
will do it with the understanding that
is not effective they will go back to ego and superego. Today, in the
Tamoguna. There are many attitudes. morning I have told you that your
say, somebody is working. Then he intellect must imbibe this within
thinks, why should I do all the work, itself, alright. And now I am telling
others are not doing? He will go back you that your action. Action that you
to their state. But those who are not do must be everytime branded by you
working will not think that this person as just your training, any action you
is working, let me also work. It's other do. Supposing you have to drive for
way round, you see. This can be an miles together, you are trying your
attitude of some people that if this patience. It is you who could do
person is working, let him work. This
is even a meaner style. Avoid just that,
you go to a restaurant and somebody
everything.
Supposing you have to drop
down from a helicopter or if they have
takes out the purse, others start
to drop from the parachute, you go on
looking this side. It's very mean.
doing it again and again, you practice
it, you drop many a times. You break
your legs, you break your hands, you
do this, you do that, till you become a
master. Do you understand my point?
Driving same way. Till you become a
master, you go on. In the same way
Everybody should come forward
and once you have paid you have paid
its finished. Then you just don't start
counting why did I pay? One should
try. Any work has to be done, go
forward with it. Do it with your heart.
Don't worry if others are not doing
you are doing this just to master your
it. Just do it for its pleasure and the
ego. Isn't it?
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-43.txt 
 40
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January-February 2003
To know how these clouds are not alright, then Mataji must come up
coming into us and that how we go and say, what do you mean by that?
into our complete analysis. How these
clouds are coming to us, you find
Why should you say like that? What's
wrong?
about our different chakras. What are
When you say that to yourself,
the chakras we are catching? Here which is outside, then the attention
comes the other constant attention
starts moving towards your self which
is Mataji and you start becoming that
and you start feeling through your
towards our chakras. Are our
vibrations alright or not. Are we
getting our vibrations? If not, what
chakra am I catching, what must be the
heart. So your Atma is to be satisfied
by your Atma. There is nothing in
between. It is you only in this dual
cateh? I must raise my Kundalini, see
for myself where is the catch. Do I
do my meditation or not? If I do it, One is ingorance and the other is
personality, has to satisfy yourself.
am I doing it just dosingly or am I
really in it? Am I really feeling it or
knowledge. Now try to identify
yourself with that Mataji call it or any
not? Am I alert or not? All this is to
be asiduously, sincerely, absolutely,
xyz, whatever you call it, Atma. Just
a drama, say. You just think that you
are the Self-Spirit. So how will you
address yourself? Let's see.
Supposing you have to sit in my seat,
truthfully worked out. Because, it is
a process between yourself-
Atamanyeva Atmanajayte. See it is so
funny relationship that it is the Atman take it like that, and then you are
is satisfied with Atma. You have
sitting in front of me also, alright? So
you are sitting here and sitting there.
to be satisfied with yourself. There
is nobody, Mataji is not concerned,
Take a position like that, now you put
nobody is concerned. It is you who is
up yourself in the drama and you start
concerned with yourself. For
addressing yourself. "So Bala, how
I
example, you ask somebody. Says, I
am like this Mother. Now think that
are you?' And Bala says 'better!'
If you are identified now with
you are Mother – one personality.
Another is say Mr. Don or Kingslay Mataji, gradually Bala will diminish,
two alright? But if you are still identified
You
or
someone.
are
personalities. So when you are telling with Bala, he will grow on this
illusion.
yourself in front of Mataji that I am
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-44.txt 
 41
January-February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
You have to try to address For example, if you have a Prime
yourself as if you are Mataji. It's a Minister and a Deputy Prime Minister
drama. You sit before the mirror. In and a Minister three persons,
airight? Now, if the Prime Minister
is your Self and the Minister has to
the mirror you see this outside of yours
and here you are sitting, whatever you
are, Mr. Don, for example.
become the Prime Minister. So, he has
to first become Deputy Prime Minister.
Now Mr. Don is addressing the
other Don there. Let him take up a role
that I am the spirit. He'll say, I am
After becoming Deputy Prime
Minister he has to become Prime
Minister. First Deputy Prime Minister
the spirit and I am eternal. I am this.
Nobody can destroy me. I am above and then the Prime Minister. But
everything. That thing will go down. Supposing this fellow starts to jump
over this, this will come up and hit
I am a realised soul. I know what
him and say, I am the one. And this
spirit is. What are you talking? It will
go down. This is how you start
one is Ego.
moving. That is only possible when
first you become a Satoguni. If you are
You understand the point. So you
cannot surpass it. You have to merge
not a Satoguni, with ego-I am this, this into this and then this into this.
and you become a
guru and sStart
The movement has to be like that but
minting money.
if you try to just become this, actually
First the ego is to be brought you will become this, not this.
Because you cannot become this. You
down, if there is still ego then without
becoming Atma you become an ego. understand my point. So, even when
So, first this journey should be doing this if you try sitting before
brought in to the centre of Satoguna. mirror and telling yourself that you are
That is why I say that when you are the spirit, who are the part of Virata,
talking or doing anything, you must that you are the ocean because your
know that it is your spirit which is drop has fallen into the ocean, then
doing it. That's how you put your you must know that your drop has
spirit in charge or say at the pedestal- fallen into the ocean. That's how
first stage. Then when the spirit is you've become an ocean. If that stage
there then from this stage to that stage, is missing then your saying that you
are an ocean is absolutely bombastic.
then you say that now I am the spirit.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-45.txt 
 January - February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
42
And that's why one has to be very
This perhaps I'll never catch
also, to be very frank. But if I want to.
know where I am catching I can find
out but I don't want to. So, what I say,
steady and careful absolutely
steady as far as dealing with oneself.
Because you know how this
intelligence can cheat you. So, be
very-very careful and when you are
dealing with you, you must know you
have to first overcome this ego. The
alright I'll tell you where is the catch.
At that time one's attitude could be
that I must tell otherwise Mataji won't
know, you see very funny! The second
thing to overcome ego is to change one could be that I know where She
your language, style, is to speaking the is catching and I must tell and Mataji
also knows but she wants to test me.
third person. [It] is a very good way.
Like you must say, when you are should be careful. At this point people
talking about yourself, this Mataji make mistakes.
won't listen to me. This Mataji won't
If I ask them where is it catching.
do this. You see, so what happens.
This Mataji will tell you part of it. I am catching on left heart but very
Once you start separating this Mataji mild finished then, you get less
away from yourself then that ego marks, you get less marks. You can get
Mataji disappears. You understand? whatever it is because at least you're
Like you can say, this Bala is like that. honest. Whatever it is. Supposing the
fellow is not catching heart but you
He won't listen. So whatever real
Bala is left within you is alright. are feeling the heart, you will say
heart. That's being honest. Then I will
That's how you get rid of your ego and
by understanding your centre, what
tell you, who is catching the heart.
But if you are. perhaps, yes Mataji,
No Mataji then you get less marks, not
very good art. I am not alright, I don't
know. that's not a good art. You have
you are catching, where you are
catching, how you are catching, it
would be really easy, for you to get
rid of your ego. Now, see what Sahaja
to tell who is catching. Then you pay
more attention that you have to pass
Yogis do. Supposing there are five
Sahaja Yogis sitting. I mean you know
that I know about everyone,
through the test. This is just testing.
Why? Because tomorrow you have to
everything. I don't have to ask, what
give realisation, you have to become
is fact? Now, why do I ask? I show
the gurus, you have to know all these
complete ignorance.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-46.txt 
 January-February 2003
43
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
things. So, this is all training period. but if you don't get a taxi it's very
I am just training you by asking you
but I have seen people even getting
difficult, better come to Hertz Green.
He said, where? I said, Hertz Green.
egoistie. It's surprising sometimes.
That also gives ego to people that I saying blue to green, I don't know. I
say alright tell me where I am said no it's Herts green. He said what
catching, where do I catch? I told did you say. I said Herts green. So he
So he said, Herts Blue? How he is
correctly, finished. It is just a very couldn't understand. What is the
foolish thing that you have said. second one? I said, what is the colour
Everyone has to see clearly. So, be a of the leaf. He said, blue. Gregoire
was there. I said, now listen to him,
simple person like children are. They
what is he saying colour of the leaf is
blue! So, Gregoire lifted the phone
just come. They try, this one, that one,
finished. Then they work untired, I'll
say. They are not bothered that we and he said, alright you come to Herts
should, they must say something or blue. So, he said now, atleast now he
something to show off, nothing. won't come Mother, that botheration
Whatever they see, they say. But only is gone. It was such a confused
personality, thinking between blue
grown-ups will say, that may be I am
catching, maybe it is his. I don't know.
All this is done by grown up people.
Because still the sensitivity is alright
and green. You are fighting with that.
That's what it is. The attention should
be there to try to see, if you are
but they are not sure of themselves. confused there is confusion, clear it
out, by clearing out your chakras.
Now, every chakra, let's have a little
testing, alright? You are going to
answer the question.
Children are very sure. They are cock
sure of everything. You ask them
anything they will tell you, yes this is
this, this is this. But you ask anyone
what is the colour of this thing. They
Now, say Hamsa Chakra is
will
say maybe green may be red. Like
we had one old gentleman, not very catching what should we do? Answer
old, as old as myself but he was to
the question.
come to my house and he telephoned
Hamsa Chakras is catching what
to me. He said, I want to come to your
should we do?
house. How should I come? I say this
This is Hamsa Chakra, so you
place is Oxtead, you can come there,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-47.txt 
 44
January February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue1& 2
the left side, left side catching is.
have to say.
there, then for left side Hamsa what
Aum tvameva sakshat, Hamsa
should you do? Tell me.
Chakra swamini sakshat, Shri Adi
Shakti Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devyai
It is the Ida Nadi. It comes from
Namo-Namah.
the left and goes to the right. So, you
ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात् श्री हंस चक्र have to say Mahakali or Ida Nadi, lda
स्वामिनी साक्षात् श्री आदिशक्ति Nadi Swamini. Now. Say it, just now
माताजी श्री निर्मला देवी नमो नमः ।
you are catching on the left.
Aum tvameva sakshat, Ida Nadi
So, it is opened up. Now fill it,
all of you.
swamini sakshat. Shri Adi Shakti
Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devyai Namo-
Now put your finger like this and
Namah.
say it.
ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात् श्री ईड़ा नाड़ी
Say it three times- (Everyone स्वामिनी साक्षात् श्री आदिशक्ति
says the mantra)
माताजी श्री निर्मला देवी नमो नमः ।
Now, what happens in this
(3times).
centre that both the Nadis 'Ha' and
*Tha', Ida and Pingla, they come and
Now, there is another thing, that
meet and they cross over. So, from the supposing your right side is catching
right Nadi, right side, this one the left or you have a liver problem then what
Nadi flows and from the right side the should we use light, Sun's rays or
one which comes from the right side what? See, right side is heat, is Surya
flows into left side. These two centres Nadi. So you have problem of Surya
meet here, I mean two Nadi's meet Nadi -right side. So, to neutralize
here, actually, below the Agya. It's it, you have to use something like
below the Agya at Hamsa, you see. [cold]. At that time what you have to
And the problems come to you either say? You can take the name of
from the right or from the left, most "Chandra'. You will cool down if
of you catch on Hamsa, here, because there is heat on the right hand side,
of cold or whatever it is. Now I have you should take the name of Chandra.
If it is the left side catching then you
told you many things by which you
have to take the name of Surya', for
control your cold. But if it is due to
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-48.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January - February
45
2003
example you are possessed then go person then go and sit in the
and sit in the Sun. All the bhoots will moonlight. May be you will be little
lunatic. (Everyone laughs)
run away. They run away from the Sun.
But supposing you are egoistical
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-49.txt 
 ISTANBUL PUBLIC PROGRAM
23rd April, 2002
On the day of the public
program on April 23rd, the whole should follow their common sense and
auditorium was as full as was last not undergo the French influence,
She said that Turkish people
which is spread around and labelled
year.
as culture.
There were approximately seven
After that, maybe fifty people
thousand people – one thousand
yogis and maybe six thousand left. Then She said that people should
seekers. First, there was a brief not do the things that they don't
introduction, then Shri Mataji Spoke. understand. She was referring to
Shri Mataji pointed out the parallel specific false practices. Another fifty
between Sufism and Sahaja Yoga, as people left.
in last year's talk. A surprise was that
Shri Mataji invited the audience
this time Shri Mataji blamed French
to ask Her question before Self
people, their eating, drinking of
Realisation.
alcohol and some of their other habits
She answered them with honesty
and their influence on some African
countries and Turkey. She said that and simplicity. Here are some of
them:
French playwright Moliere wrote
about their stupidity.
Question : Mauvlana Jelalettin
Rumi the great Islamis Sufis said, "If
I reveal the secret, I'll get burned as
"Some French people try to
influence you, your TVs. Be careful.
They do just the opposite of Christ."
She also said that we should keep our
well as well the humans."
Shri Mataji : It's true. That was
culture. "The Mother of Christ came
the time the people were not aware.
to Turkey and I came also because the
They crucified Christ, They tortured
people are so good here."
Mohammed-Sahib. I am not afraid. Let
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-50.txt 
 January - February
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
2003.
them burn Me. I don't care.
Then came the Self Realisation
Question : All you said about session, a very short one, not even
French people acting against world taking off shoes. Shri Mataji said that
peace, does it concern the whole of
the French people?
ten thousand people got their
Realisation.
The audience celebrated this
Shri Mataji : Of course not,
rebirth by listening and dancing with
there are execptions.
the joyful qawwali music of the
Allahu song for twenty-five minutes.
Question : What about death?
Shri Mataji : That we'll discuss
The next day all the TV channels
broadcast many scenes from the
later. You are very young. Don't think
of death. Think of the present. So much
publie program, all very positively
has to be doe in the present. Thinking except one, but these others were
of death is trying to escape the
enough to spread the message and the
vibrations of Shri Mataji. Also one
present.
TV channel, Star TV, broadcast online
Question : Why do people lie?
a part of the Self Realisation session.
Shri Mataji : Because they
don't know the truth and the power of
Shri Mataji left Istanbul on
Saturday, the 27th. Yogis were a bit
truth.
sad because She was leaving us and
Question : Is yoga attained by also because of this hostile TV
the power of the mind?
coverage. But surprisingly, one of the
customs officers said to a yogini,
Shri Mataji : It's beyond the
"Don't worry about the TV programs.
She is a very spiritual person. We
mind. You'll see this when you'll get
Realisation.
know that." We were surprised and all
the lost joy came back again.
Question : Where did you get
your Realisation? Do you see yourself
Another surprise was that a
as a prophet? Where is your place
police chief, a bit impressed by this
near God?
same TV program, was at the airport
Shri Mataji : Don't worry about
trying to create some difficulties,
Me. Worry about yourself.
asking about Shri Mataji. He was
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-51.txt 
 48
2003
January - February
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
invited to get his Self Realisation. By embarrassingly, "What's happening to
Shri Mataji's simple right hand me?" So everything was switched to
gesture, he was surprised by the the positive. He found out who She
strong cool breeze he felt, asking, is.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-52.txt 
 THE JOY OF SPREADING
I hope you all people understand
the importance of spreading Sahaja
WORK
You have to be not egoistical, but
Yoga.
proud. Proud that
you are Sahaja
Yogis, proud that
If
you
don't do that,
you have been
are
you
absolutely
born in sucha
time, when you
useless. The
greatest thing for
Me, as you have
have to carry on
the duties of
God's work, that
so many lights
here, we should
God has chosen
you. So first, you
should come up
have many more
Sahaja Yogis all
to that level. Like
over the world,
if you want to
change this
world and if you
some people I
find suddenly
become morose,
recluse in Sahaja
want to avoid
Yoga. They will
all the trials and
be
tribulations of
пever
forgiven because
God has given
the useless life
they are leading,
you have to save them. You have to you so much. Supposing somebody gives
salvage them. That's your job. That's
you a diamond. You are proud. You put it
on and show off. But when you have been
what you have to pay for Sahaja Yoga.
given your Spirit, you should be proud
25th December, 2001
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-53.txt 
 January -February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
50
are in Sahaja Yoga. It should show. I am
a woman Myself. Single-handed, I've
done all this work. And why shouldn't
you do it? Because it's a tremendous test
to transform people all over the world.
and not behave like recluse. Some people
feel, "I shall not take any job now. I'll
not go out. I'll sit at home and meditate."
The word "can't" should go away from
the dictionary of people who are
supposed to be Sahaja yogis.
But it's very easy for you. If I can do it,
why can't you do it?
21st March, 1983
But put your complete attention to
I'm working twenty-four hours. Not
it, that "We are going to work out Sahaja
a single minute I waste. And in the same
way, I hope you will dedicate your Yoga, not for ourselves, but for the
twenty-four hours for your emancipation
and the emancipation of the whole
betterment of humanity." We need it. We
need it very much. Your compassion, your
love, is all being wasted if you just think
universe.
about yourself, your family. What's the
use? People do that even before
4th May, 1985
In this world, everybody has to do Realisation. So what is the use of
something. But then what about Sahaja completely getting attached to your family,
Yogis? It's such a rare thing to happen attached to all other things? You should
that you have got your Realisation. So get attached to the whole world. You
where should we waste out attention? belong to the whole world now...
Why should we neglect our meditation?
Why? We have to grow. We are a different
people. We are a different race altogether
in this world. We are realised souls.
Now, as I said, the drop has become
the ocean. Identity yourself with the
ocean. The ocean is the lowest, if you have
seen, the lowest so much that the zero
There were hardly any number during the point starts from the ocean. The ocean is
time of Christ, practically I mean. And
even before that I was surprised that in
China and other places, in one age there
used to be one guru, one master. While
you are so many masters, but your don't
so humble. It's at the lowest point it lives,
but all the rivers flow into it. And the
ocean does the work of throwing clouds
in the sky. And these then burst and
become rain falling into the same ocean.
want to use your powers as a master.
They come back to the same ocean.
Why not the women use it also? I
So those who are humble will
find women are more lethargic than men
attract more Sahaja Yogis. Those who are
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-54.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January-February 2003
51
relate to others? How do I talk to others,
who are Sahaja Yogis....?
kind will attract many more Sahaja Yogis.
31st December, 2000
So now there is no time for lethargy.
Now you have to rise and awake. Today
is the day when I hope you have to jump
into nirvikalpa. But only by effort, you
will stay there, otherwise you will again
BECOMINGDYNAMIC
You have to surrender fully from
your heart. I am what I am. I have been
that. I'll be that. I'm not going to grow
any more or less. This is an eternal
personality. It is now for you to get out of
slip down.
So go through this lecture again and
again and do not think about it. Don't think
that it is for somebody else. It is for you.
For all of you, each of you and you must
Me whatever is possible, to make the use
of your birth in these modern times, to
grow to your full maturity, to be able to
work out the complete design that the
Divine wants to do through you. As soon
know yourself how far you are going
as the dedication starts, you become every day.
dynamic, clinging on to that. For this,
meditation is the only way, I should say.
3rd May, 1986
HOW ARE WE GOING TO
SPREAD THIS MESSAGE OF LOVE
Of course, rationally you can do
many things. You can rationally accept
Me, Emotionally, you may feel closer to
Me in your heart, but through meditation,
surrender, Meditation is nothing but
TO PEOPLE?
In two ways you can work it out-
how individually you can do it and how
collectively you can do it. So I have to
surrendering, is complete surrendering.
make one suggestion to the leaders, that
31st July, 1982
whatever suggestion comes to you from
the people, you must accept. You are just
the leader there. Because you have to just
communicate with each other, you are not
to dominate anybody. You are not to sort
Now you may say, "What should we
do?" Face yourself every day. In reality,
see how much time you spend on mundane
worries and how much on your ascent.
of dictate anything to anybody, but you
have to be a communication person for
Have you left everything, all your worries
to God Almighty? Have you completely
jumped out of your background?Have you
come out all the way, leaving everything
Me and them.
So now you should see that how
that was nonsensical? And how do I
these people are giving you new ideas,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-55.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
January-Febnuary 2003
52
not put them down. Don't think you are
to do the job.
the only one who has ideas. Get ideas
Another quality of Hanumana is He
was beyond time.. He was doing
everything very fast.. One of the qualities
from them. They might get ideas from the
customs. They may tell you something
which should be done and should be noted
of Shri Hanumana was that he was a fast
down and recorded that, "yes, this was
said. This was to be done." And then try
person. He would do it before anybody
could do it...
to follow whatever is possible.
It's very good to go to Trafalgar and
beat Napoleon, but in the field of dharma,
I think, people don't understand the
importance of time. We are delayed
If you are in doubt, you can always
telephone to Me and find out. But involve
them in this dynamism. Everybody is
involved.
masters and delayed habits we have. "All
right, I'll telephone, I find out.. It will
Ist December, 1988
happen." That's one of the greatest defects
SPEED
we have...
Better do it quickly immediately.
The powers that we have are for
That's the time to do it. "But next year,
Sahaja Yoga. As Mother has powers to
work for Sahaja Yoga, we too have Mother, we'll see, you know, after
powers to work for Sahaja Yoga and, as Ganapatipule we can consider. We'll
She works, we also have to work. But have discussions and then we'll have
arguments and this and that." That's one
there is attachment like this. "Mother is
thing about His character. One has to know
that today, when we are worshipping
doing everything. What can we do?" No,
you have to do it.
This is a very important detachment Hanumana, we should have that quick
I am telling you. You have to do it Vividness in us. It is to be done now. We
yourself. It's not that "Mother will do.
After all, She is doing everything." It's
cannot postpone it anymore. Already we
are very much delayed.
..
To see the results, you have to
correct. That's correct in a way. But you
are the instrument. So the source may
be there, but the instruments deliver the
become quick people, not to linger and
be satisfied with other things, but positive
things, what we are doing..
goods and, like Hanumana, you are the
instrument and you have to work. You have
So attention should be on the job.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-56.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1 & 2
HJanuary-February 2003
53
And that's what we are doing about it....
their jobs...
You just start it. You'll get it. You have
powers. Everything will be synchronized
You are not aware that you are
angels, that you have to do this and nothing
properly. We just e4
else is important.
But if we behave like human beings.
first thing, then plan it out and then cancel
it, it's not going to work out. Though it is
Hanumana, is running on the Pingala
I hope that by today's puja that
enthusiasm, that venturesome nature will
vibrate your Pingala and, without feeling
any ego about it, in the most humble
Nadi, all the time, what He does is to
manner. As Hanumana was, we'll do the
spoil our plan because, instead of Him,
we run on the Pingala. This is all right.
You are running it. I'll put you right.
jobs.
So much dynamism and so much of
humility, what a combination it was. And
that you have to manifest. The more you
work, the more you'll assert yourself.
You'll find that humility is the only thing
that helps. Obedience is the only thing that
helps to carry out your work and you'll
So He sidetracks all our plans all
the time. That's how all our planning fails.
We are particular about timing, about
things of not importance. But we are not
particular about timing about our progress
in Sahaja Yoga. We must have targets. We
become humbler and humbler.
must have fixed times.
But if you are thinking that "I am
You have to do Sahaja Yoga. You
already this," then finished. But if you
have to spread it. You have to bring it to
know that it's done by the Divine,
a level where people can see it.
"Paramchaitanya is doing everything, I'm
You have to venture. You have to
just an instrument," then humility will be
venture without any fear, collectively and there and you'll be an effective
individually forgetting as to what will
instrument...
happen. I mean, you won't go to jails,
you'll not be crucified, be sure on that. I
mean, if you lose your job, you get
another. And if you don't get a job, you
can get a dole, all right. So you don't have
If you are doing God's work, your
worries are taken over. You don't have
to worry about anything, just takes over.
But it's not self-propagation. It's not. It's
propagation of the collective.
to worry about the useless things human
beings sit down and normally worry. But,
Inner Dynamo
When you see something, it reacts,
despite that, they achieve work, they do
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-57.txt 
 54
January -February 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 1& 2
you have red also." He said. "Where? Do
it reacts. The difference between My
looking at anything is that-that reacts. you know, Mother?" I said, "We passed
When I look at you, your kundalini reacts. that way about eight years back and I know
When I look at this, it gets vibrated - there are red stones."
kataksha. Kataksha - every glance- every
So everything I see gets vibrated
and alsoI note what is there and is already
there to be used at the proper time...
glance makes the thing react. And
nireekshana means "I know what it is."
Just looking at a person, I know
what it is. Looking at a thing, I know what
it is - nireekshana. But the whole thing is
So when you have that kind of a
temperament, you will be amazed the
amount of dynamism that will work it out.
in the memory there.
You don't have to create a dynamo. It is
inside you. Let it work out.
Like we were going and they said,
"We have only black stones. I said, "No,
22nd April, 1984
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-59.txt 
 1014
WP
