YUVADRISHTI An offering at the lotus feet of our Divine Mother by the Yuvashakti Volume 4 secense Issue 4

 Index पुजी तथा हवेन की महत्व Adi Guru Moses 4. Genesis of Sanskrit Language The Great Artist Leonardo da Vinci 9. ब्रह्मपुरी 13 mon Yuvadrishti Asks 15 The essence of life is fragrance of Love This New Year, lets spread the message of Love Merry Christmas & Happy New Year to all our Brothers & Sisters.

 की महत्व पुजी तथा हवन पॅरिस, १९८३ इतने सारे सहज योगियों के साथ होनेसे मै बहुत जब आप में अंध विश्वास नही है पर श्रद्धा है, जी प्रसन्न तथा आनंद में हूँ। इनमें से कितने ही अनुभव जनित है। तो, आपकी बुद्धिमत्ता को एकदम नए भी हैं। मेरे लिये इतने नए नही हैं, उससे लढना नही चहिए। ना ही उसे ललकारना वास्तव में मैने आप सभी को हजारों साल पहले चाहिए। अगर उसे ललकारा गया, और आपने से जाना है। सहज योग में आप सभी को एक आपकी बुद्धिमत्ता को सुना, तो आप फिरसे नीचे आसान सी बात समझ लेना चअहिए, है कि आप चले जाएंगे। अगर आकाश में तारे का लक्षण भी आत्मा हैं। जो कुछ भी आत्मा नही है, वो आप नजर आ जाए,तो वैज्ञानिक विश्वास कर लेते हैं किं वहाँ पर तारा है। उसी प्रकार, आपको अपने साक्षात्कार केी अगर नही हैं। हम आत्मा की तुलना सूर्य से कर सकते हैं। सूर्य बाढलों से ढँका जा सकता है। सूर्य पर अध्यारोपण हो सकता है, किन्तु सूर्य इस बिन्दु पर, वैसा ही बना रहता है। स्वयं से ही प्रकाशित है। अब जब बाढल निकाल दिये जाते हैं, हटा दिये जाते है, तो सूर्य पूरे पर्यावरण में चमकने लगता है। तो, हमारा आत्मा भी अज्ञान से अध्यारोपित है। जब तक अध्यारोपण है आप आत्मा को देख नही सकते। और जब कुछ बादल गायब हो भी जाते हैं, तो भी अध्यारोपण उपस्थित होता ही है। आत्मा के प्रकाश को चमकता हुआ देखने के लिये व्यक्ति के लिए स्वच्छ आकाश की आवश्यकता होती है। कई तरीकों से हम इन बादलों को निकालने का प्रयासकरसकते है। झलक मात्र भी है, तो भी आपको कम से कम यह तो मान ही लेना चाहिये कि आप आत्मा भी है। अब आप वो इस अनुभव को पकडेरहिये और अपना चित्त सदा इस तथ्य पर रखिए कि आप आत्मा है। इससे आप अपनी बुद्धिमत्ता का मुख मोडसकते हैं। ा अब आपकी बुद्धिमत्ता आत्मा कीी [खो ज में कार्यान्वित होगी। यही श्रद्धा का अर्थ है। श्रद्धा शुद्ध बुद्धि (सुबुद्धि) का उदय करती है। अब, एक बार तो अपने बादलों को निकलते हुए देख लिया किन्तु अभी और भी बाढल बाकी हैं। तो आपको बादल हटाने के लिये हवा का उपयोग करना होगा, परम चैतन्य रूपी हवा ० सबसे पहली तथा महत्त्वपूर्ण वस्तु है, ये का! और, जैसा कि आप जानते हैं, इस हवा से मान्यता, विशवास कि हम आत्मा हैं: और शेष लाभलेने के कई तरीके हैं। तो ये हवा किसी और सभी कुछ अध्याो ग है। आपको ये अपने स्त्रोत से आती है। अन्दरमानना होगा। आत्मसाक्षात्कार के बाद Ghost) का स्त्रोत, आपकी कृण्डलिनी। और ये बहुत सरल हो जाना चाहिये। आप बहुत बड़ी आपके सामने तो स्वयं आदिकुण्डलिनी मानव चीज हैं, अब तक जैसा आपने अपने आप को रूप में अवतरित हैं। आपके पहले आए कई जाना उससे बहुत अलग। अर्थात आदिशक्ति (Holy साधकों की तुलनामें आपबहुत भाग्यवान हैं। क्योंकि किसी विग्रह, किसी स्वयंभू की पूजा तो अब एक नई परिस्थिती सामने आती है कि 2.

 करने में लोगों को बहुत समस्याएं हुईं। प्रथम लाभलेना चाहिये। इसके लिये आपको पूर्ण चित्त उन्हें एक तरह का ध्यान करना होता था, जो पूजा पर तथा हवा (चैतन्य) किस तरह बहु रही सर्विकल्प समाधी कहलाता था। अरथात, है, इस पर एकाग्र करना चाहिये। और फिर ये आपको इस प्रकार से किसी मूर्ती (विग्रह) पर हवा सारे बादल बाहर निकालने का ध्यान ध्यान एकाग्र करना पडता था। विग्रह का अर्थ है रखेगी। तो आपका एकमात्र कार्य आपकी चैतन्यित मूर्ति। मूर्ति की ओर देखते-देखते, एकमात्र विधि यह है कि आप पूर्ण एकाग्रता में कुण्डलिनी को उठाने का प्रयास करना होता पूजा तथा साक्षी आव में स्थित होने में लगाए। था। और तब कुण्डलिनी आज्ञा तक जागृत हो आपएक दृष्टा है । भी जाती थी पर सहस्त्रार से परे छलांग लगाना असम्भव कार्य था, क्योंकि इसमे व्यक्ति को साकार से निराकार में जाना होता है। साकार से किसी विचार बिना किसी प्रतिक्रिया, केवल निकल कर निराकार में आना इतना कठीन था हेखता मात्र है और अपने आप, सहज ही सीख और निराकार पर एकाग्र होना तो असम्भव ही (समझ) लेता है, वो दृष्टा है। मेरे लिये कभी था। जैसा कि मुसलमानों ने किया था अन्य कभी एक बोझ सा हो जाता है, क्योंकि आप में कईयों ने करने का प्रयास किया। इन परिस्थितियों में यह आवश्यक हो गया, कि এ। दृष्टा का अर्थ दोहरा है। जो केवल देखता मात्र है, और जो केवल ज्ञान है, वो दृष्टा है। जो बिना तथा देवताओं में समता होना चाहिए, कुछ सन्तुलन होना ही चाहिए। निराकार साकार रूप धरे। ताकि और अधिक जटिलता ना हो। जैसे ही आप साकार पर ध्यान केंद्रित करें, तो आप निराकार बन जाते हैं। जैसे कि, अगर आपके सामने बर्फ है, जैसे ही आप बर्फ को छूना शुरू करते हैं, वो पिघलने लगता है तथा आपठण्डकमहसूस करने लगते है। एक तरफ आप सारे मन्त्र कह रहे हैं और सारे ढेवता जागृत हैं, पर ढूसरी और आप वो हैं, जो अपने हृढय में कुछ स्वीकारना नही चाहते। सो, जोइतनी अधिक उर्जा उत्पन्न हुईउसे मुझे अपने शरीर में संजोना पडती है। तो बेहतर होगा कि आप लोग अपना हृढय खुला रख कर, तथा सो, अब समस्या आसानी से सुलझा दी गई। बिना विचार किये, पूजा केवल देखें आज हम पूजा उन वस्तुओं में से एक है, जिनसे कि आप लोग पजा विधी पल्टा कर करेंगे। पहले हम साकार-रूपों को उत्तेजित कर, निराकार रूप मे परिवर्तित कर सकते हैं (Puja is one of the things क्योंकि हम अग्नि तत्व का आह्वान by which you can excite the forms Into formless)अब, आपके केन्द्र (चक्र), उज्जा के केन्द्र हैं किन्तु इन सभी चक्रों पर भी एक मार्गदर्शक देवता विराजमान हैं। वे (देवता) भी जब अव्निका आह्वान करते है, तब भी वही करते निराकारसे साकारस्वरूप में बनाए गए हैं। और जब आप पूजा करते हैं, तो साकार रूप पिघलकर निराकार उर्जाओं में बढल जाते हैं। दोनों एक ही बात है। मेरा और इन निराकार ऊर्जाओं का प्रवाह शरू होता कर सकते है, या फिर पानी से भी कर सकते हैं। है। और तब हवा (चैतन्य लहरिया) बहुती है। जो भी बराई हैवोजल जाती है; जो भी कुछ गलत और निकाले जाते हैं। हवन करेंगे और फिर पूजा। यह बेहतर होगा । करेंगे जो सारी बुराईयों को जला देता है। जब आप मेरे पैरों (श्री चरण) को धोते है तो भी वही करते हैं, और हैं। आज पहले हम हवन करेंगे और फिर पूजा। पूजन आप आग्नि से अव्जि का सत्व है चमक, जो भी कुछ गलत है, है, जो भी बुराई है वो जल जाती है और फिर साधकों के मुख परतथाशरीरपर चमक दिखाई ढेने लगती है। और जब आप हवन करते हैं तो वातावरण भी सुन्दर चैतन्य लहरियों से आवेशित हो जाता है । परमात्मा आपसब को आशिव्वादित करें। अब, आपपूजा के विषय में सोच नही सकते। ये वस्तुएँ एक ऐसे साम्राज्य की होती हैं, जो विचारों से परे है। तो येसमझ लेना चाहिये कि आप पूजा को तर्क से सिद्ध (rationalize) नही कर सकते। बल्कि आपको अपने चक्रों में अधिक से अधिक 3.

 "Nobody else but Moses himself was born as Mohammad" - Shri Mataji, May 1985 "...the tree of life (in Bible) is nothing but the Kundalini which is enlightened.. Absolutely it is that, it looks like that, like a tree. They were describing about Moses and this was the tree of life they said..." - Shri Mataji Like, say, the Jews think that Christ was not a saviour; they are still waiting for two thousand years. It's not true. He is the one. Without Him you cannot raise the Kundalini... Christ and Moses are one." - Shri Mataji In the last issue, it was told about Adi Guru Abraham that he was the one who gave birth to the three religions of Judaism, Islam & Christianity through. Moses, Mohammad Sa'ab and Shri Jesus. In this issue we continue our series on the ten great Gurus with Adi Guru TA Adi Guru Moses Moses, who was born in the 14th century BC in the land of Egypt. Born into a slave family who served the Pharaoh of Egypt. The Pharaohs considered themselves as Gods and enslaved the Hebrews for a long time. The Hebrews suffered under the Egyptian rule waiting for their savior to arrive. An astrologer informed one King Farah about the destruction of the Egyptian rule by a Hebrew born. Farah ordered all recently born male children of Hebrew descent to be killed. Moses was protected for three months and ultimately when the danger to His life increased, His mother set him in a basket and let him float down the Nile as Moses' sister watched the basket find it's way to the Egyptian queen's bathing area on the Nile. The queen, a widow, gladly accepted the child and named him Moshe (Moses), meaning "One who is taken out of water" in Hebrew. It is believed that no one except the queen's maid knew about Moses' origin. A few articles like the blanket in the basket might have strongly suggested that Moses was a Hebrew born. grew up as an illustrious prince, a great city builder, envy of His brother Ramses and pride of the Pharaoh. While Ramses managed failures, Moses conquered cities and hearts. Ramses grew Moses 4-

 from slavery of the Egyptians, but He was not ready for this Divine purpose. Ramses took the opportunity and threw him out of Egypt into the deserts. Moses wandered the hot sands and reached Midian, which was And God spoke all these words, saying: '1 am the LORD your God... 1. You shall have no other gods before Me." predominantly inhabited by Arabs. Here he defended some ladies at a water well from the attack of shepherds. The ladies were seven sisters who were daughters of an Arab tradesman. Moses began His life as a shepherd, tending to the herds of this Arab trader. Later he married the eldest 2. "You shall not make for yourself a carved image-any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth." daughter, who was an extremely balanced, powerful and positive influence on Moses' life. During one of his usual days as the herd grazed near the foot of Mount Sinai, he saw a burning bush. The fire was calm and silent, but the bust burnt silently. This was His first real encounter with the divinity within. This silent fire was nothing but the Kundalíni enlightening the subtle system. Moses faced God directly in this moment of truth. 13. "You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain. 14. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.' %3D 5. 'Honor your father and your mother. 16. "You shall not murder. !7. "You shall not commit adultery." "Take off your shoes, the ground you are standing on is sacred" Moses: "Who are you?" "I am Abraham, Isak, Jacob. God of your forefathers. Do not fear. Go to Egypt and free the Hebrews and bring them to the holy land of Israel, their motherland." 8. "You shall not steal. 9. "You shall not bear false witness against your I neighbor." 10."You shall not covet your neighbor's house; you shall nof covet your neighbor's wife, nor his male servant, nor his female servant, nor his ox, nor his donkey, nor anything that is your neighbor's." Moses said, "What shall Itell the name fGod?" "Yahowa" The above powerful communication was followed by Moses traveling to Egypt with his brother Aaron. Kaushik Panchal uncomfortable imagining Moses at the throne of Egypt while he was the born son of the Pharaoh. When Moses was twenty-five years old, he was supervising the construction of a city which personified the glory of the Pharaoh. Here he witnessed the true cruelty of the Egyptians in ill treating the Hebrews. During this time the maid who know Moses secret tried to leak it out. The he Ratilal & Sons There confronted thé All kinds of Textile Accessories new Pharaoh Ramses, his brother. Ramses' Ahmedabad. Ph.: 2748183 (o) 3739017 problem, like all information reached Moses who went in search of his family among the Hebrew slaves. He found his mother, brother and sister. He increasingly felt that he should take up the job of freeing of the Hebrews others was his belief that he was the supreme God 5

 and this Yahowa cannot be greater than him. Thus, Moses faced the challenge of convincing his big ego that there was a God greater than his Egyptian ego and Ramses should let his people go. Moses turned his wooden stick into a snake in Ramses' court, but Ramses couldn't see Moses' divinity. Moses struck the Nile with his stick and converted all of Nile to blood to make Ramses give up his ego, but no avail. Moses' attention worked to bring various plagues upon the Egyptians, but Ramses wouldn'tagree. Moses promised Ramses that the sky will rain with hail and fire. Hail did fall and started fires everywhere. In one of the events, Ramses' son, the new prince lost his life. Ramses, then, let the Hebrews go. "Like when you say Moses crossed the river. This was the happening of the Void being crossed by the Primordial Master."-Shri Mataji, March 1982 "You mean it was miraculous, or it was a false story. What do you think of it? It was absolutely true, that he did cross the sea; with the help of God he could do it." -Shri Mataji, March 1985 Moses lead about 6 lakh Hebrews about of Egypt. When the caravan reached the Red Sea, they saw Ramses coming towards them with a great army, ready to kill them all in frustration. Moses was destined to lead the people out of slavery and tyranny and a great wind rose which split the Red Sea, making way for all Moses men to cross over safely. Ramses' army followed into the sea bed, but the watery gates closed, drowning Ramses evil army. One of the difficulties faced by Moses was the lack of faith amongst his followers. There was greed, lust and a long way to go before they became truly faithful (Wali or Khalis). The caravan reached Mount Sinai. Moses went up the hill to hear God's wishes. While he was gone, the bad elements began to spread rumours that He is gone for good and may not return. Some started teaching false religions and all the lusty and greedy people got revealed in Moses' absence. In the meantime, Moses communed with God and God wrote out the Ten Commandments, which Moses brought down. Moses descended to find a disappointing scene of arrogant false believers celebrating false Gods and stupid beliefs. Working with the aid of Moses' pure attention, the earth then opened up and consumed all these negative people. The Ten Commandments are principles that get established in a person automatically as connection with Shri Mataji becomes stronger. One can imagine these commandments related to our subtle system as follows (one can find alternate interpretations to this one): Moses then led the people towards the promised land of Israel. He rested and allowed Joshua and Priest Eleazar take up the leadership in the journey IsraelI. The commandments became the basis for the Shariat Chakra Commandment Significance Sahasrara Integration Conditioning and Ritualism Chanting God's Name Meaninglessly Purity & Inner Cleansing Father and Mother Principle Wisdom of Non-Violence Adultery Stealing (Sin against father principle) Lying Greed 1. Agnya Vishuddhi Entire Subtle System, Chitta Left & Right Heart Agnya Mooladhar, Agnya & Swadisthan to Right Side, Right Heart Vishuddhi, Mooladhar Nabhi 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. ten Laws of Islam. Moses, like all Adi Gurus warned against alcohol as it is the anti-consciousness activity that is found in the common people. His work revolved around the physical emancipation of the Hebrews and He worked against the darkness in the people's minds. One of the central themes of his teachings is to rise above the selfish self-indulgence in life and attain enlightenment. Thus lived a great Primordial Master, beloved child of the Mother and one of the ten guru principles within our void. ttt 6'

 Genesis of Sanskrit Language SIS यं 3. Today what we speak is totally a localized language as it is not having any relation with some divine work. Previously languages were not only used for the communication but languages were greatly used for the praise of the God. Our Indian scriptures and vedas are very good example of this. Sanskrit, this is the language which is greatly honored by the Indians as this is the language is very much close to God. Sanskrit was a spoken language as well as the literacy language of the Aryadom until Circa 500B.C., after which it remained for nearly 2000 years the dominant literacy language as well as the spoken language among the culture throughout the subcontinent. The word 'Sanskrit' means the one which is introduced or produced in its perfect form. It is also said that the languages which we use now in India like Bengali, Hindi, Marathi are all evolved from the Sanskrit language. But then the which question is from where has this great Sanskrit language is evolved. There are many theories on the evolution of Sanskrit language. Many great people have put forth their views in this direction. Shri Mataji has said that Sanskrit is the language evolved through the vibrations that are flowing through human being. When the Kundalini starts flowing through seven chakras then it vibrates and produce different sounds at different petals from which the devnagari or the Sanskrit language is been evolved. Like at Agyna chakra we can hear 'Om'. The alphabets present on each chakra are as follows - लं Mooladhara Swadisthana Nabhi यं Anahata Vishuddhi Agnya Shree Mataji has also said that unless you utter the sholakas in Sanskrit language the chakra would not respond. Except the 'Lords Prayer' at Agyna chakra which can be said in Hebrew or even in English. Shri Mataji said in one of Her speeches, "they say English language has evolved from sounds produced by animals. Like the letter 'm' comes from sound produced by crocodile." **Shri Mataji's speech titled "Trigun', 3-02-1978 One more interesting thing is that in Sanskrit language there are total 50 alphabets. If we count the number of petals of all the chakras from Mooladhara to Agnya then that also comes to 50. This proves that Sanskrit language is created by taking into the consideration of the human body. Even the names of all the chakras is in Sanskrit language. Chakra in Sanskrit means 'vortex of energy' which we know exactly in Sahaja Yoga. According to the lessons written by Samuel L. Lewis "What we called spirit in English corresponds in some respect to what is called as Shiva and Shakti in Sanskrit. The body being the temple of holy spirit has accommodation for both Shiva and Shakti. 21.

 Sanskrit is a very special language in the sense that it has six unmatched features It has a uniqueness in every consonant and vowel consonant combination. Since the beginning it has a complete dictionary of the root words called 'dhatu' that could create any number of words according to the requirement by adding a proper prefix and suffix which are described in detail in Sanskrit language. The Sanskrit language has remained unchanged in every age because it has a divinely produced grammar. The Sanskrit language represents the literal form of Divinity on the planet earth. The three kinds of prime Sanskrit scripture (Vedas, Upanishads, Puranas) and their style of presentation is purely having a divinity in it. For example the Bhagwatam explains philosophy of God and God's love. Sanskrit language has its localized forms (called as 'Apabhransha'). Sanskrit is only language in which maximum number of scriptures are written. Hence it is also called as Scriptural Language. Sir William Jones had written, "The Sanskrit language, whatever be its antiquity, is of wonderful structure; more perfect than Greek, more copious than Latin, and more exquisitely refined than either." The Greatest Truth for a Sahaja Yogi Ritu Mehra What is the greatest mistake for a Sahaja Yogi? 1. Thank You Shri To believe your Mind. Mataji for your blessings & What is the greatest blessing for a Sahaja Yogi? - Collective Consciousness. Who is the greatest fool? 2. attention all the time 3. and everywhere He who does not recognize the Truth. What is the surest thing in life for a Sahaja Yogi? - Your Mother's Love. 4. What is the greatest pleasure for a Sahaja Yogi? -Pure Joy- Nirmal Anand. What is the greatest opportunity for a Sahaja Yogi? To give realization to people. What is the greatest thought for a Sahaja Yogi? - Thoughtlessness. What is the greatest victory for a Sahaja Yogi? Over Ego. 6. INDORE HOUSING 7. 'A' Class Construction of 8. Bunglows by qualified engineers as per IS-Code of Civil Engineering What is the greatest handicap fora Sahaja Yogi? - Egoism. What is the greatest loss for a Sahaja Yogi? To lose the image of Mother in your heart. 9. 10. Indore. Ph.0731-2490953, What is the greatest need for a Sahaja Yogi? Absolute faith- Nirvikalpa. 11. 2490128 - 8- 5.

 The Great Artist Leonardo da Vinci is known of Leonardo's childhood, though biographers have speculated on the theme of the young Leonardo in the green Tuscan countryside, acquiring his lifelong fascination with nature. Certainly he began drawing the painting at an early age. According to the 16th century artist and art historian Giorgio Vasari, Leonardo's work so impressed his father that he took samples into Florence to show his friend Andrea del Verrocchio, one of the leading artists and sculptors of the day. Verrocchio was also enthusiastic, and Ser Piero The subtlety of working of divine is remarkable and probably needs even more subtle understanding to enjoy the divine creations. The divine created this universe in the gentlest manner. Seldom do we realize that the Shakti Herself has decorated this 'Brahmanda' with sources that are meant to reflect Her love. Sources, which are as simple as the waving leaves, which often go unnoticed, to as mystic and supremely powerful as the 'swayambhus', make us aware of the paramchitanya, Her power of love. Yet another source is eternal art. Artist like enrolled his teenage son in the master's busy Leonardo da Vinci give us a glimpse of this art. So beautifully is divinity expressed in his works that even Adishakti is workshop. www Verrocchio's workshop, like that of other major artists, was something of a cross between an art school and a design studio. Apprentices such as Leonardo worked their way up from sweeping floors to mixing colors to helping out in the production of commissioned paintings. Leonardo had reached this stage by the age of 20, when Verrocchio gave him responsibility for painting one of the angels in The Baptism of Christ. compelled to lavishly praise his creations, a reason enough to know about the life of this great artist, after all not every day does the Shri Adishakti asks Sahajis to visit Mona Lisa to experience the bliss! Leonardo's angel radiated his youthful genius. Vasari wrote that Verrocchio 'never touched colors again, he was so ashamed that the boy understood their use better than he did'. Leonardo had 'graduated', and became a master of the painters' Guild of St Luke, which allowed him to set up as an independent painter. However he remained based at Verrochhio's until the late 1470s. Leonardo had learned a good deal, in the years that he spent at his master's studio, and not all of it from Verrocchio. Florence in the 15th century was one Leonardo da Vinci was not only one of the greatest artists of the Renaissance, but also perhaps the most versatile genius who ever lived. His interests embraced virtually every field of study then known; anatomy and geology were two of his passions, and his great dream was manpowered flight. However, his perfectionism meant that he finished Leonardo would have come into contact with comparatively few major paintings. of the great cultural centres of the world, and many of the scholars whose new ideas and learning Leonardo was born on 15th April 1452 near were shaping the intellectual climate of Florence, but the scene of his most ambitious Renaissance Italy.(Pic 1) artistic undertakings was Milan. Virtually nothing According to Vessari, 'Leonardo's disposition was 9-

 so lovable that he commanded everyone's affection', and there are many other accounts of his good looks and charm, as well as his quirky sense of humour that gave him a life long taste for practical jokes. Yet, "Alone you are all yourself," he wrote, "witha companion you are halfyourself." needed for Sforza to assemble 90 odd tones of bronze required for its casting. While he was waiting for the bronze, Leonardo began work on a huge mural of The Last Supper for the nearby monastery church of Santa Maria delle Grazie. Its brilliance was indisputable, and even The first years of Leonardo's life as a fully fledged before it was finished, it drew many admiring artist coincided with the rise of supreme power in pilgrims to the monastery. Florence of Lorenzo de' Medici - 'il Magnifico'. He ruled the prosperous city-state with shrewd self interest, and like many members of his family had At 42, he was at peek of his career, admired and cultivated tastes. Yet Leonardo received little of the respected by all. He had his own school of lavish patronage which abounded in Florence at apprentices and had never been busier. Perhaps he the time: he sketched obsessively, in the years he fretted when he heard that Ludovico had sent the remained in Florence after leaving Verrocchio's bronze once destined for Great Horse to his studio, he executed as far as is known only a embattled brother-in-law to make canons. But handful of paintings. The most important of these, there were brighter things to think of. The Adoration of the magi, was left unfinished. SUCCESS ANDADMIRATION And he was writing his Treatise on Painting, a huge work which was to influence artists for centuries to His Milanese career got off to a slow start, but in 1483 he received an important commission from the church of San Francesco Grande.. The Virgin of the Rocks was delivered after 25 years. come. Leonardo's notebooks were filling rapidly, crammed with sketches and comments written in ASTATUE FOR THE DUKE his precise, left to right, mirror image hand. He While work was beginning on The Virgin of the could see nothing without wanting to study it: Rocks, Leonardo was already thinking about birds, plants, the movement of water. And what did another as yet only imagined work of art. He not exist to observe, he could imagine. During these knew that Duke Ludovico intended to honour his days came the first flood of inventions a submarine, brigand father with a massive equestrian statue, and was determined to gain the commission. He BORGIA'S MILITARY ENGINEER sent the Duke an extraordinary letter in which he outlined his prowess as a military inventor and For a few months in 1502-3, Leonardo wandered engineer. Almost as an afterthought, he offered his around Italy inspecting fortifications and then services as an architect, an sculptor and a painter. a tank, even a helicopter. suddenly returned to Florence to live as an artist again. Sanjiv Sondhi In 1483, he was allowed to begin work on the great Horse. His projected statue was an immense undertaking. Innovative as always, Leonardo was unwilling to produce the usual static sculptor: he set himself the seemingly impossible task of Around this time creating a 26 feet high rearing horse. Such a feat had never been achieved before, and much time was most celebrated of needed to solve the problem. By November 1493, all his work, the the full sized clay model was complete. All that was was Spontaneous Travels Services Pvt. Ltd. productive period for Leonardo he produced the Chandigarh. Mona Lisa. Ph. 0172 721772 In 1503, the 721186 10

 government of Florence commissioned him to paint an epic picture of The Battle of Anghiari, to glorify an encounter in a war with Milan, some 60 years before. naturalistic representation of appearances was to Leonardo "MOTIONS OF THE MIND straightforward; the second part ' the As a painter, Leonardo wanted to represent not only appearance but also feelings, 'the motions of mind'. This approach changed the status of the great artist from craftsman to a genius. revelation the character through gesture and expression was In his Lives of the Artist, first published in 1550, more difficult. Georgio Vasari wrote that Leonardo's 'name and fame will never be extinguished'. The claim has been borne out by posterity, for Leonardo is one of the few artists whose reputation has never wavered drawings, completing the job the mere exercise of from his own lifetime to the present day. His contemporaries thought his talent was little less than divine, and in the centuries since his death, When he could bring himself to finish a picture, painters, poets and philosophers have looked to however Leonardo outshone even the greatest of him as a shining example of the heights which the his contemporaries. Oil painting was at that time a human mind and spirit can attain. Once Leonardo had solved the problems of composition and characterization in his technical skill held little appeal. fairly new technique in Italyand Leonardo was one of the first great masters of it. To a profoundly remarkably thin platform for such wide spread and thoughtful worker like him, slow-drying oil paints lustrous fame. Scarcely a dozen paintings are universally accepted as being from his own hand. infinitely subtle gradations of tone and to paint and of these several are unfinished or damaged. details such as plants and rocks with an exquisite precision that would gladden the heart of a botanist or a geologist. Leonardo's achievement, then, is of an altogether exceptional kind, for although he began comparatively few major works, and finished even fewer, he has imposed himself on the consciousness of artists and critics (and even the general public) in that only a handful of other cultural giants Leonardo wanted to attain the same beauty of finish when he painted murals, so he rejected the time honoured fresco technique, which demanded great swiftness in execution. a way can match. This seeming paradox is explained not simply by the wonderful quality of the few paintings Leonardo did bring to fruition, but also by revolution in attitudes towards art that he brought about. Virtually single handedly Leonardo created the idea of the artist as genius. THE MASTER DRAUGHTSMAN With the exception of The Battle of the Anghiari, almost all Leonardo's paintings were either religious subjects or portraits. His drawing, however cover an astonishing range of subjects, for he used them not only as preparation for his paintings, but also as an essential tool in his scientific research. He was the most prolific Leonardo's fascination with the intellectual draughtsman of his times and used a wide variety of THE PAINTER PHILOSOPHER problems of art is one reason why his drawings so outnumber his paintings. He thought that the painter had to represent two main things: man and the motions of man's mind'. The first part - the media, The sheer variety of Leonardo's interest was the main reason why he finished so little in his primary

 vocation of paintings. Apart from his manifold expressions in many of the paintings are simply scientific pursuits, he was also a sculptor and an breath taking for the connoisseurs and have architect. No work that is indisputably his survives become immortal.. Among which one such in either medium, but his ideas and expertise were painting of the Mother and child turns a person important in both fields. thoughtless. Also, in these three paintings, all of Mother and Child, in the background one always The splendid bronze group of St John the Baptist sees snow capped peaks just like those of the between a Pharisee and a Levite over the north door Himalaya, the abode of the Adi Shakti. It seems he of the Baptistery in Florence, for example, is the must have known somewhere in depth of heart work of Giovanni Francesco Rustici, but Leonardo who She was, even though he might not have been played a major role in its creation. Vasari tells us aware of it himself. But, to paint so precisely and so that Rustici 'would allow no one near save significantly to what Sahaja is, and to be able to feel Leonardo, who never left him while he was moulding and casting until the work was finished'. realised soul. Shri Mataji has also mentioned In architecture, Leonardo's designs for ideal' regarding the Mother and Child theme in the past churches were influential on his friend Bramante, and has spoken regarding its inert essence on Shri the greatest architect of the High Renaissance, and Ganesh Tatrwa and also the Mahalaxmi Tattwa. She the ingenious double spiral stairecase at the chateau referred once that "The Christian conditioning has of Chambord probably derives from an idea of his. such vibrations from his work shows that he was a been even worse than Jew conditioning because Leonardo's influence was spread also by his they just took out Christ's Mother; though the writings. His notes were gathered together and painters and artists couldn't do that. They had the published as his Treatise on Painting in 1651, but mother there. Despite all that the motherhood has they had wide circulation even before then. The not been respected, as it should have been in the few paintings that he left to posterity (or that Bible. While Mahalaxmi herself incarnated as survived long enough to be copied and re-copied) Mother Mary. You cannot expect any spiritual had an unprecedented effect on succeeding artists. growth, unless and until you can accept it as the Indeed, Leonardo's influence has been so great that Shakti, the Mother who is the only communication it is harder to think of major painters who do not owe something to him than ofthose who do. between us and the Divinity". (Maha Laxmi Puja (Kolhapur), India, 21-12-90) In one of his notebooks he had written: 'As a well spent day brings happy sleep, so life well used brings happy death.' And quietly, on May 2, 1519, a few weeks after his 67th birthday, Leonardo da Vinci died. The world had lost perhaps its most universal genius. AREALISED SOUL This can be seen during the course of his life. He was fascinated by nature, just like a child. This innocence is reflected in the expressions in most of his masterpieces. The 12

 Sabaj Destinatioe हम धुरी ब्रह्मपुरी ये पवित्र स्थान महाराष्ट्र में सातारा से २३ हनुमानजी के अवतार थे तथा इसलिये उन्हे ही कि.मि. दूर कृष्णा नदी के तट पर स्थित है। यहाँ पर मूर्तीयाँ मिलीं। जिन्हे उन्होने अपने तपस्या स्थान बस्ती ना होने के कारण वातावरण शांत व याने, उत्तर मांड नदी के किनारे स्थित चाफल व आह्वाददायक है। परम् पूज्य श्री माताजी ने कहा है कि सज्जनगढ में स्थापित किया। सन १९८२ से १९९0 तपस्वी व योगी जनों के वास्तव्य से यह भूमी तक दिसंबर मे महाराष्ट्र मे आने वाले सभी विदेशी चैतन्यमय हो गई है। रामायण काल में श्री राम व सीताजी के चरण स्पर्श द्वारा यह भूमी पवित्र हो गई। कहा जाता है की ई.स. १६६० मे श्री समर्थ रामदास स्वामी को ब्रह्मपुरी के शिवनाथ मंदिर की उत्तर दिशा के दौरान उन्हें ब्रह्मपुरी की योग भूमी पर ठहराया। में स्थित जलकुंड मे श्री राम, सीता, लक्ष्मण व श्री आंग्लाई देवी की मूर्तीयाँ मिली थी, जिन्हे वे अपने साथ ले जाना चाहते थे मगर अंगापुर के ग्रामवसियों सहज योगियों को सहज योग साधना की प्राथमिक ने उन्हे रोका व कहा कि ये मूर्तीयाँ हमारे गाँव की होने शिक्षा दी। इस काल के दौरान परम् पूज्य श्री माताजी के कारणयह हमें ही मिलनी चाहिये। तब श्री रामदास स्वामी मुर्तीयाँ वहीं खेत मे रखकर चाफल के लिए निकल गये। ग्रामवासियों ने उन मूर्तीयों को खेत से लिए ब्रह्मपुरी मे रहते थे। वहाँ पर एक खुले मैदान मे गाँव ले जाने के लिए भरसक प्रयत्न किये परंतु वे टेंट लगाकर ज़मीन पर सोना, ठंडे पानी से नदी मे मूर्तीयों को हिला भी न सके। तब वे श्री रामदास स्वामी को ढूंढते चाफल तक गये। ग्रामवासियों ने श्री करना, नदी का पानी पीना व रात्री मे ३-४ कि. मी. रामदास स्वामी से प्रार्थना की कि आप ही योग्य पैदल चलकर कार्यक्रम के लिए अंगापुर तक जाना स्थान पर उन मूर्तीयों की स्थापना कीजिये। श्री इस प्रकार से परम् पुज्य श्री माताजी ने सहज योगियों रामदास स्वामी बाद मे उन मूर्तीयों को खेत से लेकर को अनुशासन सिखाया । आए और श्री राम श्री सीता तथा लक्ष्मणजी की मूर्तीयों की स्थापना उन्होने चाफल मे की, व अंग्लाई देवी की साधना करने की प्राथमिक शिक्षा विदेशी सहज मूर्ती की स्थापना उन्होने सज्जनगढ मे की। तथा योगियों को ब्रह्मपुरी मे मिली। शुरूवात में आए दोनो स्थानों पर मंदिर बनाए। इन मूर्तीयों के दर्शन विदेशी सहजयोगीयों को शीतल पेय, मांसाहार, काटे श्रद्धालु आज भी कर सकते हैं। दिसंबर १९८२ में श्री दत्तजयंती के शुभ अवसर वस्तूओं के बिना सहजयोग साधना करने की पर पूर्णिमा के पूर्ण चंद्रप्रकाश में परम् पूज्य श्री प्राथमिक शिक्षा ब्रह्मपुरी मे दी गयी। जिस जलकुंड मे माताजी तथा उनके साथ करीब १০০ विदेशी सहजयोगी इस मंदिर मे गए। उस समय श्री माताजी ने मुर्तीयाँ मिली थी, उसी जलकुंड के पानी मे पैर रखकर श्री क्षेत्र ब्रह्मपूरी व अंगापूर इन दोनो जगहों के बारे मे श्री माताजी एक शिला पर बैठी थी। उस समय विदेशी जानकारी दी। परम् पूज्य श्री माताजी ने सहज सहज योगियों ने कृष्णा नदी के पानी में उतरकर योगियों को बताया की श्री समर्थ रामदास स्वामी श्री कृष्णा माई के पानी से श्री माताजी के चरणों का सहज योगियों को श्री माताजी ने श्री रामदास स्वामी व्वारा स्थापित इन मूर्तियों के दर्शन करने के लिए सज्जनगढ़ भेजा व महाराष्ट्र के एक महिने की यात्रा ब्रह्मपूरी में सन १९८४ से १९९0 तक प्रतिवर्ष ३ दिवसीय शिविर लगाकर श्री माताजी ने विदेशी एक सर्व साधारणशेड-नुमा जगहपररहती थीं। सहज योगी सहज योग साधना सीखने के कि नहाना, ज़मीन पर बैठकर भारतीय शाकाहारी भोजन इस प्रकार लगातार सात वर्षों तक सहजयोग चम्मच, गद्दे-बिस्तर इस तरह के ऐश-आराम की श्री रामदास स्वामीजी को सीताजी व अंग्लाई देवी की 13

 माताजी के रहने का स्थान, नदी कि कृष्णा उनका स्वागत करने के की वो पवित्र शिला (श्री माताजी लिए गारही हैं। सहजयोगी मंदिर बनाने का संकल्प किया ३ं का पुजन स्थान) इन सब का गया है। इस स्थान के चैतन्य का आनंद लेने के लिए आए देशी व विदेशी सहज योगियों के रहने व योग साधना के लिये आश्रम का निर्माण भी किया जाएगा श्री माताजी की प्रेरणा, आशिर्वाद व संगीत के माध्यम अनुमति से श्री विश्व निर्मला धाम से रातें आनंदपुर्ण सातारा की होती थीं। इस स्थापना निम्न लिखित उद्देश्य यो ने उस काल मे हर साल श्री माता जी विविध रूपों मे ी द क T पू ज न कि या। भ ज न त थ ा चॅरिटेबल ट्रस्ट, पूर्ति के लिए की गई है: प्रकार संगीत की शि क्ष । को १. ब्रह्मपुरी में देश-विदेश से आने सहजयोगीयो को वाले सहजयोगियों के लिए सहज ब्रह्मपूुरी में श्री यग आश्रम तथा मन्दिर का भ अह् मा यटर टट ् टी निर्माण। माताजी के चरणों मे प्राप्त हुई। श्री २. वृद्ध सहज योगियों के रहने व योगसाधना के लिए एक आश्रम ललिता चक्र स्वामिनी, श्री बनाना। श्रीचक्र स्वामिनी, ३. सहजयो ग साधना व आयुर्वेदिक औषधियों द्वारा पूजन किया। इस मंगल समय उपस्थित सभी सहज योगियों ने श्री स्वामिनी के रूप मे श्री माताजी का गणेशजी का रूप एक शिला पर पूजन यही पर किया गया है। श्री प्रकटित देखा। इसी प्रकार यह कृष्णा माँ यानि श्री शक्ती बच्चों के विकास हेतु निर्माण कार्य मंगलमय पूजा सभी देवी देवताओ वि इ ल यानि श्री कृ षण ने देखी। सप्तरंगी इंद्रधनुष्य का े सहज योगियो ने ५. आयुर्वेदिक औषधीय वनस्पती प्रकट होकर आकाश को रंगबिरंगा श्री कृष्ण पुजा का आनंद लिया। की खेती तथा औषधी निर्माण। बनाना इसी का एक प्रतीक था। यहा पर श्री माताजी ने सहजयोग पूर्ण वातावरण चैतन्यमय तथा अऔर आयुर्वेद इस विषय पर भी आनंदमय हो गया। इस जलकंड मार्गदर्शन दिया। अपने भाषणो मे के सभी विश्व निर्मला धर्म के की उत्तर दिशा में नदी पर 'वसंत' श्री माताजी ने गुरू तत्त्व, मात तत्त्व अनुयायियों से तन, मन, धन से नामक बांध बना हुआ हैं। बांध से जैसी मौलिक शिक्षा भी इसी बहने वाले कृष्णा माई के पानी की चैतन्य भूमी परदी है। मधुर ध्वनी का अनुभव सबने किया। इस पर श्री माताजी ने कहा श्र ह स च क आरोग्य प्राप्ति। ४. निराधार, अबला र्त्रीयों व कृष्ण है। करना। इनके सान्लिध्यमे श्री विश्व निर्मला धाम के निर्माण कार्य के लिए देश व विदेश सहायता मिलने की टूरस्ट के आधिकारी आशा तथा विनति परम्पूज्य श्री माताजी ने करते हैं। और श्री माताजी के एक बार "ब्रह्मपुरी ये मेरा स्थान है" कहा था। परम् पूज्य श्री चरणों मे नम्र प्रार्थना करते है। ০০ 14

 Yuvadrishti Asksæee (జడి అ£ణ What is significance of Puja in Sahaj? During Puja our Mother is in Her full incarnation who can bestow the cardinal virtue and blessing on us, if the Puja is attended with sacred heart and in full devotion and hence attending puja in Sahaja yoga enhances the divine vibrations. --- Hitesh Bhatnagar, Allahabad The most important part of Puja is to make you go more & more deep. Rest is eternal enjoyment & to feel Ganga flow on your hands & in your body. Sahaj Singh, Pune Actually puja is a very auspicious occasion in which the presence of Her Holiness Shri Mataji helps us to get that all enormous, blissful aashirwads. The puja offered to particular deity clears that specific chakra of ours and fill that with Her Param Chaitanya that is a fuel for our happy and peaceful day-to- day life. --- Dr. Samarth Borade On the occasion of Puja, all the Ganas are present even if Shri Mataji is in Her Nirakar Swaroopa. When we attend Puja and surrender our SELF at Her lotus feet, the Chaitanya is showered upon us by Shri Mataji. --- Santosh Katiyar. Puja is an offering of our surrender and devotion to the lotus feet of divine Mother. It is the occasion when She manifests in the form of the deity whose Puja is being done. The Puja is a celebration of our complete devotion to HER and also of reaffirming the vow of spreading Her divine message to all. --- Jagriti Singh Puja is a way ofshowing our love and gratitude to our beloved Mother. NidhiAsthana, Bangalore My personal experience is that I feel the presence of Shri Mataji in everyone, and feel that Shri Mataji is watching the Puja being offered. Shubhashini Sanapala As Sahaja Yogis, we are privileged for being allowed to worship Shri Adi Shakti in person or through Her photograph. Pure devotion comes from our heart, whose reflection is the Spirit that is pleased when we perform auspicious worship of our Holy Mother. Let the heart to be the throne of Shri Adi Shakti, then worship Her Lotus Feet with the attention that has become pure and holy like the Ganges water and auspicious like 'Amrut'. -Christian Akplogan To attend a Sahaja Puja is a very fortunate thing. It fulfils our Bhakti and devotion and thus generates extra showers of vibrations that help us to grow deeper and deeper. -- Mitesh Gandhi, UK 15

 Puja blesses us to go to greater realization of 'Nirakar' from 'Sakar'. Puja blesses us with the powers, which our Holy mother emits during Puja for us to absorb. Puja blesses us "to attain 'Sakshi' State L"Supposing more and more". there is no oil in Sunil Shrivastava, Udaipur In Puja one gets so many blessings that makes our attention pure. All the dimensions are opened inside you in the Puja as the energy in the Puja is maximum. The Chit is elevated and you feel that you are one in Virata. The Nirvichar Avastha and Nirvikalp Avastha are established only through Puja. this lamp, it will all go off. It has Rajiv Sethi to have oil. It will In Sahaja yoga, we are doing the PUJA in order to worship the Deities of various chakras so that the qualities & characteristics of those chakras become stronger which ultimately makes our go off. So the spiritual ASCENT easier, matured & fruitful. dedication part is Jasmin Panchal (Ahmedabad) - * One cannot progress without attending Pujas. Puja clears our chakras, helps us to surrender and envokes a true prayer in our heart. The significance of Puja cannot be explained in words, one has to attend a Puja to believe and feel it from the heart. the oil in you, is the attachment, --Neha Shah complete Puja plays a vital role in our development and increases our depth in meditation. In simple words it is a collective treatment of Sahaja attachment to yoga. Ashwini Thakur your source. 77 The significance of attending Puja in Sahaja yoga is our spiritual ascent. ASCENT Aim Self for Continuous Enlightenment 'N' Transformation. - Mahavir Dhariwal On the subtle side, it's a way to introspect and is reflection of what we have achieved being in Sahaja Yoga and what is still lingering in us of the past which is stopping us for complete surrender to Shri Mataji. Mumbai -- Rajesh Sharma By attending the Pujas in Sahaja Yoga, we develop more Bhakti, Ekakarita & connection with our Holy Mother. Yuvashakti --- Vimal Dutt The flow of vibrations at the time of Puja remains very high, which helps us in fast spiritual growth. -Yogesh Mohite 16

 Knowledge & Fun THE SAINTS OF INDIA: ACROSS:1. Jnaneshvara's one of the major work ("Ambrosial experience"), which narrates the final state of spiritual liberation which can be achieved by an individual in the present life. (13 A) 2. He was of the Mahar caste, the untouchables of Maharashtra. His abhangas are full of a deep awareness of his low caste. English translations of one of the surviving abhangas. A sugarcane may be crooked, and yet its juice is not crooked. A bow may be curved, and yet the arrow is not. A river may have windings, and yet its water is even. So also, may be a pariah, but his heart is pure. (6A) 3. He took his birth in the family of this fifteenth century saint. He was a prominent figure in the history of the cult of Pandharpur, having brought back the image of god Vittala from Vijayanagar where it had been taken by the ruling prince. There are some ninety Abhangas ascribed to him A few have been translated into English. As the bumble bee seeks the pollen, as the bee seeks the honey, So my heart seeks this God, Pandurang. Says Take me to Pandhari, and make of me a glad offering to Vithoba. (6A) lboh 4. He devoted his energies to establishing what he called Maharashstradharma, using religious faith to install founder of the Maratha empire, who drove the Mughal conquerors from Maharashtra .The Dasbodha is his magnum opus. (6A) 5. He was a Maratha saint who restored Jnaneshvara's description of the Kundalini to the Jnaneshvari after it had been removed by the brahmin-scholars.His famous song Jogawa sung with such vigor and joy throughout modern Sahaja Yoga, is an invocation to the Mother Kundalini to rise and grant self- realisation,best expressed in the chorus: Jogawa Magen, Aicha Jogawa sense of integrity and greatness in the Maratha people. He became the guru of Shivaji, the Ai Ude G'ambe Ude! Ude, Ude, Ude, Ude, Ude, Ude, Wo! Mother, we ask for Self-realisation So you rise, O Mother Kundalini, You rise! Rise, rise, rise, rise, rise, rise, Ho! (6 A) 6. He ranks among the world's greatest poets. He lived in the Indian city of Banaras about a hundred years before Shakespeare, his life With Best Compliments from spanning most, if not all, of the 15th century. Like Gnyaneshwara before him and Guru Nanak and Sai Baba of Shirdi, who were to follow, He strove for the One Truth. He described himself as the son M/s M. R. Construction of both Ram and Allah (5 A) Civil Engineer & Contractors DOWN: 7. He was a popular preacher in the Punjab as is testified to by the inclusion of sixty-one of his verses in the Sikh holy book, the Guru Granth Sahib, of which the following is one: Prop. M.R. Patkar B.E. Civil Some say He is near, some say He is far, As ifto say the fish in water climbs a date tree. It is all an empty Babble. Whosoever has found Him, has concealed it.

 The learned scholar praises the Vedas; The ignorant only knows the Lord. (6D) 8. A contemporary of Tukaram and Ramdas, is the best known, the Muslim Maharashtran saints, his major work being the Yogasangrama, written in 1645. In his poem, Kavitasangraha, he says of himself Through the grace of (god) Gopala, transgressed all notions of purity and impurity. The jack-fruit has a thorny skin, but inside it are lumps of sugar. The bee-hive with all its humming bees contains the very nectar inside. (So also) But in his heart he has the very Govinda.(14D) may be an avindha, 9. He was a North Indian Guru whose teachings have become the basis of the Sikh religion. There are many references to Sahaja in his writings. When a man meets his true guru His doubts are dispelled and his mind ceases its wanderings; Drops of nectar pour down on him like rain. His ears catch strains of sahaja's celestial music And his mind is lit up with divine knowledge. (5 D) 10. She was perhaps the third female poet to assume this name, but the distinctive character of her major work, the Vinayagar Agaval, has forever immortalized this obscure figure as a poetical giant in Tamil literary history. Widely recited in shrines and temples dedicated to Shri Ganesha, it is also replete with the yogic imagery of the Tamil Siddhas. (7D) 11. He was a saint from Rajasthan in northern India. He lived in the second half of the sixteenth century (1544- 1603). His songs are in a Hindi dialect known as Braj Bhasa, being a mixture of Hindi and Rajasthani. Dadu clearly experienced Sahaja yoga, and alludes to it in his songs, one presented in English translation 11 10 of which are One's self is a tender plant wherein blooms the flower of Sahaja; The true guru teaches how to achieve it in a natural way, But very rare are the persons who can understand it. (9D) 10 AVAIYAR ILDADU DAYAL XVNV6 OYWYHOW HXIEHS & KANIR 7. NAMDEV 1 BHANUDAS4 RAMDAS 5. EENATH 3 [YINYHIOD) YHXOHD Z YAYHIONYINNYI 18

 Yuvashakti : An Insight Hardwar 1. At Hardwar Public Programmes are regularly conducted both in the city & nearby villages. We do canvassing on the first day. All the Sahaja Yogis including Yuvashakti go and disutribute pamphlets. Next day program is held where Sahaja Yoga is explained and Self-Realization is given to all the seekers by the grace of Shri Mataji. On the next day, there is a follow up programme. Villages covered this year are: Kherli, Haripur Kalan, Shyampur, Pathri & Ram Nagar. In city programmes are organized either in clubs or banquet halls. In city we had programs at: Shagun Banquet & Saini Dharamshala. In Niranjanpur canvassing & Public programme were done on the same day. Follow up was held the next day. A programme under the banner of Hardwar Management Association (affiliated to AIIMA) was held for all the members of HMA. In this, Powerpoint presentations on "The Science of Sahajayoga" and "About Shri Mata Ji" were shown along with Vega machine CD. It was attended by 70 Follow up was held in BHEL International Club. Hardwar center also helped in organizing public programmes and establishing centers in Uttaranchal at these places: Ranikhet, Almora, Kashipur, Ramnagar and Haldwani 2. Three lectures with Self-Realization in the end were held officially in HRDC for BHEL employees on Sahaja Yoga Meditation. 3. A full day picnic for SY families and Yuvashakti was organized in Lachchhiwala, near Dehradun. 4. A joyous Sahaja Music Evening was held on 22nd Nov. in BHEL Convention Centre, where several seekers received their self-realization. On 23rd the same was repeated for everyone in Khubsoorat palace. 5. Abooklet by the name 'Nirmala-Anand' was published in theSattal seminar. persons. Sahaja Yoga Centre Dehradun By the blessings of H. H. Shri Mataji, Dehradun city has a big collective. Different teams of Yuva Shakti take responsibility for regular and smooth functioning of the center, according to their turns. Usually the video talks/lectures of Shri Mataji are displayed through LCD projector (there is a good collection of CDs) in the meditation hall and also it is run on a T.V. simultaneously to accommodate the collectivity outside the hall. Dehra Dun collectivity has a rich library run exclusively by the Yuva Shakti which has a large collection of books, audio and video-cassettes and CDs. However, elderly Yogis alsoguide the yuva in conducting all these chores. Various Activities of the Dehra Dun Centre 1. Public Programme: In the recent year Dehradun successfully launched five big scale Public Programme in various parts of the city and the collectivity is blessed with hundreds of new seekers who had their self realization. The response was remarkable. The teams are formed to coordinate and to conduct public programs. In which it includes publicity through banners, media, loudspeaker; the sitting arrangements for seekers, arrangement of altar items, arranging and maintaining PA system, selecting and screening Shri Mataji's video talks through projector, distribution of prasad, etc. LCD projections were the main focus of the programme. While, lectures are kept bare minimum. The new seekers are exposed to the vibrations of Shri Mataji through media projection. The talks are generally the short Public Programmes or the TV 19

 interviews done in earlier years, this has indeed given a greater boost. The follow up Programmes are also very powerful that tends to bind the new seekers who finds quite out of place if not taken into confidence and absorbed in the collectivity. 2. Cultural Activities: Cultural activities are arranged from time to time to enliven the spirit of the and also the older generation. This in a way becomes a collective meditation in pretext in praise of Shri Mataji. The vibrations are shared as the programme comes up with new experience and new faces. 3. Spread of Sahaja through interaction: Besides the Public Programme one to one interactions are also entertained in the center or elsewhere in the city...like lectures in Schools or Institutions, Local channels of TV., Banners, handbills and occasionally through fair stalls etc. 4. Spread of Anti Ritualism: Even after coming to Sahaja it is sometimes difficult to shake off rituais. To keep every one in good spirits, we avvail occasions, opportunities to conduct and have get together or collective meditations, departing from ritual practices on Bhai Duj or the Id Ul Milad or the Holi or the Day of Dushrra or the Diwali. For instance during Dusherra Dehradun Sahaja Pariwar invariably hosts a beautiful cultural programme and dinner. While during the Diwali crackers do not constitute the main attraction. The festival like Raksha Bandhan or the Bhaiduj is celebrated with great flavour between the brothers and sisters. young 5, Sahaja Seminar: This forms a very attractive part of the Sahaja Yoga besides the National or the InternationalSeminar. There is always a scope to attend at least one seminar in the lush green valley and to enjoy the vibrations. 6. Sahaja Shiksha: That is an attempt has been taken for the first time on experimental basis to take Sahaja as a separate subject in school curriculum. One model school was adopted where in approx 10 yogi and yoginis used to take lectures and cover the entire school class wise and conducting quiz Even quiz competitions in the school imparted a very different interest to the younger ones. It was observed the Method was so effective that the younger ones accompanied their parents to the centers or homes of Sahaja Yogis of whom they had a contact. (Detailed article on Sahaja Shiksha was covered in Sept. 2002 issue). up Yuva Shakti Seminar: Chandigarh Sept 26,27 were the appointed days for the Yuva Shakti Seminar to be hosted in Chandigarh. The name Chandigarh brings to mind livid memories offood delicacies and to top it up with Sahaja Yoga Seminar was a perfect setting. Participants started from Delhi, Punjab to as far as Chennai to Pune assembled on the 26th for what promised to be great 3 Days. Seminar started on the 26th evening with devotional music from fellow Sahaja yogi's as waves of joy filled the hall. The days passed on a common pattern. The morning meditation was done on the audio clips of Shri Mata Ji's Talks on various topics. So we could actually feel Mother leading us through the meditation. The second session would start around 11:30 AM. Stress was laid on the need of good meditation for enjoying the Depth of, Sahaja Yoga. What was unique was the practical demonstration of Naam Simran i.e. just taking the name of our Divine mother wvas enough for us Dr. to be in meditation. One realizes that as realized souls our prayers are very powerful. The Delhi Music Group sang beautiful bhajans in between enabling the collective to enjoy the melody of Divine B.Sc. (Hons) M Comptom Vibrations. The undoubted star performers of the Seminar were the tiny and not so tiny toddlers from Dharamshala. Just watching them sing dance & act again reminded us of the Infinite Genius of our Mother in setting up an institution whose products would be the guiding Lights of Tomorrow's Youth. It was a sight watching all and sundry move to every beat, every tune, every move of these angels from Dharamshala. All in all it was really a blessing to be a participant to such events and the movement of SahajaYoga. Mitesh Gandhi Practicing in UK

 Time Line 1933-47 2010 2320 2000 1980 1960 1970 1990 1950 1940 1930 1920 Shri Mataji's group leader was one Thakur Niranjan Singh, an elderly gentleman who was committed to throwing the British out. Their underground activities included traveling from village to village, town to town and city to city, making people aware of the need to drive away the British and free themselves from slavery, This had to be done without being noticed by the vigilant British authorities. The job also included distribution of anti-British pamphlets. I remember Shri Mataji storing such pamplets in our house. She used to sneak into the house at the most unexpected times of night, collect the pamphlets, and sneak out again. The British got the tip-off that some sort of subversive activity was going on in the house, so they raided the house but were not able to find anything, My mother used to hide the pamphlets under the stack of grain that she was required to keep, as she had opened up a shop in the house selling hand pouded rice and jaggery. She was working as an agent of an organization run by Mahatma Gandhi known as Gram Udyog (cottage industry). There are many interesting episodes of Shri Mataji's underground work during the freedom struggle. Once she was made to carry a box full of explosives to Mumbai, there was a friend traveling with her and suddenly they heard the police were coming to their hotel called Madhava Ashram, Shri Mataji tied a rope to the box and hung it outside the window. When the police came to search they could not find anything in the room and they left. My Memoirs by Babamama YUVADRISHTI yuvadrishti@yahoo.com SUBSCRIPTION FORM Reg. No. (FOR YUVADRISHTI USE) LLAT(PLEASE FILL IN CAPÍTALS) H Name (IN BLOCKS) Address PIN - City. State Phone Email Drawn on Dt. Cash/DD No.- Of Rs. DD should be sent in the favour of 'Yuvadrishti' payable at Pune. Address for correspondence: Yuvadrishti, C/o Sahaja Yoga Kendra Plot No. 79, Survey No.98, Bhusari Colony, Kothrud, Pune-38, Maharashtra, Phone : 020-5286105 Signature 21

 परम् पूज्य श्री माताजी निर्मला देवी ने १9८७ में सहज योग युवा संघ को आशिर्वादित किया। उन्होंने इसका नाम ॐ निर्मल शक्ति युवा संघ रखा। निर्मल शक्ति युवा संघ, युवा शक्ति का मुख्य उद्देश्य व्यक्तित्व का इस प्रकार से विकास होना है जो परीपूर्ण हो, तथा यह कि इस प्रकार के उन्नत व्यक्ति सहजयोग को पूँजी सिद्ध हो। ० ७ युवा शक्ति के सदस्यों को ज्ञात होना चाहिए: श्री माताजी के दैवीय जीवन के बारे में ৯ सहजयोग के जन्म और उत्क्रान्ति के बारे में ৯ श्री माताजी द्वारा सूक्ष्म शरीर के विषय में बताई हुई सारी बातें ध्यान धारणा द्वारा अपने को शुद्ध और संतुलित रखना श्री माताजी के अवतार और सहजयोग के आगमन के बारे मे की गई भविष्यवाणीयों के बारे में ৯ वि ৯ स्वयम्भू और भारत की उत्पत्ति के बारे में आदि गुरू और संतों के बारे में। ঠ ৯ उनको यह भी जानना चाहिए: र भारत की विरासत तथा महान सांस्कृतिक परंपराएँ भारतीय शास्त्रीय संगीत का ज्ञान तथा कम से कम एक वाद्य बजाने की योग्यता २ शास्त्रीय नृत्य और नाटक ए भारते के महान ऐतिहासिक व्यक्तित्व २ सामाजिक, राजनैतिक तथा आर्थिक वातावरण एवं वर्तमान देशकाल व परिस्थियाँ हिन्दी और अंग्रेजी भाषाएँ बोलने और समझने की योग्यता सार्वजनिक बातचीत तथा लेखन के द्धारा संचार की क्षमता युवाशक्ति सर्वथा सहजयोग का ही एक अभिन्न अंग है । ७ युवाशक्ति एक है (एकता)। * दुनिया की किसी भी जगह जाएं तो उनको अपनी इच्छा से सामुहिक के लिए कार्य करना चाहिए। इसके सदस्यों को किसी भी केंद्र, शहर, प्रांत या देश तथा से खास लगाव या संलक्तता नही होना चाहिए। * = ০ == युवाशक्ति सहजयोग के दैवीय वृक्ष का अभिन्न भाग है। युवाशक्ति को नम होना चाहिए और वरिष्ठ सहजयोगियों के प्रति तमीजदार होना चाहिए। मिठास या माधुर्य उनका प्रतीक होना चाहिए। युवाशक्ति के लडके तथा लडकियों को सहजयोग के कार्य के नाम पर पढाई की उपेक्षा नहीं करनी चाहिए। यह हमारा परम् कर्तव्य है कि हम इस विरासत को आने वाली पीढ़ियों को हस्तांतरित करें। युवाशक्ति के सदस्यो का आत्मसम्मान बरकरार रहना चाहिए। ७ 1|Thank you Mother|| ५ूo अ

 The Last Supper 1495-97 In spite of its battered condition, Leonardo's only surviving mural retains much of the dignified authority that made it the most revered paiting in the world. He shows the moment when Christ tells his disciples that one of them will betray him, their varied reactions depicted with unprecedented psychological subtletly.



----------------------

2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 YUVADRISHTI
An offering at the lotus feet of our Divine Mother by the Yuvashakti
Volume 4
secense
Issue 4
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Index
पुजी तथा हवेन की महत्व
Adi Guru Moses
4.
Genesis of Sanskrit Language
The Great Artist
Leonardo da Vinci
9.
ब्रह्मपुरी
13
mon Yuvadrishti Asks
15
The essence of life is fragrance of Love
This New Year, lets spread the message of Love
Merry Christmas & Happy New Year
to all our Brothers & Sisters.
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 की महत्व
पुजी तथा हवन
पॅरिस, १९८३
इतने सारे सहज योगियों के साथ होनेसे मै बहुत जब आप में अंध विश्वास नही है पर श्रद्धा है, जी
प्रसन्न तथा आनंद में हूँ। इनमें से कितने ही अनुभव जनित है। तो, आपकी बुद्धिमत्ता को
एकदम नए भी हैं। मेरे लिये इतने नए नही हैं, उससे लढना नही चहिए। ना ही उसे ललकारना
वास्तव में मैने आप सभी को हजारों साल पहले चाहिए। अगर उसे ललकारा गया, और आपने
से जाना है। सहज योग में आप सभी को एक आपकी बुद्धिमत्ता को सुना, तो आप फिरसे नीचे
आसान सी बात समझ लेना चअहिए, है कि आप चले जाएंगे। अगर आकाश में तारे का लक्षण भी
आत्मा हैं। जो कुछ भी आत्मा नही है, वो आप नजर आ जाए,तो वैज्ञानिक विश्वास कर लेते हैं
किं वहाँ पर तारा है। उसी
प्रकार, आपको अपने
साक्षात्कार केी अगर
नही हैं।
हम आत्मा की तुलना सूर्य से
कर सकते हैं। सूर्य बाढलों से
ढँका जा सकता है। सूर्य पर
अध्यारोपण हो सकता है,
किन्तु सूर्य इस बिन्दु पर,
वैसा ही बना रहता है।
स्वयं से ही प्रकाशित है। अब
जब बाढल निकाल दिये
जाते हैं, हटा दिये जाते है, तो
सूर्य पूरे पर्यावरण में चमकने
लगता है। तो, हमारा आत्मा
भी अज्ञान से अध्यारोपित है।
जब तक अध्यारोपण है आप
आत्मा को देख नही सकते।
और जब कुछ बादल गायब
हो भी जाते हैं, तो भी
अध्यारोपण उपस्थित होता
ही है। आत्मा के प्रकाश को
चमकता हुआ देखने के लिये
व्यक्ति के लिए स्वच्छ आकाश की आवश्यकता
होती है। कई तरीकों से हम इन बादलों को
निकालने का प्रयासकरसकते है।
झलक मात्र भी है, तो भी
आपको कम से कम यह तो
मान ही लेना चाहिये कि
आप आत्मा भी है। अब आप
वो
इस अनुभव को पकडेरहिये
और अपना चित्त सदा इस
तथ्य पर रखिए कि आप
आत्मा है। इससे आप
अपनी बुद्धिमत्ता का मुख
मोडसकते हैं।
ा
अब आपकी बुद्धिमत्ता
आत्मा कीी [खो ज में
कार्यान्वित होगी। यही
श्रद्धा का अर्थ है। श्रद्धा शुद्ध
बुद्धि (सुबुद्धि) का उदय
करती है। अब, एक बार तो
अपने बादलों को निकलते
हुए देख लिया किन्तु अभी और भी बाढल बाकी
हैं। तो आपको बादल हटाने के लिये हवा का
उपयोग करना होगा, परम चैतन्य रूपी हवा
०
सबसे पहली तथा महत्त्वपूर्ण वस्तु है, ये का! और, जैसा कि आप जानते हैं, इस हवा से
मान्यता, विशवास कि हम आत्मा हैं: और शेष लाभलेने के कई तरीके हैं। तो ये हवा किसी और
सभी कुछ अध्याो ग है। आपको ये अपने स्त्रोत से आती है।
अन्दरमानना होगा। आत्मसाक्षात्कार के बाद Ghost) का स्त्रोत, आपकी कृण्डलिनी। और
ये बहुत सरल हो जाना चाहिये। आप बहुत बड़ी आपके सामने तो स्वयं आदिकुण्डलिनी मानव
चीज हैं, अब तक जैसा आपने अपने आप को रूप में अवतरित हैं। आपके पहले आए कई
जाना उससे बहुत अलग।
अर्थात आदिशक्ति (Holy
साधकों की तुलनामें आपबहुत भाग्यवान हैं।
क्योंकि किसी विग्रह, किसी स्वयंभू की पूजा
तो अब एक नई परिस्थिती सामने आती है कि
2.
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 करने में लोगों को बहुत समस्याएं हुईं। प्रथम लाभलेना चाहिये। इसके लिये आपको पूर्ण चित्त
उन्हें एक तरह का ध्यान करना होता था, जो पूजा पर तथा हवा (चैतन्य) किस तरह बहु रही
सर्विकल्प समाधी कहलाता था। अरथात, है, इस पर एकाग्र करना चाहिये। और फिर ये
आपको इस प्रकार से किसी मूर्ती (विग्रह) पर हवा सारे बादल बाहर निकालने का ध्यान
ध्यान एकाग्र करना पडता था। विग्रह का अर्थ है रखेगी। तो आपका एकमात्र कार्य आपकी
चैतन्यित मूर्ति। मूर्ति की ओर देखते-देखते, एकमात्र विधि यह है कि आप पूर्ण एकाग्रता में
कुण्डलिनी को उठाने का प्रयास करना होता पूजा तथा साक्षी आव में स्थित होने में लगाए।
था। और तब कुण्डलिनी आज्ञा तक जागृत हो आपएक दृष्टा है ।
भी जाती थी पर सहस्त्रार से परे छलांग लगाना
असम्भव कार्य था, क्योंकि इसमे व्यक्ति को
साकार से निराकार में जाना होता है। साकार से किसी विचार बिना किसी प्रतिक्रिया, केवल
निकल कर निराकार में आना इतना कठीन था हेखता मात्र है और अपने आप, सहज ही सीख
और निराकार पर एकाग्र होना तो असम्भव ही (समझ) लेता है, वो दृष्टा है। मेरे लिये कभी
था। जैसा कि मुसलमानों ने किया था अन्य कभी एक बोझ सा हो जाता है, क्योंकि आप में
कईयों ने करने का प्रयास किया। इन
परिस्थितियों में यह आवश्यक हो गया, कि
এ।
दृष्टा का अर्थ दोहरा है। जो केवल देखता मात्र है,
और जो केवल ज्ञान है, वो दृष्टा है। जो बिना
तथा देवताओं में समता होना चाहिए, कुछ
सन्तुलन होना ही चाहिए।
निराकार साकार रूप धरे। ताकि और अधिक
जटिलता ना हो। जैसे ही आप साकार पर ध्यान
केंद्रित करें, तो आप निराकार बन जाते हैं। जैसे
कि, अगर आपके सामने बर्फ है, जैसे ही आप
बर्फ को छूना शुरू करते हैं, वो पिघलने लगता है
तथा आपठण्डकमहसूस करने लगते है।
एक तरफ आप सारे मन्त्र कह रहे हैं और सारे
ढेवता जागृत हैं, पर ढूसरी और आप वो हैं, जो
अपने हृढय में कुछ स्वीकारना नही चाहते। सो,
जोइतनी अधिक उर्जा उत्पन्न हुईउसे मुझे अपने
शरीर में संजोना पडती है। तो बेहतर होगा कि
आप लोग अपना हृढय खुला रख कर, तथा
सो, अब समस्या आसानी से सुलझा दी गई। बिना विचार किये, पूजा केवल देखें आज हम
पूजा उन वस्तुओं में से एक है, जिनसे कि आप लोग पजा विधी पल्टा कर करेंगे। पहले हम
साकार-रूपों को उत्तेजित कर, निराकार रूप मे
परिवर्तित कर सकते हैं (Puja is one of the things क्योंकि हम अग्नि तत्व का आह्वान
by which you can excite the forms Into
formless)अब, आपके केन्द्र (चक्र), उज्जा के
केन्द्र हैं किन्तु इन सभी चक्रों पर भी एक
मार्गदर्शक देवता विराजमान हैं। वे (देवता) भी जब अव्निका आह्वान करते है, तब भी वही करते
निराकारसे साकारस्वरूप में बनाए गए हैं। और
जब आप पूजा करते हैं, तो साकार रूप
पिघलकर निराकार उर्जाओं में बढल जाते हैं। दोनों एक ही बात है। मेरा
और इन निराकार ऊर्जाओं का प्रवाह शरू होता कर सकते है, या फिर पानी से भी कर सकते हैं।
है। और तब हवा (चैतन्य लहरिया) बहुती है। जो भी बराई हैवोजल जाती है; जो भी कुछ गलत
और
निकाले जाते हैं।
हवन करेंगे और फिर पूजा। यह बेहतर होगा ।
करेंगे जो
सारी बुराईयों को जला देता है। जब आप मेरे पैरों
(श्री चरण) को धोते है तो भी वही करते हैं, और
हैं।
आज पहले हम हवन करेंगे और फिर पूजा।
पूजन आप आग्नि से
अव्जि का सत्व है चमक, जो भी कुछ गलत है,
है, जो भी बुराई है वो जल जाती है और फिर
साधकों के मुख परतथाशरीरपर चमक दिखाई
ढेने लगती है। और जब आप हवन करते हैं तो
वातावरण भी सुन्दर चैतन्य लहरियों से
आवेशित हो जाता है ।
परमात्मा आपसब को आशिव्वादित करें।
अब, आपपूजा के विषय में सोच नही सकते। ये
वस्तुएँ एक ऐसे साम्राज्य की होती हैं, जो विचारों
से परे है। तो येसमझ लेना चाहिये कि आप पूजा
को तर्क से सिद्ध (rationalize) नही कर सकते।
बल्कि आपको अपने चक्रों में अधिक से अधिक
3.
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 "Nobody else but Moses himself was
born as Mohammad"
- Shri Mataji, May 1985
"...the tree of life (in Bible) is nothing
but the Kundalini which is enlightened..
Absolutely it is that, it looks like that,
like a tree. They were describing about
Moses and this was the tree of life they
said..."
- Shri Mataji
Like, say, the Jews think that Christ
was not a saviour; they are still waiting
for two thousand years. It's not true. He
is the one. Without Him you cannot
raise the Kundalini... Christ and Moses
are one."
- Shri Mataji
In the last issue, it was told about Adi
Guru Abraham that he was the one who
gave birth to the three religions of
Judaism, Islam & Christianity through.
Moses, Mohammad Sa'ab and Shri Jesus.
In this issue we continue our series on
the ten great Gurus with Adi Guru
TA
Adi Guru Moses
Moses, who was born in the 14th century BC in the land of Egypt. Born into a slave family who served the
Pharaoh of Egypt. The Pharaohs considered themselves as Gods and enslaved the Hebrews for a long time.
The Hebrews suffered under the Egyptian rule waiting for their savior
to arrive.
An astrologer informed one King Farah about the destruction of the
Egyptian rule by a Hebrew born. Farah ordered all recently born
male children of Hebrew descent to be killed. Moses was protected for
three months and ultimately when the danger to His life increased,
His mother set him in a basket and let him float down the Nile as
Moses' sister watched the basket find it's way to the Egyptian queen's
bathing area on the Nile. The queen, a widow, gladly accepted the
child and named him Moshe (Moses), meaning "One who is taken out
of water" in Hebrew. It is believed that no one except the queen's maid
knew about Moses' origin. A few articles like the blanket in the basket
might have strongly suggested that Moses was a Hebrew born.
grew up as an illustrious prince, a great city builder, envy of His
brother Ramses and pride of the Pharaoh. While Ramses managed
failures, Moses conquered cities and hearts. Ramses grew
Moses
4-
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 from slavery of the Egyptians, but He was not
ready for this Divine purpose.
Ramses took the opportunity and threw him out of
Egypt into the deserts. Moses wandered the hot
sands and reached Midian, which was
And God spoke all these words, saying:
'1 am the LORD
your God...
1. You shall have no other gods before Me."
predominantly inhabited by Arabs. Here he
defended some ladies at a water well from the
attack of shepherds. The ladies were seven sisters
who were daughters of an Arab tradesman. Moses
began His life as a shepherd, tending to the herds of
this Arab trader. Later he married the eldest
2. "You shall not make for yourself a carved image-any
likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is
in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the
earth."
daughter, who was an extremely balanced,
powerful and positive influence on Moses' life.
During one of his usual days as the herd grazed
near the foot of Mount Sinai, he saw a burning
bush. The fire was calm and silent, but the bust
burnt silently. This was His first real encounter
with the divinity within. This silent fire was
nothing but the Kundalíni enlightening the subtle
system. Moses faced God directly in this moment
of truth.
13. "You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in
vain.
14. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.'
%3D
5. 'Honor your father and your mother.
16. "You shall not murder.
!7. "You shall not commit adultery."
"Take off your shoes, the ground you are standing
on is sacred"
Moses: "Who are you?"
"I am Abraham, Isak, Jacob. God of your
forefathers. Do not fear. Go to Egypt and free the
Hebrews and bring them to the holy land of Israel,
their motherland."
8. "You shall not steal.
9. "You shall not bear false witness against your
I neighbor."
10."You shall not covet your neighbor's house; you shall
nof covet your neighbor's wife, nor his male servant,
nor his female servant, nor his ox, nor his donkey, nor
anything that is your neighbor's."
Moses said, "What shall Itell the name fGod?"
"Yahowa"
The above powerful communication was followed
by Moses
traveling to
Egypt with his
brother Aaron.
Kaushik Panchal
uncomfortable imagining Moses at the throne of
Egypt while he was the born son of the Pharaoh.
When Moses was twenty-five years old, he was
supervising the construction of a city which
personified the glory of the Pharaoh. Here he
witnessed the true cruelty of the Egyptians in ill
treating the Hebrews. During this time the maid
who know Moses secret tried to leak it out. The
he Ratilal & Sons
There
confronted thé
All kinds of Textile
Accessories
new Pharaoh
Ramses, his
brother. Ramses'
Ahmedabad.
Ph.: 2748183 (o)
3739017
problem, like all
information reached Moses who went in search of
his family among the Hebrew slaves. He found his
mother, brother and sister. He increasingly felt that
he should take up the job of freeing of the Hebrews
others was his
belief that he was
the supreme God
5
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 and this Yahowa cannot be greater than him. Thus, Moses faced the challenge of convincing his big ego
that there was a God greater than his Egyptian ego and Ramses should let his people go.
Moses turned his wooden stick into a snake in Ramses' court, but Ramses couldn't see Moses' divinity.
Moses struck the Nile with his stick and converted all of Nile to blood to make Ramses give up his ego, but
no avail. Moses' attention worked to bring various plagues upon the Egyptians, but Ramses wouldn'tagree.
Moses promised Ramses that the sky will rain with hail and fire. Hail did fall and started fires everywhere.
In one of the events, Ramses' son, the new prince lost his life. Ramses, then, let the Hebrews go.
"Like when you say Moses crossed the river. This was the happening of the Void being crossed by the
Primordial Master."-Shri Mataji, March 1982
"You mean it was miraculous, or it was a false story. What do you think of it? It was absolutely true, that he
did cross the sea; with the help of God he could do it."
-Shri Mataji, March 1985
Moses lead about 6 lakh Hebrews about of Egypt. When the caravan reached the Red Sea, they saw Ramses
coming towards them with a great army, ready to kill them all in frustration. Moses was destined to lead
the people out of slavery and tyranny and a great wind rose which split the Red Sea, making way for all
Moses men to cross over safely. Ramses' army followed into the sea bed, but the watery gates closed,
drowning Ramses evil army.
One of the difficulties faced by Moses was the lack of faith amongst his followers. There was greed, lust and
a long way to go before they became truly faithful (Wali or Khalis). The caravan reached Mount Sinai.
Moses went up the hill to hear God's wishes. While he was gone, the bad elements began to spread
rumours that He is gone for good and may not return. Some started teaching false religions and all the lusty
and greedy people got revealed in Moses' absence. In the meantime, Moses communed with God and God
wrote out the Ten Commandments, which Moses brought down. Moses descended to find a disappointing
scene of arrogant false believers celebrating false Gods and stupid beliefs. Working with the aid of Moses'
pure attention, the earth then opened up and consumed all these negative people.
The Ten Commandments are principles that get established in a person automatically as connection with
Shri Mataji becomes stronger. One can imagine these commandments related to our subtle system as
follows (one can find alternate interpretations to this one):
Moses then led the people
towards the promised
land of Israel. He rested
and allowed Joshua and
Priest Eleazar take up the
leadership in the journey
IsraelI. The
commandments became
the basis for the Shariat
Chakra
Commandment Significance
Sahasrara
Integration
Conditioning and Ritualism
Chanting God's Name Meaninglessly
Purity & Inner Cleansing
Father and Mother Principle
Wisdom of Non-Violence
Adultery
Stealing (Sin against father principle)
Lying
Greed
1.
Agnya
Vishuddhi
Entire Subtle System, Chitta
Left & Right Heart
Agnya
Mooladhar, Agnya & Swadisthan to
Right Side, Right Heart
Vishuddhi, Mooladhar
Nabhi
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
ten
Laws of Islam. Moses, like
all Adi Gurus warned
against alcohol as it is the anti-consciousness activity that is found in the common people. His work
revolved around the physical emancipation of the Hebrews and He worked against the darkness in the
people's minds. One of the central themes of his teachings is to rise above the selfish self-indulgence in life
and attain enlightenment. Thus lived a great Primordial Master, beloved child of the Mother and one of
the ten guru principles within our void.
ttt
6'
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Genesis of Sanskrit Language
SIS
यं
3.
Today what we speak is totally a localized language as it is not having any relation with some
divine work. Previously languages were not only used for the communication but languages were
greatly used for the praise of the God. Our Indian scriptures and vedas are very good example of this.
Sanskrit, this is the language which is greatly honored by the Indians as this is the language
is very much close to God. Sanskrit was a spoken language as well as the literacy language of the Aryadom
until Circa 500B.C., after which it remained for nearly 2000 years the dominant literacy language as well
as the spoken language among the culture throughout the subcontinent. The word 'Sanskrit' means the
one which is introduced or produced in its perfect form. It is also said that the languages which we use now
in India like Bengali, Hindi, Marathi are all evolved from the Sanskrit language. But then the
which
question is
from where has this great Sanskrit language is evolved.
There are many theories on the evolution of Sanskrit language. Many great people have put forth
their views in this direction. Shri Mataji has said that Sanskrit is the language evolved through the
vibrations that are flowing through human being. When the Kundalini starts flowing through seven
chakras then it vibrates and produce different sounds at different petals from which the devnagari or the
Sanskrit language is been evolved. Like at Agyna chakra we can hear 'Om'. The alphabets present on each
chakra are as follows -
लं
Mooladhara
Swadisthana
Nabhi
यं
Anahata
Vishuddhi
Agnya
Shree Mataji has also said that unless you utter the sholakas in Sanskrit language the chakra would not
respond. Except the 'Lords Prayer' at Agyna chakra which can be said in Hebrew or even in English. Shri
Mataji said in one of Her speeches, "they say English language has evolved from sounds produced by
animals. Like the letter 'm' comes from sound produced by crocodile." **Shri Mataji's speech titled
"Trigun', 3-02-1978
One more interesting thing is that in Sanskrit language there are total 50 alphabets. If we count the
number of petals of all the chakras from Mooladhara to Agnya then that also comes to 50. This proves that
Sanskrit language is created by taking into the consideration of the human body. Even the names of all the
chakras is in Sanskrit language. Chakra in Sanskrit means 'vortex of energy' which we know exactly in
Sahaja Yoga.
According to the lessons written by Samuel L. Lewis "What we called spirit in English corresponds
in some respect to what is called as Shiva and Shakti in Sanskrit. The body being the temple of holy spirit
has accommodation for both Shiva and Shakti.
21.
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Sanskrit is a very special language in the sense that it has six unmatched features
It has a uniqueness in every consonant and vowel consonant combination.
Since the beginning it has a complete dictionary of the root words called 'dhatu' that could create any
number of words according to the requirement by adding a proper prefix and suffix which are
described in detail in Sanskrit language.
The Sanskrit language has remained unchanged in every age because it has a divinely produced
grammar. The Sanskrit language represents the literal form of Divinity on the planet earth.
The three kinds of prime Sanskrit scripture (Vedas, Upanishads, Puranas) and their style of
presentation is purely having a divinity in it. For example the Bhagwatam explains philosophy of God
and God's love.
Sanskrit language has its localized forms (called as 'Apabhransha').
Sanskrit is only language in which maximum number of scriptures are written. Hence it is also called as
Scriptural Language.
Sir William Jones had written, "The Sanskrit language, whatever be its antiquity, is of wonderful
structure; more perfect than Greek, more copious than Latin, and more exquisitely refined than either."
The Greatest Truth for a Sahaja Yogi
Ritu Mehra
What is the greatest mistake for a Sahaja Yogi?
1.
Thank You Shri
To believe your Mind.
Mataji for your
blessings &
What is the greatest blessing for a Sahaja Yogi?
- Collective Consciousness.
Who is the greatest fool?
2.
attention all the time
3.
and everywhere
He who does not recognize the Truth.
What is the surest thing in life for a Sahaja Yogi?
- Your Mother's Love.
4.
What is the greatest pleasure for a Sahaja Yogi?
-Pure Joy- Nirmal Anand.
What is the greatest opportunity for a Sahaja Yogi?
To give realization to people.
What is the greatest thought for a Sahaja Yogi?
- Thoughtlessness.
What is the greatest victory for a Sahaja Yogi?
Over Ego.
6.
INDORE HOUSING
7.
'A' Class Construction of
8.
Bunglows by qualified
engineers as per IS-Code
of Civil Engineering
What is the greatest handicap fora Sahaja Yogi?
- Egoism.
What is the greatest loss for a Sahaja Yogi?
To lose the image of Mother in your heart.
9.
10.
Indore.
Ph.0731-2490953,
What is the greatest need for a Sahaja Yogi?
Absolute faith- Nirvikalpa.
11.
2490128
-
8-
5.
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Great Artist
Leonardo da Vinci
is known of Leonardo's childhood, though
biographers have speculated on the theme of the
young Leonardo in the green Tuscan countryside,
acquiring his lifelong fascination with nature.
Certainly he began drawing the painting at an early
age. According to the 16th century artist and art
historian Giorgio Vasari, Leonardo's work so
impressed his father that he took samples into
Florence to show his friend Andrea del Verrocchio,
one of the leading artists and sculptors of the day.
Verrocchio was also enthusiastic, and Ser Piero
The subtlety of working of divine is remarkable and
probably needs even more subtle understanding to
enjoy the divine creations. The divine created this
universe in the gentlest manner. Seldom do we
realize that the Shakti Herself has decorated this
'Brahmanda' with sources that are meant to reflect
Her love. Sources, which are as simple as the
waving leaves, which often go unnoticed, to as
mystic and supremely powerful as the
'swayambhus', make us aware of the
paramchitanya, Her power of love.
Yet another source is eternal art. Artist like enrolled his teenage son in the master's busy
Leonardo da Vinci give us a glimpse of this art. So
beautifully is divinity
expressed in his works
that even Adishakti is
workshop.
www
Verrocchio's workshop, like that of other major
artists, was something of a cross between an art
school and a design studio. Apprentices such as
Leonardo worked their way up from sweeping
floors to mixing colors to helping out in the
production of commissioned paintings. Leonardo
had reached this stage by the age of 20, when
Verrocchio gave him responsibility for painting
one of the angels in The Baptism of Christ.
compelled to lavishly
praise his creations, a
reason enough to
know about the life of
this great artist, after
all not every day does
the Shri Adishakti asks
Sahajis to visit Mona
Lisa to experience the
bliss!
Leonardo's angel radiated his youthful genius.
Vasari wrote that Verrocchio 'never touched colors
again, he was so ashamed that the boy understood
their use better than he did'. Leonardo had
'graduated', and became a master of the painters'
Guild of St Luke, which allowed him to set up as an
independent painter. However he remained based
at Verrochhio's until the late 1470s.
Leonardo had learned a good deal, in the years that
he spent at his master's studio, and not all of it from
Verrocchio. Florence in the 15th century was one
Leonardo da Vinci was
not only one of the
greatest artists of the
Renaissance, but also perhaps the most versatile
genius who ever lived. His interests embraced
virtually every field of study then known; anatomy
and geology were two of his passions, and his great
dream was manpowered flight. However, his
perfectionism meant that he finished Leonardo would have come into contact with
comparatively few major paintings.
of the great cultural centres of the world, and
many of the scholars whose new ideas and learning
Leonardo was born on 15th April 1452 near were shaping the intellectual climate of
Florence, but the scene of his most ambitious Renaissance Italy.(Pic 1)
artistic undertakings was Milan. Virtually nothing According to Vessari, 'Leonardo's disposition was
9-
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 so lovable that he commanded everyone's
affection', and there are many other accounts of his
good looks and charm, as well as his quirky sense of
humour that gave him a life long taste for practical
jokes. Yet, "Alone you are all yourself," he wrote,
"witha companion you are halfyourself."
needed for Sforza to assemble 90 odd tones of
bronze required for its casting.
While he was waiting for the bronze, Leonardo
began work on a huge mural of The Last Supper for
the nearby monastery church of Santa Maria delle
Grazie. Its brilliance was indisputable, and even
The first years of Leonardo's life as a fully fledged before it was finished, it drew many admiring
artist coincided with the rise of supreme power in pilgrims to the monastery.
Florence of Lorenzo de' Medici - 'il Magnifico'. He
ruled the prosperous city-state with shrewd self
interest, and like many members of his family had At 42, he was at peek of his career, admired and
cultivated tastes. Yet Leonardo received little of the respected by all. He had his own school of
lavish patronage which abounded in Florence at apprentices and had never been busier. Perhaps he
the time: he sketched obsessively, in the years he fretted when he heard that Ludovico had sent the
remained in Florence after leaving Verrocchio's bronze once destined for Great Horse to his
studio, he executed as far as is known only a embattled brother-in-law to make canons. But
handful of paintings. The most important of these, there were brighter things to think of.
The Adoration of the magi, was left unfinished.
SUCCESS ANDADMIRATION
And he was writing his Treatise on Painting, a huge
work which was to influence artists for centuries to
His Milanese career got off to a slow start, but in
1483 he received an important commission from
the church of San Francesco Grande.. The Virgin of
the Rocks was delivered after 25 years.
come.
Leonardo's notebooks were filling rapidly,
crammed with sketches and comments written in
ASTATUE FOR THE DUKE
his precise, left to right, mirror image hand. He
While work was beginning on The Virgin of the could see nothing without wanting to study it:
Rocks, Leonardo was already thinking about birds, plants, the movement of water. And what did
another as yet only imagined work of art. He not exist to observe, he could imagine. During these
knew that Duke Ludovico intended to honour his days came the first flood of inventions a submarine,
brigand father with a massive equestrian statue,
and was determined to gain the commission. He BORGIA'S MILITARY ENGINEER
sent the Duke an extraordinary letter in which he
outlined his prowess as a military inventor and For a few months in 1502-3, Leonardo wandered
engineer. Almost as an afterthought, he offered his around Italy inspecting fortifications and then
services as an architect, an sculptor and a painter.
a tank, even a helicopter.
suddenly returned to Florence to live as an artist
again.
Sanjiv Sondhi
In 1483, he was allowed to begin work on the great
Horse. His projected statue was an immense
undertaking. Innovative as always, Leonardo was
unwilling to produce the usual static sculptor: he
set himself the seemingly impossible task of Around this time
creating a 26 feet high rearing horse. Such a feat had
never been achieved before, and much time was most celebrated of
needed to solve the problem. By November 1493, all his work, the
the full sized clay model was complete. All that was
was
Spontaneous
Travels
Services Pvt. Ltd.
productive period
for Leonardo
he produced the
Chandigarh.
Mona Lisa.
Ph. 0172 721772
In 1503, the
721186
10
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 government of Florence commissioned him to
paint an epic picture of The Battle of Anghiari, to
glorify an encounter in a war with Milan, some 60
years before.
naturalistic
representation of
appearances was to
Leonardo
"MOTIONS OF THE MIND
straightforward; the
second part
'
the
As a painter, Leonardo wanted to represent not
only appearance but also feelings, 'the motions of
mind'. This approach changed the status of the
great artist from craftsman to a genius.
revelation the
character through
gesture and
expression
was
In his Lives of the Artist, first published in 1550, more difficult.
Georgio Vasari wrote that Leonardo's 'name and
fame will never be extinguished'. The claim has
been borne out by posterity, for Leonardo is one of
the few artists whose reputation has never wavered drawings, completing the job the mere exercise of
from his own lifetime to the present day. His
contemporaries thought his talent was little less
than divine, and in the centuries since his death, When he could bring himself to finish a picture,
painters, poets and philosophers have looked to however Leonardo outshone even the greatest of
him as a shining example of the heights which the his contemporaries. Oil painting was at that time a
human mind and spirit can attain.
Once Leonardo had
solved the problems
of composition and characterization in his
technical skill held little appeal.
fairly new technique in Italyand Leonardo was one
of the first great masters of it. To a profoundly
remarkably thin platform for such wide spread and thoughtful worker like him, slow-drying oil paints
lustrous fame. Scarcely a dozen paintings are
universally accepted as being from his own hand. infinitely subtle gradations of tone and to paint
and of these several are unfinished or damaged.
details such as plants and rocks with an exquisite
precision that would gladden the heart of a botanist
or a geologist.
Leonardo's achievement, then, is of an altogether
exceptional kind, for although he began
comparatively few major works, and finished even
fewer, he has imposed himself on the consciousness
of artists and critics (and even the general public) in
that only a handful of other cultural giants
Leonardo wanted to attain the same beauty of
finish when he painted murals, so he rejected the
time honoured fresco technique, which demanded
great swiftness in execution.
a way
can match. This seeming paradox is explained not
simply by the wonderful quality of the few
paintings Leonardo did bring to fruition, but also by
revolution in attitudes towards art that he brought
about. Virtually single handedly Leonardo created
the idea of the artist as genius.
THE MASTER DRAUGHTSMAN
With the exception of The Battle of the Anghiari,
almost all Leonardo's paintings were either
religious subjects or portraits. His drawing,
however cover an astonishing range of subjects, for
he used them not only as preparation for his
paintings, but also as an essential tool in his
scientific research. He was the most prolific
Leonardo's fascination with the intellectual draughtsman of his times and used a wide variety of
THE PAINTER PHILOSOPHER
problems of art is one reason why his drawings so
outnumber his paintings. He thought that the
painter had to represent two main things: man and
the motions of man's mind'. The first part - the
media,
The sheer variety of Leonardo's interest was the
main reason why he finished so little in his primary
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 vocation of paintings. Apart from his manifold expressions in many of the paintings are simply
scientific pursuits, he was also a sculptor and an breath taking for the connoisseurs and have
architect. No work that is indisputably his survives become immortal.. Among which one such
in either medium, but his ideas and expertise were painting of the Mother and child turns a person
important in both fields.
thoughtless. Also, in these three paintings, all of
Mother and Child, in the background one always
The splendid bronze group of St John the Baptist sees snow capped peaks just like those of the
between a Pharisee and a Levite over the north door Himalaya, the abode of the Adi Shakti. It seems he
of the Baptistery in Florence, for example, is the must have known somewhere in depth of heart
work of Giovanni Francesco Rustici, but Leonardo who She was, even though he might not have been
played a major role in its creation. Vasari tells us aware of it himself. But, to paint so precisely and so
that Rustici 'would allow no one near save significantly to what Sahaja is, and to be able to feel
Leonardo, who never left him while he was
moulding and casting until the work was finished'. realised soul. Shri Mataji has also mentioned
In architecture, Leonardo's designs for ideal' regarding the Mother and Child theme in the past
churches were influential on his friend Bramante, and has spoken regarding its inert essence on Shri
the greatest architect of the High Renaissance, and Ganesh Tatrwa and also the Mahalaxmi Tattwa. She
the ingenious double spiral stairecase at the chateau referred once that "The Christian conditioning has
of Chambord probably derives from an idea of his.
such vibrations from his work shows that he was a
been even worse than Jew conditioning because
Leonardo's influence was spread also by his they just took out Christ's Mother; though the
writings. His notes were gathered together and painters and artists couldn't do that. They had the
published as his Treatise on Painting in 1651, but mother there. Despite all that the motherhood has
they had wide circulation even before then. The not been respected, as it should have been in the
few paintings that he left to posterity (or that Bible. While Mahalaxmi herself incarnated as
survived long enough to be copied and re-copied) Mother Mary. You cannot expect any spiritual
had an unprecedented effect on succeeding artists. growth, unless and until you can accept it as the
Indeed, Leonardo's influence has been so great that Shakti, the Mother who is the only communication
it is harder to think of major painters who do not
owe something to him than ofthose who do.
between us and the Divinity". (Maha Laxmi Puja
(Kolhapur), India, 21-12-90)
In one of his notebooks he had written: 'As a well
spent day brings happy sleep, so life well used
brings happy death.' And quietly, on May 2, 1519, a
few weeks after his 67th birthday, Leonardo da
Vinci died. The world
had lost perhaps its most
universal genius.
AREALISED SOUL
This can be seen during
the course of his life. He
was fascinated by
nature, just like a child.
This innocence is
reflected in the
expressions in most of
his masterpieces. The
12
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Sabaj
Destinatioe
हम धुरी
ब्रह्मपुरी ये पवित्र स्थान महाराष्ट्र में सातारा से २३ हनुमानजी के अवतार थे तथा इसलिये उन्हे ही
कि.मि. दूर कृष्णा नदी के तट पर स्थित है। यहाँ पर मूर्तीयाँ मिलीं। जिन्हे उन्होने अपने तपस्या स्थान
बस्ती ना होने के कारण वातावरण शांत व याने, उत्तर मांड नदी के किनारे स्थित चाफल व
आह्वाददायक है। परम् पूज्य श्री माताजी ने कहा है कि सज्जनगढ में स्थापित किया। सन १९८२ से १९९0
तपस्वी व योगी जनों के वास्तव्य से यह भूमी तक दिसंबर मे महाराष्ट्र मे आने वाले सभी विदेशी
चैतन्यमय हो गई है। रामायण काल में श्री राम व
सीताजी के चरण स्पर्श द्वारा यह भूमी पवित्र हो गई।
कहा जाता है की ई.स. १६६० मे श्री समर्थ रामदास
स्वामी को ब्रह्मपुरी के शिवनाथ मंदिर की उत्तर दिशा के दौरान उन्हें ब्रह्मपुरी की योग भूमी पर ठहराया।
में स्थित जलकुंड मे श्री राम, सीता, लक्ष्मण व श्री
आंग्लाई देवी की मूर्तीयाँ मिली थी, जिन्हे वे अपने
साथ ले जाना चाहते थे मगर अंगापुर के ग्रामवसियों सहज योगियों को सहज योग साधना की प्राथमिक
ने उन्हे रोका व कहा कि ये मूर्तीयाँ हमारे गाँव की होने शिक्षा दी। इस काल के दौरान परम् पूज्य श्री माताजी
के कारणयह हमें ही मिलनी चाहिये। तब श्री रामदास
स्वामी मुर्तीयाँ वहीं खेत मे रखकर चाफल के लिए
निकल गये। ग्रामवासियों ने उन मूर्तीयों को खेत से लिए ब्रह्मपुरी मे रहते थे। वहाँ पर एक खुले मैदान मे
गाँव ले जाने के लिए भरसक प्रयत्न किये परंतु वे टेंट लगाकर ज़मीन पर सोना, ठंडे पानी से नदी मे
मूर्तीयों को हिला भी न सके। तब वे श्री रामदास
स्वामी को ढूंढते चाफल तक गये। ग्रामवासियों ने श्री करना, नदी का पानी पीना व रात्री मे ३-४ कि. मी.
रामदास स्वामी से प्रार्थना की कि आप ही योग्य पैदल चलकर कार्यक्रम के लिए अंगापुर तक जाना
स्थान पर उन मूर्तीयों की स्थापना कीजिये। श्री इस प्रकार से परम् पुज्य श्री माताजी ने सहज योगियों
रामदास स्वामी बाद मे उन मूर्तीयों को खेत से लेकर को अनुशासन सिखाया ।
आए और श्री राम श्री सीता तथा लक्ष्मणजी की मूर्तीयों
की स्थापना उन्होने चाफल मे की, व अंग्लाई देवी की साधना करने की प्राथमिक शिक्षा विदेशी सहज
मूर्ती की स्थापना उन्होने सज्जनगढ मे की। तथा योगियों को ब्रह्मपुरी मे मिली। शुरूवात में आए
दोनो स्थानों पर मंदिर बनाए। इन मूर्तीयों के दर्शन विदेशी सहजयोगीयों को शीतल पेय, मांसाहार, काटे
श्रद्धालु आज भी कर सकते हैं।
दिसंबर १९८२ में श्री दत्तजयंती के शुभ अवसर वस्तूओं के बिना सहजयोग साधना करने की
पर पूर्णिमा के पूर्ण चंद्रप्रकाश में परम् पूज्य श्री प्राथमिक शिक्षा ब्रह्मपुरी मे दी गयी। जिस जलकुंड मे
माताजी तथा उनके साथ करीब १০০ विदेशी
सहजयोगी इस मंदिर मे गए। उस समय श्री माताजी ने मुर्तीयाँ मिली थी, उसी जलकुंड के पानी मे पैर रखकर
श्री क्षेत्र ब्रह्मपूरी व अंगापूर इन दोनो जगहों के बारे मे श्री माताजी एक शिला पर बैठी थी। उस समय विदेशी
जानकारी दी। परम् पूज्य श्री माताजी ने सहज सहज योगियों ने कृष्णा नदी के पानी में उतरकर
योगियों को बताया की श्री समर्थ रामदास स्वामी श्री कृष्णा माई के पानी से श्री माताजी के चरणों का
सहज योगियों को श्री माताजी ने श्री रामदास स्वामी
व्वारा स्थापित इन मूर्तियों के दर्शन करने के लिए
सज्जनगढ़ भेजा व महाराष्ट्र के एक महिने की यात्रा
ब्रह्मपूरी में सन १९८४ से १९९0 तक प्रतिवर्ष
३ दिवसीय शिविर लगाकर श्री माताजी ने विदेशी
एक सर्व साधारणशेड-नुमा जगहपररहती थीं।
सहज योगी सहज योग साधना सीखने के
कि
नहाना, ज़मीन पर बैठकर भारतीय शाकाहारी भोजन
इस प्रकार लगातार सात वर्षों तक सहजयोग
चम्मच, गद्दे-बिस्तर इस तरह के ऐश-आराम की
श्री रामदास स्वामीजी को सीताजी व अंग्लाई देवी की
13
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 माताजी के रहने का स्थान, नदी
कि कृष्णा उनका
स्वागत करने के की वो पवित्र शिला (श्री माताजी
लिए गारही हैं।
सहजयोगी मंदिर बनाने का संकल्प किया
३ं
का पुजन स्थान) इन सब का
गया है। इस स्थान के चैतन्य का
आनंद लेने के लिए आए देशी व
विदेशी सहज योगियों के रहने व
योग साधना के लिये आश्रम का
निर्माण भी किया जाएगा श्री
माताजी की प्रेरणा, आशिर्वाद व
संगीत के माध्यम अनुमति से श्री विश्व निर्मला धाम
से रातें आनंदपुर्ण सातारा की
होती थीं। इस स्थापना निम्न लिखित उद्देश्य
यो ने उस काल मे
हर साल श्री
माता जी
विविध रूपों मे
ी द
क T
पू ज न कि या।
भ ज न
त थ ा
चॅरिटेबल ट्रस्ट,
पूर्ति के लिए की गई है:
प्रकार संगीत की
शि क्ष ।
को
१. ब्रह्मपुरी में देश-विदेश से आने
सहजयोगीयो को वाले सहजयोगियों के लिए सहज
ब्रह्मपूुरी में श्री यग आश्रम तथा मन्दिर का
भ
अह्
मा
यटर
टट ्
टी
निर्माण।
माताजी के चरणों
मे प्राप्त हुई।
श्री
२. वृद्ध सहज योगियों के रहने व
योगसाधना के लिए एक आश्रम
ललिता
चक्र स्वामिनी, श्री बनाना।
श्रीचक्र स्वामिनी, ३. सहजयो ग साधना व
आयुर्वेदिक औषधियों द्वारा
पूजन किया। इस मंगल समय
उपस्थित सभी सहज योगियों ने श्री स्वामिनी के रूप मे श्री माताजी का
गणेशजी का रूप एक शिला पर पूजन यही पर किया गया है। श्री
प्रकटित देखा। इसी प्रकार यह कृष्णा माँ यानि श्री शक्ती बच्चों के विकास हेतु निर्माण कार्य
मंगलमय पूजा सभी देवी देवताओ वि इ ल यानि श्री कृ षण
ने देखी। सप्तरंगी इंद्रधनुष्य का े सहज योगियो ने ५. आयुर्वेदिक औषधीय वनस्पती
प्रकट होकर आकाश को रंगबिरंगा श्री कृष्ण पुजा का आनंद लिया। की खेती तथा औषधी निर्माण।
बनाना इसी का एक प्रतीक था। यहा पर श्री माताजी ने सहजयोग
पूर्ण वातावरण चैतन्यमय तथा अऔर आयुर्वेद इस विषय पर भी
आनंदमय हो गया। इस जलकंड मार्गदर्शन दिया। अपने भाषणो मे के सभी विश्व निर्मला धर्म के
की उत्तर दिशा में नदी पर 'वसंत' श्री माताजी ने गुरू तत्त्व, मात तत्त्व अनुयायियों से तन, मन, धन से
नामक बांध बना हुआ हैं। बांध से जैसी मौलिक शिक्षा भी इसी
बहने वाले कृष्णा माई के पानी की चैतन्य भूमी परदी है।
मधुर ध्वनी का अनुभव सबने
किया। इस पर श्री माताजी ने कहा
श्र ह स च क
आरोग्य प्राप्ति।
४. निराधार, अबला र्त्रीयों व
कृष्ण
है।
करना।
इनके सान्लिध्यमे
श्री विश्व निर्मला धाम के
निर्माण कार्य के लिए देश व विदेश
सहायता मिलने की टूरस्ट के
आधिकारी आशा तथा विनति
परम्पूज्य श्री माताजी ने करते हैं। और श्री माताजी के
एक बार "ब्रह्मपुरी ये मेरा स्थान
है" कहा था। परम् पूज्य श्री
चरणों मे नम्र प्रार्थना करते है।
০০
14
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Asksæee
(జడి
అ£ణ
What is significance of Puja in Sahaj?
During Puja our Mother is in Her full incarnation who can bestow the cardinal virtue and blessing on
us, if the Puja is attended with sacred heart and in full devotion and hence attending puja in Sahaja
yoga enhances the divine vibrations.
--- Hitesh Bhatnagar, Allahabad
The most important part of Puja is to make you go more & more deep. Rest is eternal enjoyment & to
feel Ganga flow on your hands & in your body.
Sahaj Singh, Pune
Actually puja is a very auspicious occasion in which the presence of Her Holiness Shri Mataji helps us
to get that all enormous, blissful aashirwads. The puja offered to particular deity clears that specific
chakra of ours and fill that with Her Param Chaitanya that is a fuel for our happy and peaceful day-to-
day life.
--- Dr. Samarth Borade
On the occasion of Puja, all the Ganas are present even if Shri Mataji is in Her Nirakar Swaroopa. When
we attend Puja and surrender our SELF at Her lotus feet, the Chaitanya is showered upon us by Shri
Mataji.
--- Santosh Katiyar.
Puja is an offering of our surrender and devotion to the lotus feet of divine Mother. It is the occasion
when She manifests in the form of the deity whose Puja is being done. The Puja is a celebration of our
complete devotion to HER and also of reaffirming the vow of spreading Her divine message to all.
--- Jagriti Singh
Puja is a way ofshowing our love and gratitude to our beloved Mother.
NidhiAsthana, Bangalore
My personal experience is that I feel the presence of Shri Mataji in everyone, and feel that Shri Mataji
is watching the Puja being offered.
Shubhashini Sanapala
As Sahaja Yogis, we are privileged for being allowed to worship Shri Adi Shakti in person or through
Her photograph. Pure devotion comes from our heart, whose reflection is the Spirit that is pleased
when we perform auspicious worship of our Holy Mother. Let the heart to be the throne of Shri Adi
Shakti, then worship Her Lotus Feet with the attention that has become pure and holy like the Ganges
water and auspicious like 'Amrut'.
-Christian Akplogan
To attend a Sahaja Puja is a very fortunate thing. It fulfils our Bhakti and devotion and thus generates
extra showers of vibrations that help us to grow deeper and deeper.
-- Mitesh Gandhi, UK
15
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Puja blesses us to go to greater realization of 'Nirakar' from 'Sakar'.
Puja blesses us with the powers, which our Holy mother emits
during Puja for us to absorb. Puja blesses us "to attain 'Sakshi' State
L"Supposing
more and more".
there is no oil in
Sunil Shrivastava, Udaipur
In Puja one gets so many blessings that makes our attention pure.
All the dimensions are opened inside you in the Puja as the energy
in the Puja is maximum. The Chit is elevated and you feel that you
are one in Virata. The Nirvichar Avastha and Nirvikalp Avastha
are established only through Puja.
this lamp,
it will
all go off. It has
Rajiv Sethi
to have oil. It will
In Sahaja yoga, we are doing the PUJA in order to worship the
Deities of various chakras so that the qualities & characteristics of
those chakras become stronger which ultimately makes our
go off. So the
spiritual ASCENT easier, matured & fruitful.
dedication part is
Jasmin Panchal (Ahmedabad)
-
* One cannot progress without attending Pujas. Puja clears our
chakras, helps us to surrender and envokes a true prayer in our
heart. The significance of Puja cannot be explained in words, one
has to attend a Puja to believe and feel it from the heart.
the oil in you, is
the attachment,
--Neha Shah
complete
Puja plays a vital role in our development and increases our depth
in meditation. In simple words it is a collective treatment of Sahaja
attachment to
yoga.
Ashwini Thakur
your source.
77
The significance of attending Puja in Sahaja yoga is our spiritual
ascent. ASCENT Aim Self for Continuous Enlightenment 'N'
Transformation.
- Mahavir Dhariwal
On the subtle side, it's a way to introspect and is reflection of what
we have achieved being in Sahaja Yoga and what is still lingering
in us of the past which is stopping us for complete surrender to
Shri Mataji.
Mumbai
-- Rajesh Sharma
By attending the Pujas in Sahaja Yoga, we develop more Bhakti,
Ekakarita & connection with our Holy Mother.
Yuvashakti
--- Vimal Dutt
The flow of vibrations at the time of Puja remains very high,
which helps us in fast spiritual growth.
-Yogesh Mohite
16
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Knowledge & Fun
THE SAINTS OF INDIA:
ACROSS:1. Jnaneshvara's one of the major work ("Ambrosial experience"), which narrates the final
state of spiritual liberation which can be achieved by an individual in the present life. (13 A)
2. He was of the Mahar caste, the untouchables of Maharashtra. His abhangas are full of a deep awareness
of his low caste. English translations of one of the surviving abhangas.
A sugarcane may be crooked, and yet its juice is not crooked.
A bow may be curved, and yet the arrow is not.
A river may have windings, and yet its water is even.
So also, may be a pariah, but his heart is pure. (6A)
3. He took his birth in the family of this fifteenth century saint. He was a prominent figure in the history
of the cult of Pandharpur, having brought back the image of god Vittala from Vijayanagar where it had
been taken by the ruling prince. There are some ninety Abhangas ascribed to him A few have been
translated into English.
As the bumble bee seeks the pollen,
as the bee seeks the honey,
So my heart seeks this God, Pandurang.
Says Take me to Pandhari,
and make of me a glad offering to Vithoba. (6A)
lboh
4. He devoted his energies to establishing what he called Maharashstradharma, using religious faith to
install
founder of the Maratha empire, who drove the Mughal conquerors from Maharashtra .The Dasbodha
is his magnum opus. (6A)
5. He was a Maratha saint who restored Jnaneshvara's description of the Kundalini to the Jnaneshvari
after it had been removed by the brahmin-scholars.His famous song Jogawa sung with such vigor and
joy throughout modern Sahaja Yoga, is an invocation to the Mother Kundalini to rise and grant self-
realisation,best expressed in the chorus:
Jogawa Magen, Aicha Jogawa
sense of integrity and greatness in the Maratha people. He became the guru of Shivaji, the
Ai Ude G'ambe Ude!
Ude, Ude, Ude, Ude, Ude, Ude, Wo!
Mother, we ask for Self-realisation
So you rise, O Mother Kundalini, You rise! Rise, rise, rise, rise, rise, rise, Ho! (6 A)
6. He ranks among the world's greatest poets. He lived in the Indian
city of Banaras about a hundred years before Shakespeare, his life With Best Compliments from
spanning most, if not all, of the 15th century. Like Gnyaneshwara
before him and Guru Nanak and Sai Baba of Shirdi, who were to
follow, He strove for the One Truth. He described himself as the son M/s M. R. Construction
of both Ram and Allah (5 A)
Civil Engineer & Contractors
DOWN:
7. He was a popular preacher in the Punjab as is testified to by the
inclusion of sixty-one of his verses in the Sikh holy book, the Guru
Granth Sahib, of which the following is one:
Prop. M.R. Patkar
B.E. Civil
Some say He is near, some say He is far,
As ifto say the fish in water climbs a date tree.
It is all an empty Babble.
Whosoever has found Him, has concealed it.
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The learned scholar praises the Vedas;
The ignorant
only knows the Lord. (6D)
8. A contemporary of Tukaram and Ramdas, is the best known, the Muslim Maharashtran saints, his
major work being the Yogasangrama, written in 1645. In his poem, Kavitasangraha, he says of himself
Through the grace of (god) Gopala, transgressed all notions of purity and impurity.
The jack-fruit has a thorny skin, but inside it are lumps of sugar.
The bee-hive with all its humming bees contains the very nectar inside.
(So also)
But in his heart he has the very Govinda.(14D)
may be an avindha,
9. He was a North Indian Guru whose teachings have become the basis of the Sikh religion. There are
many references to Sahaja in his writings.
When a man meets his true guru
His doubts are dispelled and his mind ceases its wanderings;
Drops of nectar pour down on him like rain.
His ears catch strains of sahaja's celestial music
And his mind is lit up with divine knowledge. (5 D)
10. She was perhaps the third female poet to assume this name, but the distinctive character of her major
work, the Vinayagar Agaval, has forever immortalized this obscure figure as a poetical giant in Tamil
literary history. Widely recited in shrines and temples dedicated to Shri Ganesha, it is also replete with
the yogic imagery of the Tamil Siddhas. (7D)
11. He was a saint from
Rajasthan in northern India.
He lived in the second half of
the sixteenth century (1544-
1603). His songs are in a
Hindi dialect known as Braj
Bhasa, being a mixture of
Hindi and Rajasthani. Dadu
clearly experienced Sahaja
yoga, and alludes to it in his
songs, one
presented in English
translation
11
10
of which are
One's self is a tender
plant wherein blooms the
flower of Sahaja;
The true guru teaches
how to achieve it in a natural
way,
But very rare are the
persons who can understand
it. (9D)
10 AVAIYAR ILDADU DAYAL
XVNV6 OYWYHOW HXIEHS
& KANIR 7. NAMDEV
1 BHANUDAS4 RAMDAS 5. EENATH
3
[YINYHIOD) YHXOHD Z YAYHIONYINNYI
18
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Yuvashakti : An Insight
Hardwar
1. At Hardwar Public Programmes are regularly conducted both in the city & nearby villages.
We do canvassing on the first day. All the Sahaja Yogis including Yuvashakti go and disutribute
pamphlets. Next day program is held where Sahaja Yoga is explained and Self-Realization is given to
all the seekers by the grace of Shri Mataji. On the next day, there is a follow up programme. Villages
covered this year are: Kherli, Haripur Kalan, Shyampur, Pathri & Ram Nagar. In city programmes are
organized either in clubs or banquet halls. In city we had programs at: Shagun Banquet & Saini
Dharamshala.
In Niranjanpur canvassing & Public programme were done on the same day. Follow up was held
the next day.
A programme under the banner of Hardwar Management Association (affiliated to AIIMA) was
held for all the members of HMA. In this, Powerpoint presentations on "The Science of Sahajayoga"
and "About Shri Mata Ji" were shown along with Vega machine CD. It was attended by 70
Follow up was held in BHEL International Club.
Hardwar center also helped in organizing public programmes and establishing centers in
Uttaranchal at these places: Ranikhet, Almora, Kashipur, Ramnagar and Haldwani
2. Three lectures with Self-Realization in the end were held officially in HRDC for BHEL employees on
Sahaja Yoga Meditation.
3. A full day picnic for SY families and Yuvashakti was organized in Lachchhiwala, near Dehradun.
4. A joyous Sahaja Music Evening was held on 22nd Nov. in BHEL Convention Centre, where several
seekers received their self-realization. On 23rd the same was repeated for everyone in Khubsoorat
palace.
5. Abooklet by the name 'Nirmala-Anand' was published in theSattal seminar.
persons.
Sahaja Yoga Centre Dehradun
By the blessings of H. H. Shri Mataji, Dehradun city has a big collective. Different teams of Yuva Shakti
take responsibility for regular and smooth functioning of the center, according to their turns. Usually the
video talks/lectures of Shri Mataji are displayed through LCD projector (there is a good collection of CDs)
in the meditation hall and also it is run on a T.V. simultaneously to accommodate the collectivity outside
the hall.
Dehra Dun collectivity has a rich library run exclusively by the Yuva Shakti which has a large collection of
books, audio and video-cassettes and CDs. However, elderly Yogis alsoguide the yuva in conducting all
these chores.
Various Activities of the Dehra Dun Centre
1. Public Programme: In the recent year Dehradun successfully launched five big scale Public Programme
in various parts of the city and the collectivity is blessed with hundreds of new seekers who had their self
realization. The response was remarkable. The teams are formed to coordinate and to conduct public
programs. In which it includes publicity through banners, media, loudspeaker; the sitting arrangements
for seekers, arrangement of altar items, arranging and maintaining PA system, selecting and screening Shri
Mataji's video talks through projector, distribution of prasad, etc. LCD projections were the main focus of
the
programme. While, lectures are kept bare minimum. The new seekers are exposed to the vibrations of
Shri Mataji through media projection. The talks are generally the short Public Programmes or the TV
19
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 interviews done in earlier years, this has indeed given a greater boost. The follow up Programmes are also
very powerful that tends to bind the new seekers who finds quite out of place if not taken into confidence
and absorbed in the collectivity.
2. Cultural Activities: Cultural activities are arranged from time to time to enliven the spirit of the
and also the older generation. This in a way becomes a collective meditation in pretext in praise of Shri
Mataji. The vibrations are shared as the programme comes up with new experience and new faces.
3. Spread of Sahaja through interaction: Besides the Public Programme one to one interactions are also
entertained in the center or elsewhere in the city...like lectures in Schools or Institutions, Local channels
of TV., Banners, handbills and occasionally through fair stalls etc.
4. Spread of Anti Ritualism: Even after coming to Sahaja it is sometimes difficult to shake off rituais. To
keep every one in good spirits, we avvail occasions, opportunities to conduct and have get together or
collective meditations, departing from ritual practices on Bhai Duj or the Id Ul Milad or the Holi or the
Day of Dushrra or the Diwali. For instance during Dusherra Dehradun Sahaja Pariwar invariably hosts a
beautiful cultural programme and dinner. While during the Diwali crackers do not constitute the main
attraction. The festival like Raksha Bandhan or the Bhaiduj is celebrated with great flavour between the
brothers and sisters.
young
5, Sahaja Seminar: This forms a very attractive part of the Sahaja Yoga besides the National or the
InternationalSeminar. There is always a scope to attend at least one seminar in the lush green valley and to
enjoy the vibrations.
6. Sahaja Shiksha: That is an attempt has been taken for the first time on experimental basis to take
Sahaja as a separate subject in school curriculum. One model school was adopted where in approx 10 yogi
and yoginis used to take lectures and cover the entire school class wise and conducting quiz Even quiz
competitions in the school imparted a very different interest to the younger ones. It was observed the
Method was so effective that the younger ones accompanied their parents to the centers or homes of
Sahaja Yogis of whom they had a contact. (Detailed article on Sahaja Shiksha was covered in Sept. 2002
issue).
up
Yuva Shakti Seminar: Chandigarh
Sept 26,27 were the appointed days for the Yuva Shakti Seminar to be hosted in Chandigarh. The name
Chandigarh brings to mind livid memories offood delicacies and to top it up with Sahaja Yoga Seminar was
a perfect setting. Participants started from Delhi, Punjab to as far as Chennai to Pune assembled on the
26th for what promised to be great 3 Days. Seminar started on the 26th evening with devotional music
from fellow Sahaja yogi's as waves of joy filled the hall. The days passed on a common pattern. The
morning meditation was done on the audio clips of Shri Mata Ji's Talks on various topics. So we could
actually feel Mother leading us through the meditation. The second session would start around 11:30 AM.
Stress was laid on the need of good meditation for enjoying the Depth of,
Sahaja Yoga. What was unique was the practical demonstration of Naam
Simran i.e. just taking the name of our Divine mother wvas enough for us Dr.
to be in meditation. One realizes that as realized souls our prayers are
very powerful. The Delhi Music Group sang beautiful bhajans in
between enabling the collective to enjoy the melody of Divine B.Sc. (Hons) M Comptom
Vibrations. The undoubted star performers of the Seminar were the tiny
and not so tiny toddlers from Dharamshala. Just watching them sing
dance & act again reminded us of the Infinite Genius of our Mother in
setting up an institution whose products would be the guiding Lights of
Tomorrow's Youth. It was a sight watching all and sundry move to every
beat, every tune, every move of these angels from Dharamshala. All in
all it was really a blessing to be a participant to such events and the
movement of SahajaYoga.
Mitesh Gandhi
Practicing in UK
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Time Line
1933-47
2010
2320
2000
1980
1960
1970
1990
1950
1940
1930
1920
Shri Mataji's group leader was one Thakur Niranjan Singh, an elderly gentleman who was committed
to throwing the British out. Their underground activities included traveling from village to village, town to town
and city to city, making people aware of the need to drive away the British and free themselves from slavery,
This had to be done without being noticed by the vigilant British authorities. The job also included distribution
of anti-British pamphlets. I remember Shri Mataji storing such pamplets in our house. She used to sneak into
the house at the most unexpected times of night, collect the pamphlets, and sneak out again. The British got the
tip-off that some sort of subversive activity was going on in the house, so they raided the house but were not
able to find anything, My mother used to hide the pamphlets under the stack of grain that she was required to
keep, as she had opened up a shop in the house selling hand pouded rice and jaggery. She was working as an
agent of an organization run by Mahatma Gandhi known as Gram Udyog (cottage industry).
There are many interesting episodes of Shri Mataji's underground work during the freedom struggle.
Once she was made to carry a box full of explosives to Mumbai, there was a friend traveling with her and
suddenly they heard the police were coming to their hotel called Madhava Ashram, Shri Mataji tied a rope to
the box and hung it outside the window. When the police came to search they could not find anything in the
room and they left.
My Memoirs by Babamama
YUVADRISHTI
yuvadrishti@yahoo.com
SUBSCRIPTION FORM
Reg. No.
(FOR YUVADRISHTI USE)
LLAT(PLEASE FILL IN CAPÍTALS)
H
Name (IN BLOCKS)
Address
PIN -
City.
State
Phone
Email
Drawn on
Dt.
Cash/DD No.-
Of Rs.
DD should be sent in the favour of 'Yuvadrishti' payable at Pune.
Address for correspondence:
Yuvadrishti, C/o Sahaja Yoga Kendra
Plot No. 79, Survey No.98, Bhusari Colony, Kothrud, Pune-38, Maharashtra, Phone : 020-5286105
Signature
21
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 परम् पूज्य श्री माताजी निर्मला देवी ने १9८७ में सहज योग युवा संघ को आशिर्वादित किया।
उन्होंने इसका नाम
ॐ
निर्मल शक्ति युवा संघ
रखा। निर्मल शक्ति युवा संघ, युवा शक्ति का मुख्य उद्देश्य व्यक्तित्व का इस प्रकार से विकास होना है
जो परीपूर्ण हो, तथा यह कि इस प्रकार के उन्नत व्यक्ति सहजयोग को पूँजी सिद्ध हो।
०
७
युवा शक्ति के सदस्यों को ज्ञात होना चाहिए:
श्री माताजी के दैवीय जीवन के बारे में
৯
सहजयोग के जन्म और उत्क्रान्ति के बारे में
৯
श्री माताजी द्वारा सूक्ष्म शरीर के विषय में बताई हुई सारी बातें
ध्यान धारणा द्वारा अपने को शुद्ध और संतुलित रखना
श्री माताजी के अवतार और सहजयोग के आगमन के बारे मे की गई भविष्यवाणीयों के बारे में
৯
वि
৯
स्वयम्भू और भारत की उत्पत्ति के बारे में
आदि गुरू और संतों के बारे में।
ঠ
৯
उनको यह भी जानना चाहिए:
र भारत की विरासत तथा महान सांस्कृतिक परंपराएँ
भारतीय शास्त्रीय संगीत का ज्ञान तथा कम से कम एक वाद्य बजाने की योग्यता
२ शास्त्रीय नृत्य और नाटक
ए भारते के महान ऐतिहासिक व्यक्तित्व
२ सामाजिक, राजनैतिक तथा आर्थिक वातावरण एवं वर्तमान देशकाल व परिस्थियाँ
हिन्दी और अंग्रेजी भाषाएँ बोलने और समझने की योग्यता
सार्वजनिक बातचीत तथा लेखन के द्धारा संचार की क्षमता
युवाशक्ति सर्वथा सहजयोग का ही एक अभिन्न अंग है ।
७
युवाशक्ति एक है (एकता)।
* दुनिया की किसी भी जगह जाएं तो उनको अपनी इच्छा से सामुहिक के लिए कार्य करना चाहिए।
इसके सदस्यों को किसी भी केंद्र, शहर, प्रांत या देश तथा से खास लगाव या
संलक्तता नही होना चाहिए।
* = ০ ==
युवाशक्ति सहजयोग के दैवीय
वृक्ष का अभिन्न भाग है।
युवाशक्ति को नम होना चाहिए और वरिष्ठ सहजयोगियों के प्रति तमीजदार
होना चाहिए। मिठास या माधुर्य उनका प्रतीक होना चाहिए।
युवाशक्ति के लडके तथा लडकियों को सहजयोग के कार्य के नाम पर पढाई
की उपेक्षा नहीं करनी चाहिए।
यह हमारा परम् कर्तव्य है कि
हम इस विरासत को आने
वाली पीढ़ियों को हस्तांतरित
करें।
युवाशक्ति के सदस्यो का आत्मसम्मान बरकरार रहना चाहिए।
७
1|Thank you Mother||
५ूo
अ
 2003_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The Last Supper
1495-97
In spite of its battered condition, Leonardo's only surviving mural
retains much of the dignified authority that made it the most revered
paiting in the world. He shows the moment when Christ tells his
disciples that one of them will betray him, their varied reactions
depicted with unprecedented psychological subtletly.
