The Divine Cool Breeze 00 November December, 2003 Volume: XV Issue: 11 & 12

 2 Shri Mataji's Letter to American Sahaja Yogis Shri Mataji's visit to Paris 3 6 Guru Puja, Cabella, July 13, 2003 56th Wedding Anniversary Celebrations, Sofia Collage Auditorium, Mumbai 7-4-2003 10 Pravachan of Shri Mataji, Bombay, May 27, 1976 Shri Mataji Said 2 22 Sat-Chit-Anand, February 15, 1977 32 Nirmala Vidya, 31-12-1980 Shri Mataji talks to women-January, 1984 34 41 After Self Realization- November 25, 1973 52 Memories of our Divine Mother

 am always present with each one of you all the time Shri Mataji's Letter MATAJINIRMALADEVI PRATISTHAN, NDA Road, Post Box No.2 Pune-411023 August 2, 2003 My Beloved Children The Sahaja Yogis of North and South America, I am happy to receive your inviation about the forthcoming Shri Krishna Puja in Canajohre. Presently, I am in Pratishthan, Pune, India and will not be able to travel at this time, but I am always present with each one of you all the time. I know that all Sahaj Yogis of the world are upholding the ethical, spiritual, moral values emanating from Lord Krishna. This is an occasion to reaffirm your resolve and to intensify your efforts to spread Sahaja Yoga. WITH ALL MY LOVE & BLESSINGS MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI

 Shri Mataji's Visit to Paris Saturday, August 02, 2003 It is with great joy that we write this I were, Your desire was so strong that here account of the brief but eternal passage of am'. She accepted flowers and then was ushered into a waiting car which took Her to Shri Mataji in Paris last week. With less than twenty-four hours notice (which was the the hotel. perfect for a French tendency to overplan), prepared ourselves to receive the Adi With all the worry and rumors circulating about our Mother's health we were we Shakti, who would be coming with Sir C.P. really not sure what to expect. In our mental on their way to Bombay. projection Shri Mataji would be tired and We were doubly blessed, because needing constant rest. Perhaps She would not come out of Her room during the entire as Shri Mataji does not have the habit of travelling on Wednesday, and as Her flight stay. And by no means was She to be disturbed. Well, Shri Mahamaya shattered arrived from Milan, Tuesday evening, we one by one our conditionings and concerned were assured of Her Divine Presence for at expectations. Her radiance, energy, and least 36 hours. graciousness lifted us up into that world of Having had a good experince a few years ago at the Hilton Hotel at Roissy Airport, Vibrations where time stands still and everything is possible. we decided once again to select a suite in this hotel to welcome Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. Wednesday morning dawned with a With only hours to prepare, yogis and yoginis did their best to clean, vibrate, decorate, and very pleasant temperature (in contrast to the unbearably hot and dry summer France had stay in thoughtless awraeness. been having) and blue skies. Shri Mataji agreed to a shopping excursion in Paris; so At about eight-thirty p.m., half an hour preparations were quickly made and two cars before the flight was scheduled to arrive, the hotel team put the finshing touches to set off early in the aftenoon for Place bedroom, bathroom, and sitting room, before Vendome, one of the most chic shopping areas of Paris. sitting down in meditation (and in intense excitement) to await Shri Mataji's arrival. Shri Mataji chose fabric for several saris for Her Family and Herself, and yogis At the airport Sahaja Yogis had gathered, those lucky ones who were not who were persent remarked how they felt their nabhis open completely as Shri Mataji away on holiday and could be contacted at such short notice and when Shri Mataji shopped. We felt the working on the subtle level for Paris and for france, a country where arrived radiant and smiling, Her first words

 Nov, & Dec. 2003 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 dissatisfaction, saying we should do so generosity is not a hallmark. With a great deal because Sir C.P. even when dissatisfied, was of determination Majid succeeded in offering so diplomatic, that nothing ever resulted from Shri Mataji the saris on behalf of the French collective. A great blessing for this country which has unfortunately been on the wrong it. Sir C.P. then told a little joke about diplomats, how they are always saying, "On the one hand it is like this but on the other side of the Divine on many occasions. hand it is like that and so that now the people Shri Mataji rested in the car on the are waiting fora diplomat with only one hand." way back to the hotel, and upon arrival was Shri Mataji said that She was thinking once again fullof joy and energy. After dining, She asked one yogi where all the Sahaja of buying some land in the area and Yogis were? He replied that they were at constructing a hotel to show the French what comfort really is! Just as our Left Vishuddhis Montfermeil (The main ashram) meditating. were starting to twinge oh, we chose the Majid suggested that the yogis could come the following morning to see Her off. Shri wrong hotel, Mother is not happy Mother soothed us by adding that the hotel was very Mataji wanted to see the yogis now. conveniently located, that it was a good place for us to meet and good for Sahaja Yoga (The Quick phone calls were made, and a car was sent to gather yogis as quicky as same two yogis who work there will soon be possible, But sooner than we knew it those of us at the hotel were ushered into Shri Starting programmes.) After Shri Mataji blessed us we took Mataji's saloon where She was waiting to address us. We were about twenty yogis leave and Shri Mataji retired to Her bedroom. But the night was yonug! After a few minutes from France and abroad (There were two Sahaja Yogis, Welsh and Austrian, who She suggested to Majid, 'Let's go out for a ride'. It was somewhere around eleven because of their jobs spend two out of every o'clock p.m. Yogis who had cars scrambled four weeks at this very hotel as fate would for their keys at this news, and those who who should come to their hotel but have it, had not, ran out to jump into any available the Adi Shakti Herself) Shri Mataji commented on the lack Seat, as five cars full of yogis prepared to follow a blue Peugeot 607, destination of basic comforts in the hotel, how low all of unknown. the furniture was, how, despite the name and In fact, inside the Peugeot 607 it was reputation of the hotel there was no real comfort provided! She urged us to write to destination unknown as well, as Shri Mataji our asked, 'so, where should wo go?' And management expressing or the

 Nov & Dec 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV lssue: 11 & 12 Shri Mataji wanted to see them. They lined Christian (driving) and Majid asked themselves where could they go from the corridor leading to Mother's suite. Once inside, Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. took their Roissy airport at eleven o'clock at night on a dinner. The night was not yet over, as a Hindi Wednesday? Christian had the idea of a manor-type hotel about fifteen minutes from film was next on the programme, lasting until about four or five o'clock in the morning. the airport. We only knew of it's existence because we had looked on the internet at Fresh as ever, at seven-thirty the next (well, the same) morning, Shri Mataji had her possible hotels, for Shri Mataji, close to the airport. tea, resplendent in a beautiful white sari with a red and pale green floral design. The two After getting lost briefly, the group of cars pulled in to the long tree-lined drive of hundred-plus kilos of baggage had gone ahead to the airport, with a slightly nervous the hotel. They entered the hotel lobby, and Shri Mataji observed a display case of Majid, as there were only four passengers antiques. The receptionist mentioned that travelling. But with the vibrations all went everything was for sale, but she then could smoothly, as the check-in clerk was so concerned that each bag be properly labelled not find the keys to the case. After some searching the keys were found, and Shri with the passenger's name, that she seemed Mataji examined many of the pieces in the to forget to count the number of bags as well case. There was other dispaly cases, which as their weight. were duly opened, and Shri Mataji purchased serveral pieces, to the surprise and delight Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. soon arrived at the airport, Sir C.P. commenting that this of the yogis, as well as the very surprised trip to Paris had been a very memorable one hotel staff! would be an understatement indeed! Shri Shri Mataji decided to return back to Mataji smiled at all present and our hearts the hotel, where meanwhile many more yogis swelled with that joyous sadness, She is had gathered having heard the message that leaving, but She has come!

 GURU PUJA CABELLA, JULY 13, 2003 PRAVACHAN OF HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI Today's Puja is very great Puja for me, because I suddenly find that I got upset with it very much. Look at my grand daughter is missing, and n me, supposed to be Adi Shakti! and why should I get so upset about grand daughter missing. It was just a human nature which I realised all of us have. If we have some responsibility and we are not there we get upset. Thank God there are very few children here, most of them have gone, but we are all children the way we worry, the way we are anxious. TodayI would like all of you to say that a new year has come, and in this new year we all should have a new proposal about ourselves and that proposal is very difficult for people to make out, that we are not responsible for anyone. We are our own and we live with ourselves. It's very difficult. Of course those who have no children are very happy people that way, but those who have, those who have certain responsibilities and commitments, they are still hanging in the air; they are nowhere near Sahaja Yoga, I must say. Our main responsibility is ourselves, is to know ourselves and to depend on ourselves. It is a very big responsibility because now as we will be having big functions and we might feel that we are lost in it. Please try to remember that you have to remember yourself, you have to know that you are there, that's the message I wanted to give you, I hope you" II think it over. May God bless you all.

 56th Wedding Anniversary Celebrations Sofia College Auditorium Mumbai-7-04-2003 Shri Mataji looked wonderful and us to join in the chorus. It was a very light and joyful evening. radiant, as always, in a red sari with a design A large cake was brought in and of little gold stars. Mother was sitting on the together Sir C.P. and Shri Mataji cut it, and throne that usually lies at Belapur hospital, and many people had brought flowers, some later everyone of us present was given as of which were put on the stage as prasad. At the end, representatives from the decorations. People came from all over India - some had flown in for the evening, and different states of India and various there were a few foreigners, but mostly it foreigners, on behelf of their countries, came was Sahaja Yogis from Mumbai and and presented flowers and gifts. After Shri Mataji had left, all thousand or so of us were Maharashtra. offered a delicious meal and prasad, served First of all seven ladies from Mumbai in the gardens of the college where the did aarti to Shri Mataji to welcome Her. Then children, members of local Sahaja Yoga function was held. groups, came in couples to give flowers to Lecture of Sir C.P. Srivastava Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. Each couple was It is said that marriages are made in dressed as a deity and His shakti. heaven and that is certainly true in my case. I must be the luckiest man in the whole I later saw a young person still covered in bluish-white powder and the universe. traditional hairstyle of Lord Shiva, a little girl dressed charmingly in a white sari and Your Shri Mataji has been a wonderful holding a musical instrument was Shri wife, a wonderful mother, an equally Saraswati and another small person, in a wonderful grandmother and now also a great- white gown, had a false beard and longish grandmother. She has spoiled me all these fifty-six years by giving me excellent food and hair to represent Lord Jesus. They were very sweet and innocent, but also symbolic, as looking after me all the time. It was because they came in, and knelt before our Divine of her generosity that I was able to work very hard in the office, but then I came back to a Mother, couple after couple. The music consisted mostly of a wonderful thing at home. She has been so kind to all my group of musicians and a man who sang forcibly and joyfully in praise of Shri Mataji in Her many forms. At times, he encouraged relations. You know, when relations came to our house, She would look after them in

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11 & 12 force in the world. There is no other force in exactly the same way as She would look after Her own daughters. She would never make the world that I know. She is bringing North any distinction between one child or another. The family, that she has given the and South together, East and West together. As I said to my audience somewhere two daughters are wonderful, Kalpana is here. I want to thank Her for all that She has done for me for fifty-six years. But I want to else, these are directions for navigation, but they are not for dividing humanity. Humanity is one. She has brought people of all faiths, of all races, al religions, together. Can thank Her more, even more, for all She has you done to the world. She has created a new name one single person who is doing that humanity. She has done what no other today? They are all dividing. They are all person, no other person that I know or have saying, 'My God is the best.' Can You read about, has been able to do, to have imagine? Can there be two Gods? Can there thousands and thousands of angels, people be two Almighties? There Cannot be two Almighties. There can be only one and She who are wedded to goodness, are wedded is his only Incarnation. to purity, who are wedded to the concept of one human family. Speech of Shri Mataji You know, in the world today there is I just want to thank you all from my conflict everywhere. You read the newspaper heart for coming to celebrate this anniversary find everywhere there are problems. and you But there is only one world, which is Her with your love. I can't do more than to thank world, which is sitting here, which is beautiful, - how you people have Really you. pure and chaste and which is the future of appreciated My humble work! Moreover, it is a work of just love. Love is the greatest humankind. On the occasion of Her birthday, She quality of human beings. And if you have developed that, then you will forget all other you over to create Sahaja Yogis. She invited things. Because love has its own reward. And said if each one of you could transform a the reward is here. I can see it. hundred more persons, the world would be I am nothing special, except that I a different place to live in. And I want to tell you, this is not mere talk. This is the most love everyone very much. And don't think anybody is to be condemned because I have important, most crucial need that we have in the world. We have a choice now and the seen people coming out of all their problems, choice is stark, either we move towards their smaller minds into a bigger area in saving humanity or we move towards destruction. She is the one who is the only which they are capable of giving love. I must say that whatever was my faith has worked

 291 Nov. & Dec 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volua-XV Issuo: 11 & 12 very well. And it is very nice thing to see how giving love to others. Maybe some of your have understood My love and experiences may not be that good, but most of you many of the people who are human beings have a have spread love among yourselves. Our special temperament of loving each other human problem is one and that is that we and this is to be shared and this is to be don't know how to love each other. If we enjoyed. I have enjoyed it and you all have could understand that, then we would also enjoyed it. SoI have said continue to do understand all this love. We really enjoy this that and spread your love all over. love. You don't have to sacrifice anything, don't have to give away anything. It is all there Thank You. and you enjoy. It is reciprocal. You enjoy MESSAGE GIVEN BY OUR HOLY MOTHER TO YUVA SHAKTI AT PRATISTHAN (18 MARCH 2000) I am greateful for what all you have done for me. I would be glad if you all grow deeper into Sahajayoga. Many of you are good Sahajis. You must remember that you have to become ideal yogis because you have to transform the whole world. That is what your Mother expects from you, that is my only desire. Everything else is futile, of no value. Then only you enjoy being in the Kingdom of the Divine. You must meditate everyday, that is the only way to mature in Sahajyoga. You have to save all those unfortunate drug addicts also. Let you emit love, compassion and generosity. May God bless you all

 Parvachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Bhartiya Vidya Bhawan, Bombay May 27, 1976 In Dadar I told you how the state of person who is not interested in music but thoughtless awarness is acheived in Sahaja somehow his interest in music gets developed-in classical music-then he will not Yaga. After attaining oneness with the Divine be able to enjoy himself in any concert of ) and then one should get nearness ( salvation (et) However the interests of non-classical music. Your state in Sahajyoga should aslo the seeker change immidiately after attaining be the same. Infact all other habits, desires oneness (ar). ) develop in you very slowly, with efforts. And On acheiving oneness (a that is the reason they get deep rooted in you although Sahajyoga has brought revolution person gets experienes and because of them he doesn't want to attain the state of (transformation) in you. You have entered into nearness (ia) and salvation (HIaa). When a new awarness, you understand vibrations, the Divine cool vibrations start flowing from you could see the Kundalini of others and give your hands and Kundalini of other people recognises you and you are able to raise the kundalini of others then your attention wishes self-realisation to many people. You could give realisation to many people, you have cured many of them, you have entered into a to look at the Kundalini of others and know new power and you are all nourished by it. But the draw-back in it is that every about your own Kundalini. One wishes to be conscious towards ones own chakras and tries to understand the Chakras of other thing has got done automatically, you had to make no effort for it. Every thing has got done people. If you look towards the sky, even if it without any effort. That might be the reason is cloudy, then you will see diffrent types of that many people in Sahaj yoga get vibrations, Kundalinis. Because now your attention is rise to a higher level, yet their attention does on the Kundalini and you will know whatever not remain on the God, the Spirit and the you want to know, whatever you want to see, Kundalini. Still, again and again, it shifts to whatever nearness you want to attain about wrong objects. the Kundalini. All other interests get vanished You asked that what is to be done after by themselves. From childhood it is like when receiving Realisation. After receiving it is to you enter into youth then your interests shift be given. It is most essential that after to your job, business, wife, children and the receiving you have to give otherwise the remaining all interests and experiences keep And while giving receiving is meaningless. vanishing and your attention now goes to new one thing is to be remembered that with the experiences. Or it could be compared with a

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 Nov. & Dec, 2003 11 get solved if you do that regularly. Whatever body, mind and intellect and the whole personality with which you are giving this may come, it is not difficult to give five unique gift, that itself should be very minutes. Before going to bed you all must sit in the water. More than half of your enchanting. Your body should be very clean. It should be disease free. If you have some catches will vanish by this practice. In the morning, get up early. Sahaj disease-many Sahajyogis might be having Yoga could be worked out during the day time, some disease of the body-then before not at night. So, we should go to bed early. am not asking you to sleep at 6 o'clock in the coming to Sahaj Yoga you might be yearning to get this disease cured. But after coming to Sahaj Yoga their attention will not stick to evening but by ten.o'clock you should sleep. it should not be later than that. Get up early in the diseases-Oh!, it's airight, it will be cured', the morning. It's not correct. Whenever you have some Get up eairy in the morning, take your problem you may just put your hand on the bath and meditate. In the morning you must affected part and remove the problem. You meditate. Many people in our country get up could keep your physical side very pure; not much is to be done for it. To take bath, early, wash their faces-they have been doing maintain cleanliness and set your physical it regularly, for the whole life. Similary eveybody should get up early and Sahajyogis side alright. For this I have told that early in the should meditate. It is to be made a habit. But Ihave seen that for some people it is difficult morning you have to go to bathroom and cleanse your body. For Sahajyogis it is to get up at 4 or 5 o'clock in the morning. essential to sit in water for five minutes There is one reason for it. I have studied human nature a lot and understood it very before going to bed. You may be anyone, very highly evolved and may say that 'we do not catch'- does not matter. For five minutes you subtly. It is very intresting, very intresting to study human nature. How one runs with should sit in the water (footsoaking). To set oneself, how one argues with oneself, it is precedent for you, I also sit-in the water so something to be observed in man. To insult that you also follow suite. Although it is himseif how he himself gives explanation and reationalizes. Sometime it happens that unnecessary for me to do so. It is a very good habit. All the Sahajyogis should sit in the water people say. "Shri Mataji, we cannot get up early". What time do you go to bed at night? for five minutes daily. Light a candle before Twelve o'ciock, but I decided that I shall get the photograph, apply kumkum, put your up at four. It canot be. But some day you sleep hands towards the photograph and both your feet in the water. Half of your problems will early and get up early next morning, then next

 12 Nov. S Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 8 12 Meditate very humbly. evening you will have to sleep early, But before getting into meditation you otherwise you cannot get up early in the have to understand that you have to give morning. For two days you follow it strictly bandhan to the seat (Aasana), when you sit and your body will be used to it. It will become for meditation give yourself, yourbody a your habit. bandhan, give bandhan to your body seven The benefit of early rising is that in times. It's all being done mechanically, outwardly because some people ritually just the early hours, seekers' receptivity is more than other times. Not only that, in these hours move their hands and it is all over. But it is the whole atmosphere remains saturated with not enough. beautiful chaitanya (Vibrations). With intense devotion, the way you So I have told you form the point of sit in Puja, sit silently and put bandhan. At view of the body and that you have to get up early and meditate. Now think how to that time your mind should be free of all other meditate-how to meditate in the morning. things like bring this, bring that etc. It is not to Be very humble, make your heart be done. Then give bandhan to your Mana. very humble. Humility is the first requirement. Humble down yourself. Now where this Mana is? No one has asked this question from me so far. Mana is here, If someone gets the idea that 'I have acheived much or have become a big saint its begining is here-l mean put a nice bandhan to your Vishuddhi and Agya Chakra and think or great soul, then you should take it that such that 'O Divine! Let us be in your bandhan, no a person is gone from Sahaja Yoga. Very negativity should affect us. Do it very humbly. humbly looking into your heart with bowed head, putting your hands towards the At that time you have to think that we are photograph, you have to sit very peacefully witnesses, away from all objects, we are pure, we are not attached to these objects. after obtaining permission (from the Divine). At every step one has to ask for Detaching yourself from eveything you are siting for meditation. forgiveness. So at that time also after asking Make this effort daily and slowly it will for forgiveness-that "If some mistake has become your habit. Meditate with intense been done by me, please forgive me and faith. In the morning it could be for ten minutes establish me in meditation". Those who have or half an hour-makes no difference. While committed mistakes against me, if they ask meditating do not move your hands up and for forgiveness, I forgive them all. With pure down. Slowly close your eyes while constantly feelings in the heart get into meditation. Close looking at the photograph. There is no need your eyes and keep your attention on the spirit.

 ov. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue : 11 & 12 13 Love is the essence of the Spirit. to move your hands and feet. At that time Only with the uttering of the word chakra merely by looking at it with your 'Love', many of your attachments will go you could cleanse any of your obstructed attention becasue at that time, as I have said, away. All that is untruth is against Love. By scolding someone if you are telling him the truth then actually it is Love. You are yourself nothing but love. So by thinking about the receptivily is intense-in the morning hours. After cleansing your plexuses think of divinity (Atma-tatva) or your Self. Put your attention on the Atma (Spirit). Where Atma is essence of Love you could get into the placed in the body? No one has asked so far essence of Spirit. that, " Shri Mataji, where is Atma placed?" While meditating you do not have The Spirit is in our heart but its seat to get into any paticular thought but you (pitha) is above, in the Sahasrara. That is why I said that be humble at heart and put can say that, "I am that essence of Love, I am that essence of the Spirit, I am that your attention on Sahasrara and be power of the Divine." You can repeat it. surendered to the Atma (Spirit). Knowingly By repeating it two or three times you will be blessed becasue you are saying the we surrender to Atma. What is the essence of Atma (Spirit)? truth. Vibrations will start emanating from Atma-tatva, the essence of spirit, is-complete you with force. purity. Look to that, it is fully detached, not attached with anything at all. Because of What have we to do in day-to-day life? In day-to-day life, you should know that attachments you are away from the Spirit. power in you is that of 'Love'. Whatever you Think of the essence of the spirit. This are doing, are you doing in love? Or are you doing it just to show off that you are such a essence is 'love', think of it again and again. It is a great thought. The essence of the Spirit I myself tell great Sahajyogi? When is Love. something or scold someone, then I see that Many religions were founded in the next day they come, sit in Sahajyogis and this world but no one could explain love. That abuse Me. Then they ask, 'why have my is why there was lot of contrariety (fufu). vibrations gone? 'If you commit this type of Love could not be explained. This love is stupidity then it will be better that you do not the same power which is flowing from come to Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is meant only for those your hands. This is the 'Awareness' (I) which people know about, but no one knows who could go by it and those who really wish that it is nothing but love. 'Awaneness', to attain something. He has no right to give we think is jusi like electricity and fan. No; anything, he has only to take from Me. If

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeza Volume-XV. Issue: 11 & 12 Guru and be there. someone wishes to give, if he has that power In Sahaja Yoga you have come to then it would be wonderful. But until you become as instrument of the God. You should know how to take, you cannot give. So, be very humble, humility should be in you. first learn how to take. What are the defects in us? In daily life we have to see that what You should give up your ego. People say that one should become ascetic. I say, first of all are we giving? Are we giving love? Are we you should renounce your ego. Get rid off as ourselves established in love? We quarrel with everyone, fight with everyone, harass your ego. Do not renounce your clothes. everyone, still we regard ourselves to be Giving up of clothes is no renouncement Sahajyogis! We should not remain in this (Sanyasa). Sanyasa means renouncement confusion; we should be clear about of ego, lust, attachment, anger and jealousy- ourselves like the image in the mirror. I mean the six enemies (Shat-Ripu). Only then one observe yourself every moment. Suppose becomes a ascetic. There is no other Sanyasa at all. something has stained my forehead, you will So in our day to day life you should tell me that, "Shri Mataji, some stain is there be very peaceful in your behaviour and deal on your forehead, please wipe it off". with people very lovingly. Talk to your children, Similariy, keep watching yourself and see if family members and ail others about Sahaja there is some stain, wipe it off immediately. Yoga. Explain Sahaja Yoga to them. Change your friends, change your company. These (Sahajyogis) are your relatives, these are Your day-to-day life should be enlightened. There should be radiance on your face. Your behaviour should be your own, talk to them. They will tell you that beautiful. You should be loving. Like camel if you are dry then you are not a Sahajyogi. You should be aware of it. You have become we have entered a new world and we have vibrations in us. Whenever you have to travel, Sahajyogi in the name only. Somehow I am whenever you go out, go to any village-these people from Rahuri were telling that, "along with our travelling articles we carry a little driving you, that is why you are sitting here. If you don't want to improve please forgive me and do not come to Sahaja Yoga. One day you, yourself, will go away from Sahaja Teerth' (water vibrated by my feet), and Yoga. Such people, who have no feeling of vibrated Kumkum along with us. If we find love and think themselves to be very nice, someone who is sick, we give to him a little very great, this,that, they are altogather useless for Sahaja Yoga. Such people should of Teerth to drink. If someone talks of religion then show the photograph to that person and tell him that She is our Shri Mataji and if go away, taste the shoebeating of other you

 Nov. & Dec 2003 15 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 then it is very shameful. It goes against us. I desire She could give you Self-Realisation. told them to cleanse Sahasrara, I do not krnow Everyone keeps these things with him. "I put what type of person he sat with? kumkum on your forehead, see how do you Never sit with a person who talks ill feel. She is our Shri Mataji." All the time of Sahaja Yoga, immediately your Sahasrara will catch. If such a person is talking then shut Sahaja Yogis should keep thinking as to how Sahajayoga could be worked out in life. Then your ears. Ask that fellow to sit away, "we have you will realise that you could go very deep nothing to do with you, don't talk to us, that is in Sahaja Yoga. all. We do not want to harm ourselves. Who There are some people who come are you to talk to us? Because of Shri Mataji to Sahaja Yoga in a way as they go to the you have met us here, keep silent." If such a temples and come back and then the bad effects are there. There are people, here person talks then say, 'enough, enough, enough.' Your Sahasrara will catch, one by sitting before me, who have never suffered one all chakras will catch and after a few days any disease after getting their Self- you will come and say, "Shri Mataji I have got Realisation. They were very sick but after cancer, the disease of cancer is the disease Realisation they have no disease at all, never of Sahasara-take it for cartain. If you do not did they go to the door of the doctor, never want to fall victim of cancer then keep your have they suffered. Never have they taken Sahasara clean. Catching of Sahasrara any medicine since coming to Sahaja Yoga. means the beginning of the cancer. I am Some of them are old people who used to telling it to you, "Always keep your Sahasraras go to doctors and to hospitals but now they clean, otherwise today or tomorrow you will do not have to go. There are many such come to know, 'O! I have got cancer." examples here, not only that they have also So from now-onwards why not to done good to other people. keep ourselves in a perfect state of health. The reason is, whatever is essential Not only that, do Sahaja Yoga work because for Sahaja Yogis to maintain health they have . of which we are sitting in the kingdom of God. been doing it. That is why they are airight. Keep in touch with each other. You are all Tomorrow when the Divine people will be selected then you will be amongst the best doctors and you are the patients. Doctors of them. Why not to do süch work so that we do not accept fee from each other, similarly you people do not take fee from another are relieved of wasting our time by going to Sahaja Yogi. Treat each other. Ask from somebody's house, to some relative's house others, there is nothing to feel bad about it. If for lunchs and dinners, criticising someone? We should give up all these stupidities, take someone says that my Sahasrara is caught,

 Nov, & Dec. 2003 16 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 11 & 12 getting enlightened yourself. Those who to the right path and make our lives such that in the world our names are remembered always think of insignificant things, it would be better for them to give them up. All these with respect. Everyone of you should think things are insignificant. about it. Now I will tell you the last thing, No one should think that 'now how Understand it thoroughly and think over it. much of my life remains, what could I do There are evil tendencies in us- they now!" You will not die. You die and take birth are called negativities. They assert- again; again you will die and incarnate, this themselves. Falling prey to them is making process will go on. So why not to finish up Satan of yourselves. You could become everything within one year? And if you want Satan or Divine at will. If you derise to become you can finish it in one week. Only once you evil then I am not the Guru. I am Guru only to have to decide-in a moment-and it will be those who wish to become Divine. You have finished. to be beware of the Satan. You have to do something special. First thing is that the nights of no moon Only by deciding it there could be enormous (Amavasya) and that of full moon (Purnima) benefit of Sahaja Yoga. You know this fact. Surrender should be there. It is both are full of danger. So, you should go to not necessary that you should come and bed very early on both these nights. After surrender at my feet, surrender should taking your dinner meditate very humbly, put your attention on Sahasrara, take bandhan be from heart. Many people come to my feet but they are not surendered at all. and sleep. The moment attention goes to Surrender should be there. If one is Saharara, one goes in the state of within, fully unconscious. There if you give youself a from surrendered surrendered, then the Kundalini will get bandhan then you are saved-specially on these two nights. On the night of Amavasya, established on the spirit (Atma-tatva), the way the flame of the lamp remains, there specially the day of amavasya you should is no flickering in it. Be surrendered. In meditate on Lord Shiva. After meditating on Lord Shiva and surrendering to Him-to the surrender is the joy, the comfort and the Spirit- you should go to bed. On the day of identification with the God. Purnima (full moon) you have to meditate on Sahajyoga is very unique. Shri Rama and leave your wellbeing to Him. Understand it and get absorbed in it. The What is the meaning of Ramchandra. It is more you are identified with it the more your a). You have to fully creativity ( spirit will shine forth. Nothing is more important than Surrender your creative powers to Him. On

 Nov. & Dec 2003 17 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 these two days you have to protect caught. It is first thing. Those who are caught at Vishuddhi. yourselves. Chakra should not also be argued with. And Although on seventh and ninth day (E ) you have my special blessings. You should be mindful of these two days and the one whose Sahasrara is caught, you should not go to his door even, you should have nothing to do with him. Tell him to set should organise something in such a way his Saharara alright. There is no harm in telling him that your Sahasrara is caught, set it right. Sahasrara should be clear. If you feel obstruction in your Sahasrara you should that you could have deep meditation on these two days. Collective meditation should be held on such a place which has been vibrated by My Feet, which has been purified. immediately go and request other Sahajyogis Collective meditation centres should not be made in your own houses. Do not sit for to 'somehow clear my Sahasrara,' If someone with the catch in Sahasrara talks collective meditation with your relatives. to you then you should tell him, 'You are my enemy.' You have not to talk to that person till Collective meditation should be on the places which I have told, any place which has not the time his Sahasrara is cleansed. been vibrated by Me, Sahajyoga should not Now about Heart Chakra. You should be discussed there for long time because at help that person whose Heart Chakra is such places ghosts, that are in you, will come caught. You should give bandhan to his heart. out and start speaking, and fighting with each other will begin. You people are not above the trap of the evil spirits. From where the Ask him to put hand on the heart, take him before the photograph of the Mother. Heart evil spirit comes, no one knows but they do Chakra is to be taken care of because sometimes the catch of one person may everything. So this is about protecting oneself. affect others. You must help where the Heart Chakra is catching. But many people have no heart, they are very dry personalities. You Whenever you go out, go out of your house, then be in nice bandhan. Keep yourself in bandhan all the times. When you find cannot do anything for such people. Despite someone's Agya Chakra catching, give it a your keenness to help them you cannot do anything. But if they come to you and ask for bandhan, may be with attention. The person your help then tell them, 'give up Hatha Yoga, who is catching at Agya, you should not have give up every thing and learn a little to love. any argument with him. It is foolishness, the First love your dogs and cats, if you cannot love human beings, than love human beings'. one who is caught at Agya, how could you argue with such a ghost? You should never you should also love everyone, love childern, argue with those whose Agya Chakras are

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 18 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11 & 12 do not be harsh to them. You should not be quarterly then we shall make it monthly, then harsh with anyone. Do not be evil-to anyone. weekly, it could be daily then afterwards. For Never beat anyone, particularly the chlidren. the time being we are starting a quarterly. If Sahajyogis have never to beat their chlidern. you have some questions, some problems You have never to beat or be angry with you could write letter to Mr. Pradhan. Do not send many letters to Me, I do not have much time. Then you will say Mother has not replied, anyone. Sahajyogis have never to be angry. Very intelligently and tactfully, without showing Shri Mataji has written to him not to me. orS anger they have to set things right. He has Sahajyoga is not for those who talk such never to be angry. How should be the day-to-day life of stupidities. You should know that the mother a Sahajyogi? You pray for that and you will know the method of it. I have told you about it loves everyone equally. Because of some in many ways. Similarly eight-ten people reason She could not write. Sometimes I do should callectively think as to what to do not write to them who I think will not mind and now I do not bother about those who about our institution of Etrnal life. You should all co-operate and help in it. Those who have mind. I have bothered about many people but the result is that those wicked people did not not yet given their names and addresses improve. They did not improve and I suffered should send it to Mr. Pradhan. We are about to start a quarterly magazine which will myself. Such people did not improve whom I tolerated, they did not transform publish my letters, messages. We shall also themselves. I kept on suffering because I have publish your experiences if you send it to us. Some of the experiences sent by Indian decided neither to kill nor to torture anyone. Sahajyogis will be given place in it. So all of They have full freedom to go to hell or heaven. They could go to the kingdom of God if they so desire, I have given full freedom. Those you should write your experiences. If you write some good article on Sahajyoga It could also be printed. So a quarterly is being who wish to go to hell, I tell them to go speedily so that I get rid of you. If you want to go to hell I shall make arrangements for you. Arrargement could be made for you to go to published, it will contain articles in English, Hindi, Marathi and Gujarati. We shall start publishing it in all these languages or one by one. In Sahajyoga things take place hell or to the Lotus Feet of the Divine. gradually. Contribute to it. Whatever money Therefore, those who harass Me, disturb Me, those who have given hard time to Me, I say to them that have dealt with all very patiently. you have to give, give it and get benefited. You could ask questions in it and I shall reply these questions. At first we are starting it But now if someone disturbs me or troubles

 : 11 & 12 Nov. & Dec 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: me than I will say that I have nothing to do his house and apologises. But I told him to sell the house to that very person. You have with you, please go away. Such people show their evil nature but I will advise that you full freedom. The poor fellow now weeps that should think of your benevolence. If these evil Mother is angry with me. I said, nothing doing, 'I am not angry. Now you sell your people are going to hell then you should not board their vehicles. Sahaj yoga is not for house to the one who came and instigated them, do not bother about them, think of your you." So such wise people, if they want to own betterment. They will remain as they go to hell then it would be better that they take were. They are wicked and will change with a direct ticket and go. I can also give you ticket to hell. It is all within my power. very great-difficulty. Those who are nice, of the Those course commit mistakes but they realise it who want to have tickets to go to hell I am very soon but the wicked ones are impossible to get transformed. I have very well realised ready to give it to them and also I am ready this fact. I have made lot of efforts but have to give tickets for the kingdom of God. Ticket been unable to change them. You also clerk could give ticket for all directions but cannot change them. They cannot have that he tells that on such and such direction there is derailment. If you go to that side then your wisdom. So there is no need to quarrel with or talk to them. So it is my humble request train will get derailed. Their is no return ticket. that have no relations with such people. That is why I am cautioning you. I don't have to tell much about hell, you yourself know a Slowly and slowly they will vanish. They are here to destroy your seeking. Beware of lot about it. That is why I have told you the system them, protect yourselves, protect yourselves from them. Receive vibrations in Sahajyoga. that keep your instrument clean and look upwards not downwards. If you look upward, One gentleman offered me his house, I gave him Realisation. But one person went only then you will ascend. Don't lookdown. to him and told that wicked and ill natured You have to ascend and go higher. At every people go to the meditation of Shri Mataji. step, every place I am with you, every Although I had given Realisation to that where, wherever you are, wherever you person and he had got vibrations, yet he be, everywhere I am with you, with mind, believed that man and said to me that, speech and action, fully. This is my "Mother, I cannot give this house to you promise. But those who want to go to hell I because such and such person has said like am dragging them downwards also. So this."I told him, "give your house to him, then." beware, look to the path of ascent not of descent. Now he telephones daily and asks me to buy

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-xV issue: 118.12 Nov & Dec 2003 whenever we do so, wicked people come and Now I am going to London. On my distrub but nice seekers are not found. So it returning I should see that everyone of you will be better if you serve Sahajyoga fully and has given realisation to atleast ten persons. Many of you are like that. All others, talk to enrich yourself by it. May God Bless You. My blessings them openly. Don't feel shy, Tell them about Sahajyoga that how much true it is. How are with you, my heart mind & body is always in your service. It is not away even much full of truthfulness and how real it is! for a second. Whenever you close your Gather people wherever you get and talk to eyes and remember me I am there with them. Everyone should take the photograph, all my powers (conch, disc, mace, lotus atlest 10 photographs each and deliver them and Garuda) (शंख, चक, गदा, पदम्, गरुड, in 10 houses. It's very nice way that everyone Sura). For a second it will not be delayed. of you should buy atleast 10 photographs and give them in 10 houses- to such families But you have to be mine. Its essential. If you are mine (Surrendered to me) then it will not take even a moment and I will be where people have faith for photogarph, where it could be worshipped, where people could accept Sahajyoga. That is how with you. May God Bless You and give you Sahajyoga could be spread. Actually we don't wisdom. Live with wisdom, with viveka. want to do too much publicity because

 SHRI MATAJI SAID On the 14th Sahasrara Day in 1983, Shri Mataji said "After coming to Sahaja Yoga and after your Sahasrara has opened, you have to pass through these four Chakras: Ardha-Bindu, Bindu, Valay and Pradakshina. After passing through these four chakras only, can you say that you have become a Sahaja Yogi." On the 9th Day of Navaratri 1988, in Pune, Shri Mataji commented: Within us as you know, there are seven chakras for your ascent and two above it. So all these nine chakras are to be crossed in this life time. That should be your destiny. Many of us have experienced awereness that is beyond the Sahasrara, often in India, particularly in Ganaptipule. But how to describe this state? The legendary Nath yogi, Matsyendranath, in the thirl chapter of the Kalajnanirvamnaya Tantra, (काल-ज्ञान निर्याण तन्त्र) puts ir like this: "Dearest, (in the pinda exist) the chakras of five lines, 16 lines, sixty four petals, the truly beautiful 100 petal (lotus) (Agnya) and the beautiful thousand petal lotus (Sahasrara) and above this is a very brilliant 10,000,00 petal lotus. Above the 10 million petal lotus is a 30,000,000 petal lotus, each pericarp of which is similar to a flame. Above this is the all encompassing, eternal, undivided, independent, steady lotus-pervading all stainless. By its will (svechha) it causes creation and dissolution.. Both the animate and inanimate are dissolved in this linga." Something for all of us to ainm for.. Whenever you are feeling very low, the present moment is whatever vou make of it, so cheer up!

 Sat-Chit-Anand Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi New Delhi - 15th February, 1977 Does everbady follow my Hindi? If I vibrated. The scientists connot understand say in English will you all follow? I am not in all this. When we start accepting all that the opposition for English language, but the language of Atma is Sanskrit. They have West is saying, we will lose all that we have, which is so great. Of course it is not going to be lost, but we are not gonig to utilise it for never bothered about the Spirit. So we have our purpose. We have to ignore all that on one side, and we have to accept-something which is just a foreign, alien thing and nothing so much comprehensive. It is not 'Samagra'. It doesn't envelop everthing. Therefore, I will to use some language which speaks about Atma. English language is not adequate enough. They do not have those experiences so far since they have not gone deep enough. We are very old ancient people. Our request you to learn a little of Hindi language culture has been to know God. Enveything has come in Sanskrit, because Sanskrit is also. One speech of mine, which was in English has been translated into Marathi, and what a tremendous thing it was! What a poor really a Devavani. Apart from that, when the Kundalini moves, she makes vibrations. She makes special sounds, which are Devnagri show it was in English! May be my English is Sounds on different Chakras. If I have time, I very poor, be it so. will inform you all about it. Even when you Now we were talking about 'Sat-Chit- Anand'. Again I have to use Sanskrit words. recite Mantras through the Sanskrit language "Sat-Chit-Anand' is the super Conscious- or Devnagri pronunciations only, you can exite them better, Try to learn, if not Sanskrit ness', the all pervading power. 'Chit' is the at least Hindi, because, it being a phonetic attention, the 'Consciousness'. You are just language, it has a sound and that sound gives now conscious and listening to me. Every that vibratory effect. You try to learn this moment, you are conscious. But every language. Hindi is not my mother tongue. My moment is becoming dead into the past. mother tongue is Marathi. I speak Hindi Every moment is coming from the future to because after all I know the importance of the present. But you are conscious at this Hindi. I also know a little bit of English. So it moment and are listening to me. A thought is better to know at-least Hindi. What I have rises and falls. You can see the thought. In between these thoughts, there is a space to say is that for speaking in Marathi is all right for me. Bengali I know a little bit. You called "Vilamb'. If you can stop for a while, you get to the Conscious Mind and there can convey it in Tamil or Telugu or in any other language of this Yoga Bhoomi. Every particle exists the 'Sat-Chit-Anand'. You can say 'Sat- of this Bhoomi, you will be surprised, is Chit-Anand' is the condition of the mind or

 Nov. & Dec: 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 11 & 12 the state of mind, where there is no thought, powers. But at this stage to leave the Kundalini is not proper, because the Kundalini but you are aware, 'Nirvichar'. This is the first stage, where you jump into; into the Super Consciousness'. Some people may think, that by realization you must achieve can start moving to this side or that side and can thus go to the supra conscious or to the collective sub-conscious. The 'Siddhis' are mostly available at this stage. Not minor Siddhis but higher Siddhis, e.g., if the with everyone it is not possible. Your first Kundalini moves to supra conscious one gets stage is Nirvichar. You become thought- the Siddhi of predicting the future. If the something as Adi Shankaracharya did, but it is not possible. With some it may be, but lessly aware. That happens when the Kundalini has moved to the Collective Sub Kundalini rises above the Agya Chakra, conscious, they can start seeing things into the past. A person like that, when he comes to me, can see who I was in my previous life. I do not have to convince him. This is the meaning enters into the lymbic area, when your attention just touches 'Sat point. The reality separates from 'Mithya'. You become same thing as anybody who is possessed. A two personalities. At that state you start person who takes to drugs and is an alcoholic to the last word, but is a good soul and is still separating-like putting lime in the milk then it starts separating into curd and water. In the same way the beginning of reality starts. seeking God, such a person can see Me, in ihe a different form. He can see my past, he can This is the state when you can say that the be very much enamoured by Me. He would know who I was. People think that the past is Kundalini has awakened only. We must understand the different stages, as it greater than the present, always, because happens. I am giving you a very detailed the past has been much greater than today, though I have never given realisation to anyone previously. He, therefore, gets picture but normally the Kundalini shoots off to 'Sahasrara' in most of the people. In some people it does not. It takes time. It is either lost into the Swadhishthana or the Nabhi. It enamoured when he sees things like that. does not go much higher. it is arrested by This happens to people who are on the Sub conscious level if they move out on the left 'Anahata Chakra' or it may not even rise at hand side i.e., into the past. Those who move all. But in case it crosses this 'door' of Agya out on the right hand side can see Me as light. Chakra, then you get into the state of They see all the five elements, they see me as a waterfall or as an iceberg. They start "Thoughtless Awareness'. With this Thoughtless Awareness, you get certain powers. Supposing for example, you become the Governor, you get certain powers of the Governor. Similarly you attain certain seeing the 'Tanmatra' namely the causal essence of the elements. It may help them to get convinced, because such a person

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 24 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12 gets convinced about Me and such a person Chit-Ananda in which you only feel the is much more convinced than you are. collective consciousness. That means you There are good many Tantrikas who know can feel another person's Kundalini. who I was. They are afraid of Me and they Yesterday there was another talk about Me. There was an ordinary maid gentleman, as you have seen it, who was servant who came to my programme and arguing with me that we have suspended she got into a trance and started speaking intelligence, 'what all that', I said, "was'? Sanskrit and she described Me completely "What is the suspended intelligence?. I do not know about this thing". So I told him this. in fitteen 'Shlokas'. She said everthing about Myself. This is how it started. He said that, "l am in a Turiya Dasha," I said So at this stage, I would not like to "If you are in Turiya' you can feel the leave your Kundalini, because you can cure Kundalini of another person and you cannot people and curative can be done with your certify yourseif like that but can you feel the Kundalini even it is in the limbic area. I am Kundalini of another person?" But he said, 'no', then I asked him "how can you be in very anxious always that it should come out of the Brahmarandhra. At that stage you start Turiya?" If you go in Turiya-i.e., if you cross this stage, then you have to feel the Kundalini getting the vibrations; but at this stage you are just a 'Chita' only and you just touch the of another person. Now you have seen there 'Sat point. Your attention is only charmed by the Spirit. Only the attention part as I told are many people who can feel the Kundalini and they all say the same thing, they talk the you is like a flicker or light in a Gas lamp, same language-whether they do so in and Kundalini is like a gas which touches English, Indian or any other language. They say the same thing i.e., this chakra is catching the spirit and the light of the spirit spreads in or that chakra is catching. This is because the central nervous system. 'Chit' part, the you start seeing your own Kundalini thereby outer core, the 'Chitta' means the attention part. At that stage the Kundalini opens the seeing the Kundalini of others, because Brahmarandhra when you feel the vibrations through the fingers you can feel what is from your hand and you can feel another happening. You just feel the Chita and not the Anand part of it. First stage is through person's also because you become "collectively' conscious'. Collectively Chitta that you feel the Kundalini of another conscious again out of Sat-Chita-Anand that person there by you can raise the Kundalini you just touch the 'Chita' part. Thus you start of another person. After a while, you can give feeling the Chit of your Chitta becoming the realization also to another person with the "Chitta' of the collective consciousness- assistance of my photograph. But the Anand means that you drop into the ocean of Sat- stage is not yet reached. In the beginning you

 Nov. & Dec 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12 has come here from England. One day he just feel the cool breeze in your hands. You feel peace and tranquility and also there is no thought. You feel the 'thoughtless awareness' but the Anand part is not yet felt was sitting and thinking about his father. Suddenly he got a burning on his index finger. Hence he rang up his father. His mother told him that his condition was not good. He was at this first stage. Because now I have suffering from a bad throat. This boy did studied thousands of human beings and their something to his finger and his father got well. problems, I know; this is the fact. But there Now he might think that he is powerful and are some, who have reached the last stage, all that but he is not. He cannot think in this though they are very very few. manner because his Sahasrara has opend Thus at the first stage when you up. He just said, "Mother, I felt it and I did like come, is the 'Chit' stage. The consciousness this, and my father became all right". He stage, you touch the 'Sat' which means you start seeing the reality, is one thing, you feel never says Idid it. 'I'goes out. You never say, T'did it but you will say, "Mother today my is flowing. At this time you start saying it is coming or it is going. Just now you said, it is Agya is catching", "Mother my heart is catching". They come and speak like this about themselves. Agya is catching means coming. You didn't say that 'I' am receiving, I am giving, That 'I goes out of your you will be going mad. But one does not feel language. But still the Ego and the Superego bad about it since he is not attached to it. He are not completely gone down. They are still is attached to his Atma. So he says, as an there, but your attention has come up and Atma, this Chakra is caught or that Chakra you feel the 'Chitta'. With this 'Collective is caught. A person who is suffering from cancer, does not know it. But to a realised Consciousness' you can cure prople, you I have told you can give them Realisation as person, his attention will tell him that so and and also you can feel the Kundalini of any so Chakras are out of gear-and so many person in the whole world; and cure the Chakras out of gear means cancer. He need Chakras of that person. You can tell the not go to the doctor but he can diagnose it himself. He will not diagnose himself as the condition of another person far away by sitting down here. Wherever your attention doctors do; saying you have the cancer of goes, it works, thereby your attention the heart, the cancer of throat etc. but he will becomes Univesal. A drop of your attention say that it is the Chakras that are caught up, becomes one with the ocean of the 'Sat-Chit- either the left or the right side. Anand'. Listen to me carefully because many Now from where the vibraticns are people at this stage become non-attentive, coming or how it is going and can give the and only the attention becomes effective. I depth of such Chakras. There are many will inform you about a disciple of mine, who

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12 26 abstract important happennings taking place. Once you get the realisation, the "Chirnjivas' surrender to you. They are understand. Somebody just now asked me, "if he is guided by internal God, then he cannot do anything by himself", It is not so! The internal Gods are his own part-and-parcel. You can say that I am quided by my brain hence I cannot do anything else. You can watching you. You are their responsibility. All the Deities are awakened in you. If you do anything against the 'Deities' immediately see, the Gods are in your internal parts, by yourself. What is this Self left with then? they will harm you. A person who has got Realisation, goes to a place which is not to be seen or which is not to be felt or which is When you are united with this Self, you not a good place, or to a fake Guru; become a hollow personality, then you do not have this feeling of the Self. All the time you immediately he will feel heated up. If he does will say "it is going, it is happening, It is flowing", You start looking at yourself as a not run away, and if he still goes on and on he will lose his vibrations and he will become like another ordinary person. third person. You do not identify your self with Initially it is a very transitory stage, yourself. It happens. You can see these Still, I would say at this point that the people how they are working. There is also a part of littie enjoyment, repulsion is not so very gerat that the man the 'Joy' or 'Anand'. Normally you find that does not accept it. Because, if you accept it, you become completely realised. If you do most of the 'Sahajyogis' will gather around a person who is realised and is not a diffcult person. Moreover, if there is somebody who comes at my feet, who is a very great soul, then the Sahajyogis, enjoy it all the more. Once we were at Calcutta staying in a hotel. not accept it then there might be little bodily problem that you might have. You might harm your own fingers, or you might get little burning sensation here or there. But if you are not afraid of these body sensations and if you ignore them, then you start rising higher and higher and I have already informed you There was a very nice man who came to see me. He was not a realized person but a very saintly person with a great Purva Sampada. He just touched my feet. The other Sahaj that all the 'Chiranjivas' start guiding you and looking after you. If there is one realised Yogis were in the other rooms. They all person in the train, there cannot be an rushed in. I said, "Why did you come?" They accident and if there is an acoident, nobody will die in that train. If a realised soul is walking on the road, and if he sees a mishap, his said, "a great joy started coming within them so they came", He was all the time on my attention goes there immedately and the feet and they were standing there. I said, mishap is averted. His attention is being "neither he is going to leave Me nor are you blessed. All this, a scientist cannot going to leave Me". For fitteen minutes he

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12 27 you are afraid of being drowned; therefore, you are picked up and put in the boat, then you are no longer afraid of being drowned. Now you can settle down firmly. was enjoying the nector of my feet and they were enjoying his nector and the fragrance of it. So the Joy' of enjoying other human beings, also start. These are the feelings. This is how you enjoy 'Nirvichar or Samadhi, You have to be firmly settled and with Samadhi does not mean going into that you get certain powers-your Kundalini unconsciousness but the unconscious starts moving. We have in Bombay certain becomes conscious. The universal people whose Kundalini rises at least one unconscious becomes conscious. So this is foot high. They are very developed people. At the first stage. There are many things like the 'Nirvikalpa' State, the collective this and a variety of things happen. consciousness becomes subtler and subtler. Supposing you were doing a lot of 'Jyoti At that stage you can understand the very deep significance of things when the reality Pooja' in your pervious life, then you can see my vibrations coming and going. Supposing starts becoming clearer. For example, you you have been doing Devi-Pooja, then you start understanding the working of the Kundalini. You start understanding how it can do something of 'Devi Pranam'. You can see that also. If you see like that before penetrates. You can understand how it works relisation, it means you are a possessed out. you can use it for experimentation with person. Somebody is giving you ideas. After realisation you start seeing certain things, your own hand and you can move it as you please. You can cure people and you can show the Kundalini's working in different then it has some meaning. So the gradual growth of the flower starts manifesting. In the second stage, you become ways. You can combine in permutations and combinations of the Kundalini. You can say that in the first year of music, you just learn "Nirvikalpa'-where there is no 'Vikalpa'. Just now in Delhi there are very few Sahaja Yogis seven notes and two other notes and ordinary like that. First of all, by temperament they ragas. But when you grow subtler and higher, are Vikalpi. The reason is a complete then you know all the minute points of how to create music. atmosphere of Vikalpa. If you say something, another will pull you down by saying At the Nirviklpa stage you need not something else. So the thing that the whole put your hand towards the person. By sitting atmosphere is so Vikalpi that you are not down you know where it is, what is yet settled down in Sahaja Yoga. But we have happening, where he is catching, what is the problem, what are the 'Collective Problems? You have no doubts about Sahajyoga, nor about kundalini, nor about anything else. also got very great 'Sahaj Yogis' in Delhi as well. Now you will ask, how do you become Nirvikalpa? Supposing you are in the water,

 The Divine Cooi Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 Nov & Dec 2003 which is Adishakti. Hence you cannot tolerate There are no doubts at all. At that time you anything against your Mother or Sahajyoga and one can get into a tremendous temper start experimenting about it and you start using it. Mastery of Kundalini starts. At that or a "Sanharshakti" which they develop. It is said that such a man if anybody tries to do stage the 'Chitta', the consciousness becomes subtle. Somebody was sitting with Me, and outside the Sahajyogis knew that some harm he will immediately bring him down through their devotion towards their this gentleman is going to get realization and Mother. We have a notion that a realized they knew that Mother is giving the realisation. Such Sahaja Yogis are extremely pleased at such time and they do not grudge or grumble person should never lose his temper. It is a very wrong idea. Then you will say. "why Krishna killed Jarasandha, why did he kill about small matters. They are carefree and live in a big way. They are not touchy. Their attention is in the subtle. They have no time Kansa?" How do you explain Devi who killed demons when She came and got into Her temper? She used to get into tremendous for outside gross matters-so their attention temper and then She used to kill. The temper of Shiva! How do you explain this? It is a foolish idea to say that they should not get is always deep into the subtle part. They are not bothered. Such prople are the satisfied souls. Such people are the ones, who are into the temper even if someone tries to kill going to create the pillars for Sahaja Yoga. them. Even Christ had to take the whip (e) Because, when somebody sees such a in his hand and drive them away. You have a person, a transformed person, like that, they get shocked, "just look at this man. He is such right to get into a temper, if you are in a Nirvikalpa state since you are given that right of even raising one's own voice when need arises. I am using all the Ayudhas, if you have a great person. He was a very horrid man earlier and how he has changed like this! See how is he transformed! "At this stage, at the noticed in my hand, the Chakra, the Parasha Nirvikalpa stage, the vibrations emit, then etc. They are there and I have to use them there is-no questioning at all. But such a man gets into a terrible temper if he sees and you cannot stop Me from using them. somebody is misbehaving with Me and This is what I say that by reading people don't understand things. A man who is connot bear it. Christ has said, "forgive all quietly sitting and is being pestered by those, for they know not what they are doing." every body is called a realized person- what nonsense I How dare you spite at such a man? Is the spite of a Devi to be born by a realised soul? To say that a realised soul But supposing they had done any thing against his mother, he would not have forgiven in the least. In the Bible it is written3B "Nothing will be tolerated against the Holy should not get into a temper is a wrong thing. Ghost". And the Holy Ghost was his Mother

 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 Nov. & Dec. 2003 Now all those Rishis I have talked Soul. I said, "how can it be? If you are a realised Soul, how are you taking to these about and all those people who have talked things? You cannot". Now for me, I will tell about me and whose names I have given you it is an impossibility. I have never taken anything. Once my doctor gave me a little brandy as a medicine, I don't know why but you, they are all above Nirvikalpa, but they are very hot tempered. These saints cannot tolerate hypocricy but I can and I have to. he felt like giving it to me without informing me, due to which I vomitted so much of blood, No Rakshasas can go near them but if anybody goes they are put into a noose and are hanged on the tree. That's why I say never since my stomach is religious or sacred. If I see a woman who has dressed provocatively go near the Babaji. They are higher people, or something like that or sometimes I have no doubt, better than you all are, and they to accompany my husband to parties and know me very well and they fall at my feet. They are very innocent and simpie like they start a cabaret or some such thing, children to me. More important is Shri immediately, I start getting vomitting, sensation like hell and more so when we are Ganesha. If he gets angry it is not so easy to the chief guests. I make their lives miserable, control him. It is easier to control Shri Shiva's since something happens in my stomach but not Ganesh's anger. Beware of him. That when I see these half-dressed women. Now is why during Kundalini Awakening, you get burning sensation and you start dancing or what canI do with my stomach is the point jumping. All this is Ganesha's anger. If you because the Dharma is born within our stomach. So the stomach becomes the have insulted him by any chance, or Insulted Dharma itself. At this stage the subtle style his Mother, He gets into a tremendous fury. It is true that after Nirvikalpa, the of things starts. Your Mooladhar becomes chastity itself. Ii just cannot bear these things. Ganesha becomes really Jagrut. Such a You don't have to tell them. They have just person is not tempted by any women. No temptation for another women will exist, no interest in such women. They do not flirt nor have they any interest in all these things. except for his own wife, where he goes on They do not bother too much to dress up in living like a celebrated husband, because such a way that they would be very attractive husband and wife are united in a bond of to other women or men and at that time they behave like very simple people. They get to matrimony. Otherwise he is a sanctified householder. He does not have temptation simplicity dignified. Then suddenly they for-any alcohol or anything like smoking and is beyond temptation, A Nirvikalpa man become very creative also. There is one cannot have any temptation. One man came gentleman in Bombay who got into 'Nirvikalpa' State. He came to me when he to me and told me that he was a realised

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 was jobless. So I told him, "why don't you ask him all about this statue whether it is alright or not? He might say that it is not alright. start interior decoration work?" He said that You can feel the subtle vibrations, whether it he did not know different types of wood nor is in Dharma or otherwise. Now can we say could differentiate between one type and another. So, what could he do? I said, "now, that Ashtavinayaka's are living God's? How you are in Nirvikalpa, so start it". Today he is do you know? Joytirlingas are living. How will a very rich man. It just becomes dynamic, you know? Unless you know the integrations of all the great souls together how are you going to judge them?. That is why you must because you start seeing the beauty, the 'saundarya' of the nature, you see-aesthetics get Realisation. This is what my father told are born in a person who is a realized Soul. me. I should say he was my first Guru, as he He starts seeing aesthetics in everything, was a realised soul. He told me, "it is of no The beauty of talking improves. The use talking about realities etc., because you movements of the hands improve and your will create another Bible or Gita. You do a style also improves. You become a beautiful practical thing. You find out 'a-mass-media", person-aesthetics come in. You can become Solworked and I knew that was my mission. suddenly a great poet. We have two people on everybody's Kundalini and tried to find out like that who have written beautiful poems permutations, combinations, of their and you can also be a great painter if you mistakes and why these people are like this. are already a painter. You get new ideas about painting, new aesthetics. In music, you start You will be surprised that so many-people understanding absolutely. You may not know what classical music is but you will start They did not know that they were highly never knew that they were even in Nirvichara. understanding the subtle music. From the classical music you will know which is the placed spirts. If they would have known then they would not have told many things which have conditioned you. They have said, "Sach best for you Atma. You see the Atma starts Bolo". Who is going to speak 'truth' They did judging everything on that level. If you appoint such a person to judge a drama or a painting, not know what Human beings are. They are whether it is good or bad, he will correctly 'Incarnations'-a great people. They did not judge it good or bad. Then you put his know much about the human beings and how selection to all the critics of the world and cunning they are or how they are all the time they will say it is the best judgement. Now, against each other. They could not come to you will ask me "how does he know?" the subtie Human Self-Realisation, as I now Because he can feel by vibrations and have. AS such I know human beings but some things, of course, I do not understand. complete harmony in everything. When you get into the Nirvikalpa You give him a statue of a deity and

 Nov. & Dec 2003 31 The Divirie Col Breeze Volutrie-XV Issue: 11 & 12 in our brain. Christ is also here. These two state, the Anand starts setting in you. When are not incarnations. They are born as Human you see cities, any beautiful picture or scene, beings. They were born to Sita, as Lava and immediately what you find is a great flow of Kusha. Then they were born as Buddha and Anand coming down. This is the grace that you are just lost into it; like the Ganges Mahavira, and 'Adishakti' was their Mother flowing over you, you are completely once again. Later on they were born to drowned into it. Your consciousness 'Fatimabi' as Hasan and Husain. They are the two Milestones you have got, by which becomes Anand. you can know to what height a Human being In reality you come to know that till can rise. Now today they are like now we have never known there is a incarnations. There are other styles of 'Sarvavyapi Shakti' but now we are aware of the same. We can feel it coming in our personalities like Chiranjivas, Bhairava, fingers. This is the Reality. There is Chaitanya Ganesha. They are all incarnations. all around us which thinks, which Hanumana later on appeared as 'Gabriel the Angel'. 'Bhairavnath' came as Saint Michael. understands, organises and loves us. All this The names are different, but they are the you come to know, the knowledge part of it. same personalities. Devi has also incanated. Then the Anand, which is the Hridaya, starts There is no doubt about it. The scientist will emitting it. Later on what you get is Vilaya not understand this but a Sahaja Yogi can, into Anand. At that stage you can control the sun, you can control the moon, you can because they can immediately feel their Vibrations and can ask questions. You can control every element. you will Beyond that there is God's ask questions about me also and get the vibrations. For that at least your Deities have to rise and say 'yes'- You may Realization. There are three stages to that also but just now I have told about this. 'Sat- or you may not get 'Realization' but the Chit-Anand' state. The God's Realistion' is answer you will definitely get. the stage which, Gautam Budha and May God bless you. Mahavira only had achieved and settled down

 NIRMALA VIDYA Talk by Shri Mataji, Rahuri, 31.12.1980 It is the special power by which we do all Divine work, even forgiving. When you Innocence takes over, which manages. That's how it works out. say, "Mother, forgive us", the techinque by which I forgive you is Nirmala Vidya. The Shakti, beyond power at the left. Becomes Then it goes on rising and called Para technique by which I love you is also Nirmala Madhyama and all that. It comes upto the Vidya. The techinque by which all the Vishuddhi at the left. There you become Mantras are manifesting themselves and are guilty. Because of your guilty nature you say effective is also Nirmala Vidya, Nirmala- things that are harsh. Left Vishuddhi is the means pure, Vidya means knowledge, catch of the Ganesh Shakti. Ganesh is the Nirmala Vidya is purest knowledge or the Sweetest Thing you can think of. Even when knowledge of this technique. It creates loops, you look at Ganesh; this Kautuk (ag)-this innocent admiration starts flowing. Just think the energy creates loops and creates also different formations by which it acts and of him, you feel so happy! That innocence draws all that is unwanted, impure & fills it becomes harsh on left Vishuddhi. So to up with its power. It is a technique, a divine technique which I may not be able to explain overcome your left Vishuddhi, all of you are to use sweet words. Your language should to you fully because your instrument does be sweet to everyone, especially (Men) must speak sweetly to their wives. Now that not do that-you don't have that instrument. But now you see, how subtle it is! sweetness will cure your left Vishuddhi. Only by saying, 'Nirmala Vidya", you just Always speak very sweetly, try to findout all invite that power, the whole thing, the whole the sweet words. The sweet methods of technique to attend to you and it attends to addressing is the best way to cure your guilt you. You don't have to worry. It never happens because if you say anything harsh to anyone; in any Government or anywhere in the world. you may say so as a matter of habit or may be because just you feel happy by saying that, You just address the Govt. and the whole thing goes into work, in the whole, the entire but as soon as you say it, you say, 'Oh God, what did I say!' That is the biggest guilt. One universe, every creation. That techique is called Nirmala Vidya. That technique once has always, to try to find out sweet words. mastered, by surrenderning into it; it Now, the birds are chirping. In the same way completely obeys, absolutely. But it is you have to learn all the sounds of everthing Ganesh Shakti, the Shakti of Innocence is by which you make people happy by your the power called innocence. The whole sweetness. It is very important. Otherwise, if power because it is innocence. So the your left Vishuddhi grows too much, you will

 Nov & Dec 2003 33 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue : 118 12 see, it is so beautiful. So this way our desire develop a way of talking by which your lips itself becomes the spirit, your desire and will get distorted towards left side. Spirit become une-but this hurdle can be very Then the flow starts higher, in the Agnya Chakra, where the Ganesh Shakti bad sometimes. You have seen, that all of becomes the Greatest Power of you who have Left Vishuddhi; when you Forgiveness. Then it rises higher into the speak harshly you must know it is not you limbic area where Ganesh Shakti goes who is speaking. No, because you are the above the Surya, the Super-ego comes up Spirit, cannot say anything harsh or destructive. It only will say harsh, when it is and this power is that of the Moon and this necessary to little bit remould. But that you Moon is Spirit, this becomes Spirit and it sits on the head of Sadashiva. That is the same. don't take over. That will be done by somebody else. The whole Ganesh Shakti's evolution, you

 SHRI MATAJI TALKS TO WOMEN January, 1984 There is no need for women to do all that and go forward together. Now the women, or we can say the men have done, or the whole energy will be Kundalini, which has been waiting all these completely wasted. years, was resting, wating for that time. Isn't The whole preparation has been made for this Aquarian age to come in, to it.? So we call it, "The blossom time has bring the kundalini upward and to make the whole thing workout in such a way that the now come". At that time, the Kundalini has left and right meet and you all becomę to rise and ignite in such a way that the ignited, enlightened. It was a question of our completion of the whole world takes place. It being, sharing the whole job in a proper is simple. Do you understand now?. So, there's no competition between understanding. Now see how Mother Earth herself was created. It is a very simple thing. men and women, but the style of work is First the movment of the energy started different. If you understand that, then only flowing. Now this is a combined energy; this kind of revolution will take place, and not alright?. Then the combined energy went turn out a rebellion. Actually women are round and round like that and when it rebelling against men, and a nonsense it is. consolidated there was this Big Bang, took It is such a headache, that you create something, allow them to grow, and another place. Now this is the manly work, I should say, manly style, because still the Mother party comes-which has to complete the job- Earth is not produced-so then these little starts rebelling. So the revolution has to take place fragments again went round and round. With and the revolution is only possible when we the momentum, they became roundish. Out understand that "what" part is leit out-is "now" of them Mother Earth was selected for one to be done. Are you getting me alright? job. On the Mother Earth, out of the water So that part to be done is now Realisation, our awakening of the Kundalini came the life-the carbon came in. or that your feminine qualities are going to Everybody helped there and a human being was created. Then the men help you, not your masculine qualities. So went round to improve thier societies; and aggressiveness must be given up by men. whatever was possible with their ego is done, Also because they are Sahaja Yogis now, they have to take feminine qualities. Not of finished now, they have done their job. Now fighting. they are on the dole. If women fight they are not women. Women have to complete their part

 The Divine Coo Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 Nov, & Dec. 2003 35 You see, women are told that "You woman can forgive, man cannot because he is aggressive. How can he forgive? Krishna are good for nothing', so, now they are trying to show, "No, we are also alright. If you have eaten one crow, we will eat three" Now this never forgave any-one. He used to kill. Right royal fashion. So, alright, if you are so, alright. understanding and the wise perception -Done. would be such that, "What do we have to do, Chirst forgave to such an extent to now, to change the 'mode' and the 'style' of show that he is now giving a turn to the spiral, our lives? "What's wrong here?" and now a 'feminine' quality has to be o A tuning point has come. Now the developed among human beings evolution is not rebellion at all by any chance. But that doesn't mean that you start It's a wrong idea people have. It's not that walking like women or developing waistlines. you hit me and I hit you-go on hitting each Because that's another stupidity. other, like the movement of the pendulum. But to be 'Motherly. Not to be fatherly, it's not like a boom, that today you are born but to be 'Motherly'. 'That kindness, that as Muslim, tomorrow you are born as a Jew, gentiness' should be in your behaviour then you are born as a Hindu. It's not a towards each other. Of course this force also corrects, pendulum. It's a spiral movement. So every time you achieve any evolution you are at a higher level than before. So the movement is spiral, sometimes gets angry also. Mother also has to get angry sometimes, specially with people who never get alright with their behaviour. She has to be shouting, punishing and see my point? Now, to achieve the 'higher' position sometimes She also destroys. It's alright. But that is sometimes, not all the time. So just in our whole being what should we do? Is to understand that from this point to that point now one has to accept that to be like Mother we have to rise in a way that we move not in Earth they have to be forebearing, 'Dhara'. a pendulum way but in a spiral way. And to She is the sustenance of 'everything'. She move spirally, you have to use another kind takes everything, the vibrations are sucked of force. Whatever you have used so far has in. to be endowed with another kind of force And now. for the first time, after and that's the feminine qualities of women. Realistion, you can give Her back what you But where are the feminine women? They have got-from Her. You can give vibrations dress up as women, that's not the way. From to Her trees that are created, you can make inside, from the heart. A feminine heart. Christ them beautiful. You can transform flower showed that in His life. He forgave. Only a into a more beautiful flower. Now whatever

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 you have to give what you have got from being gentle, nice, embalming, sweet. Let's Mother Earth you can give, because 'your' think, find out ways and means. There's a very good way, in the evening, to write down, mother earth is awakend in you now. So you "how many sweet things I've said today!" Not like this, sweet things we say- return Her back everthing that you got from Her, and give it to others.-Generosity, the greatness of heart, nobility, forgiveness, love, "You're looking beautiful" and all that. Not the affection, bearing everything for love. And superficial ones. That may pamper the ego. But they're so sweet, you know, things are. for the Mother, to save her child, she will There are so many words you can say like : starve herself, do everything to save her "are you warm enough?"- very sweet way of child-complete dedication she has for her asking a question. child. That's a real Mother-l mean, the kind It's very simple, but can see now, you of mothers you see these days, neither they are mothers nor women. But what I am can't, just-it's very difficult for people to say saying, that's the real image of a mother,- that even, I've seen. Looking after others' comforts. Somebody is sitting, he wants and you have an Image before you. water. You just go, rush and give him water. So this is what you have to develop "Oh, that's too much to expect. Oh God! you now, whether you are men or women, as Sahaja Yogis you must develop a (new gave water!" " I'm not your servant"- consciousness) of affection, love and immediately the question comes into the head. Little bit trying to do something here compassion. Getting angry, getting into a temper, shouting at people-this is not going and there. Or sometimes thinking-going in the market, you find something. "Oh! let me take to help you much. If you have to help the it for him, "well, then 'do'. whole, the growth of the whole, try to make I've seen, children all the time they yourself a milder person-be angry with think of their friends-what they can buy for yourself that you are losing tempers and you others. This is good for my friend. He's very are so unkind to others. All the proplems have come out of the overgrowth of fond of things, he likes this. All these little things. Do all these little, little things for each masculinity-overgrowth. It reaches a certain point you see, other, you know. Sometimes even small things like: early in the morning you get up, you find another person is sleeping on one It's reached such a wretched point now, that it has to come down.. You have to have love for every side, his blanket on the third side and his pillow on the fourth side. So you just put his Sahaja Yogi, every person. How to behave towards new seekers? First you think of head on the pillow and cover him with the

 The Divine Coo Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 Nov. & 3 Dec. 2003 37 blanket. That's Mother's job. Not out of fear, you come? For example, you see people come down here, I have seen, for Sahaja but out of 'sheer' love. Like even if it is cold and buttons are open, you can button up a Yaga. Now they have other interests and other priorities and other things which are person. Little things, you know. Women have very little sweet things which very important to them. All the time, they are wasting their time for that and then they will they do, which make men very happy. But say that, "Mother, we are not progressing women have lost now that sense. Not the fighting, but thinking what very much in Sahaja Yoga". If you decide, (as Mr Venugopalan sweet thing you can do. To overcome ego, to be a Sahaja Yogi, how much identified you has told you before), that- 'we have to do should be with the truth of Sahaja Yoga. Now Sahaja Yoga first and other things are it is for you to receive, imbibe into it and you have to change the whole thing. That is your secondary' then only the Sahaja Yoga can be really established into you. Now it is for you to decide, where do job and that is why it is a serious matter. The second point : I always have you come? How far are you going to? If you are going to waste your time in thinking been saying that due to ego problem, we about other Sahaja Yogis and small, small We are so disintegrated that, the things and frivolous things, your are very much disintegrated. connection with the Divine is never properly disintegration is going to be increased, established. As I have said it, that, this you are going to be separated much more, instrument (through which I am speaking). as all these decisions are taken through if it is divided into five parts and all the five you ego, e.g. 'I don't like it, I don't do it, I don't see it, and the like. parts are fighting with each other, you cannot If you could somehow or other see get anything done through this instrument, though it is connected to the mains. your ego working, then you can get rid of it- In the same way if you still remain and that is the thing one has to do-not to disintegrated, you cannot get that connection. We will have some Sahaja Yogis fight the ego. I never say fight the ego, but surrender it. It is the only way your ego can of a very high level. I know that we will have go. Do not respect false saints. Beat some of mediocre level. Some will be them with shoes. Get up in the morning and absolutely useless and some will be do meditation. Here (England), even to get absolutely thrown out. We will have all types, up in the morning people grudge. I mean, that also I know. Now it is for you to decide, where do what can you do with such slow moving

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 Nov. & Dec. 2003 people? You see it is absolutely very difficult. And this is what I think, we must understand You see, this is not the sign of intelligence either, all the time trying to find faults with each other or trying to blame that, we have a very great responsibility in yourself. Both things are wrong. The best is the West. Because this has to happen in to grow in wisdom and yourself see that we London. It has to happen in England to begin are becoming wiser and wiser. Some of you with and that is why you bear very big are really very grown up and some of you still go up and down and some of you are reponsibility. You have to evaluate yourself and Sahaja Yoga again and again and agian still very low. So all of us have to go together. and know that what makes you so slow is If somebody has achieved something, it is of no use to Sahaja Yoga. As I have told you, it is the collective thing that your ego, or even super-ego is there, no doubt. But ego, is the main problem. I must is the main problem, but I is going to work and all of you have to work it dare not say to anyone that this is out. your ego, because they will just jump on to my head. It is so sweet that you have real But, try to see your ego, how it is deviating. brothers and sisters all over the world today. Because it is your own joy that you are When you will go there with a full heart, they seeking. It is your own, that is hidden from are going to receive you, as you have received them, with a full heart. But we all you, which you have been seeking for ages. Now that is what I have to expose to must come up to a point, where we can face you. What is there to argue with a person each other with full love, with openness, who is trying to give you the highest? It is without worry of fear of anyone but just say just a waste of energy. Do not waste your that they are your brothers and you are their brothers and that you have to love them. energy on to these frivolous things and finding faults. You have to love your brothers and sisters in Sahaja Yoga. That is only possible Now, Shri Venugopalan has been arranging the printing of our book and so when we get out of our fears here because on, so smoothly, absolutely. I have not known there is also anothers side to it that ego any problems. You have seen in the camps always has fears. Because it aggresses in Delhi, how it works out, you have seen others, and that it knows others can aggress it. So this is a point we have got to think about how many people were there. Never a that never will'fetch' you in any way. Despise problem. Did you have anybody complaining, yourself, neverl You are sanits. anybody quarrelling or anybody fighting You must know that. amongst themselves? Nothing of the kind.

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 39 Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV.Issue: 1T& 12 them. Because these are the troubles of our You are realised souls in this world. own over-thinking and our over-reading and How many there are, who can raise over-domination. But we can get rid of them the Kundalini? very easily. It is just to detach yourself and How many there are, who see for yourself-addressing yourself-"Now, understand what are vibrations? I am going to tell you on Guru Puja, Mister how are you?" If you will say like that, immediately your attention will go through yourself to see your outer being. That is very what things you have achieved, and how many things you have got within you, built- in now, which are working. How your chakras important. The more you see yourself clearly, the better it is. You have to face yourself. And are awakened through Sahaja Yoga. Yes, it has happened. But what are you doing about you do not want to face-because you are it? This is the greatest of the greatest things afraid of facing yourself. Because you have been aggressing others and you are afraid which can happen to any-one that you know. Also you know, this is the greatest of aggressing in the way that is towards happening, which was prophecised long time yourself. But there would not be any back as the Last Judgement'. aggression-because that is the perfect state You know that this is the way, you where you see yourself. Neither you aggress any-one nor you are going to be judged. So we have to work very hard. We have to work. It is effortlessly are aggressed by any-one. You just see given to you, alright. But to maintain it, keep yourself clearly, and that is what you have to it up to go high, we have to religiously work see. Gradually you start seeing your chakras, seeing your oroblems and you know that's it out. It is a very humble attitude in receiving more and more into your being, imbibing into how it gradually develops. But everybody wants quick results. If you are not, be patient your being. Let it trickle into your brain completely with yourself. Not with me, but with yourself. covering it. Let that eternal bliss come into you. I am so anxious. Do not make yourself lamsaying, you have to be patient because, there is a problem with you. So you have to be patient with yourself and not with anybody a small person. Have a bigger vision. Have bigger ideas because now you belong to the else. That is the main point. bigger thing, the biggest of all, the Primordial, the highest, to the Virata! If you realise your If you are patient with yourself, this is the long promised thing which you will get. importance then you will work it out. And But you must learn to be patient with yourself and not be angry with yourself, not to debase certain things defintely have gone wrong with yourself, not to aggress yourself onto others. us, we know that, we should understand

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 40 The Divine Coo Breeze Valume-XV Issue : 11 & 12 It is a very simple thing, the simplest it not? I sill love them. I enjoy playing with thing to do; but because of your complex life them. and our complicated thinking, we have become quite entwined up into things. it can love, and love is the thing that is going to As I love, in the same way you should easily be got out and just slipped out of unfold beautifully like a lotus, you see: opens without any difficulty. I know you can do it. So forget about all these things like-my father, flowing, In the same way, your heart will open out petals and beautiful fragrance starts my sister, my brother. All these problems will out and the fragrance of love will spread be burnt in no time. throughout the world. It will ring into you. I As soon as your life runs straight, know it can happen. The sooner, the better everything will be burnt away. Nothing will be and the choice is your own-which you have left-but your light-and others who will come to make-your choice. to you for enlightenment. I am very happy because such a beautiful song to hear and just before I know that you are going to have a big day for Guru Puja and before that I have Christmas, which is a very big thing for Me. to request you to prepare yourself. I may do something great. But I must have a proper You know that, and in the same way we are having another Christmas now. Christmas to recipient, so that you must prepare yourself. celebrate a new Christ born within us. Think about it. Are you loving others? Are you Let us prepare for His coming, and in love. Are you in love with every-one? Just how you prepare is not by running away from yourself, not by getting into frivolous things; to think that you love every one is so great! I mean you ask me. Because I always think how much I have to love. You see so much but by working it out, beautifully cleansing. Cieansing has to be done if the Self has to love I have, always to give to others! Just be establihed in the temple of this being. think how great it is to love others! You know how people treat me sometimes. Terrible, is May God Bless you all

 AFTER SELF REALIZATION Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi November 25, 1973 (Seven Chakras and their Ruling Deities explained) You have to do nothing at all. In Sahaja transmigration (3ra), the growth of trees and the chirping of the sparrows. You have to look at the auspicious and pure smile, you Yoga everything gets done. In day to day language the meaning of word Sahaja is easy. The origin of this word is from Sah and "Ja These two letters make the word have to listen to the adulating voice of Divine blessings. You have, nothing else to do. Only by seeing it you will be overjoyed with it. Now you have to watch only. Nothing remains to be done. You have nothing to do for the health Sahja-meaning 'easy' and that is 'born with us.' The way our eyes are born with us, nose is bron with us. We don't have to think about of your body the way you have been doing so far, Yoga etc. You need not do many yoga it. There is no perfect image of it. The all round beauty of a rippleless lake fully excercises (yogasanas). It's alright if you do some light yoga excercises but generally you establishes complete harmony in the person have not to take much care of your body who looks at it. Similarly, when you look at because in it resides the God (HIHI). You reflects within us. Not only this, but also some beautiful sight and the beauty of the have to respect it, no excesses should be thoughtless and Divine creation, you will go the moment you get into thoughtless done with it. If you want to get rid of alcohol or drugs, it's very easy. Whatever you decide about will happen. awareness, the power of joy, that lies within it, fully reftects in your being and you get fully identified with it. The God almighty has, simiarly created many beautiful sights for you You will not get conditioned. If you have decided to get rid of alcohol you will be relieved of it. Human beings consume liquor because they do not and this beauty of nature is spread all over. By getting into the source of that beauty that want to face themselves. I am not asking to give up anything else but liquor because it iov is created in you. You have incarnated to damages your consciousness. By just have the pleasure of the joy and not to make watching you could get rid of drinking because now you have begun to love yourself. Automatically you will be in the state of joy. If yourself miserable unnecessarily. Now many people have asked that what they have to do further? Now you have by chance someone of you is imprisoned, to do something new; you have to watch only. you will say, 'Oh'! how nice! I will sit there When you go to see a movie and think as an audience that what you have to do, tne and meditate. One is in one's own glory. There remains no urge for liquor or somking cigarette. Nothing remains to be said, all the Keep on watching. You have to see tne vices go away by themselves. In Bombay answer that you get is you have to watch.

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 42 The Divine Caol Breeze Volume-XV issue: 11 & 12 and ask yourself to be angry. You will start condition is such that one could not get laughing. In the state of anger keep laughing from within. All the time you keep laughing, match box form Sahaj Yogis! While going to centres you have to take it along to burn incense and to light a candle. No one while in temper one gets involved with smokes. The chain smokers, I don't know, something or the other. All vices such as lust, anger, ego, envy etc. have their own way. You have to look at it. It is a play. You should watch it, because now you are within, not how they have stopped smoking! Some poeple used to play rammi (cards), they say, we have given up playing cards. They are enjoying their lives, they will enjoy themselvs in the exams and also in the problems without. Thal is what you have to do in Sahaj, you have to be within not without. While talking (mathematical). They will enjoy struggling to others be within, that is, in with these problems (mathematical). They thoughtlessness. Whenever you have to talk will enjoy struggling with these problems. to someone, get thoughtless first. You will penetrate in them as soon as you get into Now you have to take care that you do not have to struggle with things as you thoughtlessness first; their outlook will be used to do. You are not your old self, you changed and you are already a changed being. If you are not in thoughtlessness (within), then, may be, that they pull you back. are a changed personality. Now you have to see whether the other people are changing with us or not. You have to look to them. You could be pulled out because you have just gone within. For example, you have just There is nothing to be afraid because you come from the traffic and are made to sit on were also like them. Some people think the mountain but you have got used to the themselves to be of high position. They are traffic, so mentally you think yourself still to so much position conscious. Some think be in the traffic. You have to see, "Where am themselves to be very rich and others very I standing?"You will know your state. religious. All are mad. Do not look to them. All the mad people in a lunatic asylum think This is what Self-Realisation is. The first thing is that you are in oneness with the themselves to be very wise. When you were beauty of the whole world. You know it is in that mad house, you used to think similarly. something new, unique and unbelievable. No All these stupidities will go away slowly. Now one believes it but it's a fact. You yourself you will realise the truth. Now you are will realise that you are a withness. At home blessed with that power-such a power if someone falls ill then everyone starts because of which you will not be affected by runing, creating difficulties, may be just to your thoughts. For example, if one says to show off, may be someone is really oneself, "I do not have to be angry, then ask concerned. Nothing, absolutely no need to do yourself to be angry, stand before a mirror

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11 & 12 attained recently is acute. It stands firmly and is not afraid to say that, that is the only truth, anything. You watch yourself and it will dawn upon you as to what action you have to take. Whatever you feel you should do. If you feel everything else is untruth and a myth.' This quality could be found in great people like Christ, Lord Krishna and other great saints. It could be found in Adi Shankaracharya. You read his books and you will get the like putting your hand on the head, do it and it you feel like touching the foot, touch it. Whatever you are feeling, is for everyone, do it. Second aspect is Truth'-that what confirmation. Now you read the scriptures afresh, read the Geeta and Bible afresh and tell, truth or untruth. What is truth should you and what is untruth. Most of the truth is man- you will find that confirming truths are there. But you yourself are powerful enough, you do not need support and help of anyone else. The moment you start standing by your-self, in your glory; there is no need to feel shy made and man-made truth is not truth at all. Many-a-times something that appears untruth happens to be great truth. So, you do not have to decide about it. You just tell, about it or be afraid of anything. But I find tell in your thoughtlessness, talk to people about your state. Boldly you have to declare that this is alright, this the truth and it should be done. There is nothing to be afraid of. such people who hide themeslves in their homes. It is said in the Bible that the lamp is not to be kept under the table, it is to be put on some higher place. If you have really May be, that people take it for untruth and they laugh at you. We went to Poona, there become lamps (the enlightened beings) then were some stupid people who published in the newspapers that "Shri Mataji was asking sit on a high pedestal and enlighten all others. You may belong to any religion. If you are a Sikh then see in their scriptures, everywhere, the seekers to move their hands. She was mesmerising them." One gentleman aked a question that, "Why should She mesmerise it is written. It's a truth which could be prople? Has She nothing else to do?" They confirmed. For your satisfaction the great told that we cannot be mesmerised. But you saints have written it in all the scriptures Shlokas after shlokas could be said about it have got mesmerised Her way. Different type and lines of Quran could also be quoted. They of people are there in the world, you cannot understand them. Now you have got all confirm it, though they call it spiritual in Chaitanaya in you, it is flowing in you, you English language, in Hindi it is called have seen it, you need confirmation. But Adhyatmik and in Urdu Roohani-there are you have not attained magnificence and this is the difference between you and the great different names but Truth is the One.' If you all know that aspect, then you also know that there could be no description saints. The magnificence that you have

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue : 11& 12 Nov. & Dec. 2003 movement of your fingers everything works of truth. What could be the description of an out. Your attention has become Divine. You ocean? But every moment you will see the could check it yourself. Even in your feet truth, that the truth is spread all over; with your vibrations you will know of it, with the there, all the chakras are made. Man is a great creation of the Almighty. The God vibrations you could understand it. Then you Almighty has made this instrument extremely beautiful. What is needed is its enlightment. will see vibrations everywhere-in stones, in every-thing. If four-five chakras of a person are That part is also done, but still a lot remains. Now, you have to work it out sincerely and caught then there is no need to argue with see, what it is? Because a small lamp has him. Such persons are very difficult, beyond been lit, you are sitting with it. There is no you. Immediately you will have no vibrations in your hands. A few days later, such a need to sit. When you look within other prople person will run from himself because of the then you will come to know what it is. We hot vibrations. Have no connections with the have not thought of an organisation. In Bombay, there is an institution with the name persons who have hot vibrations. It is not an of Eternal Life. There is no membership of it, individual thought, it's something spiritual. Here there is complete darkness. The fight only the realised people are its members. Many peoples get realisation but then they between the light and darknees goes on forever. Now, so many lamps have been lit, go away. They come again and get it. There the whole atmosphere could change if a few more lamps are enlightened. So, alway keep might be helf baked people amongst you also. I requested Mr. Bose, you make him chariman or do as you like to. I will stay with your lamp lit, always weigh your vibrations. vibrations always flow from my photograph, him. His bunglow No. is 10, you could take they never stop. Stretch your hands towards his telephone number also. I will send my photograph whenever you feel burning sensations on any of your fingers. Everthing photograph etc. to him. However he is very busy person, go to him at the fixed time. has got a meaning. You know this is Manipur Chakra, this is Vishuddhi, this is Agnya, this Friday is appropriate. Fix that day for your weekly meditation. With attention, I will see Swadishthana and this one is Mooladhara all of you. You might have heard about the and in the certre of your palm is Sahasrara. symbol of God like Lord Genesha. His Its round. If someone comes to you and tells that such-n-such person is unwell, please carriage is mouse. Now your attentions are pray for him. You have nothing to do, clear your carriages. Your power resides in the affected Chakra of that person and he your attention, where ever your attention will be benefitted. Sitting here, with the goes it works out. It is so wonderful. Sitting

 Nov. & Dec 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: T1& 12 The greatest thing in it is Love. With love we here you can exercise your power and improve everrthing. Everyone, you see is have to identify ourselves. While talking to someone we have to decide first that we have torturing someone or the other. Bring them on Sahasrara and set them right. On to love. It is all love, you cannot change it. As people tell me, you see everyone is giving Brahmarandhra, you will be amazed, their realisation. In America, there is difficulty with condition has improved. There are wicked the people that they misuse it? I said," how above all of of them we (Sahajyogis) are could they misuse it? They could only give here. Give them discretion. With the power realisation, they could cure someone with it. of love people get changed because love is With love you cannot harm anyone. Think more powerful than hatred. Like ocean, the yourself, if you love someone how could you power of love is fathomless. As there is no harm him?. The quality of love is this that people, Dushasanas, there are saints and one who loves cannot think of harming the end to the expanse of the sea, there is no object of love. end of the ocean of love. It rises more than Whatever is benevolent will take hatred. If its power is lesser than the power place. The only thing you have to do is to of hatred then this world will be destroyed. You have not still understood your respect youself. When you begin to respect responsibilities. You could not realise that, yourselves, you get established within because it is a temple: the more you respect this is the new age, there are new people and new dimensions. You could understand it the more Divine Light is there in it. With love you could get identified with it, only with this dimension with your vibrations. The love you could be one with it, in complete harmony. Only pure love could emanate from singer Siddheswari Bai who was just singing here; yesterday her condition was very bad. you. The one which is Chaitanya is the Truth With great reluctance she came to me and said, "I have to undergo such and such and the Beauty. You sit in thoughtless operation, this that." I just put my hand on her head and today she has started singing! awareness and you will be one with it. Thoughtlessness comes only when you cross this point (Agya). You have crossed You all could do this work, there is nothing which I have not told you. it and now you are in thoughtless awareness. Your brain used to think. Now your Sahasrara is pierced and you are above your brain. When this point is reached, you could check it with your hand. Those who are realized, should check at this point-Ardha-Bindu-and they will feel it, but those who are not, will Now only a curtain remains within us. If you learn to tear out this curtain then everything could be done. But to tear out this curtain becomes difficult. However, you are realised now. So first we have to remove this curtain because this is a stupendous work.

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue; 11 & 12 spreading all around. To penetrate within we have to be very pure otherwise no one else could be there execpt Shri Ganesha and His not feel, Are you feeling it? Slowly, feel it, take your hands slightly up-down. That is the place of the 'Ardha-Bindu and above it is 'Bindu' Mother. and 'Valaya' is above all. In the process of creation Brahma has also been within human beings. First Deva was made the deity of the second "Valaya', then 'Bindu', after that 'Ardha- chakra. But before Him Lord Vishnu was All, that was made to create this world, Bindu', and than this (Sahasrara) then this created so that there is some sustainer for whole kundalini was created. The Adi this Divine creation. That is the reason that Kundalini, itself, penetrated in you and became your Kundalini. Some people Mohter and then there is the creation of (Deities) were placed to establish Adi- fatherly father. From the Nabhi, Brahma Deva Kundalini. In the beginning it was necessary was created. That's how it was done, the way we take birth from the Nabhi chakra of our someone is placed at some particular point. There is no untruth in it. You yourself could to establish someone. Lord Genesha was established first of all. Adishakti put Shri Ganesha only on one chakra. One Ganesha verify it. Now this void was created. It was all on the chakra. created, major nerves and Pelvic Plexus and What is Shri Ganesha? He is purity around it the void and in it was the emanating personified. Think of it. Suppose you have not taken bath for a few days and the body is love for the creation. The whole creation got caught in this love. This love is the all pervading power, in it is the creation. Now it not clean. But the vibrations clean the impurities. Shri Ganesha is nothing but is essential to cross this void but as I have vibrations and purity because he is the told you earlier the God and His power is present in our heart as our soul. So as the Eternal Child. Eternal Child, and it is difficult to find one like Him in the world. His whole child is born, not born as soon as he is love is purity and purity only and because of conceived in the womb of the mother, the that purity he has been placed on your withness state God almighty comes in his Mooladhara chakra. On Mooladhara is the Heart and looks like a flame, the way this thumb is. This soul is in the left heart. Many Mother. Its clear meaning is that in the matters of sex you have to be like children. I people get confused about it. They think soul mean to say that when the dharma is is in the heart chakra, it is not in the heart established in you, you become child like chakra it is in the heart. The soul resides in innocent in the matters of sex. It is difficult to this plain. Why does He not reside in the attain the heights of Shri Ganesha because Heart Chakra? Because it is the path of he is a very pure soul. His radiance is Kundalini to ascend. It is in the centre (ceatral

 Nov: Dec, 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12 heart) and the soul resides in the left heart. In the word 'Ram', Ra' means energy there is so much pressure, tension in this world. The day it is forced upon the human being they will break down. So, love is the and 'm' means Mahesha, that is Shri Shiva. Mahesha is Shiva-the God who resides in only way out. So this Gurudom was given to oür heart-when 'Ra' is united with 'm' it becomes Ram. To make the people cross didn't know the qualities of a Guru. Gurus me. Everything is acceptable to me. But I maintain distance but Mother does not keep the void (Bhavsagara) He has to make some distance with the children. Children sit on her head. So, you people also could take liberty arrangement. So the great power like Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha was created and with Me and enjoy. Be with Me with full they were placed in the area of dharma. freedom, you will neither be afraid nor be embarrassed. There is no problem, you Dattatreya and Adi-gurus incarnated in this world many-a-times. He incarnated as king could come and talk to Me boldly about your problems. You could complain to Me as you Janaka who was like the father of Adi-shakti. After that He incarnated in Iran as Zoraster, do to your mother. I am freely available to you, then as Machhendranath, then as Mohammad Saheb and Nanak Saheb. No freedom was needed, Religion was required to be discussed openly, there is no secret no secret about it. one fought with each other, See what type of darkness you are in? Fatima, the daughter Ultimately everything has to be explained very clearly. All the secrets are to be told about, everything could not be said of Mohammad Saheb was the same who became daughter of king Janaka. Whom are you fighting? Think overit. The Nanaki of Guru everywhere. I am telling all this to you people Nanaka was none else but Janaki. Shirdi Sai Nath was also an Adiguru. They are the who are realised ones, because non-realised will doubt it. It has some meaning only for the realised ones. You could attain much masters of all. Also, they are my gurus. These Adigurus taught me all this knowledge. In different incarnations they kept me higher state than this. Lot of work was done to cross the void, some success was teaching. Ultimately I had to come and do achieved and if you people could get it, they this work. They could not do it and now they are helpful today. They become eternal, the are placing me as a Guru so that I take up the job of a Guru. There was an age when founder of Jaina Dhama, Shri Mahavira and Shri Buddha are amongst them, They were no one was willing to accept a woman as a born of the same Mother, born of the womb Guru but in Kaliyuga only Mother could do of Adi Shakti. Try to know their first relation this work; it is beyond the power of men. This that where were they born. But it was work could not be done by force, only the experimental for all of them. All of them made love of a Mother could do it because already

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11& 12 experiments so that human beings could cross the void, Very few, however, could Shri Radha incarnated after Shri Sitaji. She was placed on the fifth chakra, that is Vishuddhi. She is very humane and She sang the song of love. It is said that at the time of cross the void, But amass realisation could be done only in Kaliyuga, after that Shri Rama incarnted in this world but he forgot killing the Kansa-the maternal uncle () of Shri Krishna, Shri Radha was called, Radha- that he was an incarnation. He remained in this world as a human being, not as an "Ra' means energy and 'dha' means the sustainer, The stream of Shri Radha starts incarnation so that you could rise abvoe the flowing in you. Shaivite people are the followers of Lord Shiva. They do not believe Bhavsagara. He was a perfect human being. During his incarnation a few seekers could get their Realisation, there is no doubt about it. But mass realisation could not be given. in Shri Krishna, There is no difference between Shri Krishna and Lord Shiva. Shiva Six-seven thousand years ago Shri Krishna is placed in your heart as soul and Shri incarnated on this earth. Right from the Krishna is on the Vishuddhi. Shri Krishna has beginning of this creation (Aadikala) all the sixteen powers (relle). Similrlay you have got seekers wished to cross the Bhavasagara. sixteen plexuses. It is surprising that Lord The poor seekers had to face lot of Krishna is the deity of Vishuddhi chakra which problems. While meditating they were has sixteen petals. His power Radha was trortured. So Adi Shakti incarnated on this then divided into two, that is, Rukmani in Radha in Vrindavan; it is very earth 108 timnes in Her perfect form. You Dwarika and might have read about it. Read Devi humanly. Shri Krishna had only one son who Mahatmaya and you will know what I am saying. Adi Shakti incarnated in the form of was 'Pranava' (Divine power), incarnate. the Devi and recoginsed the seekers. At that Think of it, He was 'Om' incarnate. He incarnated on this earth. His name was Jesus time She came in the clear form of Devi. There was no Maya around Her. So seekers Christ. Mary was his mother. He was placed on the Agya Chakra. On Agya one has to could not get their Self Realisation form Her. The only thing they got was Her protection. face ego and superego'. You see your Agya She kiled Mahishasura, Shumbh-Nishurnbh Chakra controls your pineal (siqufe) and and many others. All the rakshasas and pituitary body ( ), it is scientifically negative people who used to torture the proved. So he pushes away the evil spirits saints were killed. But none of them got from your Agya because these spirits sit on superego. They could sit in ego also because "Ida and Pingla' cross each other on Agya salvation because they were not perfect human heings. They could see only four Chakra. So Lord Jesus put His hand on this chakras, that is, upto the heart plexus. So,

 Nov & Dec. 2003 49 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12 plexus first of all. It was done at the time of Nanak Saheb. In all ages these ghostly sort of doubts will come. How will these doubts be eradicated? When you have been powers came to do encroachment. But Shri given a seat, I mean when you are seated Krishna has such a destructive power that on the throne and you have doubts as to He cut their throats. So on Agya Chakra is whether it is a throne where I am sitting? Is it alright or not? You could check it by your the name of Lord Jesus. Shri Mahalakshmi, whose praise we sing so frequently, no one has described Her. Where is She placed? own hands, that now an unparalleled energy is flowing from your hands. When you will She is Mary Herself. Whenever She cure people by touching them with your hands, when you will have such experiences then slowly and slowly your doubts will incarnates with Her child and husband, She is very peaceful. But when she comes alone then She is tremendous. So this place vanish. I mean to say that have prepared a boat for you, now you have to launch it in the (plexus) belongs to Bhagwati. The plexus of water, fight with the waves, only then you Sahasrara belongs to Bhagwati. She Herself will come to know whether it is a boat or not. (Devi) pierces it, all the seven chakras are May be, it is wood only. The boat has been built or not could be tested by launching it there in it. Therefore, the maya (illusion) also has seven layers. It is very difficult to into water and by rowing it on the waves. If it withstands the pressure of the waves then recognise Her. Seven human chakras get you will be sure of it, otherwise doubts will completed here. In nut shell I have told you what you remain. Same way you have to test your have to do, how you have to complete your realisation because man thinks no end of seeking. But if we talk about it methodically then we could say that there is no particular himself. One person out of our seekers went somewhere, a swamiji was sitting with a hoasted flag. Many people came there, had time for it. All the times we could be in the state of Thoughtless Awareness. For their food etc. This gentleman went to example, you are sitting in Thoughtless state, America with us, with the movement of his start thinking, then go in Thoughtlessness. hand he used to do things. You could also do it. With the movement of your hands you After that is Thoughtless Awareness and then comes Doubtless Awareness. You will have could raise the kundalini of someone. Siting doubts but in the second stage you get here you move your hands and see how nice Doubtless Awareness. Doubts will be there: it is that the kundalini of the other person will is right or not? What Shri Mataji has said is not right; how could it be, has it happened flowing from your hands will do it. So this move with your fingers. The energy which is way that sadhu used to pretend to awaken or not, have we got realisation or not?. This

 Dec, 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12 Nov. & the kundalini of hundreds of Americans. Since There might be some reason. You might have been seeking for many lives. It is your right. You are saints, saints of high orders. many people were going to him, one of our Sahajayogi also went to him. I come to know of everthing as to who is hanging about and where. When he returned, he was miserable. You are not awere of this fact. If you were not saints, how could I give Realization to you? aksed, "Why did you touch his feet?" He CanI give realization to stones? Thousands of people come but I cannot give realization said that since every one was touching his feet, I also touched. I said you have to touch to all of them. Only a few of you have got it. the feet of only those who are older to you. I Definitely there is some reason for it. But you cannot believe it. You think, how could it be? aksed him what was his condition, what was This problem comes because of your the condition of his kundalini, is he Realised? egolessness. In a very ordinary way; you He replied, "No, he is not Realised." His kundalini is overturned. I asked him, you neither change the style of your clothes nor any other showing-off. But you will see that raise the kundalini of thousands of seekers you have become peaceful within. You are with the movements of your fingers. Why now altogether different being. The style of your talking and doing things is of a realized one. And you will become expert. You know could you not think that you should not have touched his feet?" His kundalini is overturned; at least he should have been a Realised person to touch his feet. One about others that such and such chakra of should touch the feet of one who is higher this person is catching, That is why he is behaving abnormally. Let me set it right. And than yourself otherwise why to touch the feet within a little time that person is cooled down. at all? You know everything. You know the Some people come to quarrel with me, but reason of it. You have the complete Sahajayogis caim them down by moving their Kundalinis. They play many tricks and within alittle time such people sit quietly. One fellow knowledge of it. You are so expert in it, why did you touch his feet? Egolessness comes in you. You all live in such an unassuming came and started quarreling. It was the time for him to take Sesamum (Fae). They put the way that no one could believe that you are One becomes egoless, Realized. Completely egoless. He feels, how it has Sesamum on their hand and vibrated them. happened, how that has happened? But it As soon as he ate those sesamum, has happened. If this transformation has immidiately he went into meditation. If taken place in you, then you should think," Why has this transformation taken place in someone is disturbing you too much then put your finger in the water and make him drink that vibrated water. The work will be done. you only?" Many people live in Delhi. Why Chaitanya will awaken within that person. But we have specially been given Realization?

 51 Nov. & Doc 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11 & 12 still you are newly born children. Small child very soon, similarly you also catch recording. Watch the awakening and movements of your Kundalini. There is going to be no problem in it. Sometimes it will titillate gets ill very soon. You have to stick to your position here and move there; sometimes it will otherwise you will descend very soon. Don't leave your position, do not be shaked, stick to your place because the boon given to you is such that one could be unsteady (sraiste). I am telling it to you. Therefore, power of enlighten here and sometimes there, your conciousness, which is connected to all these things, will get enlightened and it will enlighten the whole world. collectivity ( ) should be there. There are people amongst you who come and tell, "Shri Mataji my head is catching." Collectively you could clear the catches, whether it is in Now you are sitting here, but you are not aware that thousands and millions of rays are emanating from you. You will see that the whole atmosphere of Delhi will change3B you you will see it. I went to Calcutta only once. Have you seen the atmosphere there? I said it there itself that the atmosphere of Calcutta will change. I stayed there for eight days and the whole atmosphere changed, the minds your waist, Aganya Chakra or any where else, you could clear it yourself, Now these (Sahaj Yogis) are your brothers and sisters. This is the new world of love. These are your relatives. You know them. At the time of difficulty, you will be surprised that they will of people were calmed down. Today, in run to help you. Because deities are there Maharashtra it is going on very well. The with you for your protection. Suddenly if you reason is that many people have got their Realisation. Now it is the turn of Delhi State. think about someone, immediately you find The Kundalini of the whole world is situated him before you and saying, "I don't know how in India. How tremendous! The seat of I came here! I was going this way, I thought to come upto you. "All your works are done, you will not meet with accidents. Deities are Kundalini of the whole world is in India. If our India improves then whole world will improve. The Sahasrara of the whole world is here. hovering over you. If one Sahaj Yogi is there at the place of accident then all others are So, I need thousands and thousands of Indians who could give Realisation to others. also saved becasue of him. Many things will May God Bless you. happen. You keep on watching and

 OF OUR DIVINE MOTHER MEMORIES did. I would follow Her and do as She directed, Introduction without any question. There are many, many stories and memories We all were in some school for the of our Divine Mother, which have not yet been recorded on video, audio or set to paper - stay at night and after dinner we all moved up in our rooms. "Look at Raolbai from Dhulia. but yet have been experienced and treasured She always has her attention on what I am by thousands of Her children. doing and not like others who are busy wasting From this ocean of memories- until now only their attention on trifle matter." She used to held in trust by each of us, as our individual call me Rajkunwar. experience some few sweet stories have now been collected and some selected ones After dinner She would start giving Realization to people. She asked me to keep will be printed in this magazine. hands under Her Lotus Feet. [Mr.] Modi my used to understand everything. I personally 1. IT BEGAN IN INDIA never understood anything, as for me what You are fortunate you saw me Shri Mataji used to stay at Jeevan She said was it. If She said I was realized Jyot [in 1970] and was known as Nirmala now, for me I was that. Srivastava. I asked some giris where did She worked on my back like this Nirmala Srivastava stay. When I went up, I [raising of the kundalini]. Then Mother looked saw Shri Mataji. She opened the door and very lovingly and sang a beautiful song, "Par Brahma Parmeshwar." She sang so said, "Are you looking for Me?" She held me beautifully. That face was so joyous, so loving, happy. And like this, She gave Realization to four or five people till midnight. by hand and took me inside very politely and asked me to sit on the cot. "Where are you coming from?" "I am coming from Dhulia and Next day She used to sit alone and call each I have heard your name and came looking for you." "I am about to start this work and one individually to give Self Realization. right now I am waiting for the delivery of my While returning back in the train, She daughter, Kalpana. Once I am through with asked us whether we had thoughts or not. that, I will call you. Please leave your name would say politely that I don't know what's and address before you leave and within à happening. Then Mother asked us to put our month I shall call you." hands in front of Her and whether we felt cool vibrations. Again I would reply innocently that I do not feel anything. "Raolbai, you are from We all went from Bombay to Bordi in train with Shri Mataji. We were all together. Mother would talk to all of us. We would Dhulia and I want you to come to my house follow Her wherever She went. I would never tomorrow. All of you who felt vibration must leave Mother, as I wanted to see what Mother meditate every morning and evening, so as

 Nav. & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 11& 12 closed for fifteen minutes, but thought maybe to go deep and feel the vibrations." Ihad closed for about two hours. Anyway, so I used to stay with my daughter in a one room apartment and at around 4 am I then they said I got my Realization and then was awakened naturally and I was shocked we were supposed to go to Shri Mataji. And She was in a white sari, just sitting with Her to see Mataji in front of me in same position legs in front. "You can either go and put your head under Her Feet - which were resting as when She gave Self Realization in Bordi. When next day I met Shri Mataji, She horizontally to the ground with a support under Her Feet-or you can go towards Her asked me, "Do you get thoughts by putting attention on Me?" I said, "No." Mataji told me that I have attained my hand." When my turn came, I was near Her hand and She put some Amla Oil-oil in India, you get - on my head. And She asked me how do I feel. I said, "Very fine." She asked thoughtless state. "What did you see in the morning?" me my name and She was very happy to be "Mother, I saw you in meditating hearing my name. Anyway, so this was it. pose." Avdhut Pai "For all people whom I gave Self Realization yesterday, I was meditating in the morning for them. As you all are new and do not understand, you are fortunate that you His search for God led us I got my first Realization on 12th August, 1973. The credit for this Realization saw Me." Raolbai goes to my eldest brother, Maruti, who had a yearning for getting Realization for a number of years. His search for God led us to meet She was very happy to be hearing my Mataji. name On a fine day of 12th August, we read I got my Realization on the fourteenth of April 1972 in a place called-it was big an article written by one Marathi newspaper editor about Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga and apartment called Jeevan Jyot. It was owned by Shipping Corporation of India and since Sir CP was the chairman of the Shipping that led us to approach him in his office. We went to see him and he explained how things had happened to him. He told us to visit Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan on that same day. We left his place and went to Bharatiya Vidya Corporation, Shri Mataji used to receive people in Her house every day in '72', before going to America. would relate the first experience of Bhavan about three o'clock and, to our surprise, nobody was there to tell us what meditation. I was told to sit quiet for some Sahaja Yoga is. We came out of the hall and time and with closing my eyes. I might have

 Nov & Dec. 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV isue: 11 & 12 54 meditated on each charka and discovered the telephoned back to his office, asking, "Where secrets of each one, like Mooladhara, what it do we find Mataji?" He said, "Oh, this is not looks like, what are qualities and so on. Every the time. You must come after six or seven in the evening. night I would meditate for eight hours. I have worked hard for all of you and now you have On the very same day in the evening to work hard and meditate in the morning. I would work eight hours on every charka. I we again went to Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, where Mataji was giving Realization to a very would request you people to work for one few people, ten or fifteen people. We both of houron every charka for eight days and then us sat there and, this being a very early stage move on. Like every morning, meditate for of Sahaja, Mataji was Herself working hard one hour on Mooladhara for eight days and to give Realization and raising our kundalinis. then move on to Swadisthana and so on. To my great surprise, when She touched my fontanelle, on my head, there was a flash Then you all will learn the secrets and shakti of all the charkas." and I saw - so-called-at that time I was not knowing it was the Agnya charka - a Christ crucified. It was for five or six seconds, just Raolbai I am like the source a flash. I myself wondered why I myself I also remember this meeting we had being a Hindu and a great hater of Christianity-should get a vision of a crucified with Mother. She gave us this sort of Christ. But I didn't speak anything at that time. I started enjoying it. I just closed my eyes meditation in Her lounge, you know, where we were seven or eight people. We were Maureen, Gus, from the early days, Pat, and Mother said, "You got Realization at the Douglas. At some stage Mother was trying to sort of teach us who She was, trying to tell Us who She was. And then She said, "The very first sitting." Niranjan Mavinkurve power of God actually just goes to the back of Me. I am like the source and it's just flowing This is nirmal vidya She would explain how we have to behind Me." And that is when we started remain in the collectivity and behave as realizing that Mother was trying to tell us who Sahaja Yogis. She always gave and is giving importance to meditation. She made all of She was. And then She was trying to work us meditate and one by one put attention on on our Mooladharas. And Gus was saying that all the charkas. This Mooladhara and then he saw Mother as Shri Ganesha, He was quite struck by it and he was very surprised. you go upwards and so on. "This is nirmal He hadn't seen Mother in that aspect. vidya and nobody has taught Me all this, nor have I read any book," She would say. "I have Djamel Metouri

 Nov. & Dec. 2003 55 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11 & 12 the names of Herself. As She pointed out, Reading the praise of the Goddess One time when we had a puja, the She said, "This is very strange because you've got the Goddess reading the praise of the Goddess, which is rather unusual." puja sort of started in the morning and went on through the whole of the day. And one particular puja, one of the very early pujas, we had a havan outside and we had this book Because She was the only one who could read them. But whilst we were there-and was really cold outside, it was late in the year- and the whole sky opened up like a great big of the thousand Sanskrit names of the Goddess. This was, I believe, actually the halo above us. The sky was quite dark, but first puja in praise of Shri Mataji and was at there was a whole light patch above where Her house at Parklands, Hurst Green. We we were because the vibrations that were were sitting round there putting stuff on the given out had sort of caused the sky to open. Douglas Fry. havan and Shri Mataji was actually reading

 19 Heey nans bludo orw.nIO HOANGAAMN Hque

 OEARIKY



----------------------

2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
00
November December, 2003
Volume: XV Issue: 11 & 12
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 2 Shri Mataji's Letter to American Sahaja Yogis
Shri Mataji's visit to Paris
3
6 Guru Puja, Cabella, July 13, 2003
56th Wedding Anniversary Celebrations,
Sofia Collage Auditorium, Mumbai 7-4-2003
10 Pravachan of Shri Mataji, Bombay, May 27, 1976
Shri Mataji Said
2
22
Sat-Chit-Anand, February 15, 1977
32
Nirmala Vidya, 31-12-1980
Shri Mataji talks to women-January, 1984
34
41 After Self Realization- November 25, 1973
52
Memories of our Divine Mother
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 am always present with each one of you all the time
Shri Mataji's Letter
MATAJINIRMALADEVI
PRATISTHAN,
NDA Road,
Post Box No.2
Pune-411023
August 2, 2003
My Beloved Children
The Sahaja Yogis of North and South America, I am happy to receive your
inviation about the forthcoming Shri Krishna Puja in Canajohre.
Presently, I am in Pratishthan, Pune, India and will not be able to travel at
this time, but I am always present with each one of you all the time. I know that
all Sahaj Yogis of the world are upholding the ethical, spiritual, moral values
emanating from Lord Krishna. This is an occasion to reaffirm your resolve and
to intensify your efforts to spread Sahaja Yoga.
WITH ALL MY LOVE & BLESSINGS
MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Shri Mataji's Visit to Paris
Saturday, August 02, 2003
It is with great joy that we write this
I
were, Your desire was so strong that here
account of the brief but eternal passage of am'. She accepted flowers and then was
ushered into a waiting car which took Her to
Shri Mataji in Paris last week. With less than
twenty-four hours notice (which was the the hotel.
perfect for a French tendency to overplan),
prepared ourselves to receive the Adi
With all the worry and rumors
circulating about our Mother's health we were
we
Shakti, who would be coming with Sir C.P.
really not sure what to expect. In our mental
on their way to Bombay.
projection Shri Mataji would be tired and
We were doubly blessed, because needing constant rest. Perhaps She would
not come out of Her room during the entire
as Shri Mataji does not have the habit of
travelling on Wednesday, and as Her flight stay. And by no means was She to be
disturbed. Well, Shri Mahamaya shattered
arrived from Milan, Tuesday evening, we
one by one our conditionings and concerned
were assured of Her Divine Presence for at
expectations. Her radiance, energy, and
least 36 hours.
graciousness lifted us up into that world of
Having had a good experince a few
years ago at the Hilton Hotel at Roissy Airport, Vibrations where time stands still and
everything is possible.
we decided once again to select a suite in
this hotel to welcome Shri Mataji and Sir C.P.
Wednesday morning dawned with a
With only hours to prepare, yogis and yoginis
did their best to clean, vibrate, decorate, and
very pleasant temperature (in contrast to the
unbearably hot and dry summer France had
stay in thoughtless awraeness.
been having) and blue skies. Shri Mataji
agreed to a shopping excursion in Paris; so
At about eight-thirty p.m., half an hour
preparations were quickly made and two cars
before the flight was scheduled to arrive, the
hotel team put the finshing touches to set off early in the aftenoon for Place
bedroom, bathroom, and sitting room, before Vendome, one of the most chic shopping
areas of Paris.
sitting down in meditation (and in intense
excitement) to await Shri Mataji's arrival.
Shri Mataji chose fabric for several
saris for Her Family and Herself, and yogis
At the airport Sahaja Yogis had
gathered, those lucky ones who were not who were persent remarked how they felt their
nabhis open completely as Shri Mataji
away on holiday and could be contacted at
such short notice and when Shri Mataji
shopped. We felt the working on the subtle
level for Paris and for france, a country where
arrived radiant and smiling, Her first words
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Nov, & Dec. 2003
The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
dissatisfaction, saying we should do so
generosity is not a hallmark. With a great deal
because Sir C.P. even when dissatisfied, was
of determination Majid succeeded in offering
so diplomatic, that nothing ever resulted from
Shri Mataji the saris on behalf of the French
collective. A great blessing for this country
which has unfortunately been on the wrong
it. Sir C.P. then told a little joke about
diplomats, how they are always saying, "On
the one hand it is like this but on the other
side of the Divine on many occasions.
hand it is like that and so that now the people
Shri Mataji rested in the car on the
are waiting fora diplomat with only one hand."
way back to the hotel, and upon arrival was
Shri Mataji said that She was thinking
once again fullof joy and energy. After dining,
She asked one yogi where all the Sahaja of buying some land in the area and
Yogis were? He replied that they were at constructing a hotel to show the French what
comfort really is! Just as our Left Vishuddhis
Montfermeil (The main ashram) meditating.
were starting to twinge oh, we chose the
Majid suggested that the yogis could come
the following morning to see Her off. Shri wrong hotel, Mother is not happy Mother
soothed us by adding that the hotel was very
Mataji wanted to see the yogis now.
conveniently located, that it was a good place
for us to meet and good for Sahaja Yoga (The
Quick phone calls were made, and a
car was sent to gather yogis as quicky as
same two yogis who work there will soon be
possible, But sooner than we knew it those
of us at the hotel were ushered into Shri Starting programmes.)
After Shri Mataji blessed us we took
Mataji's saloon where She was waiting to
address us. We were about twenty yogis leave and Shri Mataji retired to Her bedroom.
But the night was yonug! After a few minutes
from France and abroad (There were two
Sahaja Yogis, Welsh and Austrian, who She suggested to Majid, 'Let's go out for a
ride'. It was somewhere around eleven
because of their jobs spend two out of every
o'clock p.m. Yogis who had cars scrambled
four weeks at this very hotel as fate would
for their keys at this news, and those who
who should come to their hotel but
have it,
had not, ran out to jump into any available
the Adi Shakti Herself)
Shri Mataji commented on the lack Seat, as five cars full of yogis prepared to
follow a blue Peugeot 607, destination
of basic comforts in the hotel, how low all of
unknown.
the furniture was, how, despite the name and
In fact, inside the Peugeot 607 it was
reputation of the hotel there was no real
comfort provided! She urged us to write to destination unknown as well, as Shri Mataji
our asked, 'so, where should wo go?' And
management expressing or
the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Nov & Dec 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV lssue: 11 & 12
Shri Mataji wanted to see them. They lined
Christian (driving) and Majid asked
themselves where could they go from the corridor leading to Mother's suite. Once
inside, Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. took their
Roissy airport at eleven o'clock at night on a
dinner. The night was not yet over, as a Hindi
Wednesday? Christian had the idea of a
manor-type hotel about fifteen minutes from
film was next on the programme, lasting until
about four or five o'clock in the morning.
the airport. We only knew of it's existence
because we had looked on the internet at
Fresh as ever, at seven-thirty the next
(well, the same) morning, Shri Mataji had her
possible hotels, for Shri Mataji, close to the
airport.
tea, resplendent in a beautiful white sari with
a red and pale green floral design. The two
After getting lost briefly, the group of
cars pulled in to the long tree-lined drive of
hundred-plus kilos of baggage had gone
ahead to the airport, with a slightly nervous
the hotel. They entered the hotel lobby, and
Shri Mataji observed a display case of Majid, as there were only four passengers
antiques. The receptionist mentioned that travelling. But with the vibrations all went
everything was for sale, but she then could smoothly, as the check-in clerk was so
concerned that each bag be properly labelled
not find the keys to the case. After some
searching the keys were found, and Shri with the passenger's name, that she seemed
Mataji examined many of the pieces in the
to forget to count the number of bags as well
case. There was other dispaly cases, which
as their weight.
were duly opened, and Shri Mataji purchased
serveral pieces, to the surprise and delight
Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. soon arrived
at the airport, Sir C.P. commenting that this
of the yogis, as well as the very surprised
trip to Paris had been a very memorable one
hotel staff!
would be an understatement indeed! Shri
Shri Mataji decided to return back to
Mataji smiled at all present and our hearts
the hotel, where meanwhile many more yogis swelled with that joyous sadness, She is
had gathered having heard the message that
leaving, but She has come!
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 GURU PUJA
CABELLA, JULY 13, 2003
PRAVACHAN OF HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
Today's Puja is very great Puja for me, because I suddenly find that
I got upset with it very much. Look at
my grand daughter is missing, and
n
me, supposed to be Adi Shakti! and why should I get so upset about
grand daughter missing. It was just a human nature which I realised all of us
have.
If we have some responsibility and we are not there we get upset.
Thank God there are very few children here, most of them have gone, but
we are all children the way we worry, the way we are anxious. TodayI would
like all of you to say that a new year has come, and in this new year we all
should have a new proposal about ourselves and that proposal is very
difficult for people to make out, that we are not responsible for anyone. We
are our own and we live with ourselves. It's very difficult.
Of course those who have no children are very happy people that
way, but those who have, those who have certain responsibilities and
commitments, they are still hanging in the air; they are nowhere near Sahaja
Yoga, I must say. Our main responsibility is ourselves, is to know ourselves
and to depend on ourselves. It is a very big responsibility because now as
we will be having big functions and we might feel that we are lost in it.
Please try to remember that you have to remember yourself, you have to
know that you are there, that's the message I wanted to give you, I hope
you" II think it over.
May God bless you all.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 56th Wedding Anniversary Celebrations
Sofia College Auditorium
Mumbai-7-04-2003
Shri Mataji looked wonderful and us to join in the chorus. It was a very light
and joyful evening.
radiant, as always, in a red sari with a design
A large cake was brought in and
of little gold stars. Mother was sitting on the
together Sir C.P. and Shri Mataji cut it, and
throne that usually lies at Belapur hospital,
and many people had brought flowers, some later everyone of us present was given as
of which were put on the stage as prasad.
At the end, representatives from the
decorations. People came from all over India
- some had flown in for the evening, and different states of India and various
there were a few foreigners, but mostly it foreigners, on behelf of their countries, came
was Sahaja Yogis from Mumbai and and presented flowers and gifts. After Shri
Mataji had left, all thousand or so of us were
Maharashtra.
offered a delicious meal and prasad, served
First of all seven ladies from Mumbai
in the gardens of the college where the
did aarti to Shri Mataji to welcome Her. Then
children, members of local Sahaja Yoga function was held.
groups, came in couples to give flowers to
Lecture of Sir C.P. Srivastava
Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. Each couple was
It is said that marriages are made in
dressed as a deity and His shakti.
heaven and that is certainly true in my case.
I must be the luckiest man in the whole
I later saw a young person still
covered in bluish-white powder and the
universe.
traditional hairstyle of Lord Shiva, a little girl
dressed charmingly in a white sari and
Your Shri Mataji has been a wonderful
holding a musical instrument was Shri wife, a wonderful mother, an equally
Saraswati and another small person, in a
wonderful grandmother and now also a great-
white gown, had a false beard and longish
grandmother. She has spoiled me all these
fifty-six years by giving me excellent food and
hair to represent Lord Jesus. They were very
sweet and innocent, but also symbolic, as
looking after me all the time. It was because
they came in, and knelt before our Divine
of her generosity that I was able to work very
hard in the office, but then I came back to a
Mother, couple after couple.
The music consisted mostly of a wonderful thing at home.
She has been so kind to all my
group of musicians and a man who sang
forcibly and joyfully in praise of Shri Mataji
in Her many forms. At times, he encouraged
relations. You know, when relations came to
our house, She would look after them in
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11 & 12
force in the world. There is no other force in
exactly the same way as She would look after
Her own daughters. She would never make
the world that I know. She is bringing North
any distinction between one child or another.
The family, that she has given the
and South together, East and West together.
As I said to my audience somewhere
two daughters are wonderful, Kalpana is
here. I want to thank Her for all that She has
done for me for fifty-six years. But I want to
else, these are directions for navigation, but
they are not for dividing humanity. Humanity
is one. She has brought people of all faiths,
of all races, al religions, together. Can
thank Her more, even more, for all She has
you
done to the world. She has created a new
name one single person who is doing that
humanity. She has done what no other today? They are all dividing. They are all
person, no other person that I know or have saying, 'My God is the best.' Can You
read about, has been able to do, to have imagine? Can there be two Gods? Can there
thousands and thousands of angels, people be two Almighties? There Cannot be two
Almighties. There can be only one and She
who are wedded to goodness, are wedded
is his only Incarnation.
to purity, who are wedded to the concept of
one human family.
Speech of Shri Mataji
You know, in the world today there is
I just want to thank you all from my
conflict everywhere. You read the newspaper
heart for coming to celebrate this anniversary
find everywhere there are problems.
and you
But there is only one world, which is Her with your love. I can't do more than to thank
world, which is sitting here, which is beautiful,
- how you people have
Really
you.
pure and chaste and which is the future of appreciated My humble work! Moreover, it
is a work of just love. Love is the greatest
humankind.
On the occasion of Her birthday, She
quality of human beings. And if you have
developed that, then you will forget all other
you over to create Sahaja Yogis. She
invited
things. Because love has its own reward. And
said if each one of you could transform a
the reward is here. I can see it.
hundred more persons, the world would be
I am nothing special, except that I
a different place to live in. And I want to tell
you, this is not mere talk. This is the most love everyone very much. And don't think
anybody is to be condemned because I have
important, most crucial need that we have
in the world. We have a choice now and the
seen people coming out of all their problems,
choice is stark, either we move towards their smaller minds into a bigger area in
saving humanity or we move towards
destruction. She is the one who is the only
which they are capable of giving love. I must
say that whatever was my faith has worked
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 291
Nov. & Dec 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volua-XV Issuo: 11 & 12
very well. And it is very nice thing to see how giving love to others. Maybe some of your
have understood My love and experiences may not be that good, but most
of
you
many
of the people who are human beings have a
have spread love among yourselves. Our
special temperament of loving each other
human problem is one and that is that we
and this is to be shared and this is to be
don't know how to love each other. If we
enjoyed. I have enjoyed it and you all have
could understand that, then we would
also enjoyed it. SoI have said continue to do
understand all this love. We really enjoy this
that and spread your love all over.
love. You don't have to sacrifice anything,
don't have to give away anything. It is all there
Thank You.
and you enjoy. It is reciprocal. You enjoy
MESSAGE GIVEN BY OUR HOLY MOTHER TO
YUVA SHAKTI AT PRATISTHAN
(18 MARCH 2000)
I am greateful for what all you have done for me. I would be glad
if you all grow deeper into Sahajayoga. Many of you are good Sahajis.
You must remember that you have to become ideal yogis because
you have to transform the whole world. That is what your Mother expects
from you, that is my only desire. Everything else is futile, of no value.
Then only you enjoy being in the Kingdom of the Divine.
You must meditate everyday, that is the only way to mature in
Sahajyoga. You have to save all those unfortunate drug addicts also. Let
you emit love, compassion and generosity.
May God bless you all
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Parvachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Bhartiya Vidya Bhawan, Bombay
May 27, 1976
In Dadar I told you how the state of person who is not interested in music but
thoughtless awarness is acheived in Sahaja somehow his interest in music gets
developed-in classical music-then he will not
Yaga. After attaining oneness with the Divine
be able to enjoy himself in any concert of
) and then
one should get nearness (
salvation (et) However the interests of non-classical music.
Your state in Sahajyoga should aslo
the seeker change immidiately after attaining
be the same. Infact all other habits, desires
oneness (ar).
)
develop in you very slowly, with efforts. And
On acheiving oneness (a
that is the reason they get deep rooted in you
although Sahajyoga has brought revolution
person gets experienes and because of
them he doesn't want to attain the state of
(transformation) in you. You have entered into
nearness (ia) and salvation (HIaa). When
a new awarness, you understand vibrations,
the Divine cool vibrations start flowing from
you could see the Kundalini of others and give
your hands and Kundalini of other people
recognises you and you are able to raise the
kundalini of others then your attention wishes
self-realisation to many people. You could
give realisation to many people, you have
cured many of them, you have entered into a
to look at the Kundalini of others and know
new power and you are all nourished by it.
But the draw-back in it is that every
about your own Kundalini. One wishes to be
conscious towards ones own chakras and
tries to understand the Chakras of other thing has got done automatically, you had to
make no effort for it. Every thing has got done
people. If you look towards the sky, even if it
without any effort. That might be the reason
is cloudy, then you will see diffrent types of
that many people in Sahaj yoga get vibrations,
Kundalinis. Because now your attention is
rise to a higher level, yet their attention does
on the Kundalini and you will know whatever
not remain on the God, the Spirit and the
you want to know, whatever you want to see,
Kundalini. Still, again and again, it shifts to
whatever nearness you want to attain about
wrong objects.
the Kundalini. All other interests get vanished
You asked that what is to be done after
by themselves. From childhood it is like when
receiving Realisation. After receiving it is to
you enter into youth then your interests shift
be given. It is most essential that after
to your job, business, wife, children and the
receiving you have to give otherwise the
remaining all interests and experiences keep
And while giving
receiving is meaningless.
vanishing and your attention now goes to new
one thing is to be remembered that with the
experiences. Or it could be compared with a
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
Nov. & Dec, 2003
11
get solved if you do that regularly. Whatever
body, mind and intellect and the whole
personality with which you are giving this may come, it is not difficult to give five
unique gift, that itself should be very minutes. Before going to bed you all must
sit in the water. More than half of your
enchanting. Your body should be very clean.
It should be disease free. If you have some
catches will vanish by this practice.
In the morning, get up early. Sahaj
disease-many Sahajyogis might be having
Yoga could be worked out during the day time,
some disease of the body-then before
not at night. So, we should go to bed early.
am not asking you to sleep at 6 o'clock in the
coming to Sahaj Yoga you might be yearning
to get this disease cured. But after coming
to Sahaj Yoga their attention will not stick to
evening but by ten.o'clock you should sleep.
it should not be later than that. Get up early in
the diseases-Oh!, it's airight, it will be cured',
the morning.
It's not correct. Whenever you have some
Get up eairy in the morning, take your
problem you may just put your hand on the
bath and meditate. In the morning you must
affected part and remove the problem. You
meditate. Many people in our country get up
could keep your physical side very pure; not
much is to be done for it. To take bath,
early, wash their faces-they have been doing
maintain cleanliness and set your physical
it regularly, for the whole life. Similary
eveybody should get up early and Sahajyogis
side alright.
For this I have told that early in the
should meditate. It is to be made a habit. But
Ihave seen that for some people it is difficult
morning you have to go to bathroom and
cleanse your body. For Sahajyogis it is to get up at 4 or 5 o'clock in the morning.
essential to sit in water for five minutes There is one reason for it. I have studied
human nature a lot and understood it very
before going to bed. You may be anyone, very
highly evolved and may say that 'we do not
catch'- does not matter. For five minutes you
subtly. It is very intresting, very intresting to
study human nature. How one runs with
should sit in the water (footsoaking). To set
oneself, how one argues with oneself, it is
precedent for you, I also sit-in the water so
something to be observed in man. To insult
that you also follow suite. Although it is himseif how he himself gives explanation and
reationalizes. Sometime it happens that
unnecessary for me to do so. It is a very good
habit. All the Sahajyogis should sit in the water
people say. "Shri Mataji, we cannot get up
early". What time do you go to bed at night?
for five minutes daily. Light a candle before
Twelve o'ciock, but I decided that I shall get
the photograph, apply kumkum, put your
up at four. It canot be. But some day you sleep
hands towards the photograph and both your
feet in the water. Half of your problems will
early and get up early next morning, then next
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 12
Nov. S Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 8 12
Meditate very humbly.
evening you will have to sleep early,
But before getting into meditation you
otherwise you cannot get up early in the
have to understand that you have to give
morning. For two days you follow it strictly
bandhan to the seat (Aasana), when you sit
and your body will be used to it. It will become
for meditation give yourself, yourbody a
your habit.
bandhan, give bandhan to your body seven
The benefit of early rising is that in
times. It's all being done mechanically,
outwardly because some people ritually just
the early hours, seekers' receptivity is more
than other times. Not only that, in these hours
move their hands and it is all over. But it is
the whole atmosphere remains saturated with
not enough.
beautiful chaitanya (Vibrations).
With intense devotion, the way you
So I have told you form the point of
sit in Puja, sit silently and put bandhan. At
view of the body and that you have to get up
early and meditate. Now think how to that time your mind should be free of all other
meditate-how to meditate in the morning.
things like bring this, bring that etc. It is not to
Be very humble, make your heart be done.
Then give bandhan to your Mana.
very humble. Humility is the first requirement.
Humble down yourself.
Now where this Mana is? No one has asked
this question from me so far. Mana is here,
If someone gets the idea that 'I have
acheived much or have become a big saint
its begining is here-l mean put a nice bandhan
to your Vishuddhi and Agya Chakra and think
or great soul, then you should take it that such
that 'O Divine! Let us be in your bandhan, no
a person is gone from Sahaja Yoga. Very
negativity should affect us. Do it very humbly.
humbly looking into your heart with bowed
head, putting your hands towards the At that time you have to think that we are
photograph, you have to sit very peacefully witnesses, away from all objects, we are
pure, we are not attached to these objects.
after obtaining permission (from the Divine).
At every step one has to ask for Detaching yourself from eveything you are
siting for meditation.
forgiveness. So at that time also after asking
Make this effort daily and slowly it will
for forgiveness-that "If some mistake has
become your habit. Meditate with intense
been done by me, please forgive me and
faith. In the morning it could be for ten minutes
establish me in meditation". Those who have
or half an hour-makes no difference. While
committed mistakes against me, if they ask
meditating do not move your hands up and
for forgiveness, I forgive them all. With pure
down. Slowly close your eyes while constantly
feelings in the heart get into meditation. Close
looking at the photograph. There is no need
your eyes and keep your attention on the spirit.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 ov. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue : 11 & 12
13
Love is the essence of the Spirit.
to move your hands and feet. At that time
Only with the uttering of the word
chakra merely by looking at it with your 'Love', many of your attachments will go
you could cleanse any of your obstructed
attention becasue at that time, as I have said,
away. All that is untruth is against Love. By
scolding someone if you are telling him the
truth then actually it is Love. You are yourself
nothing but love. So by thinking about the
receptivily is intense-in the morning hours.
After cleansing your plexuses think
of divinity (Atma-tatva) or your Self. Put your
attention on the Atma (Spirit). Where Atma is essence of Love you could get into the
placed in the body? No one has asked so far
essence of Spirit.
that, " Shri Mataji, where is Atma placed?"
While meditating you do not have
The Spirit is in our heart but its seat
to get into any paticular thought but you
(pitha) is above, in the Sahasrara. That is
why I said that be humble at heart and put
can say that, "I am that essence of Love,
I am that essence of the Spirit, I am that
your attention on Sahasrara and be power of the Divine." You can repeat it.
surendered to the Atma (Spirit). Knowingly
By repeating it two or three times you will
be blessed becasue you are saying the
we surrender to Atma.
What is the essence of Atma (Spirit)?
truth. Vibrations will start emanating from
Atma-tatva, the essence of spirit, is-complete
you with force.
purity. Look to that, it is fully detached, not
attached with anything at all. Because of
What have we to do in day-to-day
life? In day-to-day life, you should know that
attachments you are away from the Spirit.
power in you is that of 'Love'. Whatever you
Think of the essence of the spirit. This
are doing, are you doing in love? Or are you
doing it just to show off that you are such a
essence is 'love', think of it again and again.
It is a great thought. The essence of the Spirit
I myself tell
great Sahajyogi? When
is Love.
something or scold someone, then I see that
Many religions were founded in
the next day they come, sit in Sahajyogis and
this world but no one could explain love. That abuse Me. Then they ask, 'why have my
is why there was lot of contrariety (fufu).
vibrations gone? 'If you commit this type of
Love could not be explained. This love is stupidity then it will be better that you do not
the same power which is flowing from
come to Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja Yoga is meant only for those
your hands. This is the 'Awareness' (I)
which people know about, but no one knows
who could go by it and those who really wish
that it is nothing but love. 'Awaneness', to attain something. He has no right to give
we think is jusi like electricity and fan. No; anything, he has only to take from Me. If
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeza Volume-XV. Issue: 11 & 12
Guru and be there.
someone wishes to give, if he has that power
In Sahaja Yoga you have come to
then it would be wonderful. But until you
become as instrument of the God. You should
know how to take, you cannot give. So,
be very humble, humility should be in you.
first learn how to take. What are the defects
in us? In daily life we have to see that what
You should give up your ego. People say that
one should become ascetic. I say, first of all
are we giving? Are we giving love? Are we
you should renounce your ego. Get rid off as
ourselves established in love? We quarrel
with everyone, fight with everyone, harass your ego. Do not renounce your clothes.
everyone, still we regard ourselves to be Giving up of clothes is no renouncement
Sahajyogis! We should not remain in this (Sanyasa). Sanyasa means renouncement
confusion; we should be clear about of ego, lust, attachment, anger and jealousy-
ourselves like the image in the mirror. I mean
the six enemies (Shat-Ripu). Only then one
observe yourself every moment. Suppose becomes a ascetic. There is no other
Sanyasa at all.
something has stained my forehead, you will
So in our day to day life you should
tell me that, "Shri Mataji, some stain is there
be very peaceful in your behaviour and deal
on your forehead, please wipe it off".
with people very lovingly. Talk to your children,
Similariy, keep watching yourself and see if
family members and ail others about Sahaja
there is some stain, wipe it off immediately.
Yoga. Explain Sahaja Yoga to them. Change
your friends, change your company. These
(Sahajyogis) are your relatives, these are
Your day-to-day life should be
enlightened. There should be radiance
on your face. Your behaviour should be
your own, talk to them. They will tell you that
beautiful. You should be loving. Like camel
if you are dry then you are not a Sahajyogi.
You should be aware of it. You have become
we have entered a new world and we have
vibrations in us.
Whenever you have to travel,
Sahajyogi in the name only. Somehow I am
whenever you go out, go to any village-these
people from Rahuri were telling that, "along
with our travelling articles we carry a little
driving you, that is why you are sitting here.
If you don't want to improve please forgive
me and do not come to Sahaja Yoga. One
day you, yourself, will go away from Sahaja Teerth' (water vibrated by my feet), and
Yoga. Such people, who have no feeling of vibrated Kumkum along with us. If we find
love and think themselves to be very nice, someone who is sick, we give to him a little
very great, this,that, they are altogather
useless for Sahaja Yoga. Such people should
of Teerth to drink. If someone talks of religion
then show the photograph to that person and
tell him that She is our Shri Mataji and if
go away, taste the shoebeating of other
you
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Nov. & Dec 2003
15
The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
then it is very shameful. It goes against us. I
desire She could give you Self-Realisation.
told them to cleanse Sahasrara, I do not krnow
Everyone keeps these things with him. "I put
what type of person he sat with?
kumkum on your forehead, see how do you
Never sit with a person who talks ill
feel. She is our Shri Mataji." All the time
of Sahaja Yoga, immediately your Sahasrara
will catch. If such a person is talking then shut
Sahaja Yogis should keep thinking as to how
Sahajayoga could be worked out in life. Then
your ears. Ask that fellow to sit away, "we have
you will realise that you could go very deep
nothing to do with you, don't talk to us, that is
in Sahaja Yoga.
all. We do not want to harm ourselves. Who
There are some people who come
are you to talk to us? Because of Shri Mataji
to Sahaja Yoga in a way as they go to the
you have met us here, keep silent." If such a
temples and come back and then the bad
effects are there. There are people, here person talks then say, 'enough, enough,
enough.' Your Sahasrara will catch, one by
sitting before me, who have never suffered
one all chakras will catch and after a few days
any disease after getting their Self-
you will come and say, "Shri Mataji I have got
Realisation. They were very sick but after
cancer, the disease of cancer is the disease
Realisation they have no disease at all, never
of Sahasara-take it for cartain. If you do not
did they go to the door of the doctor, never
want to fall victim of cancer then keep your
have they suffered. Never have they taken
Sahasara clean. Catching of Sahasrara
any medicine since coming to Sahaja Yoga.
means the beginning of the cancer. I am
Some of them are old people who used to
telling it to you, "Always keep your Sahasraras
go to doctors and to hospitals but now they
clean, otherwise today or tomorrow you will
do not have to go. There are many such
come to know, 'O! I have got cancer."
examples here, not only that they have also
So from now-onwards why not to
done good to other people.
keep ourselves in a perfect state of health.
The reason is, whatever is essential
Not only that, do Sahaja Yoga work because
for Sahaja Yogis to maintain health they have
.
of which we are sitting in the kingdom of God.
been doing it. That is why they are airight.
Keep in touch with each other. You are all
Tomorrow when the Divine people will be
selected then you will be amongst the best
doctors and you are the patients. Doctors
of them. Why not to do süch work so that we
do not accept fee from each other, similarly
you people do not take fee from another are relieved of wasting our time by going to
Sahaja Yogi. Treat each other. Ask from somebody's house, to some relative's house
others, there is nothing to feel bad about it. If for lunchs and dinners, criticising someone?
We should give up all these stupidities, take
someone says that my Sahasrara is caught,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Nov, & Dec. 2003
16
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 11 & 12
getting enlightened yourself. Those who
to the right path and make our lives such that
in the world our names are remembered always think of insignificant things, it would
be better for them to give them up. All these
with respect. Everyone of you should think
things are insignificant.
about it.
Now I will tell you the last thing,
No one should think that 'now how
Understand it thoroughly and think over it.
much of my life remains, what could I do
There are evil tendencies in us- they
now!" You will not die. You die and take birth
are called negativities. They assert-
again; again you will die and incarnate, this
themselves. Falling prey to them is making
process will go on. So why not to finish up
Satan of yourselves. You could become
everything within one year? And if you want
Satan or Divine at will. If you derise to become
you can finish it in one week. Only once you
evil then I am not the Guru. I am Guru only to
have to decide-in a moment-and it will be
those who wish to become Divine. You have
finished.
to be beware of the Satan.
You have to do something special.
First thing is that the nights of no moon
Only by deciding it there could be enormous
(Amavasya) and that of full moon (Purnima)
benefit of Sahaja Yoga. You know this fact.
Surrender should be there. It is both are full of danger. So, you should go to
not necessary that you should come and bed very early on both these nights. After
surrender at my feet, surrender should taking your dinner meditate very humbly, put
your attention on Sahasrara, take bandhan
be from heart. Many people come to my
feet but they are not surendered at all. and sleep. The moment attention goes to
Surrender should be there. If one is Saharara, one goes in the state of
within, fully unconscious. There if you give youself a
from
surrendered
surrendered, then the Kundalini will get bandhan then you are saved-specially on
these two nights. On the night of Amavasya,
established on the spirit (Atma-tatva), the
way the flame of the lamp remains, there specially the day of amavasya you should
is no flickering in it. Be surrendered. In meditate on Lord Shiva. After meditating on
Lord Shiva and surrendering to Him-to the
surrender is the joy, the comfort and the
Spirit- you should go to bed. On the day of
identification with the God.
Purnima (full moon) you have to meditate on
Sahajyoga is very
unique.
Shri Rama and leave your wellbeing to Him.
Understand it and get absorbed in it. The
What is the meaning of Ramchandra. It is
more you are identified with it the more your
a). You have to fully
creativity (
spirit will shine forth.
Nothing is more important than Surrender your creative powers to Him. On
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Nov. & Dec 2003
17
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
these two days you have to protect caught. It is first thing.
Those who are caught at Vishuddhi.
yourselves.
Chakra should not also be argued with. And
Although on seventh and ninth day
(E ) you have my special blessings.
You should be mindful of these two days and
the one whose Sahasrara is caught, you
should not go to his door even, you should
have nothing to do with him. Tell him to set
should organise something in such a way
his Saharara alright. There is no harm in
telling him that your Sahasrara is caught, set
it right. Sahasrara should be clear. If you feel
obstruction in your Sahasrara you should
that you could have deep meditation on these
two days. Collective meditation should be
held on such a place which has been
vibrated by My Feet, which has been purified.
immediately go and request other Sahajyogis
Collective meditation centres should not be
made in your own houses. Do not sit for to 'somehow clear my Sahasrara,' If
someone with the catch in Sahasrara talks
collective meditation with your relatives.
to you then you should tell him, 'You are my
enemy.' You have not to talk to that person till
Collective meditation should be on the places
which I have told, any place which has not
the time his Sahasrara is cleansed.
been vibrated by Me, Sahajyoga should not
Now about Heart Chakra. You should
be discussed there for long time because at
help that person whose Heart Chakra is
such places ghosts, that are in you, will come
caught. You should give bandhan to his heart.
out and start speaking, and fighting with each
other will begin. You people are not above
the trap of the evil spirits. From where the
Ask him to put hand on the heart, take him
before the photograph of the Mother. Heart
evil spirit comes, no one knows but they do Chakra is to be taken care of because
sometimes the catch of one person may
everything.
So this is about protecting oneself.
affect others. You must help where the Heart
Chakra is catching. But many people have
no heart, they are very dry personalities. You
Whenever you go out, go out of your house,
then be in nice bandhan. Keep yourself in
bandhan all the times. When you find cannot do anything for such people. Despite
someone's Agya Chakra catching, give it a
your keenness to help them you cannot do
anything. But if they come to you and ask for
bandhan, may be with attention. The person
your help then tell them, 'give up Hatha Yoga,
who is catching at Agya, you should not have
give up every thing and learn a little to love.
any argument with him. It is foolishness, the
First love your dogs and cats, if you cannot
love human beings, than love human beings'.
one who is caught at Agya, how could you
argue with such a ghost? You should never
you should also love everyone, love childern,
argue with those whose Agya Chakras are
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
18
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11 & 12
do not be harsh to them. You should not be
quarterly then we shall make it monthly, then
harsh with anyone. Do not be evil-to anyone.
weekly, it could be daily then afterwards. For
Never beat anyone, particularly the chlidren.
the time being we are starting a quarterly. If
Sahajyogis have never to beat their chlidern. you have some questions, some problems
You have never to beat or be angry with
you could write letter to Mr. Pradhan. Do not
send many letters to Me, I do not have much
time. Then you will say Mother has not replied,
anyone. Sahajyogis have never to be angry.
Very intelligently and tactfully, without showing
Shri Mataji has written to him not to me.
orS
anger they have to set things right. He has
Sahajyoga is not for those who talk such
never to be angry.
How should be the day-to-day life of
stupidities.
You should know that the mother
a Sahajyogi? You pray for that and you will
know the method of it. I have told you about it
loves everyone equally. Because of some
in many ways. Similarly eight-ten people reason She could not write. Sometimes I do
should callectively think as to what to do not write to them who I think will not mind
and now I do not bother about those who
about our institution of Etrnal life. You should
all co-operate and help in it. Those who have
mind. I have bothered about many people but
the result is that those wicked people did not
not yet given their names and addresses
improve. They did not improve and I suffered
should send it to Mr. Pradhan. We are about
to start a quarterly magazine which will myself. Such people did not improve whom
I tolerated, they did not transform
publish my letters, messages. We shall also
themselves. I kept on suffering because I have
publish your experiences if you send it to us.
Some of the experiences sent by Indian decided neither to kill nor to torture anyone.
Sahajyogis will be given place in it. So all of
They have full freedom to go to hell or heaven.
They could go to the kingdom of God if they
so desire, I have given full freedom. Those
you should write your experiences. If you
write some good article on Sahajyoga It could
also be printed. So a quarterly is being
who wish to go to hell, I tell them to go speedily
so that I get rid of you. If you want to go to hell
I shall make arrangements for you.
Arrargement could be made for you to go to
published, it will contain articles in English,
Hindi, Marathi and Gujarati. We shall start
publishing it in all these languages or one by
one. In Sahajyoga things take place hell or to the Lotus Feet of the Divine.
gradually. Contribute to it. Whatever money
Therefore, those who harass Me, disturb Me,
those who have given hard time to Me, I say
to them that have dealt with all very patiently.
you have to give, give it and get benefited.
You could ask questions in it and I shall reply
these questions. At first we are starting it But now if someone disturbs me or troubles
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 : 11 & 12
Nov. & Dec 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue:
me than I will say that I have nothing to do
his house and apologises. But I told him to
sell the house to that very person. You have
with you, please go away. Such people show
their evil nature but I will advise that you
full freedom. The poor fellow now weeps that
should think of your benevolence. If these evil Mother is angry with me. I said, nothing
doing, 'I am not angry. Now you sell your
people are going to hell then you should not
board their vehicles. Sahaj yoga is not for house to the one who came and instigated
them, do not bother about them, think of your
you."
So such wise people, if they want to
own betterment. They will remain as they
go to hell then it would be better that they take
were. They are wicked and will change with
a direct ticket and go. I can also give you
ticket to hell. It is all within my power.
very great-difficulty. Those who are nice, of
the
Those
course commit mistakes but they realise it
who want to have tickets to go to hell I am
very soon but the wicked ones are impossible
to get transformed. I have very well realised
ready to give it to them and also I am ready
this fact. I have made lot of efforts but have
to give tickets for the kingdom of God. Ticket
been unable to change them. You also clerk could give ticket for all directions but
cannot change them. They cannot have that
he tells that on such and such direction there
is derailment. If you go to that side then your
wisdom. So there is no need to quarrel with
or talk to them. So it is my humble request
train will get derailed. Their is no return ticket.
that have no relations with such people. That is why I am cautioning you. I don't have
to tell much about hell, you yourself know a
Slowly and slowly they will vanish. They are
here to destroy your seeking. Beware of lot about it.
That is why I have told you the system
them, protect yourselves, protect yourselves
from them. Receive vibrations in Sahajyoga.
that keep your instrument clean and look
upwards not downwards. If you look upward,
One gentleman offered me his house,
I gave him Realisation. But one person went
only then you will ascend. Don't lookdown.
to him and told that wicked and ill natured
You have to ascend and go higher. At every
people go to the meditation of Shri Mataji. step, every place I am with you, every
Although I had given Realisation to that where, wherever you are, wherever
you
person and he had got vibrations, yet he be, everywhere I am with you, with mind,
believed that man and said to me that, speech and action, fully. This is
my
"Mother, I cannot give this house to you
promise. But those who want to go to hell I
because such and such person has said like
am dragging them downwards also. So
this."I told him, "give your house to him, then." beware, look to the path of ascent not of
descent.
Now he telephones daily and asks me to buy
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-xV issue: 118.12
Nov & Dec 2003
whenever we do so, wicked people come and
Now I am going to London. On my
distrub but nice seekers are not found. So it
returning I should see that everyone of you
will be better if you serve Sahajyoga fully and
has given realisation to atleast ten persons.
Many of you are like that. All others, talk to
enrich yourself by it.
May God Bless You. My blessings
them openly. Don't feel shy, Tell them about
Sahajyoga that how much true it is. How are with you, my heart mind & body is
always in your service. It is not away even
much full of truthfulness and how real it is!
for a second. Whenever you close your
Gather people wherever you get and talk to
eyes and remember me I am there with
them. Everyone should take the photograph,
all my powers (conch, disc, mace, lotus
atlest 10 photographs each and deliver them
and Garuda) (शंख, चक, गदा, पदम्, गरुड,
in 10 houses. It's very nice way that everyone
Sura). For a second it will not be delayed.
of you should buy atleast 10 photographs and
give them in 10 houses- to such families But you have to be mine. Its essential. If
you are mine (Surrendered to me) then it
will not take even a moment and I will be
where people have faith for photogarph,
where it could be worshipped, where people
could accept Sahajyoga. That is how with you.
May God Bless You and give you
Sahajyoga could be spread. Actually we don't
wisdom. Live with wisdom, with viveka.
want to do too much publicity because
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI SAID
On the 14th Sahasrara Day in 1983, Shri Mataji said
"After coming to Sahaja Yoga and after your Sahasrara has
opened, you have to pass through these four Chakras: Ardha-Bindu,
Bindu, Valay and Pradakshina. After passing through these four chakras
only, can you say that you have become a Sahaja Yogi."
On the 9th Day of Navaratri 1988, in Pune, Shri Mataji commented:
Within us as you know, there are seven chakras for your ascent
and two above it. So all these nine chakras are to be crossed in this life
time. That should be your destiny.
Many of us have experienced awereness that is beyond the
Sahasrara, often in India, particularly in Ganaptipule. But how to
describe this state? The legendary Nath yogi, Matsyendranath, in the
thirl chapter of the Kalajnanirvamnaya Tantra, (काल-ज्ञान निर्याण तन्त्र) puts ir
like this: "Dearest, (in the pinda exist) the chakras of five lines, 16
lines, sixty four petals, the truly beautiful 100 petal (lotus) (Agnya) and
the beautiful thousand petal lotus (Sahasrara) and above this is a very
brilliant 10,000,00 petal lotus. Above the 10 million petal lotus is a
30,000,000 petal lotus, each pericarp of which is similar to a flame.
Above this is the all encompassing, eternal, undivided, independent,
steady lotus-pervading all stainless. By its will (svechha) it causes
creation and dissolution.. Both the animate and inanimate are dissolved
in this linga." Something for all of us to ainm for..
Whenever you are feeling very low, the present moment is whatever
vou make of it, so cheer up!
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Sat-Chit-Anand
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
New Delhi - 15th February, 1977
Does everbady follow my Hindi? If I vibrated. The scientists connot understand
say in English will you all follow? I am not in all this. When we start accepting all that the
opposition for English language, but the
language of Atma is Sanskrit. They have
West is saying, we will lose all that we have,
which is so great. Of course it is not going to
be lost, but we are not gonig to utilise it for
never bothered about the Spirit. So we have
our purpose. We have to ignore all that on
one side, and we have to accept-something
which is just a foreign, alien thing and nothing
so much comprehensive. It is not 'Samagra'.
It doesn't envelop everthing. Therefore, I will
to use some language which speaks about
Atma. English language is not adequate
enough. They do not have those experiences
so far since they have not gone deep
enough. We are very old ancient people. Our
request you to learn a little of Hindi language
culture has been to know God. Enveything
has come in Sanskrit, because Sanskrit is also. One speech of mine, which was in
English has been translated into Marathi, and
what a tremendous thing it was! What a poor
really a Devavani. Apart from that, when the
Kundalini moves, she makes vibrations. She
makes special sounds, which are Devnagri show it was in English! May be my English is
Sounds on different Chakras. If I have time, I very poor, be it so.
will inform you all about it. Even when you
Now we were talking about 'Sat-Chit-
Anand'. Again I have to use Sanskrit words.
recite Mantras through the Sanskrit language
"Sat-Chit-Anand' is the super Conscious-
or Devnagri pronunciations only, you can
exite them better, Try to learn, if not Sanskrit ness', the all pervading power. 'Chit' is the
at least Hindi, because, it being a phonetic attention, the 'Consciousness'. You are just
language, it has a sound and that sound gives now conscious and listening to me. Every
that vibratory effect. You try to learn this moment, you are conscious. But every
language. Hindi is not my mother tongue. My moment is becoming dead into the past.
mother tongue is Marathi. I speak Hindi Every moment is coming from the future to
because after all I know the importance of the present. But you are conscious at this
Hindi. I also know a little bit of English. So it moment and are listening to me. A thought
is better to know at-least Hindi. What I have rises and falls. You can see the thought. In
between these thoughts, there is a space
to say is that for speaking in Marathi is all
right for me. Bengali I know a little bit. You called "Vilamb'. If you can stop for a while,
you get to the Conscious Mind and there
can convey it in Tamil or Telugu or in any other
language of this Yoga Bhoomi. Every particle exists the 'Sat-Chit-Anand'. You can say 'Sat-
of this Bhoomi, you will be surprised, is Chit-Anand' is the condition of the mind or
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Nov. & Dec: 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 11 & 12
the state of mind, where there is no thought, powers. But at this stage to leave the
Kundalini is not proper, because the Kundalini
but you are aware, 'Nirvichar'. This is the first
stage, where you jump into; into the Super
Consciousness'. Some people may think,
that by realization you must achieve
can start moving to this side or that side and
can thus go to the supra conscious or to the
collective sub-conscious. The 'Siddhis' are
mostly available at this stage. Not minor
Siddhis but higher Siddhis, e.g., if the
with everyone it is not possible. Your first Kundalini moves to supra conscious one gets
stage is Nirvichar. You become thought- the Siddhi of predicting the future. If the
something as Adi Shankaracharya did, but
it is not possible. With some it may be, but
lessly aware. That happens when the Kundalini has moved to the Collective Sub
Kundalini rises above the Agya Chakra, conscious, they can start seeing things into
the past. A person like that, when he comes
to me, can see who I was in my previous life.
I do not have to convince him. This is the
meaning enters into the lymbic area, when
your attention just touches 'Sat point. The
reality separates from 'Mithya'. You become
same thing as anybody who is possessed. A
two personalities. At that state you start
person who takes to drugs and is an alcoholic
to the last word, but is a good soul and is still
separating-like putting lime in the milk then
it starts separating into curd and water. In
the same way the beginning of reality starts.
seeking God, such a person can see Me, in
ihe
a different form. He can see my past, he can
This is the state when you can say that the
be very much enamoured by Me. He would
know who I was. People think that the past is
Kundalini has awakened only. We must
understand the different stages, as it
greater than the present, always, because
happens. I am giving you a very detailed
the past has been much greater than today,
though I have never given realisation to
anyone previously. He, therefore, gets
picture but normally the Kundalini shoots off
to 'Sahasrara' in most of the people. In some
people it does not. It takes time. It is either
lost into the Swadhishthana or the Nabhi. It
enamoured when he sees things like that.
does not go much higher. it is arrested by
This happens to people who are on the Sub
conscious level if they move out on the left
'Anahata Chakra' or it may not even rise at
hand side i.e., into the past. Those who move
all. But in case it crosses this 'door' of Agya
out on the right hand side can see Me as light.
Chakra, then you get into the state of
They see all the five elements, they see me
as a waterfall or as an iceberg. They start
"Thoughtless Awareness'. With this
Thoughtless Awareness, you get certain
powers. Supposing for example, you
become the Governor, you get certain powers
of the Governor. Similarly you attain certain
seeing the 'Tanmatra' namely the causal
essence of the elements. It may help them
to get convinced, because such a person
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
24
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12
gets convinced about Me and such a person Chit-Ananda in which you only feel the
is much more convinced than you are.
collective consciousness. That means you
There are good many Tantrikas who know
can feel another person's Kundalini.
who I was. They are afraid of Me and they
Yesterday there was another
talk about Me. There was an ordinary maid
gentleman, as you have seen it, who was
servant who came to my programme and arguing with me that we have suspended
she got into a trance and started speaking intelligence, 'what all that', I said, "was'?
Sanskrit and she described Me completely
"What is the suspended intelligence?. I do
not know about this thing". So I told him this.
in fitteen 'Shlokas'. She said everthing about
Myself. This is how it started.
He said that, "l am in a Turiya Dasha," I said
So at this stage, I would not like to
"If you are in Turiya' you can feel the
leave your Kundalini, because you can cure
Kundalini of another person and you cannot
people and curative can be done with your
certify yourseif like that but can you feel the
Kundalini even it is in the limbic area. I am
Kundalini of another person?" But he said,
'no', then I asked him "how can you be in
very anxious always that it should come out
of the Brahmarandhra. At that stage you start
Turiya?" If you go in Turiya-i.e., if you cross
this stage, then you have to feel the Kundalini
getting the vibrations; but at this stage you
are just a 'Chita' only and you just touch the
of another person. Now you have seen there
'Sat point. Your attention is only charmed
by the Spirit. Only the attention part as I told
are many people who can feel the Kundalini
and they all say the same thing, they talk the
you is like a flicker or light in a Gas lamp, same language-whether they do so in
and Kundalini is like a gas which touches English, Indian or any other language. They
say the same thing i.e., this chakra is catching
the spirit and the light of the spirit spreads in
or that chakra is catching. This is because
the central nervous system. 'Chit' part, the
you start seeing your own Kundalini thereby
outer core, the 'Chitta' means the attention
part. At that stage the Kundalini opens the seeing the Kundalini of others, because
Brahmarandhra when you feel the vibrations through the fingers you can feel what is
from your hand and you can feel another happening. You just feel the Chita and not
the Anand part of it. First stage is through
person's also because you become
"collectively' conscious'. Collectively
Chitta that you feel the Kundalini of another
conscious again out of Sat-Chita-Anand that
person there by you can raise the Kundalini
you just touch the 'Chita' part. Thus you start
of another person. After a while, you can give
feeling the Chit of your Chitta becoming the
realization also to another person with the
"Chitta' of the collective consciousness-
assistance of my photograph. But the Anand
means that you drop into the ocean of Sat-
stage is not yet reached. In the beginning you
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Nov. & Dec 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12
has come here from England. One day he
just feel the cool breeze in your hands. You
feel peace and tranquility and also there is
no thought. You feel the 'thoughtless
awareness' but the Anand part is not yet felt
was sitting and thinking about his father.
Suddenly he got a burning on his index finger.
Hence he rang up his father. His mother told
him that his condition was not good. He was
at this first stage. Because now I have
suffering from a bad throat. This boy did
studied thousands of human beings and their
something to his finger and his father got well.
problems, I know; this is the fact. But there
Now he might think that he is powerful and
are some, who have reached the last stage,
all that but he is not. He cannot think in this
though they are very very few.
manner because his Sahasrara has opend
Thus at the first stage when you
up. He just said, "Mother, I felt it and I did like
come, is the 'Chit' stage. The consciousness
this, and my father became all right". He
stage, you touch the 'Sat' which means you
start seeing the reality, is one thing, you feel
never says Idid it. 'I'goes out. You never say,
T'did it but you will say, "Mother today my
is flowing. At this time you start saying it is
coming or it is going. Just now you said, it is
Agya is catching", "Mother my heart is
catching". They come and speak like this
about themselves. Agya is catching means
coming. You didn't say that 'I' am receiving,
I am giving, That 'I goes out of your
you will be going mad. But one does not feel
language. But still the Ego and the Superego
bad about it since he is not attached to it. He
are not completely gone down. They are still
is attached to his Atma. So he says, as an
there, but your attention has come up and
Atma, this Chakra is caught or that Chakra
you feel the 'Chitta'. With this 'Collective
is caught. A person who is suffering from
cancer, does not know it. But to a realised
Consciousness' you can cure prople, you
I have told you
can give them Realisation as
person, his attention will tell him that so and
and also you can feel the Kundalini of any
so Chakras are out of gear-and so many
person in the whole world; and cure the
Chakras out of gear means cancer. He need
Chakras of that person. You can tell the
not go to the doctor but he can diagnose it
himself. He will not diagnose himself as the
condition of another person far away by
sitting down here. Wherever your attention
doctors do; saying you have the cancer of
goes, it works, thereby your attention
the heart, the cancer of throat etc. but he will
becomes Univesal. A drop of your attention
say that it is the Chakras that are caught up,
becomes one with the ocean of the 'Sat-Chit-
either the left or the right side.
Anand'. Listen to me carefully because many
Now from where the vibraticns are
people at this stage become non-attentive,
coming or how it is going and can give the
and only the attention becomes effective. I
depth of such Chakras. There are many
will inform you about a disciple of mine, who
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12
26
abstract important happennings taking place.
Once you get the realisation, the
"Chirnjivas' surrender to you. They are
understand. Somebody just now asked me,
"if he is guided by internal God, then he cannot
do anything by himself", It is not so! The
internal Gods are his own part-and-parcel.
You can say that I am quided by my brain
hence I cannot do anything else. You can
watching you. You are their responsibility. All
the Deities are awakened in you. If you do
anything against the 'Deities' immediately
see, the Gods are in your internal parts, by
yourself. What is this Self left with then?
they will harm you. A person who has got
Realisation, goes to a place which is not to
be seen or which is not to be felt or which is
When you are united with this Self, you
not a good place, or to a fake Guru; become a hollow personality, then you do not
have this feeling of the Self. All the time you
immediately he will feel heated up. If he does
will say "it is going, it is happening, It is
flowing", You start looking at yourself as a
not run away, and if he still goes on and on
he will lose his vibrations and he will become
like another ordinary person.
third person. You do not identify your self with
Initially it is a very transitory stage, yourself. It happens. You can see these
Still, I would say at this point that the people how they are working.
There is also a part of littie enjoyment,
repulsion is not so very gerat that the man
the 'Joy' or 'Anand'. Normally you find that
does not accept it. Because, if you accept it,
you become completely realised. If you do
most of the 'Sahajyogis' will gather around a
person who is realised and is not a diffcult
person. Moreover, if there is somebody who
comes at my feet, who is a very great soul,
then the Sahajyogis, enjoy it all the more.
Once we were at Calcutta staying in a hotel.
not accept it then there might be little bodily
problem that you might have. You might harm
your own fingers, or you might get little
burning sensation here or there. But if you
are not afraid of these body sensations and
if you ignore them, then you start rising higher
and higher and I have already informed you
There was a very nice man who came to see
me. He was not a realized person but a very
saintly person with a great Purva Sampada.
He just touched my feet. The other Sahaj
that all the 'Chiranjivas' start guiding you and
looking after you. If there is one realised
Yogis were in the other rooms. They all
person in the train, there cannot be an
rushed in. I said, "Why did you come?" They
accident and if there is an acoident, nobody
will die in that train. If a realised soul is walking
on the road, and if he sees a mishap, his
said, "a great joy started coming within them
so they came", He was all the time on my
attention goes there immedately and the feet and they were standing there. I said,
mishap is averted. His attention is being "neither he is going to leave Me nor are you
blessed. All this, a scientist cannot going to leave Me". For fitteen minutes he
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12
27
you are afraid of being drowned; therefore,
you are picked up and put in the boat, then
you are no longer afraid of being drowned.
Now you can settle down firmly.
was enjoying the nector of my feet and they
were enjoying his nector and the fragrance
of it. So the Joy' of enjoying other human
beings, also start. These are the feelings.
This is how you enjoy 'Nirvichar or Samadhi,
You have to be firmly settled and with
Samadhi does not mean going into that you get certain powers-your Kundalini
unconsciousness but the unconscious starts moving. We have in Bombay certain
becomes conscious. The universal people whose Kundalini rises at least one
unconscious becomes conscious. So this is
foot high. They are very developed people. At
the first stage. There are many things like the 'Nirvikalpa' State, the collective
this and a variety of things happen. consciousness becomes subtler and subtler.
Supposing you were doing a lot of 'Jyoti
At that stage you can understand the very
deep significance of things when the reality
Pooja' in your pervious life, then you can see
my vibrations coming and going. Supposing
starts becoming clearer. For example, you
you have been doing Devi-Pooja, then you start understanding the working of the
Kundalini. You start understanding how it
can do something of 'Devi Pranam'. You can
see that also. If you see like that before penetrates. You can understand how it works
relisation, it means you are a possessed out. you can use it for experimentation with
person. Somebody is giving you ideas. After
realisation you start seeing certain things,
your own hand and you can move it as you
please. You can cure people and you can
show the Kundalini's working in different
then it has some meaning. So the gradual
growth of the flower starts manifesting.
In the second stage, you become
ways. You can combine in permutations and
combinations of the Kundalini. You can say
that in the first year of music, you just learn
"Nirvikalpa'-where there is no 'Vikalpa'. Just
now in Delhi there are very few Sahaja Yogis
seven notes and two other notes and ordinary
like that. First of all, by temperament they
ragas. But when you grow subtler and higher,
are Vikalpi. The reason is a complete then you know all the minute points of how
to create music.
atmosphere of Vikalpa. If you say something,
another will pull you down by saying
At the Nirviklpa stage you need not
something else. So the thing that the whole
put your hand towards the person. By sitting
atmosphere is so Vikalpi that you are not down you know where it is, what is
yet settled down in Sahaja Yoga. But we have
happening, where he is catching, what is the
problem, what are the 'Collective Problems?
You have no doubts about Sahajyoga, nor
about kundalini, nor about anything else.
also got very great 'Sahaj Yogis' in Delhi as
well. Now you will ask, how do you become
Nirvikalpa? Supposing you are in the water,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cooi Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
Nov & Dec 2003
which is Adishakti. Hence you cannot tolerate
There are no doubts at all. At that time you
anything against your Mother or Sahajyoga
and one can get into a tremendous temper
start experimenting about it and you start
using it. Mastery of Kundalini starts. At that
or a "Sanharshakti" which they develop. It is
said that such a man if anybody tries to do
stage the 'Chitta', the consciousness
becomes subtle. Somebody was sitting with
Me, and outside the Sahajyogis knew that some harm he will immediately bring him
down through their devotion towards their
this gentleman is going to get realization and
Mother. We have a notion that a realized
they knew that Mother is giving the realisation.
Such Sahaja Yogis are extremely pleased at
such time and they do not grudge or grumble
person should never lose his temper. It is a
very wrong idea. Then you will say. "why
Krishna killed Jarasandha, why did he kill
about small matters. They are carefree and
live in a big way. They are not touchy. Their
attention is in the subtle. They have no time
Kansa?" How do you explain Devi who killed
demons when She came and got into Her
temper? She used to get into tremendous
for outside gross matters-so their attention
temper and then She used to kill. The temper
of Shiva! How do you explain this? It is a
foolish idea to say that they should not get
is always deep into the subtle part. They are
not bothered. Such prople are the satisfied
souls. Such people are the ones, who are
into the temper even if someone tries to kill
going to create the pillars for Sahaja Yoga.
them. Even Christ had to take the whip (e)
Because, when somebody sees such a
in his hand and drive them away. You have a
person, a transformed person, like that, they
get shocked, "just look at this man. He is such
right to get into a temper, if you are in a
Nirvikalpa state since you are given that right
of even raising one's own voice when need
arises. I am using all the Ayudhas, if you have
a great person. He was a very horrid man
earlier and how he has changed like this! See
how is he transformed! "At this stage, at the
noticed in my hand, the Chakra, the Parasha
Nirvikalpa stage, the vibrations emit, then
etc. They are there and I have to use them
there is-no questioning at all. But such a man
gets into a terrible temper if he sees and you cannot stop Me from using them.
somebody is misbehaving with Me and This is what I say that by reading people
don't understand things. A man who is
connot bear it. Christ has said, "forgive all
quietly sitting and is being pestered by
those, for they know not what they are doing."
every body is called a realized person-
what nonsense I How dare you spite at such
a man? Is the spite of a Devi to be born by a
realised soul? To say that a realised soul
But supposing they had done any thing
against his mother, he would not have
forgiven in the least. In the Bible it is written3B
"Nothing will be tolerated against the Holy
should not get into a temper is a wrong thing.
Ghost". And the Holy Ghost was his Mother
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
Nov. & Dec. 2003
Now all those Rishis I have talked Soul. I said, "how can it be? If you are a
realised Soul, how are you taking to these
about and all those people who have talked
things? You cannot". Now for me, I will tell
about me and whose names I have given
you it is an impossibility. I have never taken
anything. Once my doctor gave me a little
brandy as a medicine, I don't know why but
you, they are all above Nirvikalpa, but they
are very hot tempered. These saints cannot
tolerate hypocricy but I can and I have to.
he felt like giving it to me without informing
me, due to which I vomitted so much of blood,
No Rakshasas can go near them but if
anybody goes they are put into a noose and
are hanged on the tree. That's why I say never
since my stomach is religious or sacred. If I
see a woman who has dressed provocatively
go near the Babaji. They are higher people,
or something like that or sometimes I have
no doubt, better than you all are, and they
to accompany my husband to parties and
know me very well and they fall at my feet.
They are very innocent and simpie like they start a cabaret or some such thing,
children to me. More important is Shri immediately, I start getting vomitting,
sensation like hell and more so when we are
Ganesha. If he gets angry it is not so easy to
the chief guests. I make their lives miserable,
control him. It is easier to control Shri Shiva's
since something happens in my stomach
but not Ganesh's anger. Beware of him. That
when I see these half-dressed women. Now
is why during Kundalini Awakening, you get
burning sensation and you start dancing or what canI do with my stomach is the point
jumping. All this is Ganesha's anger. If you because the Dharma is born within our
stomach. So the stomach becomes the
have insulted him by any chance, or Insulted
Dharma itself. At this stage the subtle style
his Mother, He gets into a tremendous fury.
It is true that after Nirvikalpa, the of things starts. Your Mooladhar becomes
chastity itself. Ii just cannot bear these things.
Ganesha becomes really Jagrut. Such a
You don't have to tell them. They have just
person is not tempted by any women. No
temptation for another women will exist,
no interest in such women. They do not flirt
nor have they any interest in all these things.
except for his own wife, where he goes on
They do not bother too much to dress up in
living like a celebrated husband, because
such a way that they would be very attractive
husband and wife are united in a bond of
to other women or men and at that time they
behave like very simple people. They get to
matrimony. Otherwise he is a sanctified
householder. He does not have temptation
simplicity dignified. Then suddenly they
for-any alcohol or anything like smoking and
is beyond temptation, A Nirvikalpa man become very creative also. There is one
cannot have any temptation. One man came gentleman in Bombay who got into
'Nirvikalpa' State. He came to me when he
to me and told me that he was a realised
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
was jobless. So I told him, "why don't you ask him all about this statue whether it is
alright or not? He might say that it is not alright.
start interior decoration work?" He said that
You can feel the subtle vibrations, whether it
he did not know different types of wood nor
is in Dharma or otherwise. Now can we say
could differentiate between one type and
another. So, what could he do? I said, "now, that Ashtavinayaka's are living God's? How
you are in Nirvikalpa, so start it". Today he is do you know? Joytirlingas are living. How will
a very rich man. It just becomes dynamic, you know? Unless you know the integrations
of all the great souls together how are you
going to judge them?. That is why you must
because you start seeing the beauty, the
'saundarya' of the nature, you see-aesthetics
get Realisation. This is what my father told
are born in a person who is a realized Soul.
me. I should say he was my first Guru, as he
He starts seeing aesthetics in everything,
was a realised soul. He told me, "it is of no
The beauty of talking improves. The
use talking about realities etc., because you
movements of the hands improve and your
will create another Bible or Gita. You do a
style also improves. You become a beautiful
practical thing. You find out 'a-mass-media",
person-aesthetics come in. You can become
Solworked
and I knew that was my mission.
suddenly a great poet. We have two people
on everybody's Kundalini and tried to find out
like that who have written beautiful poems
permutations, combinations, of their
and you can also be a great painter if you
mistakes and why these people are like this.
are already a painter. You get new ideas about
painting, new aesthetics. In music, you start You will be surprised that so many-people
understanding absolutely. You may not know
what classical music is but you will start They did not know that they were highly
never knew that they were even in Nirvichara.
understanding the subtle music. From the
classical music you will know which is the
placed spirts. If they would have known then
they would not have told many things which
have conditioned you. They have said, "Sach
best for you Atma. You see the Atma starts
Bolo". Who is going to speak 'truth' They did
judging everything on that level. If you appoint
such a person to judge a drama or a painting, not know what Human beings are. They are
whether it is good or bad, he will correctly 'Incarnations'-a great people. They did not
judge it good or bad. Then you put his know much about the human beings and how
selection to all the critics of the world and cunning they are or how they are all the time
they will say it is the best judgement. Now, against each other. They could not come to
you will ask me "how does he know?" the subtie Human Self-Realisation, as I now
Because he can feel by vibrations and have. AS such I know human beings but some
things, of course, I do not understand.
complete harmony in everything.
When you get into the Nirvikalpa
You give him a statue of a deity and
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Nov. & Dec 2003
31
The Divirie Col Breeze Volutrie-XV Issue: 11 & 12
in our brain. Christ is also here. These two
state, the Anand starts setting in you. When
are not incarnations. They are born as Human
you see cities, any beautiful picture or scene,
beings. They were born to Sita, as Lava and
immediately what you find is a great flow of
Kusha. Then they were born as Buddha and
Anand coming down. This is the grace that
you are just lost into it; like the Ganges Mahavira, and 'Adishakti' was their Mother
flowing over you, you are completely once again. Later on they were born to
drowned into it. Your consciousness 'Fatimabi' as Hasan and Husain. They are
the two Milestones you have got, by which
becomes Anand.
you can know to what height a Human being
In reality you come to know that till
can rise. Now today they are like
now we have never known there is a
incarnations. There are other styles of
'Sarvavyapi Shakti' but now we are aware of
the same. We can feel it coming in our personalities like Chiranjivas, Bhairava,
fingers. This is the Reality. There is Chaitanya Ganesha. They are all incarnations.
all around us which thinks, which Hanumana later on appeared as 'Gabriel the
Angel'. 'Bhairavnath' came as Saint Michael.
understands, organises and loves us. All this
The names are different, but they are the
you come to know, the knowledge part of it.
same personalities. Devi has also incanated.
Then the Anand, which is the Hridaya, starts
There is no doubt about it. The scientist will
emitting it. Later on what you get is Vilaya
not understand this but a Sahaja Yogi can,
into Anand. At that stage you can control the
sun, you can control the moon, you can because they can immediately feel their
Vibrations and can ask questions. You can
control every element.
you will
Beyond that there is God's ask questions about me also and
get the vibrations. For that at least your
Deities have to rise and say 'yes'- You may
Realization. There are three stages to that
also but just now I have told about this. 'Sat-
or you may not get 'Realization' but the
Chit-Anand' state. The God's Realistion' is
answer you will definitely get.
the stage which, Gautam Budha and
May God bless you.
Mahavira only had achieved and settled down
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 NIRMALA VIDYA
Talk by Shri Mataji, Rahuri, 31.12.1980
It is the special power by which we
do all Divine work, even forgiving. When you
Innocence takes over, which manages.
That's how it works out.
say, "Mother, forgive us", the techinque by
which I forgive you is Nirmala Vidya. The Shakti, beyond power at the left. Becomes
Then it goes on rising and called Para
technique by which I love you is also Nirmala Madhyama and all that. It comes upto the
Vidya. The techinque by which all the Vishuddhi at the left. There you become
Mantras are manifesting themselves and are
guilty. Because of your guilty nature you say
effective is also Nirmala Vidya, Nirmala- things that are harsh. Left Vishuddhi is the
means pure, Vidya means knowledge, catch of the Ganesh Shakti. Ganesh is the
Nirmala Vidya is purest knowledge or the Sweetest Thing you can think of. Even when
knowledge of this technique. It creates loops,
you look at Ganesh; this Kautuk (ag)-this
innocent admiration starts flowing. Just think
the energy creates loops and creates also
different formations by which it acts and of him, you feel so happy! That innocence
draws all that is unwanted, impure & fills it becomes harsh on left Vishuddhi. So to
up with its power. It is a technique, a divine
technique which I may not be able to explain
overcome your left Vishuddhi, all of you are
to use sweet words. Your language should
to you fully because your instrument does
be sweet to everyone, especially (Men) must
speak sweetly to their wives. Now that
not do that-you don't have that instrument.
But now you see, how subtle it is! sweetness will cure your left Vishuddhi.
Only by saying, 'Nirmala Vidya", you just Always speak very sweetly, try to findout all
invite that power, the whole thing, the whole the sweet words. The sweet methods of
technique to attend to you and it attends to
addressing is the best way to cure your guilt
you. You don't have to worry. It never happens
because if you say anything harsh to anyone;
in any Government or anywhere in the world.
you may say so as a matter of habit or may
be because just you feel happy by saying that,
You just address the Govt. and the whole
thing goes into work, in the whole, the entire
but as soon as you say it, you say, 'Oh God,
what did I say!' That is the biggest guilt. One
universe, every creation. That techique is
called Nirmala Vidya. That technique once
has always, to try to find out sweet words.
mastered, by surrenderning into it; it Now, the birds are chirping. In the same way
completely obeys, absolutely. But it is
you have to learn all the sounds of everthing
Ganesh Shakti, the Shakti of Innocence is by which you make people happy by your
the power called innocence. The whole sweetness. It is very important. Otherwise, if
power because it is innocence. So the
your left Vishuddhi grows too much, you will
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Nov & Dec 2003
33
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue : 118 12
see, it is so beautiful. So this way our desire
develop a way of talking by which your lips
itself becomes the spirit, your desire and
will get distorted towards left side.
Spirit become une-but this hurdle can be very
Then the flow starts higher, in the
Agnya Chakra, where the Ganesh Shakti bad sometimes. You have seen, that all of
becomes the Greatest Power of you who have Left Vishuddhi; when you
Forgiveness. Then it rises higher into the speak harshly you must know it is not you
limbic area where Ganesh Shakti goes who is speaking. No, because you are the
above the Surya, the Super-ego comes up Spirit, cannot say anything harsh or
destructive. It only will say harsh, when it is
and this power is that of the Moon and this
necessary to little bit remould. But that you
Moon is Spirit, this becomes Spirit and it sits
on the head of Sadashiva. That is the same.
don't take over. That will be done by
somebody else.
The whole Ganesh Shakti's evolution, you
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI TALKS TO WOMEN
January, 1984
There is no need for women to do all that
and go forward together.
Now the women, or we can say the
men have done, or the whole energy will be
Kundalini, which has been waiting all these
completely wasted.
years, was resting, wating for that time. Isn't
The whole preparation has been
made for this Aquarian age to come in, to it.?
So we call it, "The blossom time has
bring the kundalini upward and to make the
whole thing workout in such a way that the
now come". At that time, the Kundalini has
left and right meet and you all becomę to rise and ignite in such a way that the
ignited, enlightened. It was a question of our
completion of the whole world takes place. It
being, sharing the whole job in a proper is simple. Do you understand now?.
So, there's no competition between
understanding. Now see how Mother Earth
herself was created. It is a very simple thing. men and women, but the style of work is
First the movment of the energy started different. If you understand that, then only
flowing. Now this is a combined energy;
this kind of revolution will take place, and not
alright?. Then the combined energy went turn out a rebellion. Actually women are
round and round like that and when it rebelling against men, and a nonsense it is.
consolidated there was this Big Bang, took It is such a headache, that you create
something, allow them to grow, and another
place. Now this is the manly work, I should
say, manly style, because still the Mother party comes-which has to complete the job-
Earth is not produced-so then these little starts rebelling.
So the revolution has to take place
fragments again went round and round. With
and the revolution is only possible when we
the momentum, they became roundish. Out
understand that "what" part is leit out-is "now"
of them Mother Earth was selected for one
to be done. Are you getting me alright?
job.
On the Mother Earth, out of the water
So that part to be done is now
Realisation, our awakening of the Kundalini
came the life-the carbon came in.
or that your feminine qualities are going to
Everybody helped there and a
human being was created. Then the men help you, not your masculine qualities. So
went round to improve thier societies; and aggressiveness must be given up by men.
whatever was possible with their ego is done, Also because they are Sahaja Yogis now,
they have to take feminine qualities. Not of
finished now, they have done their job. Now
fighting.
they are on the dole.
If women fight they are not women.
Women have to complete their part
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Coo Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
Nov, & Dec. 2003
35
You see, women are told that "You
woman can forgive, man cannot because he
is aggressive. How can he forgive? Krishna
are good for nothing', so, now they are trying
to show, "No, we are also alright. If you have
eaten one crow, we will eat three" Now this
never forgave any-one. He used to kill. Right
royal fashion. So, alright, if you are so, alright.
understanding and the wise perception -Done.
would be such that, "What do we have to do,
Chirst forgave to such an extent to
now, to change the 'mode' and the 'style' of
show that he is now giving a turn to the spiral,
our lives? "What's wrong here?"
and now a 'feminine' quality has to be
o
A tuning point has come. Now the
developed among human beings
evolution is not rebellion at all by any chance.
But that doesn't mean that you start
It's a wrong idea people have. It's not that
walking like women or developing waistlines.
you hit me and I hit you-go on hitting each
Because that's another stupidity.
other, like the movement of the pendulum.
But to be 'Motherly. Not to be fatherly,
it's not like a boom, that today you are born
but to be 'Motherly'. 'That kindness, that
as Muslim, tomorrow you are born as a Jew,
gentiness' should be in your behaviour
then you are born as a Hindu. It's not a towards each other.
Of course this force also corrects,
pendulum.
It's a spiral movement. So every time
you achieve any evolution you are at a higher
level than before. So the movement is spiral,
sometimes gets angry also. Mother also has
to get angry sometimes, specially with people
who never get alright with their behaviour.
She has to be shouting, punishing and
see my point?
Now, to achieve the 'higher' position
sometimes She also destroys. It's alright. But
that is sometimes, not all the time. So just
in our whole being what should we do? Is to
understand that from this point to that point
now one has to accept that to be like Mother
we have to rise in a way that we move not in
Earth they have to be forebearing, 'Dhara'.
a pendulum way but in a spiral way. And to
She is the sustenance of 'everything'. She
move spirally, you have to use another kind
takes everything, the vibrations are sucked
of force. Whatever you have used so far has
in.
to be endowed with another kind of force
And now. for the first time, after
and that's the feminine qualities of women.
Realistion, you can give Her back what you
But where are the feminine women? They
have got-from Her. You can give vibrations
dress up as women, that's not the way. From
to Her trees that are created, you can make
inside, from the heart. A feminine heart. Christ
them beautiful. You can transform
flower
showed that in His life. He forgave. Only a
into a more beautiful flower. Now whatever
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
you have to give what you have got from being gentle, nice, embalming, sweet. Let's
Mother Earth you can give, because 'your' think, find out ways and means. There's a
very good way, in the evening, to write down,
mother earth is awakend in you now. So you
"how many sweet things I've said today!"
Not like this, sweet things we say-
return Her back everthing that you got from
Her, and give it to others.-Generosity, the
greatness of heart, nobility, forgiveness, love, "You're looking beautiful" and all that. Not the
affection, bearing everything for love. And superficial ones. That may pamper the ego.
But they're so sweet, you know, things are.
for the Mother, to save her child, she will
There are so many words you can say like :
starve herself, do everything to save her
"are you warm enough?"- very sweet way of
child-complete dedication she has for her
asking a question.
child. That's a real Mother-l mean, the kind
It's very simple, but can see now, you
of mothers you see these days, neither they
are mothers nor women. But what I am
can't, just-it's very difficult for people to say
saying, that's the real image of a mother,- that even, I've seen. Looking after others'
comforts. Somebody is sitting, he wants
and you have an Image before you.
water. You just go, rush and give him water.
So this is what you have to develop
"Oh, that's too much to expect. Oh God! you
now, whether you are men or women, as
Sahaja Yogis you must develop a (new gave water!" " I'm not your servant"-
consciousness) of affection, love and immediately the question comes into the
head. Little bit trying to do something here
compassion. Getting angry, getting into a
temper, shouting at people-this is not going
and there. Or sometimes thinking-going in the
market, you find something. "Oh! let me take
to help you much. If you have to help the
it for him, "well, then 'do'.
whole, the growth of the whole, try to make
I've seen, children all the time they
yourself a milder person-be angry with
think of their friends-what they can buy for
yourself that you are losing tempers and you
others. This is good for my friend. He's very
are so unkind to others. All the proplems
have come out of the overgrowth of fond of things, he likes this. All these little
things. Do all these little, little things for each
masculinity-overgrowth.
It reaches a certain point you see, other, you know. Sometimes even small
things like: early in the morning you get up,
you find another person is sleeping on one
It's reached such a wretched point now, that
it has to come down..
You have to have love for every side, his blanket on the third side and his
pillow on the fourth side. So you just put his
Sahaja Yogi, every person. How to behave
towards new seekers? First you think of head on the pillow and cover him with the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Coo Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
Nov. &
3
Dec. 2003
37
blanket. That's Mother's job. Not out of fear, you come? For example, you see people
come down here, I have seen, for Sahaja
but out of 'sheer' love. Like even if it is cold
and buttons are open, you can button up a
Yaga. Now they have other interests and
other priorities and other things which are
person. Little things, you know.
Women have very little sweet things which
very important to them. All the time, they are
wasting their time for that and then they will
they do, which make men very happy. But
say that, "Mother, we are not progressing
women have lost now that sense.
Not the fighting, but thinking what very much in Sahaja Yoga".
If you decide, (as Mr Venugopalan
sweet thing you can do. To overcome ego,
to be a Sahaja Yogi, how much identified you
has told you before), that- 'we have to do
should be with the truth of Sahaja Yoga. Now
Sahaja Yoga first and other things are
it is for you to receive, imbibe into it and you
have to change the whole thing. That is your
secondary' then only the Sahaja Yoga can
be really established into you.
Now it is for you to decide, where do
job and that is why it is a serious matter.
The second point : I always have
you come? How far are you going to? If you
are going to waste your time in thinking
been saying that due to ego problem, we
about other Sahaja Yogis and small, small
We are so disintegrated that, the things and frivolous things, your
are very much disintegrated.
connection with the Divine is never properly disintegration is going to be increased,
established. As I have said it, that, this you are going to be separated much more,
instrument (through which I am speaking). as all these decisions are taken through
if it is divided into five parts and all the five
you ego, e.g. 'I don't like it, I don't do it, I
don't see it, and the like.
parts are fighting with each other, you cannot
If you could somehow or other see
get anything done through this instrument,
though it is connected to the mains.
your ego working, then you can get rid of it-
In the same way if you still remain
and that is the thing one has to do-not to
disintegrated, you cannot get that
connection. We will have some Sahaja Yogis
fight the ego. I never say fight the ego, but
surrender it. It is the only way your ego can
of a very high level. I know that we will have
go.
Do not respect false saints. Beat
some of mediocre level. Some will be
them with shoes. Get up in the morning and
absolutely useless and some will be
do meditation. Here (England), even to get
absolutely thrown out. We will have all types,
up in the morning people grudge. I mean,
that also I know.
Now it is for you to decide, where do what can you do with such slow moving
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
Nov. & Dec. 2003
people? You see it is absolutely very difficult.
And this is what I think, we must understand
You see, this is not the sign of
intelligence either, all the time trying to find
faults with each other or trying to blame
that, we have a very great responsibility in
yourself. Both things are wrong. The best is
the West.
Because this has to happen in to grow in wisdom and yourself see that we
London. It has to happen in England to begin
are becoming wiser and wiser. Some of you
with and that is why you bear very big are really very grown up and some of you
still go up and down and some of you are
reponsibility. You have to evaluate yourself
and Sahaja Yoga again and again and agian
still very low. So all of us have to go together.
and know that what makes you so slow is
If somebody has achieved
something, it is of no use to Sahaja Yoga. As
I have told you, it is the collective thing that
your ego, or even super-ego is there, no
doubt. But ego, is the main problem. I must
is the main problem, but I
is going to work and all of you have to work it
dare not say to anyone that this
is
out.
your ego,
because they will just jump on to my head.
It is so sweet that you have real
But, try to see your ego, how it is deviating.
brothers and sisters all over the world today.
Because it is your own joy that you are
When you will go there with a full heart, they
seeking. It is your own, that is hidden from are going to receive you, as you have
received them, with a full heart. But we all
you, which you have been seeking for ages.
Now that is what I have to expose to
must come up to a point, where we can face
you. What is there to argue with a person
each other with full love, with openness,
who is trying to give you the highest? It is
without worry of fear of anyone but just say
just a waste of energy. Do not waste your
that they are your brothers and you are their
brothers and that you have to love them.
energy on to these frivolous things and finding
faults.
You have to love your brothers and
sisters in Sahaja Yoga. That is only possible
Now, Shri Venugopalan has been
arranging the printing of our book and so
when we get out of our fears here because
on, so smoothly, absolutely. I have not known there is also anothers side to it that ego
any problems. You have seen in the camps always has fears. Because it aggresses
in Delhi, how it works out, you have seen
others, and that it knows others can aggress
it. So this is a point we have got to think about
how many people were there. Never a
that never will'fetch' you in any way. Despise
problem. Did you have anybody complaining,
yourself, neverl You are sanits.
anybody quarrelling or anybody fighting
You must know that.
amongst themselves? Nothing of the kind.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
39
Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV.Issue: 1T& 12
them. Because these are the troubles of our
You are realised souls in this world.
own over-thinking and our over-reading and
How many there are, who can raise
over-domination. But we can get rid of them
the Kundalini?
very easily. It is just to detach yourself and
How many there are, who
see for yourself-addressing yourself-"Now,
understand what are vibrations?
I am going to tell you on Guru Puja,
Mister how are you?" If you will say like that,
immediately your attention will go through
yourself to see your outer being. That is very
what things you have achieved, and how
many things you have got within you, built-
in now, which are working. How your chakras
important. The more you see yourself clearly,
the better it is. You have to face yourself. And
are awakened through Sahaja Yoga. Yes, it
has happened. But what are you doing about
you do not want to face-because you are
it? This is the greatest of the greatest things
afraid of facing yourself. Because you have
been aggressing others and you are afraid
which can happen to any-one that you know.
Also you know, this is the greatest of aggressing in the way that is towards
happening, which was prophecised long time yourself. But there would not be any
back as the Last Judgement'.
aggression-because that is the perfect state
You know that this is the way, you
where you see yourself.
Neither you aggress any-one nor you
are going to be judged. So we have to work
very hard. We have to work. It is effortlessly are aggressed by any-one. You just see
given to you, alright. But to maintain it, keep
yourself clearly, and that is what you have to
it up to go high, we have to religiously work
see. Gradually you start seeing your chakras,
seeing your oroblems and you know that's
it out. It is a very humble attitude in receiving
more and more into your being, imbibing into
how it gradually develops. But everybody
wants quick results. If you are not, be patient
your being.
Let it trickle into your brain completely
with yourself. Not with me, but with yourself.
covering it. Let that eternal bliss come into
you. I am so anxious. Do not make yourself
lamsaying, you have to be patient because,
there is a problem with you. So you have to
be patient with yourself and not with anybody
a small person. Have a bigger vision. Have
bigger ideas because now you belong to the
else. That is the main point.
bigger thing, the biggest of all, the Primordial,
the highest, to the Virata! If you realise your
If you are patient with yourself, this is
the long promised thing which you will get.
importance then you will work it out. And
But you must learn to be patient with yourself
and not be angry with yourself, not to debase
certain things defintely have gone wrong with
yourself, not to aggress yourself onto others.
us, we know that, we should understand
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
40
The Divine Coo Breeze Valume-XV Issue : 11 & 12
It is a very simple thing, the simplest
it not?
I sill love them. I enjoy playing with
thing to do; but because of your complex life
them.
and our complicated thinking, we have
become quite entwined up into things. it can love, and love is the thing that is going to
As I love, in the same way you should
easily be got out and just slipped out of unfold beautifully like a lotus, you see: opens
without any difficulty. I know you can do it.
So forget about all these things like-my father, flowing, In the same way, your heart will open
out petals and beautiful fragrance starts
my sister, my brother. All these problems will
out and the fragrance of love will spread
be burnt in no time.
throughout the world. It will ring into you. I
As soon as your life runs straight, know it can happen. The sooner, the better
everything will be burnt away. Nothing will be
and the choice is your own-which you have
left-but your light-and others who will come
to make-your choice.
to you for enlightenment.
I am very happy because such a
beautiful song to hear and just before
I know that you are going to have a
big day for Guru Puja and before that I have
Christmas, which is a very big thing for Me.
to request you to prepare yourself. I may do
something great. But I must have a proper
You know that, and in the same way we are
having another Christmas now. Christmas to
recipient, so that you must prepare yourself.
celebrate a new Christ born within us.
Think about it. Are you loving others? Are you
Let us prepare for His coming, and
in love. Are you in love with every-one? Just
how you prepare is not by running away from
yourself, not by getting into frivolous things;
to think that you love every one is so great! I
mean you ask me. Because I always think
how much I have to love. You see so much
but by working it out, beautifully cleansing.
Cieansing has to be done if the Self has to
love I have, always to give to others! Just be establihed in the temple of this being.
think how great it is to love others! You know
how people treat me sometimes. Terrible, is
May God Bless you all
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 AFTER SELF REALIZATION
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
November 25, 1973
(Seven Chakras and their Ruling Deities explained)
You have to do nothing at all. In Sahaja
transmigration (3ra), the growth of trees
and the chirping of the sparrows. You have
to look at the auspicious and pure smile, you
Yoga everything gets done. In day to day
language the meaning of word Sahaja is
easy. The origin of this word is from Sah
and "Ja These two letters make the word
have to listen to the adulating voice of Divine
blessings. You have, nothing else to do. Only
by seeing it you will be overjoyed with it. Now
you have to watch only. Nothing remains to
be done. You have nothing to do for the health
Sahja-meaning 'easy' and that is 'born with
us.' The way our eyes are born with us, nose
is bron with us. We don't have to think about
of your body the way you have been doing so
far, Yoga etc. You need not do many yoga
it.
There is no perfect image of it. The
all round beauty of a rippleless lake fully
excercises (yogasanas). It's alright if you do
some light yoga excercises but generally you
establishes complete harmony in the person have not to take much care of your body
who looks at it. Similarly, when you look at because in it resides the God (HIHI). You
reflects within us. Not only this, but also
some beautiful sight and the beauty of the have to respect it, no excesses should be
thoughtless and
Divine creation, you will go
the moment you get into thoughtless
done with it. If you want to get rid of alcohol
or drugs, it's very easy. Whatever you decide
about will happen.
awareness, the power of joy, that lies within
it, fully reftects in your being and you get
fully identified with it. The God almighty has,
simiarly created many beautiful sights for you
You will not get
conditioned. If you have decided to get rid of
alcohol you will be relieved of it. Human
beings consume liquor because they do not
and this beauty of nature is spread all over.
By getting into the source of that beauty that
want to face themselves.
I am not asking to
give up anything else but liquor because it
iov is created in you. You have incarnated to damages your consciousness. By just
have the pleasure of the joy and not to make
watching you could get rid of drinking because
now you have begun to love yourself.
Automatically you will be in the state of joy. If
yourself miserable unnecessarily.
Now many people have asked that
what they have to do further? Now you have
by chance someone of you is imprisoned,
to do something new; you have to watch only.
you will say, 'Oh'! how nice! I will sit there
When you go to see a movie and think as
an audience that what you have to do, tne
and meditate. One is in one's own glory. There
remains no urge for liquor or somking
cigarette. Nothing remains to be said, all the
Keep on watching. You have to see tne vices go away by themselves. In Bombay
answer that you get is you have to watch.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
42
The Divine Caol Breeze Volume-XV issue: 11 & 12
and ask yourself to be angry. You will start
condition is such that one could not get
laughing. In the state of anger keep laughing
from within. All the time you keep laughing,
match box form Sahaj Yogis! While going to
centres you have to take it along to burn
incense and to light a candle. No one while in temper one gets involved with
smokes. The chain smokers, I don't know, something or the other. All vices such as
lust, anger, ego, envy etc. have their own way.
You have to look at it. It is a play. You should
watch it, because now you are within, not
how they have stopped smoking! Some
poeple used to play rammi (cards), they say,
we have given up playing cards. They are
enjoying their lives, they will enjoy themselvs
in the exams and also in the problems
without. Thal is what you have to do in Sahaj,
you have to be within not without. While talking
(mathematical). They will enjoy struggling to others be within, that is, in
with these problems (mathematical). They thoughtlessness. Whenever you have to talk
will enjoy struggling with these problems.
to someone, get thoughtless first. You will
penetrate in them as soon as you get into
Now you have to take care that you
do not have to struggle with things as you thoughtlessness first; their outlook will be
used to do. You are not your old self, you changed and you are already a changed
being. If you are not in thoughtlessness
(within), then, may be, that they pull you back.
are a changed personality. Now you have to
see whether the other people are changing
with us or not. You have to look to them. You could be pulled out because you have
just gone within. For example, you have just
There is nothing to be afraid because you
come from the traffic and are made to sit on
were also like them. Some people think
the mountain but you have got used to the
themselves to be of high position. They are
traffic, so mentally you think yourself still to
so much position conscious. Some think
be in the traffic. You have to see, "Where am
themselves to be very rich and others very
I standing?"You will know your state.
religious. All are mad. Do not look to them.
All the mad people in a lunatic asylum think
This is what Self-Realisation is. The
first thing is that you are in oneness with the
themselves to be very wise. When you were
beauty of the whole world. You know it is
in that mad house, you used to think similarly.
something new, unique and unbelievable. No
All these stupidities will go away slowly. Now
one believes it but it's a fact. You yourself
you will realise the truth. Now you are
will realise that you are a withness. At home
blessed with that power-such a power
if someone falls ill then everyone starts
because of which you will not be affected by
runing, creating difficulties, may be just to
your thoughts. For example, if one says to
show off, may be someone is really
oneself, "I do not have to be angry, then ask
concerned. Nothing, absolutely no need to do
yourself to be angry, stand before a mirror
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-44.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11 & 12
attained recently is acute. It stands firmly and
is not afraid to say that, that is the only truth,
anything. You watch yourself and it will dawn
upon you as to what action you have to take.
Whatever you feel you should do. If you feel
everything else is untruth and a myth.' This
quality could be found in great people like
Christ, Lord Krishna and other great saints.
It could be found in Adi Shankaracharya. You
read his books and you will get the
like putting your hand on the head, do it and
it you feel like touching the foot, touch it.
Whatever you are feeling, is for everyone,
do it.
Second aspect is Truth'-that what confirmation. Now you read the scriptures
afresh, read the Geeta and Bible afresh and
tell, truth or untruth. What is truth
should you
and what is untruth. Most of the truth is man-
you will find that confirming truths are there.
But you yourself are powerful enough, you
do not need support and help of anyone else.
The moment you start standing by your-self,
in your glory; there is no need to feel shy
made and man-made truth is not truth at all.
Many-a-times something that appears
untruth happens to be great truth. So, you
do not have to decide about it. You just tell,
about it or be afraid of anything. But I find
tell in your thoughtlessness, talk to people
about your state. Boldly you have to declare
that this is alright, this the truth and it should
be done. There is nothing to be afraid of.
such people who hide themeslves in their
homes.
It is said in the Bible that the lamp is
not to be kept under the table, it is to be put
on some higher place. If you have really
May be, that people take it for untruth and
they laugh at you. We went to Poona, there
become lamps (the enlightened beings) then
were some stupid people who published in
the newspapers that "Shri Mataji was asking
sit on a high pedestal and enlighten all others.
You may belong to any religion. If you are a
Sikh then see in their scriptures, everywhere,
the seekers to move their hands. She was
mesmerising them." One gentleman aked a
question that, "Why should She mesmerise it is written. It's a truth which could be
prople? Has She nothing else to do?" They confirmed. For your satisfaction the great
told that we cannot be mesmerised. But you saints have written it in all the scriptures
Shlokas after shlokas could be said about it
have got mesmerised Her way. Different type
and lines of Quran could also be quoted. They
of people are there in the world, you cannot
understand them. Now you have got all confirm it, though they call it spiritual in
Chaitanaya in you, it is flowing in you, you English language, in Hindi it is called
have seen it, you need confirmation. But Adhyatmik and in Urdu Roohani-there are
you have not attained magnificence and this
is the difference between you and the great
different names but Truth is the One.'
If you all know that aspect, then you
also know that there could be no description
saints. The magnificence that you have
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue : 11& 12
Nov. & Dec. 2003
movement of your fingers everything works
of truth. What could be the description of an
out. Your attention has become Divine. You
ocean? But every moment you will see the
could check it yourself. Even in your feet
truth, that the truth is spread all over; with
your vibrations you will know of it, with the there, all the chakras are made. Man is a
great creation of the Almighty. The God
vibrations you could understand it. Then you
Almighty has made this instrument extremely
beautiful. What is needed is its enlightment.
will see vibrations everywhere-in stones, in
every-thing.
If four-five chakras of a person are
That part is also done, but still a lot remains.
Now, you have to work it out sincerely and
caught then there is no need to argue with
see, what it is? Because a small lamp has
him. Such persons are very difficult, beyond
been lit, you are sitting with it. There is no
you. Immediately you will have no vibrations
in your hands. A few days later, such a
need to sit. When you look within other prople
person will run from himself because of the then you will come to know what it is. We
hot vibrations. Have no connections with the have not thought of an organisation. In
Bombay, there is an institution with the name
persons who have hot vibrations. It is not an
of Eternal Life. There is no membership of it,
individual thought, it's something spiritual.
Here there is complete darkness. The fight only the realised people are its members.
Many peoples get realisation but then they
between the light and darknees goes on
forever. Now, so many lamps have been lit,
go away.
They come again and get it. There
the whole atmosphere could change if a few
more lamps are enlightened. So, alway keep
might be helf baked people amongst you
also. I requested Mr. Bose, you make him
chariman or do as you like to. I will stay with
your lamp lit, always weigh your vibrations.
vibrations always flow from my photograph,
him. His bunglow No. is 10, you could take
they never stop. Stretch your hands towards
his telephone number also. I will send
my photograph whenever you feel burning
sensations on any of your fingers. Everthing
photograph etc. to him. However he is very
busy person, go to him at the fixed time.
has got a meaning. You know this is Manipur
Chakra, this is Vishuddhi, this is Agnya, this
Friday is appropriate. Fix that day for your
weekly meditation. With attention, I will see
Swadishthana and this one is Mooladhara
all of you. You might have heard about the
and in the certre of your palm is Sahasrara.
symbol of God like Lord Genesha. His
Its round. If someone comes to you and tells
that such-n-such person is unwell, please carriage is mouse. Now your attentions are
pray for him. You have nothing to do, clear your carriages. Your power resides in
the affected Chakra of that person and he your attention, where ever your attention
will be benefitted. Sitting here, with the goes it works out. It is so wonderful. Sitting
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Nov. & Dec 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: T1& 12
The greatest thing in it is Love. With love we
here you can exercise your power and
improve everrthing. Everyone, you see is have to identify ourselves. While talking to
someone we have to decide first that we have
torturing someone or the other. Bring them
on Sahasrara and set them right. On
to love. It is all love, you cannot change it. As
people tell me, you see everyone is giving
Brahmarandhra, you will be amazed, their
realisation. In America, there is difficulty with
condition has improved. There are wicked
the people that they misuse it? I said," how
above all of of them we (Sahajyogis) are could they misuse it? They could only give
here. Give them discretion. With the power realisation, they could cure someone with it.
of love people get changed because love is With love you cannot harm anyone. Think
more powerful than hatred. Like ocean, the yourself, if you love someone how could you
power of love is fathomless. As there is no harm him?. The quality of love is this that
people, Dushasanas, there are saints and
one who loves cannot think of harming the
end to the expanse of the sea, there is no
object of love.
end of the ocean of love. It rises more than
Whatever is benevolent will take
hatred. If its power is lesser than the power
place. The only thing you have to do is to
of hatred then this world will be destroyed.
You have not still understood your respect youself. When you begin to respect
responsibilities. You could not realise that, yourselves, you get established within
because it is a temple: the more you respect
this is the new age, there are new people
and new dimensions. You could understand
it the more Divine Light is there in it. With
love you could get identified with it, only with
this dimension with your vibrations. The
love you could be one with it, in complete
harmony. Only pure love could emanate from
singer Siddheswari Bai who was just singing
here; yesterday her condition was very bad.
you. The one which is Chaitanya is the Truth
With great reluctance she came to me and
said, "I have to undergo such and such and the Beauty. You sit in thoughtless
operation, this that." I just put my hand on
her head and today she has started singing!
awareness and you will be one with it.
Thoughtlessness comes only when
you cross this point (Agya). You have crossed
You all could do this work, there is nothing
which I have not told you.
it and now you are in thoughtless awareness.
Your brain used to think. Now your Sahasrara
is pierced and you are above your brain.
When this point is reached, you could check
it with your hand. Those who are realized,
should check at this point-Ardha-Bindu-and
they will feel it, but those who are not, will
Now only a curtain remains within us.
If you learn to tear out this curtain then
everything could be done. But to tear out this
curtain becomes difficult. However, you are
realised now. So first we have to remove this
curtain because this is a stupendous work.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue; 11 & 12
spreading all around. To penetrate within we
have to be very pure otherwise no one else
could be there execpt Shri Ganesha and His
not feel, Are you feeling it? Slowly, feel it, take
your hands slightly up-down. That is the place
of the 'Ardha-Bindu and above it is 'Bindu'
Mother.
and 'Valaya' is above all.
In the process of creation Brahma
has also been within human beings. First Deva was made the deity of the second
"Valaya', then 'Bindu', after that 'Ardha- chakra. But before Him Lord Vishnu was
All, that was made to create this world,
Bindu', and than this (Sahasrara) then this
created so that there is some sustainer for
whole kundalini was created. The Adi this Divine creation. That is the reason that
Kundalini, itself, penetrated in you and
became your Kundalini. Some people Mohter and then there is the creation of
(Deities) were placed to establish Adi- fatherly father. From the Nabhi, Brahma Deva
Kundalini. In the beginning it was necessary was created. That's how it was done, the way
we take birth from the Nabhi chakra of our
someone is placed at some particular point.
There is no untruth in it. You yourself could
to establish someone. Lord Genesha was
established first of all. Adishakti put Shri
Ganesha only on one chakra. One Ganesha
verify it. Now this void was created. It was all
on the chakra.
created, major nerves and Pelvic Plexus and
What is Shri Ganesha? He is purity
around it the void and in it was the emanating
personified. Think of it. Suppose you have
not taken bath for a few days and the body is
love for the creation. The whole creation got
caught in this love. This love is the all
pervading power, in it is the creation. Now it
not clean. But the vibrations clean the
impurities. Shri Ganesha is nothing but is essential to cross this void but as I have
vibrations and purity because he is the told you earlier the God and His power is
present in our heart as our soul. So as the
Eternal Child. Eternal Child, and it is difficult
to find one like Him in the world. His whole child is born, not born as soon as he is
love is purity and purity only and because of conceived in the womb of the mother, the
that purity he has been placed on your withness state God almighty comes in his
Mooladhara chakra. On Mooladhara is the Heart and looks like a flame, the way this
thumb is. This soul is in the left heart. Many
Mother. Its clear meaning is that in the
matters of sex you have to be like children. I
people get confused about it. They think soul
mean to say that when the dharma is is in the heart chakra, it is not in the heart
established in you, you become child like chakra it is in the heart. The soul resides in
innocent in the matters of sex. It is difficult to this plain. Why does He not reside in the
attain the heights of Shri Ganesha because Heart Chakra? Because it is the path of
he is a very pure soul. His radiance is Kundalini to ascend. It is in the centre (ceatral
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-48.txt 
 Nov: Dec, 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12
heart) and the soul resides in the left heart.
In the word 'Ram', Ra' means energy
there is so much pressure, tension in this
world. The day it is forced upon the human
being they will break down. So, love is the
and 'm' means Mahesha, that is Shri Shiva.
Mahesha is Shiva-the God who resides in
only way out. So this Gurudom was given to
oür heart-when 'Ra' is united with 'm' it
becomes Ram. To make the people cross didn't know the qualities of a Guru. Gurus
me. Everything is acceptable to me. But I
maintain distance but Mother does not keep
the void (Bhavsagara) He has to make some
distance with the children. Children sit on her
head. So, you people also could take liberty
arrangement. So the great power like
Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha was created and
with Me and enjoy. Be with Me with full
they were placed in the area of dharma.
freedom, you will neither be afraid nor be
embarrassed. There is no problem, you
Dattatreya and Adi-gurus incarnated in this
world many-a-times. He incarnated as king
could
come and talk to Me boldly about your
problems. You could complain to Me as you
Janaka who was like the father of Adi-shakti.
After that He incarnated in Iran as Zoraster,
do to your mother. I am freely available to you,
then as Machhendranath, then as
Mohammad Saheb and Nanak Saheb. No
freedom was needed, Religion was required
to be discussed openly, there is no secret
no secret about it.
one fought with each other, See what type of
darkness you are in? Fatima, the daughter
Ultimately everything has to be
explained very clearly. All the secrets are to
be told about, everything could not be said
of Mohammad Saheb was the same who
became daughter of king Janaka. Whom are
you fighting? Think overit. The Nanaki of Guru
everywhere. I am telling all this to you people
Nanaka was none else but Janaki. Shirdi Sai
Nath was also an Adiguru. They are the
who are realised ones, because non-realised
will doubt it. It has some meaning only for
the realised ones. You could attain much
masters of all. Also, they are my gurus.
These Adigurus taught me all this knowledge.
In different incarnations they kept me
higher state than this. Lot of work was done
to cross the void, some success was
teaching. Ultimately I had to come and do
achieved and if you people could get it, they
this work. They could not do it and now they
are helpful today. They become eternal, the
are placing me as a Guru so that I take up
the job of a Guru. There was an age when
founder of Jaina Dhama, Shri Mahavira and
Shri Buddha are amongst them, They were
no one was willing to accept a woman as a
born of the same Mother, born of the womb
Guru but in Kaliyuga only Mother could do
of Adi Shakti. Try to know their first relation
this work; it is beyond the power of men. This
that where were they born. But it was
work could not be done by force, only the
experimental for all of them. All of them made
love of a Mother could do it because already
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-49.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue
11& 12
experiments so that human beings could
cross the void, Very few, however, could
Shri Radha incarnated after Shri Sitaji. She
was placed on the fifth chakra, that is
Vishuddhi. She is very humane and She sang
the song of love. It is said that at the time of
cross the void, But amass realisation could
be done only in Kaliyuga, after that Shri
Rama incarnted in this world but he forgot
killing the Kansa-the maternal uncle () of
Shri Krishna, Shri Radha was called, Radha-
that he was an incarnation. He remained in
this world as a human being, not as an "Ra' means energy and 'dha' means the
sustainer, The stream of Shri Radha starts
incarnation so that you could rise abvoe the
flowing in you. Shaivite people are the
followers of Lord Shiva. They do not believe
Bhavsagara. He was a perfect human being.
During his incarnation a few seekers could
get their Realisation, there is no doubt about
it. But mass realisation could not be given.
in Shri Krishna, There is no difference
between Shri Krishna and Lord Shiva. Shiva
Six-seven thousand years ago Shri Krishna is placed in your heart as soul and Shri
incarnated on this earth. Right from the Krishna is on the Vishuddhi. Shri Krishna has
beginning of this creation (Aadikala) all the sixteen powers (relle). Similrlay you have got
seekers wished to cross the Bhavasagara. sixteen plexuses. It is surprising that Lord
The poor seekers had to face lot of Krishna is the deity of Vishuddhi chakra which
problems. While meditating they were has sixteen petals. His power Radha was
trortured. So Adi Shakti incarnated on this then divided into two, that is, Rukmani in
Radha in Vrindavan; it is very
earth 108 timnes in Her perfect form. You Dwarika and
might have read about it. Read Devi humanly.
Shri Krishna had only one son who
Mahatmaya and you will know what I am
saying. Adi Shakti incarnated in the form of was 'Pranava' (Divine power), incarnate.
the Devi and recoginsed the seekers. At that Think of it, He was 'Om' incarnate. He
incarnated on this earth. His name was Jesus
time She came in the clear form of Devi.
There was no Maya around Her. So seekers
Christ. Mary was his mother. He was placed
on the Agya Chakra. On Agya one has to
could not get their Self Realisation form Her.
The only thing they got was Her protection. face ego and superego'. You see your Agya
She kiled Mahishasura, Shumbh-Nishurnbh Chakra controls your pineal (siqufe) and
and many others. All the rakshasas and pituitary body ( ), it is scientifically
negative people who used to torture the proved. So he pushes away the evil spirits
saints were killed. But none of them got from your Agya because these spirits sit on
superego. They could sit in ego also because
"Ida and Pingla' cross each other on Agya
salvation because they were not perfect
human heings. They could see only four
Chakra. So Lord Jesus put His hand on this
chakras, that is, upto the heart plexus. So,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-50.txt 
 Nov & Dec. 2003
49
The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11 & 12
plexus first of all. It was done at the time of
Nanak Saheb. In all ages these ghostly
sort of doubts will come. How will these
doubts be eradicated? When you have been
powers came to do encroachment. But Shri given a seat, I mean when you are seated
Krishna has such a destructive power that
on the throne and you have doubts as to
He cut their throats. So on Agya Chakra is
whether it is a throne where I am sitting? Is
it alright or not? You could check it by your
the name of Lord Jesus. Shri Mahalakshmi,
whose praise we sing so frequently, no one
has described Her. Where is She placed?
own hands, that now an unparalleled energy
is flowing from your hands. When you will
She is Mary Herself. Whenever She
cure people by touching them with your
hands, when you will have such experiences
then slowly and slowly your doubts will
incarnates with Her child and husband, She
is very peaceful. But when she comes alone
then She is tremendous. So this place
vanish. I mean to say that have prepared a
boat for you, now you have to launch it in the
(plexus) belongs to Bhagwati. The plexus of
water, fight with the waves, only then you
Sahasrara belongs to Bhagwati. She Herself
will come to know whether it is a boat or not.
(Devi) pierces it, all the seven chakras are
May be, it is wood only. The boat has been
built or not could be tested by launching it
there in it.
Therefore, the maya (illusion) also
has seven layers. It is very difficult to
into water and by rowing it on the waves. If it
withstands the pressure of the waves then
recognise Her. Seven human chakras get
you will be sure of it, otherwise doubts will
completed here.
In nut shell I have told you what you
remain. Same way you have to test your
have to do, how you have to complete your
realisation because man thinks no end of
seeking. But if we talk about it methodically
then we could say that there is no particular
himself. One person out of our seekers went
somewhere, a swamiji was sitting with a
hoasted flag. Many people came there, had
time for it. All the times we could be in the
state of Thoughtless Awareness. For their food etc. This gentleman went to
example, you are sitting in Thoughtless state, America with us, with the movement of his
start thinking, then go in Thoughtlessness. hand he used to do things. You could also
do it. With the movement of your hands you
After that is Thoughtless Awareness and then
comes Doubtless Awareness. You will have
could raise the kundalini of someone. Siting
doubts but in the second stage you get here you move your hands and see how nice
Doubtless Awareness. Doubts will be there: it is that the kundalini of the other person will
is right or not? What Shri Mataji has said is
not right; how could it be, has it happened flowing from your hands will do it. So this
move with your fingers. The energy which is
way that sadhu used to pretend to awaken
or not, have we got realisation or not?. This
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-51.txt 
 Dec, 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 11& 12
Nov. &
the kundalini of hundreds of Americans. Since There might be some reason. You might
have been seeking for many lives. It is your
right. You are saints, saints of high orders.
many people were going to him, one of our
Sahajayogi also went to him. I come to know
of everthing as to who is hanging about and
where. When he returned, he was miserable.
You are not awere of this fact. If you were not
saints, how could I give Realization to you?
aksed, "Why did you touch his feet?" He CanI give realization to stones? Thousands
of people come but I cannot give realization
said that since every one was touching his
feet, I also touched. I said you have to touch
to all of them. Only a few of you have got it.
the feet of only those who are older to you. I Definitely there is some reason for it. But you
cannot believe it. You think, how could it be?
aksed him what was his condition, what was
This problem comes because of your
the condition of his kundalini, is he Realised?
egolessness. In a very ordinary way; you
He replied, "No, he is not Realised." His
kundalini is overturned. I asked him, you neither change the style of your clothes nor
any other showing-off. But you will see that
raise the kundalini of thousands of seekers
you have become peaceful within. You are
with the movements of your fingers. Why
now altogether different being. The style of
your talking and doing things is of a realized
one. And you will become expert. You know
could you not think that you should not have
touched his feet?" His kundalini is
overturned; at least he should have been a
Realised person to touch his feet. One about others that such and such chakra of
should touch the feet of one who is higher this person is catching, That is why he is
behaving abnormally. Let me set it right. And
than yourself otherwise why to touch the feet
within a little time that person is cooled down.
at all? You know everything. You know the
Some people come to quarrel with me, but
reason of it. You have the complete
Sahajayogis caim them down by moving their
Kundalinis. They play many tricks and within
alittle time such people sit quietly. One fellow
knowledge of it. You are so expert in it, why
did you touch his feet? Egolessness comes
in you. You all live in such an unassuming
came and started quarreling. It was the time
for him to take Sesamum (Fae). They put the
way that no one could believe that you are
One becomes egoless,
Realized.
Completely egoless. He feels, how it has Sesamum on their hand and vibrated them.
happened, how that has happened? But it As soon as he ate those sesamum,
has happened. If this transformation has immidiately he went into meditation. If
taken place in you, then you should think,"
Why has this transformation taken place in
someone is disturbing you too much then put
your finger in the water and make him drink
that vibrated water. The work will be done.
you only?" Many people live in Delhi. Why
Chaitanya will awaken within that person. But
we have specially been given Realization?
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-52.txt 
 51
Nov. & Doc 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11 & 12
still you are newly born children. Small child
very soon, similarly you also catch
recording. Watch the awakening and
movements of your Kundalini. There is going
to be no problem in it. Sometimes it will titillate
gets ill
very soon. You have to stick to your position
here and move there; sometimes it will
otherwise you will descend very soon. Don't
leave your position, do not be shaked, stick
to your place because the boon given to you
is such that one could be unsteady (sraiste).
I am telling it to you. Therefore, power of
enlighten here and sometimes there, your
conciousness, which is connected to all
these things, will get enlightened and it will
enlighten the whole world.
collectivity ( ) should be there. There
are people amongst you who come and tell,
"Shri Mataji my head is catching." Collectively
you could clear the catches, whether it is in
Now you are sitting here, but you are
not aware that thousands and millions of rays
are emanating from you. You will see that
the whole atmosphere of Delhi will change3B
you
you will see it. I went to Calcutta only once.
Have you seen the atmosphere there? I said
it there itself that the atmosphere of Calcutta
will change. I stayed there for eight days and
the whole atmosphere changed, the minds
your waist, Aganya Chakra or any where else,
you could clear it yourself, Now these (Sahaj
Yogis) are your brothers and sisters. This is
the new world of love. These are your
relatives. You know them. At the time of
difficulty, you will be surprised that they will of people were calmed down. Today, in
run to help you. Because deities are there Maharashtra it is going on very well. The
with you for your protection. Suddenly if you reason is that many people have got their
Realisation. Now it is the turn of Delhi State.
think about someone, immediately you find
The Kundalini of the whole world is situated
him before you and saying, "I don't know how
in India. How tremendous! The seat of
I came here! I was going this way, I thought
to come upto you. "All your works are done,
you will not meet with accidents. Deities are
Kundalini of the whole world is in India. If our
India improves then whole world will improve.
The Sahasrara of the whole world is here.
hovering over you. If one Sahaj Yogi is there
at the place of accident then all others are So, I need thousands and thousands of
Indians who could give Realisation to others.
also saved becasue of him. Many things will
May God Bless you.
happen. You keep on watching and
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-53.txt 
 OF OUR DIVINE MOTHER
MEMORIES
did. I would follow Her and do as She directed,
Introduction
without any question.
There are many, many stories and memories
We all were in some school for the
of our Divine Mother, which have not yet been
recorded on video, audio or set to paper - stay at night and after dinner we all moved
up in our rooms. "Look at Raolbai from Dhulia.
but yet have been experienced and treasured
She always has her attention on what I am
by thousands of Her children.
doing and not like others who are busy wasting
From this ocean of memories- until now only
their attention on trifle matter." She used to
held in trust by each of us, as our individual
call me Rajkunwar.
experience some few sweet stories have
now been collected and some selected ones
After dinner She would start giving
Realization to people. She asked me to keep
will be printed in this magazine.
hands under Her Lotus Feet. [Mr.] Modi
my
used to understand everything. I personally
1. IT BEGAN IN INDIA
never understood anything, as for me what
You are fortunate you saw me
Shri Mataji used to stay at Jeevan She said was it. If She said I was realized
Jyot [in 1970] and was known as Nirmala now, for me I was that.
Srivastava. I asked some giris where did
She worked on my back like this
Nirmala Srivastava stay. When I went up, I [raising of the kundalini]. Then Mother looked
saw Shri Mataji. She opened the door and very lovingly and sang a beautiful song, "Par
Brahma Parmeshwar." She sang so
said, "Are you looking for Me?" She held me
beautifully. That face was so joyous, so
loving, happy. And like this, She gave
Realization to four or five people till midnight.
by hand and took me inside very politely and
asked me to sit on the cot. "Where are you
coming from?" "I am coming from Dhulia and
Next day She used to sit alone and call each
I have heard your name and came looking
for you." "I am about to start this work and
one individually to give Self Realization.
right now I am waiting for the delivery of my
While returning back in the train, She
daughter, Kalpana. Once I am through with asked us whether we had thoughts or not.
that, I will call you. Please leave your name would say politely that I don't know what's
and address before you leave and within à happening. Then Mother asked us to put our
month I shall call you."
hands in front of Her and whether we felt cool
vibrations. Again I would reply innocently that
I do not feel anything. "Raolbai, you are from
We all went from Bombay to Bordi in
train with Shri Mataji. We were all together.
Mother would talk to all of us. We would Dhulia and I want you to come to my house
follow Her wherever She went. I would never
tomorrow. All of you who felt vibration must
leave Mother, as I wanted to see what Mother
meditate every morning and evening, so as
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-54.txt 
 Nav. & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 11& 12
closed for fifteen minutes, but thought maybe
to go deep and feel the vibrations."
Ihad closed for about two hours. Anyway, so
I used to stay with my daughter in a
one room apartment and at around 4 am I then they said I got my Realization and then
was awakened naturally and I was shocked we were supposed to go to Shri Mataji. And
She was in a white sari, just sitting with Her
to see Mataji in front of me in same position
legs in front. "You can either go and put your
head under Her Feet - which were resting
as when She gave Self Realization in Bordi.
When next day I met Shri Mataji, She
horizontally to the ground with a support
under Her Feet-or you can go towards Her
asked me, "Do you get thoughts by putting
attention on Me?"
I said, "No."
Mataji told me that I have attained my
hand." When my turn came, I was near Her
hand and She put some Amla Oil-oil in India,
you get - on my head. And She asked me
how do I feel. I said, "Very fine." She asked
thoughtless state. "What did you see in the
morning?"
me my name and She was very happy to be
"Mother, I saw you in meditating
hearing my name. Anyway, so this was it.
pose."
Avdhut Pai
"For all people whom I gave Self
Realization yesterday, I was meditating in the
morning for them. As you all are new and do
not understand, you are fortunate that you
His search for God led us
I got my first Realization on 12th
August, 1973. The credit for this Realization
saw Me."
Raolbai
goes to my eldest brother, Maruti, who had a
yearning for getting Realization for a number
of years. His search for God led us to meet
She was very happy to be hearing my
Mataji.
name
On a fine day of 12th August, we read
I got my Realization on the fourteenth
of April 1972 in a place called-it was big an article written by one Marathi newspaper
editor about Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga and
apartment called Jeevan Jyot. It was owned
by Shipping Corporation of India and since
Sir CP was the chairman of the Shipping
that led us to approach him in his office. We
went to see him and he explained how things
had happened to him. He told us to visit
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan on that same day.
We left his place and went to Bharatiya Vidya
Corporation, Shri Mataji used to receive
people in Her house every day in '72', before
going to America.
would relate the first experience of Bhavan about three o'clock and, to our
surprise, nobody was there to tell us what
meditation. I was told to sit quiet for some
Sahaja Yoga is. We came out of the hall and
time and with closing my eyes. I might have
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-55.txt 
 Nov & Dec. 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV isue: 11 & 12
54
meditated on each charka and discovered the
telephoned back to his office, asking, "Where
secrets of each one, like Mooladhara, what it
do we find Mataji?" He said, "Oh, this is not
looks like, what are qualities and so on. Every
the time. You must come after six or seven
in the evening.
night I would meditate for eight hours. I have
worked hard for all of you and now you have
On the very same day in the evening
to work hard and meditate in the morning. I
would work eight hours on every charka. I
we again went to Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan,
where Mataji was giving Realization to a very
would request you people to work for one
few people, ten or fifteen people. We both of
houron every charka for eight days and then
us sat there and, this being a very early stage
move on. Like every morning, meditate for
of Sahaja, Mataji was Herself working hard
one hour on Mooladhara for eight days and
to give Realization and raising our kundalinis.
then move on to Swadisthana and so on.
To my great surprise, when She touched my
fontanelle, on my head, there was a flash Then you all will learn the secrets and shakti
of all the charkas."
and I saw - so-called-at that time I was not
knowing it was the Agnya charka - a Christ
crucified. It was for five or six seconds, just
Raolbai
I am like the source
a flash. I myself wondered why I myself
I also remember this meeting we had
being a Hindu and a great hater of
Christianity-should get a vision of a crucified with Mother. She gave us this sort of
Christ. But I didn't speak anything at that time.
I started enjoying it. I just closed my eyes
meditation in Her lounge, you know, where
we were seven or eight people. We were
Maureen, Gus, from the early days, Pat,
and Mother said, "You got Realization at the
Douglas. At some stage Mother was trying
to sort of teach us who She was, trying to tell
Us who She was. And then She said, "The
very first sitting."
Niranjan Mavinkurve
power of God actually just goes to the back
of Me. I am like the source and it's just flowing
This is nirmal vidya
She would explain how we have to
behind Me." And that is when we started
remain in the collectivity and behave as
realizing that Mother was trying to tell us who
Sahaja Yogis. She always gave and is giving
importance to meditation. She made all of She was. And then She was trying to work
us meditate and one by one put attention on
on our Mooladharas. And Gus was saying that
all the charkas. This Mooladhara and then he saw Mother as Shri Ganesha, He was
quite struck by it and he was very surprised.
you go upwards and so on. "This is nirmal
He hadn't seen Mother in that aspect.
vidya and nobody has taught Me all this, nor
have I read any book," She would say. "I have
Djamel Metouri
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-56.txt 
 Nov. & Dec. 2003
55
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 11 & 12
the names of Herself. As She pointed out,
Reading the praise of the Goddess
One time when we had a puja, the She said, "This is very strange because
you've got the Goddess reading the praise of
the Goddess, which is rather unusual."
puja sort of started in the morning and went
on through the whole of the day. And one
particular puja, one of the very early pujas,
we had a havan outside and we had this book
Because She was the only one who could
read them. But whilst we were there-and
was really cold outside, it was late in the year-
and the whole sky opened up like a great big
of the thousand Sanskrit names of the
Goddess. This was, I believe, actually the
halo above us. The sky was quite dark, but
first puja in praise of Shri Mataji and was at
there was a whole light patch above where
Her house at Parklands, Hurst Green. We
we were because the vibrations that were
were sitting round there putting stuff on the
given out had sort of caused the sky to open.
Douglas Fry.
havan and Shri Mataji was actually reading
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-57.txt 
 19
Heey
nans
bludo orw.nIO
HOANGAAMN
Hque
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-59.txt 
 OEARIKY
