The Divine Cool Breeze 00 Volume: XV Issue: 9 & 10 September - October, 2003

 ++

 Public Programme, Delhi, 24.3.2003 6. Inauguration - Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram, 27.3.2003 The importance of Meditation, 1.2.1975 22 How to overcome Ego and Know Thyself, 18.11.1979 28 The Bhaswrasuri 29 Predictions frorm Gyaneshwari, 12.2.1984 37 T am the Holy Ghost, New York, 30.9.1981 2.

 PUBLIC PROGRAMME Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium, New Delhi, 24th March, 2003 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Your warm welcome moves my heart happened ! Could I do it alone? You with joy. I do not know what to say and what not to say. I do not even know what have taken care of it, brought it to a higher pedestal and have worked hard for it. How much I thank you, I do not know! to tell you today, on this occasion, It is a big achievement that thousands of because most of you are Sahaja Yogis. And those who are not will also be people have entered this New Life and transformed, everytime it so happens. a New Light has dawned in them. It is There were times when the attainment beyond anybody's understanding and of Sahajayoga in life used to be very belief that such a thing has happened. difficult. But now the things have But it has taken place. People from all changed. Now your Kundalini could be castes and creeds have got their awakened very easily. Without any Realization. They are not from any difficulty you could attain that state where particular strata of life; there is no high or low. Thousands of people have it is said that the soul resides within you, and within you that miracle should take received Realization, not only in India but place which makes you familiar with your also in other countries. Still we have to soul (Atma). This state was very difficult give it to many many more people. All the problems of our country will get to get in the olden days. Only a few achieve it as a result of penance of could solved by it (Sahaja Yoga). The problems of all those who have got it have been solved. They have developed thousands of years, living in Jungles and serving the saints and seers. But in this a new outlook, it is co-incidence that all age if people do not receive their Self- those who have received it are working Realization then, no one knows, what it out. I know only this much that this was to happen and it has happened. I never would happen to them and what abyss they will fall in. May be that it is the reason why Sahaja Yoga is working out thought that it will gain so much of in this Kaliyuga. momentem. Thave to say only this much that those Your contribution is also there in its who have got their Realization, should spreadment. Thousands have become not confine it to themselves. They should give it to others, distribute it among other Sahaja Yogis, and every one could give realization. Such a big thing has

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 Septermber & October 2003 that people ask me, "Mother from where people. By giving, their joy will increase. have they got so much of knowledge?" Joy will be doubled by giving. There is no doubt about it that it is not something to be confined to yourself. It is to be This knowledge has awakened from within. It has awakened in them from within, where else has it come? It is the given, and this giving will give you joy. I hope you all will derive joy by distributing dawn, the expression of that supreme spirit that resides within. With it they it. know as to what is the Truth and what is For years together I have worked hard ahead of it. in India and also put very hard work in l explained it to my might. Now I find foreign countries. Now you have to do more than me. Only then ignorance could that people absorb it very easily. In be destroyed in world. The world is villages where people are not much submerged in deep ignorance. Today educated, they have understood Sahaja there is one problem and tomorrow there Yoga so well and they explain it so nicely! I am myself amazed to see their style. Delhi people have done wonders. is another. You have to be prepared to set it right. Those who have received it, (Self-Realization) they should increase There is no ill-will. People here, are very it, spread it and give it to others. You open-minded. I remained with them as much as I could. Now I cannot give them should not lose temper on any excuse. You have to be very peaceful. This power much time. However, they have become will workout in you and with that power experts. Working themselves they have understood Sahaja Yoga and have you will transform others. For me it is a big achievement that so taken it to great heights. I am surprised to see that such much work has been done in Delhi. I remember in the beginning when I came ordinary people knew so much, they here, people knew nothing. They went have so much of knowledge! Many of their own way. Gradually they developed them are illiterates but they are so expert and knowledgeable that one is and gained balance in every way. With experience they realized the astonished as to how they have known so much and how they do so much of weaknesses and problems of human beings. Slowly they were trained. Now work. We have still to open some they have become so knowledgeable more fronts. Firstly we should talk of

 September & October 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue:9& 10 patriotism. It is essential to be patriotic. We should know the historical facts and There is no use forgetting them. Not only that but we have to spread these also how so many people sacrificed ideals in other countries. All the everything for the sake of the country. It's misunderstanding about our country will vanish and we shall be able to tell others necessary that you should have that'How great our country is'. Our good points should come up. By them people knowledge of it and you should talk to people about it. It's a great country and will know the greatness of our country. many great people incarnated in this want to say that you should all be very land. But now some curse has fallen on respectful to your country, to those who us. Many people came to us from have made sacrifices for the country, to abroad. Because of them we could not open our hearts to the people. But it is necessary to tell the people about all this. In foreign countries also it was told what those who have upheld the Truth and sacrificed their lives for the sake of Truth. You should have knowledge of such saintly people. Sahaja Yoga doesn't mean that you know only the greatness excesses were committed in India but that doesn't mean that you should know of this country. You also have to know its tradition, take to its culture. what the people of this country suffered. Under what difficult circumstances they It's the age in which we have lived! If you have understood it then you might have realized how great our developed likings only for imported goods and we have taken to the path of foreigners. It has done enormous harm to the people. How much difficulty it has put us in! Know the greatness and glory of your country and see it in your life and country is and what a monstrous upheaval it has gone through. When you become aware of it then you will be proud of your country and think what a great country it is. The culture of our country is very high. Nowhere else one lives of others. There are wonderful could find such a culture. I have gone to traditions here. By running away from these traditions we are going away from so many countries but our culture it. We stood on truth and because of that teaches us to respect everyone, love everyone, love the country and also it has big-big ideals. We have to follow those we have to face innumerable difficulties. You have to accept it. But the person ideals. standing on truth becomes immortal.

 cRT September & October 2003 n The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 something which adds to the glory of our Nothing is good or bad for him. He is respectable, worthy of worship and to country. There are number of things a big which Sahaj Yogis have to do and they become like him will be have been doing also. Their lives have achievement. Butstill we don't recognise become so beautiful. Whether it is in the our country and instead of becoming its ornaments, we go on imitating others. It does not behove Sahaj Yogis; and I know family or outside, people praise them and say that how beautiful the lives of Sahaj Yogis do not do such things. But we have to téll it to others also that there is pride of country, self-pride and different Sahaj Yogis have become! Firstly the blessings of the spirit and secondly the subtle outlook which makes you know and recognise goodness. Without that types of ideals of life. I think gradually it subtle outiook you are not Sahaj Yogis. There is a lot to say but I am thinking will develop. The number of Sahaj Yogis has increased. It has increased so much that many such people are present here that there is no need for me to tell much. who have not experienced their spirit. It Sahaj Yogis will themselves do this work. What I have to say is that if you are is necessary to have a session of Self- Sahaj Yogis then method and system of Realization for them. You should all stretch your hands towards me and sit your life should be that of an ideal Indian. silently, peacefully. Now please close Caste and religion should not be cared your eyes. Both the hands towards me for. The only significant fact is that you and close your eyes. Keeping your eyes closed, now say 'Shri Mataji' please give us Self-Realization' (say it in your heart are an Indian and it is your duty to be glory of the country and enjoy living in that glory. You should take care of each and every tradition of your country, its - without speaking). Keep your eyes music, art, craft and architecture. All closed and feel whether you have cool these were wonderful. Now-a-days that standard could not be maintained but breeze or hot blowing from your hands. If you are feeling this breeze then stretch your right hand towards me and left hand atleast we should understand them and see those standards. Indians should overyour head and feel. Are you feeling the cool breeze over your head? have this quality. They should know that so much great work has been done in May God Bless You All. this country and we should also do

 Inaugration Ceremony - NGO Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram, Greater Noida (27-03-2003) the children are also thrown out of house. You must allow me to speak in Hindi language. Out of the various problems of our country, one big problem is that How could this system change in our country? Is there any remedy for it or not? Many a times I thought of writing about it but ultimately I concluded that there will here, there are different standards for men and women. I don't know how it has be no use of writing. Some permanent creeped in because nowhere in our scriptures we were commanded to do arrangement has to be made about it, that. It's written in our religious books, something has to be done. I wanted to "Yatra Narya Pujyanté Tatra Ramanté do something concrete. I have seen Devta'. Devas (the deities) reside where many such women who are begging on the road-sides. People told me that it is a women are worshipped. I don't nice way to beg. I replied, 'you will realise it only if only if you are made to beg'. The indifferent attitude that people of our country have developed for women understand how this state was developed in which we have no respect for women. I was myself married in U.P. and was surprised to see that women makes me weep. That is why I resolved had no significance in domestic life. to do something for shelter and food for There was no differance between the these poor women. Something must be done. The poor women beg on the roads, maid servents and the ladies of the house. How did it happen and why is it do everything. I called them at my house, talked to them. However I could not find continuing? Because people are not awakened to this problem. The way women have been treated, thrown out of any reason for their undergoing this the houses, makes one weep. Without travail. Man develops liking for any woman. I don't know why? The life of any reason women are thrown out of the women is very great. It is the foundation house. I had many such experiences of the whole world. They give birth to which anguished me. I don't understand thousands of children but people treat why the women are being tortured like them so insultingly that poor woman that! There is no arrangement for them goes to the brink of madness, tolerating to live. Once they go out of the house then all this. Because of her children she tries there is no one to look after them. Poor to face all atrocities very bravely. But ladies were thrown out with their small children. Those women are destitutes but what should she do? They have no

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 means to feed themselves what should circumstances it will get spoiled. As an they do, where to go and from whom to experiment I have used it but it is a beg. No one allows them to knock at the wonderful thing. I don't know why our door. I could see no remedy to it, so I industry doesn't make things like that! It thought that the best thing for these is not difficult to make such a thing. I told women would be to build a dwelling for many people to use it, but then who will bother. There is neither difficulty nor them. Here they will learn something, learn to do some work-massaging, botheration. But Indians do not want to running small restaurants etc. But many change, they let the things go as they are. people are needed to help them, to make What could you say to them? In this them understand. Some place is also country there were many scholars and needed for them. With this target I have Sanskrit Pandits. They have imparted built this ashram and through this, knowledge in abundance. But people challanged the emotions of everyone. I are not aware of it as to what a great have challenged the love of the whole country they are born in and how much world so that people could see them with knowledge is there in it. They have no love. There is no fault of these poor respect for women. Women are treated women. Responsibility of their begging like beggars. Husbands drink alchohal and beat their wives and those who do from door to door lies on the shoulders not beat, give no facility to them. Some of our society. Being a woman, it moves me and I am anguished to see all this. When the construction startedI girl belongs to rich parents then it is all wished to complete it somehow. Put a lot right, otherwise they are tortured. That is of hard work on it and made a design of how, many women have become how the poor women have to live. If the backward. Some of them have left their it. Its speciality is that the white colour houses and are begging. Some of them are rotting in the domesticity. They keep weeping in the house and somehow getting on with the life. I do not know why you are seeing is such that it will not get spoiled with a special technique it has been made. I learnt this technique in Itly. There I learnt to make such a colour which will never fade. Use it and see how the attention of the society, particularly beautiful it is! It will not be spoiled with in U.P., has not been drawn to it. In Maharashtra two-three social reformers any quantity of water falling on it. In no

 September & October 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 sufficient and practice Sahaja Yoga. came up and they did a lot of work in this they achieve it then they will be able to direction. Universities were established live with pride and self respect. We could there because of them. Women were given high education and people could set up some art and craft work and also see potential in them. Now we have built could we make many eatables and this institution and I request you to impart high level education, Then the capability of women would be judged suggest as to what could be done here. and seen that how many of them could Which education could we impart? We be self-sufficient. have also thought a lot about it but you Some times we find that women are are also well informed. You write to me misused even on such places, but those what else we could do for the betterment of these women. I have seen in foreign who try to be self-sufficient they should be helped, they should be looked after. What is being done in our society is very harmful. It is the sign of wickedness but we pay no heed to it. I don't know how? We should give some attention to it. The respect that we should have for woman countries that no one could harass women like this. Their condition is not so bad. It is the speciality of our country that women are put to misery. I have been living abroad for many years and have noticed this difference. It hurts me to see is absent. We torture them, beat them for that there is no value of women in our nothing. I have such stories of tortured country. Woman gives birth to children, women which if I tell you, you will not be looks after them. Also Indian women are able to control your tears. I have wept very charming, active, efficient and very over it a lot, but now I want to find out loving, Indian mothers are very famous. some solution to it. To achieve this end I But there is no respect for their love in have made this small effort. It would be our country. I don't know why? Western expanded later on. The women who are women have formed their fronts and imparted training there, they will mature managed everything for themselves. But there is no one to take care of them in and do something in their lives. They this country. With the idea to impart would be able to take care of themselves knowledge and technique to girls and and their children, lead their lives women who come here, we built up this respectfully. It is very necessary, however Ashram so that they could be self- educated and trained may, the woman,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 the miserable state of the women of ur be they are not respected in their homes. What do the poor creatures do? Even country before these people? They are their education is nor respected. proud of this country. Whenever they Therefore we should direct our efforts to come to India they touch the earth of this impart some such training to women so country and bow before it. They respect it so much that I have no words to express it. I never told them to do it. From that they are not insulted. We should also realise that we have to respect the woman and have faith in them. I have their own minds they have faith in it and seen such inhuman deeds that, one regard this country as 'Nandan Van' but they don't know the miserable condition that prevails over here. I don't want them to know about it. What is the use of cannot believe, are possible from one human being for another one. How could human beings cheat, harrass and torture the another one. Its a strange slavery! We criticising our own country? But at the have gained independence from the same time the short comings need to be removed. They should be finished slavery of Britishers but freedom from the completely. That is what I am telling to slavery of our own social system is more all of you that there is no specific reason essential than that. The number of women in.our country, is at least 70%, for women being respected in Western countries. But their laws are such. In India the remaining are men. Inspite of it, men have so much of ego that they don't no one bothers about the condition of allow the women to lead their lives with women and men think no end of self respect, like human beings. They are themselves. The women are very important part of the society and you and you children will have to face the results of all the excesses done to women. Now no animals. They are human beings and to give them respect of human beings is absolutely necessary. We have to understand and respect them. We have we find our children getting spoiled to start from our own house and see what because who is there to control them? is going on there. I have seen it very Mother has no right and father no time. So who will look after the children and closely but there was no other way out put them on right path. Its the story of but weeping over it. each family. I have seen in U.P. that the Knowingly i am talking in Hindi language because how could I tell about college boys absent themselves from the

 September & October 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue:9& 10 10 college and get into trains and loot the the guidance of woman. The way things are happening here, I hope the small effort will bring some improvements and passengers. What could their poor mothers do? The poor mothers could say it will attract the attention of people and nothing, no one listens to them. This they will be drawn towards the problem outlook should be changed and attention should be given to the progress and for which I have been worrying and weeping throughout. People should see social status of our women. If it begins in every domesticity then things will that by Sahaja Yoga your spirit is improve all over. These conditions awakened and you have the knowledge anguish me extremely. Men failed to of the spirit. But you should have a accept the right of women. So I thought compassionate outlook towards others to spend on this project. Now such a after getting self-realization. Without compassion what's the use? Compassionately if you look, you will be concerned to see as to what miserable place is built which attracts attention of the people. Atleast some respect should be given to women. In our lives we could whirl our mothers and sisters have see their conditon. First of all we have to caught in. So its my request to you, to go all around and improve the state of see the condition of our own mothers and sisters and then look to the society. The women. I have done small effort but you improvement in the condition of women could do a lot. So l request you all to love will have our country to rise very high. your mothers and sisters as you love me. Abundant blessings to all of you. Many great people have come up under

 THE IMPORTANCE OF MEDITATION Prabha Devi, Bombay, 1st Feb. 1975 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi is that?" He replied, "I must go there, have to save time, time is very important" lasked, "after all, what is the matter? Why The most important thing to progress and ascend in Sahaja Yoga is that you have to meditate. Meditation is very essential. You may or may not do any are you saving time and running to other effort but if you establish yourself London?" He said,"there is a special dinner which I have to attend and after in meditation then you could progress in dinner there is a ball (dance)." What are Sahaja Yoga. As I told you it's a new path, a new you saving the time for? The wrist watch that you are wearing dimension, a new system in which you is meant for Sahaja Yoga and meditation have jumped. You have entered into your and also to do the Sahaja work. I am unconscious, into that great ocean, it is wearing it only for this purpose, alright but if you wish to penetrate deep otherwise I would not have used it. into it then you will have to meditate. I have heard many people saying, "Shri Mataji, we do not get time to time in Sahaja Yoga is not free from meditate." Modern man of today keeps domestic duties. Sahaj work is no excuse Someone who spends most of his to get rid of official duties. You have to do watch all the time only to save time, but he doesn't know as to why he is saving all the duties but everything should be done in the state of meditation. this time. Human being has invented Everything would be done in the state of watch only for Sahaja Yoga; he is not meditation because you have been aware of this fact. One gentleman came and said," It's established in the state of meditation. You can do everything in thoughtless very necessary for me to go to London and I have to go by this very plane, awareness. As soon as you get into thoughtless awareness, the beauty, the whole knowledge and the joy of the work somehow or other my ticket should be booked. Please do something, talk to Air India people and do something."I asked, starts pouring into you. what's the urgency? Why do you want to It's necessary to understand, but go to London? What's the problem? What people do not understand it and the problem begins that they get no time for particular job you have to do there? What

 September & October 2003 12 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 9 & 10 getting very deep within, but some Sahaj meditation. However, when you start Yogis are very perplexed. I do not know receiving the joy of it then, you will be surprised; sleep is reduced to a large whether all of them could reach that state or not. But one has to do everything extent and you go in meditation. Even while sleeping you will think as if you possible in this life. Maximum time should be spent for it, everything else is were in meditation. You have neither to give up nor to reduce anything. All that insignificant. was significant to us iooses it's significance and which we regarded of various things but how many of you Most of the people, I have seen, talk talk of meditation, of cleansing insignificant becomes very significant. You have to remember that the yourselves and of enhancing the joy within? 'Such and such person said so, instrument which you are going to play into meditation, the Veena (aijun) on which such and such thing happened, that should not have been done, this should this beautiful music is to be played, has not have been done'-does it behove a to be very neat and clean. You are neither Sahaj Yogi? When you have got such a that Veena nor the prelude to singing huge wealth of Thoughtless Awareness, (Aalaap) but you are going to listen to it or to play it, you are the master of it. should it not be unfolded fully? You know it well that every moment Therefore, if the Veena is not properly you are getting it, but at the same time tuned, if its chords are rusted, or if some of the chords are broken, then, it's you are loosing it every moment. How significant this moemnt is, that you have necessary to set them right. If the chords I have never told you to renounce to see. of the instrument are not in a perfect or adopt anything but this is your illusion; condition then there could be no sweetness in your life, there could be no your mind is pushing you in illusion. beauty in you. There will be a strange Would you renounce your domestic life? Have I renounced my family life? How irritancy (Fast44), a strange dryness and a strange perplexity in you. could I ask you to do that? You know it well that I work more than you but I never Seeing a Sahaj Yogi sitting in get tired because you people are the meditation with a firm mind is a big thing 1 source of my joy. When I see you I get for me. I see that many Sahaj Yogis are

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 September & October 2003 13 & 10 very happy, my whole being is filled with The way Himalaya is highest in the world, everyone looks to it, you have to joy. Look to what is significant, I don't ask be like that, You yourself could be like Himalaya and see people of the world you to sit in meditation twenty four hours looking at you and saying, I should also a day. Keep on wherever you are, that is what I mean. Wherever you are become like that person who has risen so high in Sahaja Yoga.' The ascent is established, remain there, at your place, internal not external and I know about on your throne. everyone as to who has reached which Some people ascend because of it but some do not. Diseases of the body of level. many of you have got cured, many have no diseases at all but still doubts of the You are the only obstacle for yourself, no one else could be an obstacle for you, no one could affect you by mantras- mind continue to be there. tantras etc. Without spoiling yourself if you try to know the other people then you will understand that some negativity has gripped that person. That is why, he is Forget everything, every human being has the right to get it. It is your birth right because it is 'Saha+Ja', born with you. will have to meditate and that But you talking in such a way, otherwise no one too collectively. You don't have to bother does like that. The way he is talking, there to organise it, need not bother much to is definitely some negativity in him. There is no need to accept him. May be, that he is your husband or she is your organise it. That work is being done and it will be done. How does it matter if the number of people is ten more or ten less! It's better to keep ten worthy people than wife, there is no need either to quarrel or to argue with hìm; they will improve by thousand useless ones. These ten people are very significant for Sahaja themselves. Not only that, you also know that in Yoga. You have to be one of these ten case of some catch how could you set it significant people. One of those who are right by the movement of your hands. doing Sahaj work very happily, enjoying Such a power is flowing through your hands! All the deities that I have talked of have been awakened in your fingers- themselves of it, flowing in it, advancing in it and those who stand in the front row.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 14 in these five fingers, and in the palm all to think that, I do this work, I do that work." It's getting done as 'it is going and it is the deities are awakened. But it's important that these deities are not coming'. Now you have to get into the state of 'Akarma'-the way the Sun never insulted in anyway. You have to take says, 'I give you light.' 'He is giving'. utmost care of these deities and all efforts should be made in this direction. They because it is flowing the energy of the God-the most powerful energy, from should be worshipped. Our hands should be worthy of worship. People should within. Similarly, very subtle powers are think,these are hands or the streams of flowing from you because you are a subtle machine. You are not a machine Ganges'! The stream of Ganges should like the sun, you are a 'special' machine flow. The power that sanctified the which is very subtle and the beautiful Ganges, those vibrations (that chaitanya) is flowing from you. The power that runs vibrations that flow from you, no doubt give very soothing (strange) experience the whole creation is flowing from you, not only to you but to others as well. you are aware of this fact. These vibrations set alright their subtle Therefore, the hands and the feet from aspects, small-small instruments and which this energy flows should be kept very pure. I don't mean to say that you machine with great love. keep washing your hands and feet all the times. Whatever you do with your How do I explain this fact to you? If you hands should be done beautifully, have to prepare some machine then it Now this power is the 'power of love'. could be done by tightening some screw naturally and with love. Love is the most or by filing it with something but the significant element. To gain depth in meditation is your human machine which has been only work, nothing else is so important. Everything else is going on. Whosoever wounded could be set right only by love. Human beings have many wounds in them and they are very tortured beings. amongst you, if thinks that I do this work, You have to fill their wounds with the balm I do that work, then you know I let loose my Maya (element of illusion) and many have suffered for it. However, I shall keep of love. The vibrations which are flowing from you are nothing else but love. When the stream of your love stops flowing, the on doing it. I have already told you never

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 15 meditation. The moment you look at the flow of your vibrations also stops. Many people tell me, "Shri Mataji, I thoughts that come while meditating, you will get into the unconscious state along have got some catch. The flow of vibrations in my hands has stopped." with your consciousness. Your The stream of love within you has consciousness never ends. In that state discontinued to flow. Stick to your you will understand consiousness. First time it has happened in the body of the love, keep holding it tightly and your human being that one knows about one's vibrations will continue. Because this is the love of the God which is flowing. own body and about the body of others as well. Through collective concious- Only that is flowing. It is such a unique experience, such ness you know what is happening in other person's instrument. a unique time has come. Because in it Till now very few people know its you have not co-operated with me whole- heartedly, shall it all be wasted.? significance. Everyone says to me, "Shri Mataji if you take money from everybody, You yourself can know everything and I am also ready to explain it to you only then they will understand because wherever you fail to understand. money carries utmost importance in their However, there is a suggestion to give minds. Money is an apparition. If you that you have to think whether you understand its significance by my deserve it or not. Because you come in accepting money from you, then it is my attention-like in Marathi language it better not to understand it. By giving is said Jamoon aale'. That does not money, you can't understand its make you deserving. The depth within importance. You have to give yourself fully to me and with that surrender how makes you deserving. For example, there is a pitcher (TR), much you are likely to gain! There is no doubt that you will get many times more it will contain the quantity of water than what you give. For meditation you have to come in according to its depth. If it has no depth then what is the use of pouring water in it, the whole water will flow out. With collectivity, it is imperative. Though it is meditation you increase you depth, get once in a month but you should meditate established in meditation, go in where seven (some) people sit

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9810 16 September & October 2003 because it is not something to be taught. collectively to meditate. You may have If your hands are shaking then you a small group who could sit for should know that there is some serious meditation once a week and gather once in a big group. I told you it is the work of problem in you. Shoe beating is the best treatment for it. Yesterday, you might have the Virata. You have to awaken every part of the seen one fellow came and started saying, "Mother, there I went in a state of body, as soon as it is awakned the lights stupor." Then he came in front of me and started shaking. I asked him as to who will get lit up. However you meditate at home, you realise on my arrival that no his guru was? He replied, "one Bhagwat progress has been made. But the six- Sa in Poona," so I asked, what does he seven persons who used to come here daily have made lot of progress. do? He replied,"that he has opened a If there is fluttering in the eyes then spiritual centre over there; he gave me deeksha (initiation)". I asked, what you immediately know that Aganya deeksha did he do? He said,"he taught Chakra is being hit. There is nothing to me the technique of this shaking. For feel bad about it. If Aganya Chakra is not I have suffered from alright then it should be cleared sixteen years diseases, I lost my job, I suffered this, I otherwise the joy is reduced. While meditating if your body is suffered that," I asked, are you not awakened still? If you have a guru then shaking and if you are not able to sit comfortably then you should know that you should not have all these problems. there is problem in mooladhara and this "How much money did you pay to him could be a dangerous situation. When so far?" "I have paid rupees five-six the mooladhara is affected then it should thousand to the centre". I said, you have be got cured. These people know how nicely bought all these diseases for rupees five-six thousands! Then shoe- to cure the mooladhara chakra. So far as the knowledge is concerned, beating was done to his ghost-the by listening to my lectures you could, Bhagwat Sahab and the centre. Dnly know all the scriptures. But I find many then his hands stopped shaking. It all happened before all of you, many people new seekers, sometimes, ascend with more speed and leave you behind were here.

 17 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue:9& 10. September & October 2003 should be more active than the old Very clearly it should be asked from people. If the elderly people are worthy the people that do they have some guru or some negativity. If there is a problem, of respect, they will be respected. So, they have to be worthy and the there is nothing to feel bad about it. But I see if one person has a little problem, youngsters should respect them. Even otherwise Sahaj Yogis should the another possessed one also stands with him; they make a queue together not disrespect other Sahaj Yogis and you could know that all these because you are all divine personalities. You can know all this in meditation. While talking to each other if you think deeply then you will immediately know that. "Oh! his Agya Chakra is catching. That is why negative people are sitting together. Actually they should not sit like that, they should sit separately. But they sit as if making a group. It's wrong. Like, Thane it is happening." Oh! his heart is catching people will come and sit with the Thane people and so-on. Šit separately, it's that is why it is getting done, that is why the proper sounds are not emanating". You will not feel bad about it nor will the necessary. Don't sit in groups. Another thing is that there are some old people, some middle aged and some other people do. But feeling bad is a 'big problem', a youngsters. There is nothing wrong with big obstruction. People take ill of what I the children but those who are old or middle-aged should sit separately. Old say, what to taik of others. You should not feel bad about anything that I say. I always poeple should sit with the young and work for your benevolence-you know it. young ones with the old. Four-five young people sitting together will create While discussing anything you should problem and same is with the old ones. see that we are discussing about it, now, "where is our Kundalini, where are we It happens, you may see. The experience going, how are we ascending. All other of the old and young age is to be shared and it could be shared in collective discussions are useless. How much are consciousness. The old people need to we awakned in dharma?" How much be wise, very wise-elderly qualities and large heart-and the younger ones should have we achieved? How much divine joy we are enjoying?" These experiences are to be told to each other. This is what pay respect to the elders. Youngsters

 September & October 2003 18 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 you have to share, everthing else is put your fingers in the ears and your useless. Its better to keep silent about Sahasrara is opened then you could other matters. If Sahaj Yogis become listen through it even if your eyes and such people then there will be a big ears are closed. So the deaf boys that differece-a very big difference'. came started listening to some extent. If your Sahasrara is opened, doctors You are going to reflect Sahaja Yoga know it well that there are certain subtle and the reflector should be very clean. If points, subtle centres in the limbic area the reflecting power of the reflector is fully which perform the functions of nose, awakned then there will be no difficulty. ears, mouth and other organs of the body. By no other means-no other methods, by making big big organisations, by We awaken that Sahasrara which takes care of the whole body. Then there chanting big mantras or singing music could we work out Sahaja Yoga? remains no need of the sense organs You could also breath from Sahasrara. Even if, all sense Nothing could be achieved by all these methods. organs of the body are rendered useless never saw so many realised people as I am seeing today. Its my goods luck still you could do all the functions However the organs are not rendered thatI am seeing so many realised people. useless. By the awakening of Sahasrara In no age I saw so many self realised your body starts blooming. It gets people. Its a matter of great fortune. But the way I say there is no perfect beautified. All the diseases run away. saint (sadhu) in this modern age. You Everything is all-right. Some small people were the great saints in olden problems, if arise, they also get solved. To make progress in meditation one times but you were not involved in this world. You were in forests but today you are here living with the other people of thing is very essential, very essential. We call it innocence. Purity & innocence of child. That is why you have seen children the world. What a joy will it be to get into get their realisation in no time. But the your saintliness. The Saraswati will start flowing along with this Ganges and cunning, those who think no end of themselves, those who have no desire Yamuna. to get connected to the Divine and who No outer sounds will disturb you. If you

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 remembering their innocent utterings. keep on showing their cleverness, such Those who become innocent get entitled people do not get their realisation so easily. One should be fully innocent. to the kingdom of God. While meditating, look within and Effort should be made for it. see what tricks my mind is playing? Where is it moving? What foolishness is it committing? The moment you see We should not trouble anyone. Troubling anyone is against innocence. Troubling so many souls, how could we be innocent? Innocence means it, immediately you go into thoughtless. 'Thoughtlessness'- this something bloomed like flower that gives is innocence. fragrance to the whole world. It troubles Now you will go in meditation, we may none. However, sometimes people are not meditate for a long time. But while troubled because of their foolishness. Its going in meditation you have to see right. Getting sure of yourself, you should which one of your chakra is catching. All not trouble others. You have now got the switch of of you who have got Self-Realisation. innocence. I tried to see if you have made know it well. You could feel it on your such a switch? If you have that switch fingers as to which finger has burning sensation. Put bandhan to the burning then put it on and your Agya Chakra will be cleared immediately. But you do not finger and the burning will go. If the fingers are burning too much, toss your have the switch of innocence, switch of hands and it will go away, you know it. compassion, the switch of peace. All the Put a bandhan. switches have not been created in you But be in thoughtlessness and keep so far. First of all, you awaken the deities who are sitting within you then all the the attention on Sahasrara. See whether those who have come for the first time switches will be commissioned in you, have got their Self-Realisation or not. V len one by one. It is the easiest to put the switch of What is their problem? What are their catches? It will all be removed, all these innocence because when we were born aek and were very small, we were innocent. Innocence develops in the company of problems are external. This is a big dedication where energy small children, by talking to them, by flows from both the sides, where there is

 September & October 2003 20 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 expression of left and right sympathetic are also burning-what could be done other than cleansing. I am unable to sit. nervous system-from that channel Also, you know many other methods of within, it is the channel of Sushumna. By cleansing. There is nothing to feel bad if doing this, Sushumna starts working, but it should be awakened. If it is not I asked someone to sit in water and cleanse himself, there is nothing to feel awakened then it means Sushumna is bad about it. How foolish it is to feel bad not working out. The meaning of about it? How foolish it is to take ill of it? awakening is that cool breeze will start People think what Shri Mataji has said? emanating from your fingers. If you have Are you such a great saint? You don't this cool breeze flowing, if you are fully in thoughtless state in meditation, then know that even the big saints do it (Cleansing). As I have said about Kabir Dasa -ara you are progressing and ascending. Like, you sit in an aeroplane, you do not know used with great care? where you are going, yet you reach chalk sida Kabir said of himself that,"I used this somewhere. "body' with great care". He was such a So long as we are here it is necessary then what is there that all the Sahaja Yogis should great person (H to feel bad about it? participate in it and even after my going If some one is told to bring pitcher they should not spoil this collectivity. If (HEa), he will feel bad about it! Some you talk useless things then you will suffer for it. Anyone talking of any people bring so big pitcher! Give up all the useless and stupid external thing, anything except Sahaja imaginations. No childishness-not at all. Yoga and the spirit, that is within, shall You have to be child like not childish. suffer. No worldly thing is to be talked. Now we shall go in meditation. As I Talk of the spirit. said, first tell yourself with love. You Clear your chakras. There is nothing to feel shy about it. The catches of know I am your Mother. Know it fully well that I am your Mother. Know it fully wel chakras arise due to external problems. Boldly cleanse the chakras and get rid that I am your mother and having a security, full Mother means full of the catches. Those who have burning hands should cleanse them. My hands protection. Nothing will go wrong.

 September & October 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 21 Stretch your hands towards me, slowly ask from the God. Ask for nothing else. close your eyes and watch your Ask for yourself.. thoughts. You will be thought-less. You have to do nothing at all. Immediately on Establish me in your lotus feet. Submerge this drop into your ocean. getting thoughtless you will penetrate within yourself. "Whatever impure is there in me remove it all. Whatever you ask from the First tell yourself that I have decided Divine, will happen... not to hurt anyone today onward, 'O "Make me large hearted, make me Divine forgive everyone', all those who wise. Give me Thy wisdom. Give me Thy have hurt me and also forgive me knowledge." because I have also hurt many people. "Let there be benediction of the whole God will grant you only what you ask world. Let there be kingdom of love in the for. You have to pray that, "O Almighty, whole world. Let my lamp be lit for it. Let make me peaceful", and he will grant you this body dissolve in it. Let my mind be peace but you don't ask for peace. Ask for contentment and he will give you in it. Let my heart be submerged in it." Think of the most benevolent thing satisfaction. But you don't ask for that. and ask from the God. "All that is Give me beautiful character and he beautiful if you ask for, that you will get. If you ask for ugly things, you will get that will grant you beautiful character. also. On asking you will get the ugly also, Prayer means now you are connected the useless also. Then why shall he not to the Divine. "Fill me with love, give me love for give what is worth asking? the whole world". Give me sweetness- Do not ask externally (with lips) but sweetness. You will get whatever you ask from within (with Heart).

 HOW TO OVERCOME EGO AND KNOW THYSELF Dollis Hill, November 18, 1979 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi understand, where you stand for it. How much you have to improve yourself? Because you are the people, who are going to take Sahaja Yoga to that position, A happening by which a creation of God is going to get its fulfilment and is going to know its meaning. It is that great! Perhaps we do not realise it. But when we say, we are Sahaja Yogis; you have to know that, to be Sahaja Yogi how where it has to reach. As far as I am concerned, I have nothing to do anymore. I have done it. Now it is for you to receive, you have to imbibe into it and you have to change the whole thing. That is your job and that is why it is a serious much identified you should be with the Truth of Sahaja Yoga; and so many misidentifications which are hanging on to you, must be got rid of. People call it a sacrifice. I do not think it is a sacrifice. If you think, something is happening in your way, you try to take out that hurdle. In the matter. in The second point: I always have been saying that due to ego problem, we are same way, if you stand out from your very much disintegrated. We are so obstructions, you will be able to disintegrated that, the connection with the understand that, these obstructions are Divine is never properly established. As standing in your way and they are not I have said it, that, this instrument your own and that they are stopping your (through which I am speaking) if it is divided into five parts and all the five progress. So you should let these misidentifications out of your minds parts are fighting with each other, you cannot get anything done through this instrument, though it is connected to the mains. In the same way if you still remain This is one of the problems I think, disintegrated, you cannot get that people have here. Whenever I get any connection. For example, you see complaints, or something of that sort, I people come down here, I have seen, for understand that, still the level of Sahaja Yoga. Now they have other understanding about Sahaja Yoga is not interests and other priorities and other upto that point. It is a tremendous task things which are very important to them. and for that if you are the people, who All the time, they are wasting their time have to come up; and if you are the for that and then they will say that, people, who have to fight it, you have to 'Mother, we are not progressing much in understand it in its full extent and also Sahaja Yoga'. If you decide, as Mr. completely, and try to be more and more yourself and not in tune with misidentifications.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 23 Venugopalan has told you before, that comes to Sahaja Yoga. Still his ego is 'we have to do Sahaja Yoga first and the other things are secondary'-then only the have such a big ego as he has. I mean, Sahaja Yoga can be really established the way he will talk that, 'I don't do these into you. We will have some Sahaja things' and so on. I am myself amazed, Yogis of a very high level. I know that, the way people talk. As if, you see, we will have some of mediocre level. everybody has become the King of so big. Even our Prime Minister won't Some will be absolutely useless and some will be absolutely thrown out. We will have all types, that also I know. Now it is for you to decide, where do you come? How, far you are going to? If England or what, the way they talk! This is something, one should tell people, when they come here. 'Do not waste Shri Mataji's energies in arguing this and that'. Because everybody thinks no end of themselves here. And that is the biggest hurdle that they have, when they even come first time. You find it so difficult. have to show all my appreciation of their ego all the time', to just satisfy them; so that they come round. And that is why, the progress becomes less. Now in his case (Mr. Venugopalan's) you are going to waste your time in thinking about other Sahaja Yogis and small-small things and frivolous things, your disintegration is going to be increased, you are going to be separated much more as all these decisions are taken through your ego e.g. I don't like it, I don't do it. I don't see it'and the like. If you could somehow or other see your he has been a person, who has been to ego working, then you can get rid of it all kinds of horrible Gurus and his wife and that is the thing one has to do; not to also has been to all kinds of horrible fight the ego. I never say fight the ego but Gurus; because of another extreme in surrender it. It is the only way your ego -India we have, that we must respect all the saints. But these types of saints are can go. That is why the progress in the West, fake saints. Not only are they fake saints, as you have seen it, is much less than but some of them are devils. So they are that is in India. Take the particular case not going to say that,"We are devils'. of Shri Venugopalan. He is remarkable. When they do not say that they are devils He is the particular man who is doing or whatever it is, they do not come in their remarkably well. He is holding a very big proper forms. These simple innocent position in India. Here I have seen a people, who are seeking God, just go to person who is, say, a dish washer. He them, give their heart, do everything and

 24 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 understand that, we have a very great responsibility in the West. Because this has to happen in London. It has to happen in England to begin with and that is why you bear a very big responsibility. You have to evaluate yourself and Sahaja Yoga again and again and again and know that what makes you slow is your ego or even superego is there, no doubt. But ego is the main problem. I must tell you that, ego is the main problem but I dare not say to anyone that, this is your ego, because that will just jump on to my head. But, try to see your ego, how it is deviating. Because it is your own joy that you are seeking. Your own property that they find that they are devils. Once they discover that they are devils, then they are surprised. Then they come back and go to another Guru and another Guru. But the harm is done. But they get rid of that harm because they recognise that harm has been done and they know what the truth is and what to expect. It is the blessing of that country that the people know what to expect. You see, people like those good quality people would not like to go and will not go to a man, who shows some sort of sensationalisations or 'Chamatkaras, i.e. miracles. They would not go to them, but they will go to other subtler people, who are very you are seeking. It is your own that is hidden from you, which you have been cunning and put up another kind of a show and just say that, 'no, no, this is the seeking for ages. Now that is what I have to expose to you. What is there to argue with a person, who is trying to give you the highest? It is just a waste of Do not waste your energy on these things, frivolous things and finding faults. Now he has been organising our Delhi Camp. He is the one, who has organised the printing of our books and so on, so smooth, absolutely. I have not way you can attain the highest' and that is how most of the Sahaja Yogis in India also have been. Except for the village people and the district people; most of the city people have been, to some Guru or something. But despite all that, they have left everything. I have told them, 'you have to beat them with shoes;' they will energy. do. In the morning every day he does his sadhana (meditation) for one hour, even if he is a very busy man. Here even to known any problems you just tell them get up in the morning, people grudge. I that 'this has to happen', 'Alright'. I do not mean, what can you do with such slow know how it works out. You have stayed moving people? You see it is absolutely in Delhi. You have seen how many very difficult. And this is what I think, we must you have anybody complaining, anybody people were there. Never a problem. Did

 25 September & October 2003 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 that never will fetch you in any way. quarrelling or anybody fighting among themselves? Nothing of the kind. You see, this is not the sign of You must know that. You are realised intelligence either, all the time trying to souls in this world. How many there are, find faults with each other or trying to who can raise the Kundalini? How many Despise yourself, never! You are saints. there are, who understands what are blame yourself. Both things are wrong. vibrations? The best thing is to grow in wisdom and I am going to tell you on Guru Puja, yourself see that we are becoming wiser and wiser. Some of you are really very what things you have achieved, and how; grown up and some of you still go up and many things you have got within you, down and some of you still very low. So built-in how, which are working. How your all of us have to go together. If somebody chakras are awakened through Sahaja has achieved something, it is of no use Yoga! As he says, 'Yes,' It has happened. to Sahaja Yoga. As I have told you, it is But what are you doing about it? This is the collective thing that is going to work the greatest of the greatest things which and all of you have to work it out. It is so can happen to anyone that you know. Also you know, this is the greatest happening, which was prophesied long time back as the 'last judgement;. You sweet that you have real brothers and sisters all over the world today. When you will go there with a full heart, they are going to receive you, as you have know that this is the way, you are going received them with full heart. But, we all to be judged. So we have to work very hard. We have to work. It is effortlessly given to you, alright. But to maintain it, keep it up to go high, we have to must come up, come up to a point, where we can face each other with full love, with openness, without any worry about any thing, without any fear of anyone; but just religiously work it out. It is a very humble attitude in receiving say they are your brothers and you are their brothers and that you have to more and more and more into your being, imbibing into your being. Let it love them. That is only possible when we get out trickle into your brain completely of our fears here because there is also covering it. Let that eternal bliss come another side to it that ego always has into you. I am so anxious. Do not make fears. Because it aggresses others, and, yourself a small person. Have a bigger that it knows others can aggress it. So vision. Have bigger ideas because now this is a point we have got to think about, you belong to the bigger thing, the

 26 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 biggest of all the Primordial, the highest, and joyous. to the Virata! If you realise your And certain things definitely have importance then you will work it out. See! If you see an Indian Sahaja Yogi, should understand them. Because these you will be amazed! He sleeps only for are the troubles of our own over-thinking two or three hours or four hours. But he and our over-reading and over- will not give up his sadhana. If he can domination. But we can get rid of them get his full sleep, it is alright. First thing very easily. It is just to detach yourself and is to have one hour for sadhana in the see for yourself addressing yourself. morning. He will get it out somehow. But "Now Mister, how are you?" If you say sleep? We have been sleeping all our lives! You have to correct yourself. You go through yourself to see your outer have to rise. You have to go ahead to being. That is very important. The more achieve you own ascent. That is the you see yourself clearly, the better it is. gone wrong with us, we know that, we like that, immediately your attention will point. See your selfishness, I am telling. To not want to face because you are afraid know yourself is the greatest selfishness. of facing yourself. Because you have If you do not know yourself, all the been aggressing others and you are selfishness is useless. As you call it afraid of aggressing in the way that is "Swartha" in Sanskrit. If you break it towards yourself. But there would not be You have to face yourself. And you do there are two words 'Swa' and 'Artha'. If, any aggression because that is the you know the meaning of it, it is your 'swa' means your 'Self' and it is the greatest selfishness. So this is what it is. perfect state where you see yourself. Neither you aggress any one nor you are aggressed by anyone. You just see yourself clearly and that is what you have We are very happy that he is here. We will also be going to India. Next year, we to see. also are planning to go to India and we are going to meet lots of them in Delhi chakras, seeing your problems and you and Bombay. They are all waiting for you. know that how it gradually develops. But They are all planning, how to receive everybody wants quick results. It is you and will be happy that so many of alright, if you want quick results. But are Sahaja Yogis from London and all over you like that? If you are like that you will will be coming. And you know how they get quick results. If you are not, then be look after you and how they are happy patient with yourself. Not with me, but Gradually you start seeing your

 September & October 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 27 with yourself. I am saying, you have to you love everyone is so great! I mean you be patient because, there is a problem ask me. Because I always think how with you. So you have to be patient with much I have to love. You see, so much yourself and not with anybody else. That love I have always to give to others. Just is the main point. If you are patient with think how great it is to love others. You yourself, this is the long promised thing know how people treat me sometimes. which you will get. But you must learn to Terrible! Is it not? I still love them. I enjoy be patient with yourself and not to be playing with it. angry with yourself, not to debase yourself, not to aggress yourself on to love is the thing that is going to unfold others. It is a very simple thing, the beautifully like a lotus, you see: opens simplest thing to do; but because of your out petals and beautiful fragrance starts complex life and our complicated flowing. In the same way, your heart will thinking, we have become quite open out and the fragrance of love will entwined up into things. It can easily be spread throughout the world. It will ring got out of and just slipped out of without into you. I know it can happen. any difficulty. I know that you can do it. So forget about all these things, like my In the same way you should love, and The sooner the better and the choice is your own which you have to make-your father, my sister, my brother. All these problems will be burnt in no time. As soon choice. I am very happy because such a as your life runs straight, everything will beautiful song to hear and just before be burnt away. Nothing will be left but Christmas, which is a very big thing for your light and others who will come to me. You know that; and in the same way we are having another Christmas now. you for enlightenment. I know that you are going to have a Christmas to celebrate a new Christ born within us. Let us prepare for His coming and how you prepare is not by running away from yourself, not by getting into frivolous things; bụt by working it out, beautifully cleansing. Cleansing has to big day for a Guru Puja; and before that I have to request you to prepare yourself. I may do something great. But I must have a proper recipient, so that you must prepare yourself. Think about it. Are you loving others? Are you in love? Are you in love with every one? Just to think that be done if the Self has to be established in the temple of this 'Being'. May God bless you all.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9& 10 28 September & October 2003 POEM Shri Bhaswarasuri Shri Bhaswarasuri, in radiance you shine, You are the Holy Ghost, all adoration Thine, Mother, You are the Devi, and demons You do slay, You protect the Devas, and those to You who pray, Creator of all that is, of all this Mahamaya, You guide and help all those who have spiritual desire, Transformation You have wrought, Your Chaitanya does blow, This breeze, Divine does integrate all things in me, You know, In others too, I see the change, and as all things work out, I see the truth, and feel the joy, which leaves me in no doubt, That now, at ease surrendered, whole, I feel that I'm in no doubt, That now, at ease surrendered, whole, I feel that l'm in You, I've found again my innocence, there's little left to do, Except, at times, proclaim to all, "You too can know what's true l" JAI SHRI MATA JI MA

 COOE PREDICTION FROM GYANESHWARI (Bordi, 12.2.84) It's a great responsibility on all of you have so many Shaktis within you, you that you make your marriages successful. have to give. That means you are superior in a way that you can give so that your ego should not stand up all the time and say why should I do? Why It is your responsibility much more than that of the men and you have to see that you behave in such a manner that you create a proper motherhood within should I do? And then you will start enjoying this womanhood. So try to be yourself and a discipline that you want your children to imbibe and your good mothers, good wives and responsible Sahaja Yoginis. Those who, husband to have. You have seen, your Mother has been sitting from 9 to 10 hours after marriage, try to deviate their husbands from Sahaja Yoga are really sometimes at one place. Not even the most cursed ones. You should have getting out of this place, but I have seen sweet tongue for others. You should be that people can't sit for 2 hours in a place careful about what you talk. You have to even if they are meditating and they will be responsible. You are special people get up, disturb everybody else and come that you are married in Sahaja Yoga. I down. This is a sign that we lack in our hope you will keep this in mind. Gauri Puja discipline, that our parents didn't discipline us, that we didn't discipline ourselves. So now first thing is that you The power of the virgin is alone, have to have perfect discipline of your without Shiva. Your body should be your slave at the time of meditation. temperament and it is a sign that you are the people who represent this Mother "Yasham' means, Yash means a good reputation. 'Roopam' means auspicious Earth who has a special wisdom. All of you have to be extremely careful that personality. Now the thing is, all the whatever you do will be reflected in the whole family and in the whole Sahaja If you say success, it means good Sahaja Yoga terminology are integrated. reputation that has come out of righteous Yoga system. Now when you get married success. Anybody who has a success is to your husbands, try to understand that not a fellow who has yasha. In Sanskrit you are the Mother Earth and you have language it is just the other way round. If to give, and bacause you have the powers, you can give and because you you have got so called success.

 30 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 supposing some body has become The joy of Nirvana. minister, for all practical purposes he is She is the one who opens the supposed to be a person who has got Moksha's door. She is the one who success, in the English language, but in should give me alms of realization. Asking for alms. Its all the way of asking the Sanskrit language the Yash means a person who achieves something which something in a very humble way. Very gives him good reputation, the righteous humble way that give me the alms of reputation. Reputation of virtue. So such Realization. Like a begger would say, a person need not be a very wealthy beg of you, please give me realization. I am a begger at your door." She is the one who gives the prologue man, need not be so successful as a Minister or a Prime Minister but the in a drama. She is the one who holds the success that gives you great reputation. Like the success of the saint. So one must cords in a show, where the pantomimes are there. It is called as 'Sutradhara', the always understand in Sahaja Yoga all the words. Now Roopam, Roopam can one who is the holder of the threads. But She is the one who holds all the Sutras mean in normal words like just 'good in Her hand, all the threads in Her hand looks' but in Sahaja Yoga it is not good and just makes us do all the drama. Its looks but it means the look or apearance that is blissful. You see that gives all Her own style. It is true, agreed. If you biessings. The face that gives blessings don't keep her pleased, she will destroy the whole world. So you have to keep and not negativity. So its an integrated her pleased all the time. That's what the terminology. Its one word means many things. People should not confuse women must understand. They must because good looks can be like a keep their husbands pleased. cinema actress, that's not the good look. Kashmir Tripureshwari means the Sahasrara. See, the Himalaya is the Good look means not glamorous but it Sahasrara and Kashmir is there. These means a look that is blissful, auspicious. are two meanings of Tripura. One is that Muktananda means She gives me the bliss of yoga, the joy of yoga and She killed the horrible demon called the joy of complete freedom. Mukta, Tripur and Tripura means of the three worlds'. She is the beauty of three worlds. Mukti, as they call it. Complete Nirvana.

 The Divine Cool. Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 31 course of Chaitanya. When you will meet Her, that's Me. ...(Clapping). This is the (Tripursundri). I mean the beauty is not to be confused, it is to be integrated. She opens the doors of the heavens because description of the Sahaj Yogis, you must listen to this. That they will be the forests, then you can enjoy. 'Pasaya' means the blessings that you are going to have, it is used for me; what like forests, many thousands, like moving forests of huge trees, of trees that give blessings. Kalptaru is the tree that gives you are going to get is the milk of the Mother. Now he says that all of you, who you whatever you want. They will be like are one in Spirit, this is all description of the moving forests. Means all of you are Sahaja Yoga today, in future and present. like that, great. That you will be like the great trees which are moving, but which That you will get; at this time what is going to happen. It is so beautifully are bestowing blessings upon others, giving them what they want. They will be, shown, you will be surprised, that you all will become one in the universe, the spirit now you people, the oceans of talking of the universe will be satisfied with the or bubbling Amruta. Amruta is the nector. The nector of life. You will be the oceans Yagnas, with the fire ceremonies you are of the bubbling nector which are talking. going to have. How it is appropriate? He Like this ocean is here. See the trees in said it 300 years back. Then you should give us the milk of your blessings by the Ocean. getting complete satisfaction from us. That time all the horrible evil people will The ocean that talks in a way that it just emits nector. The nector of bliss. That is you people. They will be like the moon be ruined and their laws will be spoiled, and people will take to righteousness. At without any spots on it. Immaculate, that time there will be a tremendous which has no spots, no blemish, without friendship of the spirit of people. Those any blemish. Like the sun which is who are in ignorance will get light. The without, heat in it. Th is you. All such whole universe will see the light, the Sun people who will be righteous, who will of one Universal Religion. Whatever they stand for the right, for the truth, are going will desire, they will get it. All the human to be related to each other. Are going to beings. When you will meet Her, there be related in the whole world. Now with this beginning we will be a shower of blessings and of

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 9 & 10 32 September & October 2003 understand that the great saints of what am I doing? I don't even have Maharashtra that time, the greatest was attention that can absorb the energy of Gyaneshwara. Because he saw the the Divine, The attention should be such future that was going to come and he told that I should be able to absorb the will of the people about you that men of God the Divine. Instead of that my attention is on wrong things and what am I doing? What do I do about myself? Is that I am will become prophets and they will have powers to make others prophets. Now we not fine to manifest that special quality. do not realize, what are we. When we become Sahaja Yogis, we become so The highest quality. The one that I am, I much, still worried about things which am born after ages. I have been born so have no value. If you see, in the ultimate many times. I have been a saint, I have been going round, seeking God. I have all these things which are so temporary have no value and if you go on wasting been going round, and again when I am your energy about things that have no born in this life time for such a tremendous task, again I am lost with the spiritual value, that does not matter, you are going to waste your life because noW same non-sense. I am still moving about you are that, what is described. The with the same non-sense. If you oceans which are talking nector. Oceans understand that then you will know what of talking nector. Nector; not the nector importance it has today on this day of our that we understand, nector of spiritual international seminar. Internationally you are all related to bliss. You are that, and when you are that then what is expected of you about each other and to nobody else. yourself? Just find out? You just find out Internationally you are all related to each yourself, reflect back that what is other. These are the relations which are expected of me, of myself. What am I relations of deep friendship. Friendship doing about it. I am worried about this has no bias, no lust, no greed, nothing. nonsense, that nonsense and I am It's just friendship. It's pure relationship deine suppossed to be the ocean of blissfull and we are that. So its alright to say that nector. I am supposed to be the forest of its all love, its all affection, its all goodness, its all very sweet thing but you the Kalptarus, the trees that give the boon must know that you have to come up. to the people, huge victories and then

 33 Seplember & October 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 The first and foremost thing that goes These trees have come up after a long against us is our own non-sensical ego. struggle against the atmosphere, against We must understand that this ego is the the whole surrounding. They have come up on their own, except for the Mother one greatest barrier within us. And we have to get out of it. Kundalini has to rise Earth, to which they are connected. So like the tree has risen and the ego is the you people must know that you all are biggest, biggest hurdle for most of us. It here. Come up, fight yourself, to find out, what is wrong with you? appears in many ways. We fight the Where is your attention first of all? The Mother Earth which is giving you the source. You are the very being of that attention has to move in such a manner, She Mother Earth. She has created you. that outward you grow and inward you has made you. Because of her you have hold fast to your Mother, with complete come up. You are fighting her, you are respect. Those who can't do it are absolutely useless. If any tree does not going against her. This is wrong. How wll you go? And once you start growing the sun can help you. The nature can help try to hold fast the Mother Earth, it will fall out. I mean its just what it is doing you. But you must have complete desire to rise above your dwarfness, above your and for what it is rewarded. Its nothing to do with Mother Earth. This Mother Earth selfishness, above your conditionings has this special quality and if this Mother and speically your ego. All this when we Earth is not going to be linked by you, say that you are this, there is no need to by your purposeful adherence, be puffed up. You see if tell that you are continuous identification, you are going to fall out like a dead tree. So its very a little tree and you are going to be a big tree, it does not mean that it has become important to understand that you are a big tree. great. No doubt. These trees are great. One has to become the big tree by They have fought through, they have come up. But where is your attention and pushing forward and that quality like Gyaneshwara, like Tukarama, like what are you here for? What is needed Ramdasa, you all have to become that for sticking, sticking to things which are against your growth? Bothered about quality. They never saw Me, I just nourished them without their seeing me. things which go against all the time!

 September & COctober 2003 34 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 But they nourished themselve, on their within and that growth expresses itself outside. So that 'growth within' is to be own greatness. You have to be great like that. Instead, you live with false notions done by you fully with full understanding. about yourself, artificialities, absurd Then I don't have to tell you about ideas, all nonsense that we have anyone. You won't be vulnerable to non- sensical talks and jabberings. You have gathered through our upbringing, through our nationality, through our some people who are intellectuals. reading, through our Gurus and through Intellectuals have a bad habit of our own mental projections. We are intellectualising every thing. Intelligence is nothing for God because God has going to be extremely dangerous for the created it. So you have to see through. growth of every individual Sahaja Yogi and as a whole also it will act. So we There are some people who are very have to take a vow today that we are emotional and try to express themselves going to behave in a manner which emotionally. You have to get out of those behoves our advent, not others. Our ideas and you have to understand that advent at this time which is being emotions can play a very dangerous role described and prophesied. Prophecy in life. was made long time back. If we Now we have decided to have so many marriages in Bordi. It is very nice understand that we have come on this earth for that purpose, we really separate thing and very auspicious thing. Very happy about it that we are going to have ourselves from all rest of the nonsense so many marriages. It is very auspicious because marriages are supported, that goes on and try to rise towards the sky as these trees are rising. You should not follow any other Sahaja Yogi in all blessed by God. You are special because I am sitting here before you for these marriages. Don't make a fuss out of it, anti-growth activities. And anyone who tries to create a kind of a bhoot or tries to impress you by saying that Do not create a problem by becoming superficial. These are the marriages of he can teach you something higher, lower, all kinds of techniques this and Brhama Eka, where one feels the oneness of the spirit, of the All Pervading that, you have to forget. First of all you Power. Try to know that these marriages must know that Sahaja Yoga is a growth

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue:9 & 10: September & October 2003 35 are done among saints and not among been described. ordinary people. Try to respect the inner quality of a person. If somebody is a इसकी प्रगति, मेरे विचार से, बहुत धीमी है। इसकी Sahaja Yogi of a high quality that must प्रगति बहुत धीमी है। प्रगति आपकी वजह से धीमी हो be respected and that must be loved, जाती है। ऐसी जगह चित्त अपना जाता है जहाँ हम इस तरह से हो रहा है, और हो गया है। लेकिन अभी अपने को गिरा लेते हैं। अपना चित्त इस पेड़ का जैसा and not the outer quality. The outward qualities are non-sensical. You must इस पृथ्वी से पूरी तरह से निगड़ित है, ऐसा आपको respect each other when you marry अपनी माँ के साथ निगड़ित करना चाहिए और उसकी because you are all saints. You are जो ऊँचाई है. उसके ओर दृष्टि होनी चाहिए। ये ऊँचाई जो भी इन्होंने हासिल की है, वो इस वातावरण से लड़ saints of a very high quality, | have told, and the potential is so great. It is already कर, झगड़ कर, बाहर आकर, अपना सर ऊँचा उठा described to you that only your करके। जो लोग अपना सर दुनियाई. चीजों के लिए. कृत्रिम चीजों के लिए, बाह्य चीजों के लिए झुका लेते हैं वो कैसे उसे पा सकते हैं? या जो अपना चित्त इस धरती माँ से हटा लेते हैं वो तो मर ही जाएंगे। इसलिए assumption can fetch you that greatness. अब मैं हिन्दी में थोड़ा सा आपको बताना चाहती हूँ कि सहजयोग में हम लोग अब ये नहीं जानते कि हमारे बारे में हज़ारों वर्ष पहले ये बताया गया था कि ऐसे महान हर सहज़योगी का ये कर्त्तव्य है, ये पूरी तरह से कर्त्तव्य लोग संसार में आयेंगे और पहाड़ के पहाड़, ऐसे बड़े बड़े वृक्षों के बड़े बड़े अरण्य संसार में घूमेंगे, जो बोलते चलते हुए, दुनिया को उनकी इच्छाओं की पूर्ति के है कि वो जाने कि सारी दुनिया आपकी तरफ आँख बैठी हुई है और आप अपने गौरव को पहचानें । The whole world is watching your हुए, लगाए कल्पतरु जैसे उनके आशीर्वाद देंगे और उनके एक एक progress, the world is expecting this to व्यक्ति में जैसे सागर उमड़ते हैं, जिसमें कि अमृत बोलता happen. The whole world has already है। ऐसे सागर, ऐसे सूरज होगे-चमकते हुए सूरज जिनके pronounced it and where are we? Our अन्दर कोई भी अग्नि नहीं, ऐसे चन्द्रमा जिसके ऊपर progress is so slow.We are worried about कोई कलंक नहीं। ये आपके वर्णन हज़ारों वर्ष पहले भृगु stupid things, material things, worldly ने किए और तीन सौ वर्ष पहले ग्यानेश्वर जी ने किए things, superficial things, artificial things. कि कितना आपका महत्त्व उन्होंने बताया, कि कितना So one has to understand, you are here जरूरी है-सारी दुनिया के लिए। सारी दुनिया के लिए today for this international Seminar, to एक आशा है। promise me. The whole world is hoping this thing आप लोग आज यहाँ मुझे वचन देने आए हैं इस अन्तर्राष्ट्रीय सेमिनार (संगोष्ठी) पर कि माँ आप जितनी to happen that they should get such मेहनत करते हो उसी तरह से हम भी मेहनत करंगे। people on this earth, those, which have

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9& 10 September & October 2003 36 puja today. At this time a big resrvoir has to be opened out but it is to be Everybody seems to be younger than me in this puja, but you have to promise channelised through people and how that Mother we will work with the same zeal, same attention as you are doing canI channelise through people who and try to settle ourselves. Quieten are filled with vanity, with stupidity or Guie with small mindedness? You have to ourselves within. We talk too much. We talk too much, do nothing. Try to preserve be large, huge, big hearted, great your energy in that silence. उस शान्तिमय गौरव में आप अपने को उतारें। अपने people. You are all 'Born Again' who are great today again. But some how you are बारे में पूरी आपको कल्पना होनी चाहिए कि आप हैं mixed up with your surroundings. So try to understand your own importance and क्या। You must have full idea as to what you the importance of the time. It is time to are. You must understand, what you have worship yourself, to worship, but be worshipable. You all think that by been upto, what have you done about it? dressing up properly or by putting up any Talking, talking, talking! That's not the show like that we become worshipable, way it is going to work out. The atmosphere is fine, everything is fine. The we do not. We should be worshipable to ourselves. You see that whatever we are future seems very jubilant. Everything doing, it has that grace and beauty and seems to be fine but the highest about the love and the greatness of the saints everything is the hope of your Mother that you are going to emancipate the who are very great saints, not ordinary one but tremendous saints. It is being whole world. Give attention to that. Think described, actually, Gyaneshwara in this poem has really worshipped you. I wish about it that you are going to do it. You have to be the walking, talking, moving forests of that Divine Love, that Ritambra we had people like Gyaneshwara but Pragya. I hope you understand that today they are all inside my body. You are all outside and whatever he said has to be is the very important day and I feel that if fulfilled. Not only that but whatever he this holy session works out well, may be said is the truth. we might achieve a lot next time. It is my request to all of you to meditate May God bless you. sincerely. Now we look forward to a

 I'M THE HOLY GHOST (New York, 30.9.81) person who is the embodiment of this ..It is revealed that how those people are reborn, who crucifed him again, and Divine Power. Christians may be wrong. again & again they are crucifying! The If Christians have tortured you, forget Crucifixion is not the message of Christ. them. They are just the same as you are, fanatics, fanatics, fanatics. Whether they are Christians or they are Muslims, so That's why I also don't like people to wear the cross. I can't see them. Its not cross, many arc the same as any other person. I do not find any difference whatsoever. of course it is very helpful because if the bad spirits see the cross, they run away. Dogmatic, ignorant, fanatic. Forget those people. They do not stand for Christ. But it is a reminder of something which was unbearable because the Mother had Christ himself said in the second Chapter all the powers. She was Maha-Laxmi. He had eleven powers. Eleven powers to of Matthews II, "You will be calling me destroy! You can imagine. He had still "Christ, Christ, Christ, I won't recognise those powers and he had to go through you. Who are they?"We people, who say all that without destruction. He saw to it, Christ, we are the self solicitors of Christ, we are the people who are incharge of Now people may say, "How was Jesus resurrected?" First of all there was an Christ, all of these people will be objection to immaculate conception', mean they have objection for everything. the hell, the way they have managed charged and they will be thrown away in . I things about Christ. Some of them are He was not a human being. He was the Divine Power.I conceive you in my heart. You know that and I put my Kundalini and genuine, they don't know that this is artificial. They are genuine, but they must get their realization. They must ask for I put you from my heart into it, and I get you out of it. The way you have got your their realization and they must know Second Birth, in the same way Christ what is Christ, within themselves they have to awake the Christ in them. was to be immaculate. But She put Him I was telling you that Christ said that in the heart and into the uterus down you are to be 'born again'. That I am to be born in your heart. Now the heart below and She created Him. Its very easy to doubt Him and say things against Him may centre is here as well as here. Because because He is no more. And the Jews must learn a lesson now. They denied the heart is controlled by the centre at Him once and they have suffered. Now the fontanel bone area and that's what don't deny Him again. You can't deny, the he said that you should get your

 September & October 2003 38 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 suffer, told me that they saw their Gurus realization, when he said he should be giggling at them and mockring at them. put in the heart. Now the people of various countries, And they showed me some of the even your country, went down to India photographs they had taken up of these and they never told that Christ was born Gurus, which show complete mockery of who was the Maha Vishnu. Because it these stupid disciples who were is already described in the Puranas that suffering in their body and suffering he is the Aadhara. He is the one who their mind in the presence of these once awakened by the Kundalini, will Gurus. So they have a double enjoyment suck your Karmas. They never went and : one the money and another is the told. So the Indians went on with their kingdom and third, the greatest of all, that Karma theory and these Gurus have their purpose is to kill you all and to come here to teach you Karma. It is destroy you all because you are that they achieve by their falsehood. Because these God's men are impressed by their amazing how you accept all these theories of non-sense! Like they say that you have to suffer because you have falsehood. Now see if there was any done bad Karmas. Then they will say that false Guru here, this hall would have been filled, the whole thing would be to give yourself balance you go this way or that way and you just keep it to balance. If that is so, that you have to go filled; on the road there would be a jam but the real Guru, I have seen not only here, everywhere, it starts very slowly. to one extreme and to other extreme then Of course in a place where people are very simple and who are very sensitive, is a different one. But people in the cities, specially, they are so insensitive to reality and so sensitive to devils that it is surprising that they feel very much at home with devils and very much lost with the reality. what are they doing here? Why are they talking? They should shut up, because they can't do anything. They can't give you realization. They can't save you from this situation, so its better that they suffer. Why do they say, "you should suffer"? Why should they say? Because they want to enjoy you suffering. They want you to suffer because they enjoy it. Now Because you are in falsehood so you so many of these disciples who came from these horrible Gurus, who said you real. You have to become that which is must know that you have to become the must have your karmas and you must the spirit, which is not so far shining in

 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 8& 10 39 September & October 2003 to give birth to a child then everybody is going to say that it's a very very blasphemous thing; that it's a very very illegitimate thing and it should not be spoken up. Horrible fellow, and one better than the other! Then they took it in your central nervous system, in your awareness, and this is the spirit which is the one described. Not spoken before also in the churches, but today for the first time I am speaking about the Christ in a church and that's why I am very happy such a funny way because they became that at least in this church I could say supraconscious people. They started speaking the languages of so many evils. That part of Bible is wrong where they become not realized. The wind part is alright. But so many people, I have seen, they come to my programme, when they come for realization, they feel the wind for a while and immediately they shunt something that would establish itself and that when people will come here, I hope, they get their realization and that something works out here and they get at least awakening because so many saints are sitting in front of me. May be that one day will come in this church, may be, it may work out that the people will get one day their realization. Christ's life was only for 3-4 years. out and become supraconscious. Now we will see what is supraconscious entity subconscious entity. Now you see here these are two petals. These are two petals. One controls, of course, the pituitary, that controls the Ego and the Pineal, that controls the Super Ego. But and the Nobody allowed him to live longer than that. Whatever possible was done but such stupid people, such stupid people, you could not talk to them; and that's how they killed him. He could not speak to them anymore and that's how his life was this also has the capacity to blow it this finished. But in that small life of his what a spark, what a spark it was! The way way out and blow it out this way. people have behaved towards him was Supposing you become supra- atrocious. I must say, I must say that the conscious and you start thinking too apostle themselves, because this much, some thing about the future, what Matthews and this. He was such an must be the galaxies, we should find intellectual, such an intellectual, that he about this, we must find out about the would not accept the idea of immaculate stars and about all these things and conception. Very difficult man! He would argue it out. He said that if a virgin is going about future and about - say prophecies and astrology. It is all futuristic. You

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9& September & October 2003 40 people are mostly futuristic. You try to plan and every plan fails of course, but who has done that work of aura picturing. this thinking and planning is too much, Now after realization you don't get any can push up this side too much. Actually auras in a person, can't see aura in a have shown here it is this side. But person because he is integrated. aura, auras I was talking to some one actually when it is placed, it is placed like this. The ego is placed like this and super ego is placed like this. Here we could not show the three dimensions. So from the back to this side is Super Ego and from Completely integrated. But when he is in a mess, he starts getting the auras. Like if he had cancer he will get auras. If he is alcohalic, he will get auras. A kind of a crazy auras. A normal person may have auras, not so much crazy. But auras you cannot see when the whole thing is here to here is the Ego. Now this ego bloats out into this side and when it bloats to this side, it goes into the Supraconscious Area. So it comes up here. Now the supraconscious area gives you visions, hallucinations, L.S.D.; effect. Then you start seeing from the eyes of a person who is a dead person but a very ambitious person. For example you might get the vision of Hitler and all these horrible kings. You might get the colours, you may say the auras and one has to integrated. You can see in a light which has no aberration, that means it is good light; if there is aberration then it is a bad light. All the seven colours, colours of the light have to be concentrated and have to be integrated. If they are prismatic and if they are giving it separately then it is not one integration, and when it is one- integration then you cannot see seven lights. So the person is not integrated. understand here that these auras start Now all these auras come to us coming to us because we shift, we disintegrate from our being. That's how we start seeing something else because we are made of seven types of tatwas within us. But the people who are on the right side only believe in the five tatwas. They call them Koshas. I don't think if I have a type for that, but these are the Koshas that are created by the first centre, by the second centre, by the third centre. These are the physical words, by the forth one, then the fifth one separated from us. To see auras is not a good sign in Sahaja Yoga. If you are seeing auras, we have to bring you back to the same position because you have to be in the present and not in the future. You get disintegrated. For example if there is machine, say which takes the and the sixth and the seventh, and they

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 41 do not create auras out side. They create things which it has to work out inside near the heart. And these are throughout. One of them is spleen, created near the heart but as soon as another is pancreas. When it neglects the you get realization, they all become one. pancreas, you get diabetes. Not by They all merge into one and that is the sugar. Of course sugar, because it has spirit. So as if you can say, when the spirit exists in a prismatic way, then you get to convert it into fat. But if you do not have sugar then it's a double work. If you have sugar then it converts it into fat and makes it useful for your brain. But if you the auras of seven, but when it becomes integrated than you become one, all the aura become one. So integration is the aim of Sahaja Yoga as now l think I have told you that you could also go to the sub think too much and you don't take sugar, it's the double action. But if you just take sugar and do not think also can be conscious area, in the same way. The problematic because it has to convert too subconscious area is there on the left much of it into fat. You see, too much hand side. If you move into collective sub conscious area, you can be triggered into cancer. By this triggering you might get heart attack, something like that, work is given to it. So there is no balance. So one has to understand that too much sugar is not good but you must take sugar because sugar is needed, and stop your thinking. How do you stop your thinking, diabetese. only by rising above the Agnya Chakra. This is a very very important point at Agnya, that you must know, that the thinking Many people believe that sugar gives you diabetes. It is not true. Sugar does not give you diabetes. What gives you diabetes is too much thinking. Those stops, Now the thinking stops in you, like this. There is a way, it rises the thoughts and falls off. Another thought rises and who do not think too much never get. Indian farmers never get diabetes. They don't know what this disease is. Because think too much, you work too much. falls off. In between there is a place you This centre works too much. It has to called as "Vilamba' Now when the create food for the brain. It has to replace the brain cells and these brain cells are thought rises, it automatically falls off. Now this space is the place of present. This rises either from the ego or super fats, the new cells, the evolved cells. If it ego and goes into the past. The in- to be replaced. For that it creates, out of works too much, it neglects the other between space is the present. One is the

 September & October 2003 42 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 the Kundalini, it has pierced through, it future, one is the past, Now this place pushes through and she fills these with When it increases then what happens the grace. The grace comes on this, is that Agnya chakra opens more and when the grace comes in, you start has to be increased. you become thoughtlessly aware. You relaxing, the centres also relax. The become thoughtlessly aware. You come centres are in tension, but when the grace comes in they go back into normal. So there is more, sort of, expansion and the thoughtless awareness starts establishing itself at the Agnya Now the Mantra of the Agnya Chakra is Lord's Prayer. It has got two sides Ham' and 'Ksham', 'Ham' means in the present. There is no thought. And the thought is the barrier between the creator and ourselves. For example if Chakra. you look at a beautiful stone that is placed there or anything, you watch it. Now if you want to think oh!, it looks like a man, it am' looks like a devil or it looks like a God or what ever it is. There is a thought in you. and Ksham' means 'I forgive". So if supposing this is catching, you have to say, I forgive. If there is ego within us, you should say 'I forgive.' If there is Super, Ego within us, we should say 'I am, I am: so it is 'Ham and Ksham, is the beeja, is So what you do when you are realized, you just watch, you watch and whatever the joy is put there of the creator, of an artist, completely it is within you, because there is no thought. There is no wave, there is no disturbance, in a the seed. It is the seed of the prayer, completely silent lake. All that is around Lord's prayer. it, all that creation comes into it, absolutely reflected and you enjoy the that the Lords prayer in not alright. I mean thoughtless awareness called as who are you? What do you know about Nirvichar Samadhi. There is complete it. Everybody is challenging everyone! Nirvichara where you have no thought What do you know? What is your and you start enjoying that creation authority? The trouble is every body is completely. The joy of that is there. entitled to do what they like with religion Now there are people who are talking and with God. Though they do not know Nothing is in between. So the anything about it, they are absolutely ignorant but they think they have a right because there is no political control over thoughtless awareness comes in when the kundalini crosses this Agnya Chakra. It does double work. Firstly, it makes you thoughtlessly aware. Secondly, because it. Even Hitlar can talk about Christ;

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 43 anybody can talk about Christ, and about the prayer that He taught you. Who are you to challenge it? Who are you to challenge him? I can't understand, how enlightened can only enlighten. Now about Christ you have to speak. I have spoken once about Christ for seven days one after another. There is no end to it. Such a great incarnation that I just do not know how to say that is. I have spoken all about him. As it is, we have many tapes in London. You can send for it. We do you challenge a person, without knowing your own position in relation to him. But this is a very very common thing that people do, and it is due to ego. Ego makes you high headed, and this is the worst I found that this high headedness are now going to have a centre here. Herman has offered his place and we will that you challenge God, you challenge Christ, you challenge everything which be sending those tapes there. As these 300 tapes we have brought in London which you can listen to, and see for you don't understand! yourself and all of these tapes are very good because they actually are Mantras. They work out the mantras and you also get listening to them, opening of your Your Mind is limíted. It's a very limited way. You can't do anything with this mind of yours. You have to go beyond it. Somebody has to trigger you into space. You have to go into that. You have to (Sahasrara) centres and all that Now the become the spirit. Only by realizing your spirit you can get connected with God, before that you are not connected. That's why you have to become the spirit and the spirit is the connection, is the link with God. There is no otherway you can be last one, which is embarrassing because he already has told you that and I am supposed to have been here, I think, which is the integration. The end of it is the integration of all these seven centres. All these seven centres are placed around this area called as limbic. Which linked with God. If you want to keep is the limbic area. Now if you cut it, the yourself in delusion, you go ahead. But this is the real thing I am telling you, this is the true thing I am telling you for which you should know, you can't pay,, you can't purchase it, you can't demand it, and you can't work it out. brain, the transect section of the brain, you will find it like a lotus. You can find it, that there is a marking look, like a lotus, opened out and it has thousand petals, are like this. But the colour is not alright. The grace of God has to come, fall You people are so fond of this pastel upon you to do it. Or a person who is colour, so they have used it, but we can

 September & October 2003 44 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 the Swadhishthana Chakra. Then here say that this kind of a 1000 petals are is the Vishudhi Chakra, is the Viraat. The there. Now it is said in the Bible that I will appear before you like tongue of flames', and these are, they appear, they Vishudhi Chakra is here. When you catch cold you find you will have the problem here. But if you apply something here, you will feel better. And this is the Vishudhi Chakra which is related to your throat. Now if you have the problem with collectivity also you might find a big block here. Now at the back of it is Nabhi, here at the back. This Nabhi has the left all appear. But these are very large ones and they appear as living. Living flames in different colours starting from one to another and they are 1000 in number. Now the doctors argue that they can't be 1000. They have to be 992. I mean just imagine these foolish people who argue on that! But they do not know that they and right sides. As we have shown here the left Nabhi and the right Nabhi. There are 1000 in number and they are placed are two, left and right Nabhi. I don't know here. But in the limbic area all the seven ifI have told you about that left and right. centres are surrounding it. Like we have You can find out in the book. Now, so got now, you see from here. This is the Agnya Chakra. Here, behind it, here at you have got left and right Nabhi and the back exactly, just at the back is the also sometimes you feel that Nabhi is Mooladhara. Surrounding it, is the here. Some people do feel, who have Swadhishthana. Surrounding the problems with some kind of Gurus and mooladhara is the Swadhishthana. If you things like that, you see, then you feel. are catching on Swadhishthana, you can feel it within yourself, the heavyness. If you are catching on it you will have diabetes. I will give one example. But the whole void is here and this void is called as Ekadasha Rudra. This void, the whole of it goes like a great round, and this is very important because you get it from the void. If you go to a bad Guru or someone, you get this. And this Diabetic people get blind'after sometime, they loose the power of the eyes because this thing oppresses optic nerve which is controlled by the Mooladhara Chakra. We call it as Back Agnya. So this is the Swadhishthana Chakra, here at the is the one that is the rider. The rider, one who has eleven powers of destruction. The one who is going to come, slash out. Then he is not going to give you any council, he is not going to redeem you, back in the centre, here you find a hole, no realization. He will slash out those that is the Mooladhara and around it is

 45 September & October 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volumo-XV Issue:9& 10 think of it, or to the bugs? You are human beings. You should not who are not realized. That's the last, that you don't ask just now. Give some time more to save more people. Because he eat flesh which is of the bigger animals than yourself. Because that is horrible. is not going to question anyone, he is not going to allow any more time and that will be the time of complete destruction But you can eat the flesh of the animal which are smaller than you. There is no of all the satanic forces. So that is the harm in eating that. And this kind of a Ekadasha, here. That collect, because nonsensical vegetarianism! Don't do any all these horrible gurus are here. These harm to the animals? But they don't are the Ekadshas. One thing is to be mind, doing this. These Jains are the understood that one could get rid of this greatest, they are, you see, such just like suckers and they don't mind killing very easily. Now these two children of people for their money. They don't mind going for what you call, 'Shikari' hunting and killing anything but they will not eat a chicken or even the garlic. Now garlic as you know is very good for heart. But they don't eat garlic. Its very good for the heart. Its very good for people who have Rama who were born here and were endowed as the sun and the moon. The sun and the moon both are here, and the sun, as I told you Buddha, ultimately here and he became, ultimately, Mahavira. They are there. But when they were on this earth, Buddha talked about Non- got tendency towards hardening of the artries, where circulation is the problem, is very good to eat that and for cold. For people who suffer from cold, if they regularly eat a fresh garlic, say in the night, brush their teeth, then they will be much better off. So these seven centres violence and people thought non- violence to chickens, to bugs! These Mahavira people called Jains, we have got horrible community called Jains in India, and they believe in vegetarianism to this extent that they get a Brahmin, pay him and put him in a hut and bring all the are there. Now at the fontanel bone is bugs of the village and put all the bugs in the hut and bugs drink his blood. It's a the centre of the heart. Now just imagine, it is at that centre. So where do I exist? fact, even today and then they pay some money to the Brahmin because the bugs are fed. Now you just tell me this kind of nonsensical vegetarianism. Am I going to give realization to chickens? Just I mean all of them are seven centres, am just like a bubble, But am in so I your heart. So the key of Sahaja Yoga is that you have to recognise Me. If

 September & October 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 9 & 10 46 am love. I can't help it. I really can't help you can't recognise Me, you can't it. I am campassion. One day I did feel very disgusted. Really once I did feel very disgusted with people, the way they were and I said that just forget it. And then progress in Sahaja Yoga. I have to frankly admit it. I don't tell this in my first lecture but I have to say that please now recognise Me. As your Mother, now I request you to recognise Me and you don't have to give Me anything. Just take suddenly I saw my photograph. I saw my eyes, and I said, "Nirmala, you are compassion, you are compassion, you can't help it. You just can't help it." I have to work it out. I know what it means, it things from Me. Just have it yourself but recognise Me, If you deny Me then this won't open. This will be always covered. means sometimes too much, too much, That's why at the end when you say but I have to work it out. Now some people come out with question; 'why you Mother?' I said, "Why not you?" It's the good idea. Come along with me. I did a lot. It would be the best for me to retire and my husband might give you the Mother, please give me my realization because I have come on this earth to give you realization. That's My job. Its one of the worst jobs that one can have. Because its not difficult with people to talk to them, to tell them about it and they are all the time up in arms, they are so pension and would be so happy that aggressive and they start fighting. It's the have found out somebody who will Mother's job which is a thankless job, replace me. But I have not found out absolutely thankless job. You have to do somebody who will replace me. I wish it, and also only the Mother can do it. you could, will be a good idea. Because if you had the Christ, he would Now the name Nirmala itself means have taken eleven things and finished immaculate. Means the one who is the cleansing power and the name of the Goddess also. My actually sign name is off everything. If you had Krishna, he has also 'Sanharak Shakti' to kill. But to use the whole thing which integrated ideas, Lalita who is the name of the Primordial balancing with understanding human Mother. That is the name of the beings, you have to have a Mother. And Primordial Mother. But to be a human that's why sometimes people try to being with all these centres around, we become very familiar and start taking work in, for example, from the last three advantage or taking liberties which is a days you don't know how much I am wrong thing. What ever I am, I am, and I vibrating. You can ask Waren and other

 September & October 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10 there. Most of them know about it, but people. I asked them to take vibrations they can't understand why I have come to America? They say that why you come here, the people here won't accept. Butl don't think so, because I think you are and they were doing like this but they could not touch Me. They tried to put the hand on the head and they were just and then, they didn't know how to touch Me! Even it was so much vibrating. So its not great seekers, very great, born in this easy to carry all this load on this human body. Appear like a human being, to act like a human being, to behave like a special time. You have to work for Me. must say that the transformation that has taken place in the Western Sahaja Yogis has not been achieved by Indians, so much, though they have an advantage because they are born ina country which human being, so that there is a rapport. Why an incarnation is needed. There has to be a rapport because the unconscious can't talk to you. Whatever you see in the keeps the attention intact. The attention dreams comes back to you afterwards from the sub-conscious area. All the is very much intact; so it is easy to work it out there. Here it is difficult. It does not ideas, you have such a mass, such a confusion and you can't decide anything. So it has to come on this earth as a apeal to people but still you are all great people. So many of you are not but they can be all saints. But those who are here human being and tell you with the knack. I never knew English all my life. So first time I learnt English, but stillI don't know American English. I hope I will be able to learn something more when I travel around. It's a dream that, it is a desire that should know that you have the greatest opportunity in your life to be realized and to give realization to others. First of all you have to become alright, then you can give light to others. Now the greatest thing that is needed you are to be realized. Its all written in for Sahaja Yoga is wisdom. And logically the Bible, its all written in all the books you will reach a conclusion and understand that Sahaja Yoga is the end of all the problems of the world, of all the problems; for example take the capitalism and the communism. Sol am the capitalist because I have all the powers but I am the communist because Ican't enjoy it without giving it to you. But of scriptures. It is very large, large in the books of Adi Shankaracharya who had described Me in full, in a very beautiful way and it is very easy for Indians to get it. I mean though I have not much disciples in the city but they are aware of my advent and they know that I am

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 9 & 10 September & October 2003 48 its continuing. I have not to do anything because I think about it and it just works. It is like that. All the problems, political supports it. You are completely integrated in one being that is your spirit. May God bless you all. Normally I don't tell about myself but today he forced Me as soon as I came problems, economic problems, everything can be solved. Krishna has said, 'Yog Kshema Vahamayam'; when here to tell because its not tactful. Its not tactful to say anything. Better, that you discover Me than I tell you. Because Christ was crucified, everybody was tortured. I do not want to hamper my work because it makes no difference by telling you get your yoga, you will get your well being. He has summed up. He could have said Kshema Yoga Vahamayam'. He did not. Yoga Kshema Vahamyam' He said first do yoga. First unite. Unite with the spirit; then you are blessed by you anything before realization. Its better to tell you after realization that 'l am the Holy Ghost. No doubt, I am the Holy all these things. There is centre of even material wealth, of Laxmi, which works Ghost, and the one, about which the out, and all the Sahaja Yogis who have Christ has told'. I had told them, I have been to Me are blessed by material never said this from a platform and I told because they have been telling me, "Mother you must say once. I said in America I will declare. So today I I am the Holy Ghost, I am wealth also but not too much like Mr. Ford, that is an extreme case. That is a headache. But they get wel being from every angle in a balanced way and an integrated way. So the last message is of integration that you get completely integrated. Whatever you do, your heart supports it, your mind supports it and your body declare that the Holy Spirit who has incarnated on this earth for your realization'. May God Bless You.



----------------------

2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
00
Volume: XV Issue: 9 & 10
September - October, 2003
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 ++
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Public Programme, Delhi, 24.3.2003
6.
Inauguration - Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram, 27.3.2003
The importance of Meditation, 1.2.1975
22 How to overcome Ego and Know Thyself, 18.11.1979
28 The Bhaswrasuri
29 Predictions frorm Gyaneshwari, 12.2.1984
37
T am the Holy Ghost, New York, 30.9.1981
2.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 PUBLIC PROGRAMME
Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium, New Delhi, 24th March, 2003
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Your warm welcome moves my heart
happened ! Could I do it alone? You
with joy. I do not know what to say and
what not to say. I do not even know what
have taken care of it, brought it to a higher
pedestal and have worked hard for it.
How much I thank you, I do not know!
to tell you today, on this occasion,
It is a big achievement that thousands of
because most of you are Sahaja Yogis.
And those who are not will also be people have entered this New Life and
transformed, everytime it so happens.
a New Light has dawned in them. It is
There were times when the attainment beyond anybody's understanding and
of Sahajayoga in life used to be very belief that such a thing has happened.
difficult. But now the things have But it has taken place. People from all
changed. Now your Kundalini could be castes and creeds have got their
awakened very easily. Without any Realization. They are not from any
difficulty you could attain that state where
particular strata of life; there is no high
or low. Thousands of people have
it is said that the soul resides within you,
and within you that miracle should take
received Realization, not only in India but
place which makes you familiar with your
also in other countries. Still we have to
soul (Atma). This state was very difficult
give it to many many more people. All
the problems of our country will get
to get in the olden days. Only a few
achieve it as a result of penance of
could
solved by it (Sahaja Yoga). The
problems of all those who have got it
have been solved. They have developed
thousands of years, living in Jungles and
serving the saints and seers. But in this
a new outlook, it is co-incidence that all
age if people do not receive their Self-
those who have received it are working
Realization then, no one knows, what
it out. I know only this much that this was
to happen and it has happened. I never
would happen to them and what abyss
they will fall in. May be that it is the
reason why Sahaja Yoga is working out thought that it will gain so much of
in this Kaliyuga.
momentem.
Thave to say only this much that those
Your contribution is also there in its
who have got their Realization, should
spreadment. Thousands have become
not confine it to themselves. They should
give it to others, distribute it among other
Sahaja Yogis, and every one could give
realization. Such a big thing has
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
Septermber & October 2003
that people ask me, "Mother from where
people. By giving, their joy will increase.
have they got so much of knowledge?"
Joy will be doubled by giving. There is
no doubt about it that it is not something
to be confined to yourself. It is to be
This knowledge has awakened from
within. It has awakened in them from
within, where else has it come? It is the
given, and this giving will give you joy. I
hope you all will derive joy by distributing
dawn, the expression of that supreme
spirit that resides within. With it they
it.
know as to what is the Truth and what is
For years together I have worked hard
ahead of it.
in India and also put very hard work in
l explained it to my might. Now I find
foreign countries. Now you have to do
more than me. Only then ignorance could that people absorb it very easily. In
be destroyed in world. The world is villages where people are not much
submerged in deep ignorance. Today
educated, they have understood Sahaja
there is one problem and tomorrow there
Yoga so well and they explain it so
nicely! I am myself amazed to see their
style. Delhi people have done wonders.
is another. You have to be prepared to
set it right. Those who have received it,
(Self-Realization) they should increase
There is no ill-will. People here, are very
it, spread it and give it to others. You
open-minded. I remained with them as
much as I could. Now I cannot give them
should not lose temper on any excuse.
You have to be very peaceful. This power
much time. However, they have become
will workout in you and with that power
experts. Working themselves they have
understood Sahaja Yoga and have
you will transform others.
For me it is a big achievement that so
taken it to great heights.
I am surprised to see that such
much work has been done in Delhi. I
remember in the beginning when I came ordinary people knew so much, they
here, people knew nothing. They went have so much of knowledge! Many of
their own way. Gradually they developed
them are illiterates but they are so expert
and knowledgeable that one is
and gained balance in every way. With
experience
they
realized the
astonished as to how they have known
so much and how they do so much of
weaknesses and problems of human
beings. Slowly they were trained. Now work. We have still to open some
they have become so knowledgeable more fronts. Firstly we should talk of
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 September & October 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue:9& 10
patriotism. It is essential to be patriotic.
We should know the historical facts and
There is no use forgetting them. Not
only that but we have to spread these
also how so many people sacrificed ideals in other countries. All the
everything for the sake of the country. It's misunderstanding about our country will
vanish and we shall be able to tell others
necessary that you should have
that'How great our country is'. Our good
points should come up. By them people
knowledge of it and you should talk to
people about it. It's a great country and
will know the greatness of our country.
many great people incarnated in this
want to say that you should all be very
land. But now some curse has fallen on
respectful to your country, to those who
us. Many people came to us from
have made sacrifices for the country, to
abroad. Because of them we could not
open our hearts to the people. But it is
necessary to tell the people about all this.
In foreign countries also it was told what
those who have upheld the Truth and
sacrificed their lives for the sake of Truth.
You should have knowledge of such
saintly people. Sahaja Yoga doesn't
mean that you know only the greatness
excesses were committed in India but
that doesn't mean that you should know
of this country. You also have to know its
tradition, take to its culture.
what the people of this country suffered.
Under what difficult circumstances they
It's the age in which we have
lived! If you have understood it then you
might have realized how great our developed likings only for imported
goods and we have taken to the path of
foreigners. It has done enormous harm
to the people. How much difficulty it has
put us in! Know the greatness and glory
of your country and see it in your life and
country is and what a monstrous
upheaval it has gone through. When you
become aware of it then you will be
proud of your country and think what a
great country it is. The culture of our
country is very high. Nowhere else one lives of others. There are wonderful
could find such a culture. I have gone to traditions here. By running away from
these traditions we are going away from
so many countries but our culture
it. We stood on truth and because of that
teaches us to respect everyone, love
everyone, love the country and also it has
big-big ideals. We have to follow those
we have to face innumerable difficulties.
You have to accept it. But the person
ideals.
standing on truth becomes immortal.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 cRT September & October 2003
n
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
something which adds to the glory of our
Nothing is good or bad for him. He is
respectable, worthy of worship and to country. There are number of things
a big which Sahaj Yogis have to do and they
become like him will be
have been doing also. Their lives have
achievement. Butstill we don't recognise
become so beautiful. Whether it is in the
our country and instead of becoming its
ornaments, we go on imitating others. It
does not behove Sahaj Yogis; and I know
family or outside, people praise them
and say that how beautiful the lives of
Sahaj Yogis do not do such things. But
we have to téll it to others also that there
is pride of country, self-pride and different
Sahaj Yogis have become! Firstly the
blessings of the spirit and secondly the
subtle outlook which makes you know
and recognise goodness. Without that
types of ideals of life. I think gradually it
subtle outiook you are not Sahaj Yogis.
There is a lot to say but I am thinking
will develop. The number of Sahaj Yogis
has increased. It has increased so much
that many such people are present here
that there is no need for me to tell much.
who have not experienced their spirit. It
Sahaj Yogis will themselves do this work.
What I have to say is that if you are
is necessary to have a session of Self-
Sahaj Yogis then method and system of Realization for them. You should all
stretch your hands towards me and sit
your life should be that of an ideal Indian.
silently, peacefully. Now please close
Caste and religion should not be cared
your eyes. Both the hands towards me
for. The only significant fact is that you
and close your eyes. Keeping your eyes
closed, now say 'Shri Mataji' please give
us Self-Realization' (say it in your heart
are an Indian and it is your duty to be
glory of the country and enjoy living in
that glory. You should take care of each
and every tradition of your country, its - without speaking). Keep your eyes
music, art, craft and architecture. All closed and feel whether you have cool
these were wonderful. Now-a-days that
standard could not be maintained but
breeze or hot blowing from your hands.
If you are feeling this breeze then stretch
your right hand towards me and left hand
atleast we should understand them and
see those standards. Indians should overyour head and feel. Are you feeling
the cool breeze over your head?
have this quality. They should know that
so much great work has been done in
May God Bless You All.
this country and we should also do
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Inaugration Ceremony - NGO
Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram, Greater Noida (27-03-2003)
the children are also thrown out of house.
You must allow me to speak in Hindi
language. Out of the various problems
of our country, one big problem is that
How could this system change in our
country? Is there any remedy for it or not?
Many a times I thought of writing about it
but ultimately I concluded that there will
here, there are different standards for
men and women. I don't know how it has
be no use of writing. Some permanent
creeped in because nowhere in our
scriptures we were commanded to do arrangement has to be made about it,
that. It's written in our religious books, something has to be done. I wanted to
"Yatra Narya Pujyanté Tatra Ramanté do something concrete. I have seen
Devta'. Devas (the deities) reside where many such women who are begging on
the road-sides. People told me that it is a
women are worshipped. I don't
nice way to beg. I replied, 'you will realise
it only if only if you are made to beg'. The
indifferent attitude that people of our
country have developed for women
understand how this state was
developed in which we have no respect
for women. I was myself married in U.P.
and was surprised to see that women
makes me weep. That is why I resolved
had no significance in domestic life.
to do something for shelter and food for
There was no differance between the
these poor women. Something must be
done. The poor women beg on the roads,
maid servents and the ladies of the
house. How did it happen and why is it
do everything. I called them at my house,
talked to them. However I could not find
continuing? Because people are not
awakened to this problem. The way
women have been treated, thrown out of any reason for their undergoing this
the houses, makes one weep. Without travail. Man develops liking for any
woman. I don't know why? The life of
any reason women are thrown out of the
women is very great. It is the foundation
house. I had many such experiences
of the whole world. They give birth to
which anguished me. I don't understand
thousands of children but people treat
why the women are being tortured like
them so insultingly that poor woman
that! There is no arrangement for them
goes to the brink of madness, tolerating
to live. Once they go out of the house then
all this. Because of her children she tries
there is no one to look after them. Poor
to face all atrocities very bravely. But
ladies were thrown out with their small
children. Those women are destitutes but what should she do? They have no
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
means to feed themselves what should circumstances it will get spoiled. As an
they do, where to go and from whom to experiment I have used it but it is a
beg. No one allows them to knock at the wonderful thing. I don't know why our
door. I could see no remedy to it, so I industry doesn't make things like that! It
thought that the best thing for these is not difficult to make such a thing. I told
women would be to build a dwelling for
many people to use it, but then who will
bother. There is neither difficulty nor
them. Here they will learn something,
learn to do some work-massaging, botheration. But Indians do not want to
running small restaurants etc. But many change, they let the things go as they are.
people are needed to help them, to make What could you say to them? In this
them understand. Some place is also country there were many scholars and
needed for them. With this target I have Sanskrit Pandits. They have imparted
built this ashram and through this, knowledge in abundance. But people
challanged the emotions of everyone. I are not aware of it as to what a great
have challenged the love of the whole country they are born in and how much
world so that people could see them with knowledge is there in it. They have no
love. There is no fault of these poor respect for women. Women are treated
women. Responsibility of their begging like beggars. Husbands drink alchohal
and beat their wives and those who do
from door to door lies on the shoulders
not beat, give no facility to them. Some
of our society. Being a woman, it moves
me and I am anguished to see all this.
When the construction startedI girl belongs to rich parents then it is all
wished to complete it somehow. Put a lot right, otherwise they are tortured. That is
of hard work on it and made a design of how, many women have become
how the poor women have to live. If the
backward. Some of them have left their
it. Its speciality is that the white colour
houses and are begging. Some of them
are rotting in the domesticity. They keep
weeping in the house and somehow
getting on with the life. I do not know why
you are seeing is such that it will not get
spoiled with a special technique it has
been made. I learnt this technique in Itly.
There I learnt to make such a colour
which will never fade. Use it and see how
the attention of the society, particularly
beautiful it is! It will not be spoiled with
in U.P., has not been drawn to it. In
Maharashtra two-three social reformers
any quantity of water falling on it. In no
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 September & October 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
sufficient and practice Sahaja Yoga.
came up and they did a lot of work in this
they achieve it then they will be able to
direction. Universities were established
live with pride and self respect. We could
there because of them. Women were
given high education and people could set up some art and craft work and also
see potential in them. Now we have built could we make many eatables and
this institution and I request you to impart high level education, Then the
capability of women would be judged
suggest as to what could be done here.
and seen that how many of them could
Which education could we impart? We
be self-sufficient.
have also thought a lot about it but you
Some times we find that women are
are also well informed. You write to me
misused even on such places, but those
what else we could do for the betterment
of these women. I have seen in foreign
who try to be self-sufficient they should
be helped, they should be looked after.
What is being done in our society is very
harmful. It is the sign of wickedness but
we pay no heed to it. I don't know how?
We should give some attention to it. The
respect that we should have for woman
countries that no one could harass
women like this. Their condition is not so
bad. It is the speciality of our country that
women are put to misery. I have been
living abroad for many years and have
noticed this difference. It hurts me to see
is absent. We torture them, beat them for
that there is no value of women in our
nothing. I have such stories of tortured
country. Woman gives birth to children,
women which if I tell you, you will not be
looks after them. Also Indian women are
able to control your tears. I have wept
very charming, active, efficient and very
over it a lot, but now I want to find out
loving, Indian mothers are very famous.
some solution to it. To achieve this end I
But there is no respect for their love in
have made this small effort. It would be
our country. I don't know why? Western
expanded later on. The women who are
women have formed their fronts and
imparted training there, they will mature
managed everything for themselves. But
there is no one to take care of them in and do something in their lives. They
this country. With the idea to impart would be able to take care of themselves
knowledge and technique to girls and and their children, lead their lives
women who come here, we built up this respectfully. It is very necessary, however
Ashram so that they could be self- educated and trained may, the woman,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
the miserable state of the women of ur
be they are not respected in their homes.
What do the poor creatures do? Even country before these people? They are
their education is nor respected. proud of this country. Whenever they
Therefore we should direct our efforts to
come to India they touch the earth of this
impart some such training to women so
country and bow before it. They respect
it so much that I have no words to
express it. I never told them to do it. From
that they are not insulted. We should also
realise that we have to respect the
woman and have faith in them. I have
their own minds they have faith in it and
seen such inhuman deeds that, one regard this country as 'Nandan Van' but
they don't know the miserable condition
that prevails over here. I don't want them
to know about it. What is the use of
cannot believe, are possible from one
human being for another one. How could
human beings cheat, harrass and torture
the another one. Its a strange slavery! We criticising our own country? But at the
have gained independence from the
same time the short comings need to be
removed. They should be finished
slavery of Britishers but freedom from the
completely. That is what I am telling to
slavery of our own social system is more
all of you that there is no specific reason
essential than that. The number of
women in.our country, is at least 70%, for women being respected in Western
countries. But their laws are such. In India
the remaining are men. Inspite of it, men
have so much of ego that they don't no one bothers about the condition of
allow the women to lead their lives with women and men think no end of
self respect, like human beings. They are
themselves. The women are very
important part of the society and you and
you children will have to face the results
of all the excesses done to women. Now
no animals. They are human beings and
to give them respect of human beings is
absolutely necessary. We have to
understand and respect them. We have
we find our children getting spoiled
to start from our own house and see what
because who is there to control them?
is going on there. I have seen it very
Mother has no right and father no time.
So who will look after the children and
closely but there was no other way out
put them on right path. Its the story of
but weeping over it.
each family. I have seen in U.P. that the
Knowingly i am talking in Hindi
language because how could I tell about
college boys absent themselves from the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 September & October 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue:9& 10
10
college and get into trains and loot the
the guidance of woman. The way things
are happening here, I hope the small
effort will bring some improvements and
passengers. What could their poor
mothers do? The poor mothers could say
it will attract the attention of people and
nothing, no one listens to them. This
they will be drawn towards the problem
outlook should be changed and attention
should be given to the progress and for which I have been worrying and
weeping throughout. People should see
social status of our women. If it begins in
every domesticity then things will that by Sahaja Yoga your spirit is
improve all over. These conditions awakened and you have the knowledge
anguish me extremely. Men failed to of the spirit. But you should have a
accept the right of women. So I thought compassionate outlook towards others
to spend on this project. Now such a
after getting self-realization. Without
compassion what's the use?
Compassionately if you look, you will be
concerned to see as to what miserable
place is built which attracts attention of
the people. Atleast some respect should
be given to women. In our lives we could
whirl our mothers and sisters have
see their conditon. First of all we have to
caught in. So its my request to you, to go
all around and improve the state of
see the condition of our own mothers and
sisters and then look to the society. The
women. I have done small effort but you
improvement in the condition of women
could do a lot. So l request you all to love
will have our country to rise very high.
your mothers and sisters as you love me.
Abundant blessings to all of you.
Many great people have come up under
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 THE IMPORTANCE OF MEDITATION
Prabha Devi, Bombay, 1st Feb. 1975
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
is that?" He replied, "I must go there,
have to save time, time is very important"
lasked, "after all, what is the matter? Why
The most important thing to progress
and ascend in Sahaja Yoga is that you
have to meditate. Meditation is very
essential. You may or may not do any are you saving time and running to
other effort but if you establish yourself London?" He said,"there is a special
dinner which I have to attend and after
in meditation then you could progress in
dinner there is a ball (dance)." What are
Sahaja Yoga.
As I told you it's a new path, a new you saving the time for?
The wrist watch that you are wearing
dimension, a new system in which you
is meant for Sahaja Yoga and meditation
have jumped. You have entered into your
and also to do the Sahaja work. I am
unconscious, into that great ocean, it is
wearing it only for this purpose,
alright but if you wish to penetrate deep
otherwise I would not have used it.
into it then you will have to meditate.
I have heard many people saying,
"Shri Mataji, we do not get time to time in Sahaja Yoga is not free from
meditate." Modern man of today keeps domestic duties. Sahaj work is no excuse
Someone who spends most of his
to get rid of official duties. You have to do
watch all the time only to save time, but
he doesn't know as to why he is saving
all the duties but everything should be
done in the state of meditation.
this time. Human being has invented
Everything would be done in the state of
watch only for Sahaja Yoga; he is not
meditation because you have been
aware of this fact.
One gentleman came and said," It's established in the state of meditation. You
can do everything in thoughtless
very necessary for me to go to London
and I have to go by this very plane,
awareness. As soon as you get into
thoughtless awareness, the beauty, the
whole knowledge and the joy of the work
somehow or other my ticket should be
booked. Please do something, talk to Air
India people and do something."I asked,
starts pouring into you.
what's the urgency? Why do you want to
It's necessary to understand, but
go to London? What's the problem? What people do not understand it and the
problem begins that they get no time for
particular job you have to do there? What
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 September & October 2003
12
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 9 & 10
getting very deep within, but some Sahaj
meditation. However, when you start
Yogis are very perplexed. I do not know
receiving the joy of it then, you will be
surprised; sleep is reduced to a large whether all of them could reach that state
or not. But one has to do everything
extent and you go in meditation. Even
while sleeping you will think as if you possible in this life. Maximum time
should be spent for it, everything else is
were in meditation. You have neither to
give up nor to reduce anything. All that insignificant.
was significant to us iooses it's
significance and which we regarded of various things but how many of you
Most of the people, I have seen, talk
talk of meditation, of cleansing
insignificant becomes very significant.
You have to remember that the yourselves and of enhancing the joy
within? 'Such and such person said so,
instrument which you are going to play
into meditation, the Veena (aijun) on which such and such thing happened, that
should not have been done, this should
this beautiful music is to be played, has
not have been done'-does it behove a
to be very neat and clean. You are neither
Sahaj Yogi? When you have got such a
that Veena nor the prelude to singing
huge wealth of Thoughtless Awareness,
(Aalaap) but you are going to listen to it
or to play it, you are the master of it. should it not be unfolded fully?
You know it well that every moment
Therefore, if the Veena is not properly
you are getting it, but at the same time
tuned, if its chords are rusted, or if some
of the chords are broken, then, it's you are loosing it every moment. How
significant this moemnt is, that you have
necessary to set them right. If the chords
I have never told you to renounce
to see.
of the instrument are not in a perfect
or adopt anything but this is your illusion;
condition then there could be no
sweetness in your life, there could be no your mind is pushing you in illusion.
beauty in you. There will be a strange Would you renounce your domestic life?
Have I renounced my family life? How
irritancy (Fast44), a strange dryness
and a strange perplexity in you.
could I ask you to do that? You know it
well that I work more than you but I never
Seeing a Sahaj Yogi sitting in
get tired because you people are the
meditation with a firm mind is a big thing
1
source of my joy. When I see you I get
for me. I see that many Sahaj Yogis are
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9
September & October 2003
13
& 10
very happy, my whole being is filled with The way Himalaya is highest in the
world, everyone looks to it, you have to
joy.
Look to what is significant, I don't ask
be like that, You yourself could be like
Himalaya and see people of the world
you to sit in meditation twenty four hours
looking at you and saying, I should also
a day. Keep on wherever you are, that is
what I mean. Wherever you are
become like that person who has risen
so high in Sahaja Yoga.' The ascent is
established, remain there, at your place,
internal not external and I know about
on your throne.
everyone as to who has reached which
Some people ascend because of it but
some do not. Diseases of the body of level.
many of you have got cured, many have
no diseases at all but still doubts of the
You are the only obstacle for yourself,
no one else could be an obstacle for you,
no one could affect you by mantras-
mind continue to be there.
tantras etc. Without spoiling yourself if
you try to know the other people then you
will understand that some negativity has
gripped that person. That is why, he is
Forget everything, every human being
has the right to get it. It is your birth right
because it is 'Saha+Ja', born with you.
will have to meditate and that
But
you
talking in such a way, otherwise no one
too collectively. You don't have to bother
does like that. The way he is talking, there
to organise it, need not bother much to
is definitely some negativity in him.
There is no need to accept him. May be,
that he is your husband or she is your
organise it. That work is being done and
it will be done. How does it matter if the
number of people is ten more or ten less!
It's better to keep ten worthy people than
wife, there is no need either to quarrel or
to argue with hìm; they will improve by
thousand useless ones. These ten
people are very significant for Sahaja themselves.
Not only that, you also know that in
Yoga.
You have to be one of these ten
case of some catch how could you set it
significant people. One of those who are right by the movement of your hands.
doing Sahaj work very happily, enjoying Such a power is flowing through your
hands! All the deities that I have talked
of have been awakened in your fingers-
themselves of it, flowing in it, advancing
in it and those who stand in the front row.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
14
in these five fingers, and in the palm all
to think that, I do this work, I do that work."
It's getting done as 'it is going and it is
the deities are awakened. But it's
important that these deities are not coming'. Now you have to get into the
state of 'Akarma'-the way the Sun never
insulted in anyway. You have to take
says, 'I give you light.' 'He is giving'.
utmost care of these deities and all efforts
should be made in this direction. They because it is flowing the energy of the
God-the most powerful energy, from
should be worshipped. Our hands should
be worthy of worship. People should within. Similarly, very subtle powers are
think,these are hands or the streams of flowing from you because you are a
subtle machine. You are not a machine
Ganges'! The stream of Ganges should
like the sun, you are a 'special' machine
flow. The power that sanctified the
which is very subtle and the beautiful
Ganges, those vibrations (that chaitanya)
is flowing from you. The power that runs
vibrations that flow from you, no doubt
give very soothing (strange) experience
the whole creation is flowing from you,
not only to you but to others as
well.
you are aware of this fact.
These vibrations set alright their subtle
Therefore, the hands and the feet from
aspects, small-small instruments and
which this energy flows should be kept
very pure. I don't mean to say that you machine with great love.
keep washing your hands and feet all
the times. Whatever you do with your How do I explain this fact to you? If you
hands should be done beautifully, have to prepare some machine then it
Now this power is the 'power of love'.
could be done by tightening some screw
naturally and with love. Love is the most
or by filing it with something but the
significant element.
To gain depth in meditation is your human machine which has been
only work, nothing else is so important.
Everything else is going on. Whosoever
wounded could be set right only by love.
Human beings have many wounds in
them and they are very tortured beings.
amongst you, if thinks that I do this work,
You have to fill their wounds with the balm
I do that work, then you know I let loose
my Maya (element of illusion) and many
have suffered for it. However, I shall keep
of love. The vibrations which are flowing
from you are nothing else but love. When
the stream of your love stops flowing, the
on doing it. I have already told you never
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
15
meditation. The moment you look at the
flow of your vibrations also stops.
Many people tell me, "Shri Mataji, I thoughts that come while meditating, you
will get into the unconscious state along
have got some catch. The flow of
vibrations in my hands has stopped." with your consciousness. Your
The stream of love within you has consciousness never ends. In that state
discontinued to flow. Stick to your you will understand consiousness. First
time it has happened in the body of the
love, keep holding it tightly and your
human being that one knows about one's
vibrations will continue. Because this
is the love of the God which is flowing.
own body and about the body of others
as well. Through collective concious-
Only that is flowing.
It is such a unique experience, such ness you know what is happening in
other person's instrument.
a unique time has come. Because in it
Till now very few people know its
you have not co-operated with me whole-
heartedly, shall it all be wasted.?
significance. Everyone says to me, "Shri
Mataji if you take money from everybody,
You yourself can know everything and
I am also ready to explain it to you only then they will understand because
wherever you fail to understand. money carries utmost importance in their
However, there is a suggestion to give minds. Money is an apparition. If you
that you have to think whether you understand its significance by my
deserve it or not. Because you come in accepting money from you, then it is
my attention-like in Marathi language it better not to understand it. By giving
is said Jamoon aale'. That does not money, you can't understand its
make you deserving. The depth within importance. You have to give yourself
fully to me and with that surrender how
makes you deserving.
For example, there is a pitcher (TR),
much you are likely to gain! There is no
doubt that you will get many times more
it will contain the quantity of water
than what you give.
For meditation you have to come in
according to its depth. If it has no depth
then what is the use of pouring water in
it, the whole water will flow out. With collectivity, it is imperative. Though it is
meditation you increase you depth, get once in a month but you should meditate
established in meditation, go in where seven (some) people sit
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9810
16
September & October 2003
because it is not something to be taught.
collectively to meditate. You may have
If your hands are shaking then you
a small group who could sit for
should know that there is some serious
meditation once a week and gather once
in a big group. I told you it is the work of
problem in you. Shoe beating is the best
treatment for it. Yesterday, you might have
the Virata.
You have to awaken every part of the
seen one fellow came and started
saying, "Mother, there I went in a state of
body, as soon as it is awakned the lights
stupor." Then he came in front of me and
started shaking. I asked him as to who
will get lit up. However you meditate at
home, you realise on my arrival that no
his guru was? He replied, "one Bhagwat
progress has been made. But the six-
Sa in Poona," so I asked, what does he
seven persons who used to come here
daily have made lot of progress.
do? He replied,"that he has opened a
If there is fluttering in the eyes then
spiritual centre over there; he gave me
deeksha (initiation)". I asked, what
you immediately know that Aganya
deeksha did he do? He said,"he taught
Chakra is being hit. There is nothing to
me the technique of this shaking. For
feel bad about it. If Aganya Chakra is not
I have suffered from
alright then it should be cleared sixteen years
diseases, I lost my job, I suffered this, I
otherwise the joy is reduced.
While meditating if your body is suffered that," I asked, are you not
awakened still? If you have a guru then
shaking and if you are not able to sit
comfortably then you should know that
you should not have all these problems.
there is problem in mooladhara and this "How much money did you pay to him
could be a dangerous situation. When so far?" "I have paid rupees five-six
the mooladhara is affected then it should thousand to the centre". I said, you have
be got cured. These people know how nicely bought all these diseases for
rupees five-six thousands! Then shoe-
to cure the mooladhara chakra.
So far as the knowledge is concerned, beating was done to his ghost-the
by listening to my lectures you could, Bhagwat Sahab and the centre. Dnly
know all the scriptures. But I find many then his hands stopped shaking. It all
happened before all of you, many people
new seekers, sometimes, ascend with
more speed and leave you behind
were here.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue:9& 10.
September & October 2003
should be more active than the old
Very clearly it should be asked from
people. If the elderly people are worthy
the people that do they have some guru
or some negativity. If there is a problem,
of respect, they will be respected. So,
they have to be worthy and the
there is nothing to feel bad about it. But I
see if one person has a little problem, youngsters should respect them.
Even otherwise Sahaj Yogis should
the another possessed one also stands
with him; they make a queue together not disrespect other Sahaj Yogis
and you could know that all these because you are all divine personalities.
You can know all this in meditation. While
talking to each other if you think deeply
then you will immediately know that. "Oh!
his Agya Chakra is catching. That is why
negative people are sitting together.
Actually they should not sit like that, they
should sit separately. But they sit as if
making a group. It's wrong. Like, Thane
it is happening." Oh! his heart is catching
people will come and sit with the Thane
people and so-on. Šit separately, it's
that is why it is getting done, that is why
the proper sounds are not emanating".
You will not feel bad about it nor will the
necessary. Don't sit in groups.
Another thing is that there are some
old people, some middle aged and some
other people do.
But feeling bad is a 'big problem', a
youngsters. There is nothing wrong with
big obstruction. People take ill of what I
the children but those who are old or
middle-aged should sit separately. Old
say, what to taik of others. You should not
feel bad about anything that I say. I always
poeple should sit with the young and
work for your benevolence-you know it.
young ones with the old. Four-five young
people sitting together will create While discussing anything you should
problem and same is with the old ones.
see that we are discussing about it, now,
"where is our Kundalini, where are we
It happens, you may see. The experience
going, how are we ascending. All other
of the old and young age is to be shared
and it could be shared in collective discussions are useless. How much
are
consciousness. The old people need to we awakned in dharma?" How much
be wise, very wise-elderly qualities and
large heart-and the younger ones should
have we achieved? How much divine
joy we are enjoying?" These experiences
are to be told to each other. This is what
pay respect to the elders. Youngsters
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 September & October 2003
18
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
you have to share, everthing else is put your fingers in the ears and your
useless. Its better to keep silent about Sahasrara is opened then you could
other matters. If Sahaj Yogis become
listen through it even if your eyes and
such people then there will be a big ears are closed. So the deaf boys that
differece-a very big difference'.
came started listening to some extent.
If your Sahasrara is opened, doctors
You are going to reflect Sahaja Yoga
know it well that there are certain subtle
and the reflector should be very clean. If
points, subtle centres in the limbic area
the reflecting power of the reflector is fully
which perform the functions of nose,
awakned then there will be no difficulty.
ears, mouth and other organs of the body.
By no other means-no other methods, by
making big big organisations, by We awaken that Sahasrara which takes
care of the whole body. Then there
chanting big mantras or singing music
could we work out Sahaja Yoga? remains no need of the sense organs
You could also
breath from Sahasrara. Even if, all sense
Nothing could be achieved by all these
methods.
organs of the body are rendered useless
never saw so many realised people
as I am seeing today. Its my goods luck still you could do all the functions
However the organs are not rendered
thatI am seeing so many realised people.
useless. By the awakening of Sahasrara
In no age I saw so many self realised
your body starts blooming. It gets
people. Its a matter of great fortune.
But the way I say there is no perfect beautified. All the diseases run away.
saint (sadhu) in this modern age. You Everything is all-right. Some small
people were the great saints in olden problems, if arise, they also get solved.
To make progress in meditation one
times but you were not involved in this
world. You were in forests but today you
are here living with the other people of
thing is very essential, very essential. We
call it innocence. Purity & innocence of
child. That is why you have seen children
the world. What a joy will it be to get into
get their realisation in no time. But the
your saintliness. The Saraswati will start
flowing along with this Ganges and cunning, those who think no end of
themselves, those who have no desire
Yamuna.
to get connected to the Divine and who
No outer sounds will disturb you. If you
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
remembering their innocent utterings.
keep on showing their cleverness, such
Those who become innocent get entitled
people do not get their realisation so
easily. One should be fully innocent. to the kingdom of God.
While meditating, look within and
Effort should be made for it.
see what tricks my mind is playing?
Where is it moving? What foolishness
is it committing? The moment you see
We should not trouble anyone.
Troubling anyone is against innocence.
Troubling so many souls, how could we
be innocent? Innocence means
it, immediately you go into
thoughtless. 'Thoughtlessness'- this
something bloomed like flower that gives
is innocence.
fragrance to the whole world. It troubles
Now you will go in meditation, we may
none. However, sometimes people are
not meditate for a long time. But while
troubled because of their foolishness. Its
going in meditation you have to see
right. Getting sure of yourself, you should
which one of your chakra is catching. All
not trouble others.
You have now got the switch of of you who have got Self-Realisation.
innocence. I tried to see if you have made know it well. You could feel it on your
such a switch? If you have that switch fingers as to which finger has burning
sensation. Put bandhan to the burning
then put it on and your Agya Chakra will
be cleared immediately. But you do not finger and the burning will go. If the
fingers are burning too much, toss your
have the switch of innocence, switch of
hands and it will go away, you know it.
compassion, the switch of peace. All the
Put a bandhan.
switches have not been created in you
But be in thoughtlessness and keep
so far. First of all, you awaken the deities
who are sitting within you then all the the attention on Sahasrara. See whether
those who have come for the first time
switches will be commissioned in you,
have got their Self-Realisation or not.
V len
one by one.
It is the easiest to put the switch of
What is their problem? What are their
catches? It will all be removed, all these
innocence because when we were born
aek
and were very small, we were innocent.
Innocence develops in the company of
problems are external.
This is a big dedication where energy
small children, by talking to them, by flows from both the sides, where there is
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 September & October 2003
20
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
expression of left and right sympathetic are also burning-what could be done
other than cleansing. I am unable to sit.
nervous system-from that channel
Also, you know many other methods of
within, it is the channel of Sushumna. By
cleansing. There is nothing to feel bad if
doing this, Sushumna starts working, but
it should be awakened. If it is not I asked someone to sit in water and
cleanse himself, there is nothing to feel
awakened then it means Sushumna is
bad about it. How foolish it is to feel bad
not working out. The meaning of
about it? How foolish it is to take ill of it?
awakening is that cool breeze will start
People think what Shri Mataji has said?
emanating from your fingers. If you have
Are you such a great saint? You don't
this cool breeze flowing, if you are fully
in thoughtless state in meditation, then know that even the big saints do it
(Cleansing).
As I have said about Kabir Dasa -ara
you are progressing and ascending. Like,
you sit in an aeroplane, you do not know
used with great care?
where you are going, yet you reach chalk sida
Kabir said of himself that,"I used this
somewhere.
"body' with great care". He was such a
So long as we are here it is necessary
then what is there
that all the Sahaja Yogis should great person (H
to feel bad about it?
participate in it and even after my going
If some one is told to bring pitcher
they should not spoil this collectivity. If
(HEa), he will feel bad about it! Some
you talk useless things then you will
suffer for it. Anyone talking of any people bring so big pitcher!
Give up all the useless and stupid
external thing, anything except Sahaja
imaginations. No childishness-not at all.
Yoga and the spirit, that is within, shall
You have to be child like not childish.
suffer. No worldly thing is to be talked.
Now we shall go in meditation. As I
Talk of the spirit.
said, first tell yourself with love. You
Clear your chakras. There is nothing
to feel shy about it. The catches of
know I am your Mother. Know it fully well
that I am your Mother. Know it fully wel
chakras arise due to external problems.
Boldly cleanse the chakras and get rid that I am your mother and having a
security, full
Mother means full
of the catches. Those who have burning
hands should cleanse them. My hands protection. Nothing will go wrong.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 September & October 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
21
Stretch your hands towards me, slowly
ask from the God. Ask for nothing else.
close your eyes and watch your Ask for yourself..
thoughts. You will be thought-less. You
have to do nothing at all. Immediately on
Establish me in your lotus feet.
Submerge this drop into your ocean.
getting thoughtless you will penetrate
within yourself.
"Whatever impure is there in me
remove it all. Whatever you ask from the
First tell yourself that I have decided
Divine, will happen...
not to hurt anyone today onward, 'O
"Make me large hearted, make me
Divine forgive everyone', all those who wise. Give me Thy wisdom. Give me Thy
have hurt me and also forgive me knowledge."
because I have also hurt many people.
"Let there be benediction of the whole
God will grant you only what you ask
world. Let there be kingdom of love in the
for. You have to pray that, "O Almighty,
whole world. Let my lamp be lit for it. Let
make me peaceful", and he will grant you
this body dissolve in it. Let my mind be
peace but you don't ask for peace. Ask
for contentment and he will give you
in it. Let my heart be submerged in it."
Think of the most benevolent thing
satisfaction. But you don't ask for that.
and ask from the God. "All that is
Give me beautiful character and he
beautiful if you ask for, that you will get.
If you ask for ugly things, you will get that
will grant you beautiful character.
also. On asking you will get the ugly also,
Prayer means now you are connected
the useless also. Then why shall he not
to the Divine.
"Fill me with love, give me love for
give what is worth asking?
the whole world". Give me sweetness-
Do not ask externally (with lips) but
sweetness. You will get whatever you
ask from within (with Heart).
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 HOW TO OVERCOME EGO AND KNOW THYSELF
Dollis Hill, November 18, 1979
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
understand, where you stand for it. How
much you have to improve yourself?
Because you are the people, who are
going to take Sahaja Yoga to that position,
A happening by which a creation of
God is going to get its fulfilment and is
going to know its meaning. It is that great!
Perhaps we do not realise it. But when
we say, we are Sahaja Yogis; you have
to know that, to be Sahaja Yogi how
where it has to reach. As far as I am
concerned, I have nothing to do
anymore. I have done it. Now it is for you
to receive, you have to imbibe into it and
you have to change the whole thing. That
is your job and that is why it is a serious
much identified you should be with the
Truth of Sahaja Yoga; and so many
misidentifications which are hanging on
to you, must be got rid of. People call it a
sacrifice. I do not think it is a sacrifice. If
you think, something is happening in your
way, you try to take out that hurdle. In the
matter.
in
The second point: I always have been
saying that due to ego problem, we are
same way, if you stand out from your very much disintegrated. We are so
obstructions, you will be able to disintegrated that, the connection with the
understand that, these obstructions are Divine is never properly established. As
standing in your way and they are not I have said it, that, this instrument
your own and that they are stopping your (through which I am speaking) if it is
divided into five parts and all the five
progress. So you should let these
misidentifications out of your minds parts are fighting with each other, you
cannot get anything done through this
instrument, though it is connected to the
mains. In the same way if you still remain
This is one of the problems I think, disintegrated, you cannot get that
people have here. Whenever I get any connection. For example, you see
complaints, or something of that sort, I people come down here, I have seen, for
understand that, still the level of Sahaja Yoga. Now they have other
understanding about Sahaja Yoga is not interests and other priorities and other
upto that point. It is a tremendous task things which are very important to them.
and for that if you are the people, who All the time, they are wasting their time
have to come up; and if you are the for that and then they will say that,
people, who have to fight it, you have to 'Mother, we are not progressing much in
understand it in its full extent and also Sahaja Yoga'. If you decide, as Mr.
completely, and try to be more and more
yourself and not in tune with
misidentifications.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
23
Venugopalan has told you before, that comes to Sahaja Yoga. Still his ego is
'we have to do Sahaja Yoga first and the
other things are secondary'-then only the have such a big ego as he has. I mean,
Sahaja Yoga can be really established the way he will talk that, 'I don't do these
into you. We will have some Sahaja things' and so on. I am myself amazed,
Yogis of a very high level. I know that, the way people talk. As if, you see,
we will have some of mediocre level. everybody has become the King of
so big. Even our Prime Minister won't
Some will be absolutely useless and
some will be absolutely thrown out. We
will have all types, that also I know.
Now it is for you to decide, where do
you come? How, far you are going to? If
England or what, the way they talk! This
is something, one should tell people,
when they come here. 'Do not waste Shri
Mataji's energies in arguing this and that'.
Because everybody thinks no end of
themselves here. And that is the biggest
hurdle that they have, when they even
come first time. You find it so difficult.
have to show all my appreciation of their
ego all the time', to just satisfy them; so
that they come round. And that is why,
the progress becomes less.
Now in his case (Mr. Venugopalan's)
you are going to waste your time in
thinking about other Sahaja Yogis and
small-small things and frivolous things,
your disintegration is going to be
increased, you are going to be separated
much more as all these decisions are
taken through your ego e.g. I don't like
it, I don't do it. I don't see it'and the like. If
you could somehow or other see your
he has been a person, who has been to
ego working, then you can get rid of it all kinds of horrible Gurus and his wife
and that is the thing one has to do; not to also has been to all kinds of horrible
fight the ego. I never say fight the ego but Gurus; because of another extreme in
surrender it. It is the only way your ego -India we have, that we must respect all
the saints. But these types of saints are
can go.
That is why the progress in the West, fake saints. Not only are they fake saints,
as you have seen it, is much less than but some of them are devils. So they are
that is in India. Take the particular case not going to say that,"We are devils'.
of Shri Venugopalan. He is remarkable. When they do not say that they are devils
He is the particular man who is doing or whatever it is, they do not come in their
remarkably well. He is holding a very big proper forms. These simple innocent
position in India. Here I have seen a people, who are seeking God, just go to
person who is, say, a dish washer. He them, give their heart, do everything and
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
understand that, we have a very great
responsibility in the West. Because this
has to happen in London. It has to
happen in England to begin with and that
is why you bear a very big responsibility.
You have to evaluate yourself and Sahaja
Yoga again and again and again and
know that what makes you slow is your
ego or even superego is there, no doubt.
But ego is the main problem. I must tell
you that, ego is the main problem but I
dare not say to anyone that, this is your
ego, because that will just jump on to my
head. But, try to see your ego, how it is
deviating. Because it is your own joy that
you are seeking. Your own property that
they find that they are devils. Once they
discover that they are devils, then they
are surprised. Then they come back and
go to another Guru and another Guru. But
the harm is done. But they get rid of that
harm because they recognise that harm
has been done and they know what the
truth is and what to expect. It is the
blessing of that country that the people
know what to expect. You see, people
like those good quality people would not
like to go and will not go to a man, who
shows some sort of sensationalisations
or 'Chamatkaras, i.e. miracles. They
would not go to them, but they will go to
other subtler people, who are very
you are seeking. It is your own that is
hidden from you, which you have been
cunning and put up another kind of a
show and just say that, 'no, no, this is the
seeking for ages. Now that is what I have
to expose to you. What is there to argue
with a person, who is trying to give you
the highest? It is just a waste of
Do not waste your energy on these
things, frivolous things and finding faults.
Now he has been organising our
Delhi Camp. He is the one, who has
organised the printing of our books and
so on, so smooth, absolutely. I have not
way you can attain the highest' and that
is how most of the Sahaja Yogis in India
also have been. Except for the village
people and the district people; most of
the city people have been, to some Guru
or something. But despite all that, they
have left everything. I have told them, 'you
have to beat them with shoes;' they will
energy.
do. In the morning every day he does his
sadhana (meditation) for one hour, even
if he is a very busy man. Here even to known any problems you just tell them
get up in the morning, people grudge. I that 'this has to happen', 'Alright'. I do not
mean, what can you do with such slow know how it works out. You have stayed
moving people? You see it is absolutely in Delhi. You have seen how many
very difficult.
And this is what I think, we must you have anybody complaining, anybody
people were there. Never a problem. Did
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 25
September & October 2003
The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
that never will fetch you in any way.
quarrelling or anybody fighting among
themselves? Nothing of the kind.
You see, this is not the sign of You must know that. You are realised
intelligence either, all the time trying to souls in this world. How many there are,
find faults with each other or trying to who can raise the Kundalini? How many
Despise yourself, never! You are saints.
there are, who understands what are
blame yourself. Both things are wrong.
vibrations?
The best thing is to grow in wisdom and
I am going to tell you on Guru Puja,
yourself see that we are becoming wiser
and wiser. Some of you are really very what things you have achieved, and how;
grown up and some of you still go up and many things you have got within you,
down and some of you still very low. So built-in how, which are working. How your
all of us have to go together. If somebody chakras are awakened through Sahaja
has achieved something, it is of no use Yoga! As he says, 'Yes,' It has happened.
to Sahaja Yoga. As I have told you, it is But what are you doing about it? This is
the collective thing that is going to work the greatest of the greatest things which
and all of you have to work it out. It is so
can happen to anyone that you know.
Also you know, this is the greatest
happening, which was prophesied long
time back as the 'last judgement;. You
sweet that you have real brothers and
sisters all over the world today. When you
will go there with a full heart, they are
going to receive you, as you have know that this is the way, you are going
received them with full heart. But, we all to be judged. So we have to work very
hard. We have to work. It is effortlessly
given to you, alright. But to maintain it,
keep it up to go high, we have to
must come up, come up to a point, where
we can face each other with full love,
with openness, without any worry about
any thing, without any fear of anyone; but
just
religiously work it out.
It is a very humble attitude in receiving
say they are your brothers and you
are their brothers and that you have to
more and more and more into your
being, imbibing into your being. Let it
love them.
That is only possible when we get out trickle into your brain completely
of our fears here because there is also covering it. Let that eternal bliss come
another side to it that ego always has into you. I am so anxious. Do not make
fears. Because it aggresses others, and, yourself a small person. Have a bigger
that it knows others can aggress it. So vision. Have bigger ideas because now
this is a point we have got to think about,
you belong to the bigger thing, the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 26
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
biggest of all the Primordial, the highest, and joyous.
to the Virata! If you realise your
And certain things definitely have
importance then you will work it out.
See! If you see an Indian Sahaja Yogi, should understand them. Because these
you will be amazed! He sleeps only for are the troubles of our own over-thinking
two or three hours or four hours. But he and our over-reading and over-
will not give up his sadhana. If he can domination. But we can get rid of them
get his full sleep, it is alright. First thing very easily. It is just to detach yourself and
is to have one hour for sadhana in the see for yourself addressing yourself.
morning. He will get it out somehow. But "Now Mister, how are you?" If you say
sleep? We have been sleeping all our
lives! You have to correct yourself. You go through yourself to see your outer
have to rise. You have to go ahead to being. That is very important. The more
achieve you own ascent. That is the you see yourself clearly, the better it is.
gone wrong with us, we know that, we
like that, immediately your attention will
point.
See your selfishness, I am telling. To not want to face because you are afraid
know yourself is the greatest selfishness. of facing yourself. Because you have
If you do not know yourself, all the been aggressing others and you are
selfishness is useless. As you call it afraid of aggressing in the way that is
"Swartha" in Sanskrit. If you break it towards yourself. But there would not be
You have to face yourself. And you do
there are two words 'Swa' and 'Artha'. If,
any aggression because that is the
you know the meaning of it, it is your 'swa'
means your 'Self' and it is the greatest
selfishness. So this is what it is.
perfect state where you see yourself.
Neither you aggress any one nor you are
aggressed by anyone. You just see
yourself clearly and that is what you have
We are very happy that he is here. We
will also be going to India. Next year, we
to see.
also are planning to go to India and we
are going to meet lots of them in Delhi chakras, seeing your problems and you
and Bombay. They are all waiting for you. know that how it gradually develops. But
They are all planning, how to receive everybody wants quick results. It is
you and will be happy that so many of alright, if you want quick results. But are
Sahaja Yogis from London and all over you like that? If you are like that you will
will be coming. And you know how they get quick results. If you are not, then be
look after you and how they are happy patient with yourself. Not with me, but
Gradually you start seeing your
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 September & October 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
27
with yourself. I am saying, you have to you love everyone is so great! I mean you
be patient because, there is a problem ask me. Because I always think how
with you. So you have to be patient with much I have to love. You see, so much
yourself and not with anybody else. That love I have always to give to others. Just
is the main point. If you are patient with think how great it is to love others. You
yourself, this is the long promised thing know how people treat me sometimes.
which you will get. But you must learn to Terrible! Is it not? I still love them. I enjoy
be patient with yourself and not to be playing with it.
angry with yourself, not to debase
yourself, not to aggress yourself on to love is the thing that is going to unfold
others. It is a very simple thing, the beautifully like a lotus, you see: opens
simplest thing to do; but because of your out petals and beautiful fragrance starts
complex life and our complicated flowing. In the same way, your heart will
thinking, we have become quite open out and the fragrance of love will
entwined up into things. It can easily be spread throughout the world. It will ring
got out of and just slipped out of without into you. I know it can happen.
any difficulty. I know that you can do it.
So forget about all these things, like my
In the same way you should love, and
The
sooner the better and the choice is your
own which you have to make-your
father, my sister, my brother. All these
problems will be burnt in no time. As soon
choice.
I am very happy because such a
as your life runs straight, everything will beautiful song to hear and just before
be burnt away. Nothing will be left but Christmas, which is a very big thing for
your light and others who will come to me. You know that; and in the same way
we are having another Christmas now.
you for enlightenment.
I know that you are going to have a
Christmas to celebrate a new Christ born
within us. Let us prepare for His coming
and how you prepare is not by running
away from yourself, not by getting into
frivolous things; bụt by working it out,
beautifully cleansing. Cleansing has to
big day for a Guru Puja; and before that I
have to request you to prepare yourself.
I may do something great. But I must have
a proper recipient, so that you must
prepare yourself. Think about it. Are you
loving others? Are you in love? Are you
in love with every one? Just to think that
be done if the Self has to be established
in the temple of this 'Being'.
May God bless you all.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9& 10
28
September & October 2003
POEM
Shri Bhaswarasuri
Shri Bhaswarasuri, in radiance you shine,
You are the Holy Ghost, all adoration Thine,
Mother, You are the Devi, and demons You do slay,
You protect the Devas, and those to You who pray,
Creator of all that is, of all this Mahamaya,
You guide and help all those who have spiritual desire,
Transformation You have wrought, Your Chaitanya does blow,
This breeze, Divine does integrate all things in me, You know,
In others too, I see the change, and as all things work out,
I see the truth, and feel the joy, which leaves me in no doubt,
That now, at ease surrendered, whole, I feel that I'm in no doubt,
That now, at ease surrendered, whole, I feel that l'm in You,
I've found again my innocence, there's little left to do,
Except, at times, proclaim to all, "You too can know what's true l"
JAI SHRI MATA JI
MA
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 COOE
PREDICTION FROM GYANESHWARI
(Bordi, 12.2.84)
It's a great responsibility on all of you have so many Shaktis within you, you
that you make your marriages successful. have to give. That means you are
superior in a way that you can give so
that your ego should not stand up all the
time and say why should I do? Why
It is your responsibility much more than
that of the men and you have to see that
you behave in such a manner that you
create a proper motherhood within should I do? And then you will start
enjoying this womanhood. So try to be
yourself and a discipline that you want
your children to imbibe and your good mothers, good wives and
responsible Sahaja Yoginis. Those who,
husband to have. You have seen, your
Mother has been sitting from 9 to 10 hours after marriage, try to deviate their
husbands from Sahaja Yoga are really
sometimes at one place. Not even
the most cursed ones. You should have
getting out of this place, but I have seen
sweet tongue for others. You should be
that people can't sit for 2 hours in a place
careful about what you talk. You have to
even if they are meditating and they will
be responsible. You are special people
get up, disturb everybody else and come
that you are married in Sahaja Yoga. I
down. This is a sign that we lack in our
hope you will keep this in mind.
Gauri Puja
discipline, that our parents didn't
discipline us, that we didn't discipline
ourselves. So now first thing is that you
The power of the virgin is alone,
have to have perfect discipline of your without Shiva. Your body should be
your slave at the time of meditation.
temperament and it is a sign that you are
the people who represent this Mother "Yasham' means, Yash means a good
reputation. 'Roopam' means auspicious
Earth who has a special wisdom. All of
you have to be extremely careful that personality. Now the thing is, all the
whatever you do will be reflected in the
whole family and in the whole Sahaja If you say success, it means good
Sahaja Yoga terminology are integrated.
reputation that has come out of righteous
Yoga system. Now when you get married
success. Anybody who has a success is
to your husbands, try to understand that
not a fellow who has yasha. In Sanskrit
you are the Mother Earth and you have
language it is just the other way round. If
to give, and bacause you have the
powers, you can give and because you you have got so called success.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
supposing some body has become The joy of Nirvana.
minister, for all practical purposes he is
She is the one who opens the
supposed to be a person who has got Moksha's door. She is the one who
success, in the English language, but in should give me alms of realization.
Asking for alms. Its all the way of asking
the Sanskrit language the Yash means
a person who achieves something which something in a very humble way. Very
gives him good reputation, the righteous humble way that give me the alms of
reputation. Reputation of virtue. So such
Realization. Like a begger would say,
a person need not be a very wealthy beg of you, please give me realization. I
am a begger at your door."
She is the one who gives the prologue
man, need not be so successful as a
Minister or a Prime Minister but the
in a drama. She is the one who holds the
success that gives you great reputation.
Like the success of the saint. So one must
cords in a show, where the pantomimes
are there. It is called as 'Sutradhara', the
always understand in Sahaja Yoga all
the words. Now Roopam, Roopam can
one who is the holder of the threads. But
She is the one who holds all the Sutras
mean in normal words like just 'good
in Her hand, all the threads in Her hand
looks' but in Sahaja Yoga it is not good
and just makes us do all the drama. Its
looks but it means the look or apearance
that is blissful. You see that gives
all Her own style. It is true, agreed. If you
biessings. The face that gives blessings
don't keep her pleased, she will destroy
the whole world. So you have to keep
and not negativity. So its an integrated
her pleased all the time. That's what the
terminology. Its one word means many
things. People should not confuse women must understand. They must
because good looks can be like a keep their husbands pleased.
cinema actress, that's not the good look.
Kashmir Tripureshwari means the
Sahasrara. See, the Himalaya is the
Good look means not glamorous but it
Sahasrara and Kashmir is there. These
means a look that is blissful, auspicious.
are two meanings of Tripura. One is that
Muktananda means She gives me
the bliss of yoga, the joy of yoga and She killed the horrible demon called
the joy of complete freedom. Mukta, Tripur and Tripura means of the three
worlds'. She is the beauty of three worlds.
Mukti, as they call it. Complete Nirvana.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool. Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
31
course of Chaitanya. When you will meet
Her, that's Me. ...(Clapping). This is the
(Tripursundri). I mean the beauty is not
to be confused, it is to be integrated. She
opens the doors of the heavens because
description of the Sahaj Yogis, you must
listen to this. That they will be the forests,
then you can enjoy.
'Pasaya' means the blessings that you
are going to have, it is used for me; what
like forests, many thousands, like moving
forests of huge trees, of trees that give
blessings. Kalptaru is the tree that gives
you are going to get is the milk of the
Mother. Now he says that all of you, who
you whatever you want. They will be like
are one in Spirit, this is all description of
the moving forests. Means all of you are
Sahaja Yoga today, in future and present.
like that, great. That you will be like the
great trees which are moving, but which
That you will get; at this time what is
going to happen. It is so beautifully
are bestowing blessings upon others,
giving them what they want. They will be,
shown, you will be surprised, that you all
will become one in the universe, the spirit now you people, the oceans of talking
of the universe will be satisfied with the
or bubbling Amruta. Amruta is the nector.
The nector of life. You will be the oceans
Yagnas, with the fire ceremonies you are
of the bubbling nector which are talking.
going to have. How it is appropriate? He
Like this ocean is here. See the trees in
said it 300 years back. Then you should
give us the milk of your blessings by the Ocean.
getting complete satisfaction from us.
That time all the horrible evil people will
The ocean that talks in a way that it
just emits nector. The nector of bliss. That
is you people. They will be like the moon
be ruined and their laws will be spoiled,
and people will take to righteousness. At without any spots on it. Immaculate,
that time there will be a tremendous which has no spots, no blemish, without
friendship of the spirit of people. Those any blemish. Like the sun which is
who are in ignorance will get light. The without, heat in it. Th
is you. All such
whole universe will see the light, the Sun
people who will be righteous, who will
of one Universal Religion. Whatever they
stand for the right, for the truth, are going
will desire, they will get it. All the human
to be related to each other. Are going to
beings. When you will meet Her, there be related in the whole world.
Now with this beginning we
will be a shower of blessings and of
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 9 & 10
32
September & October 2003
understand that the great saints of what am I doing? I don't even have
Maharashtra that time, the greatest was
attention that can absorb the energy of
Gyaneshwara. Because he saw the
the Divine, The attention should be such
future that was going to come and he told
that I should be able to absorb the will of
the people about you that men of God
the Divine. Instead of that my attention is
on wrong things and what am I doing?
What do I do about myself? Is that I am
will become prophets and they will have
powers to make others prophets. Now we
not fine to manifest that special quality.
do not realize, what are we. When we
become Sahaja Yogis, we become so
The highest quality. The one that I am, I
much, still worried about things which
am born after ages. I have been born so
have no value. If you see, in the ultimate
many times. I have been a saint, I have
been going round, seeking God. I have
all these things which are so temporary
have no value and if you go on wasting
been going round, and again when I am
your energy about things that have no born in this life time for such a
tremendous task, again I am lost with the
spiritual value, that does not matter, you
are going to waste your life because noW same non-sense. I am still moving about
you are that, what is described. The with the same non-sense. If you
oceans which are talking nector. Oceans
understand that then you will know what
of talking nector. Nector; not the nector
importance it has today on this day of our
that we understand, nector of spiritual international seminar.
Internationally you are all related to
bliss. You are that, and when you are that
then what is expected of you about each other and to nobody else.
yourself? Just find out? You just find out
Internationally you are all related to each
yourself, reflect back that what is other. These are the relations which are
expected of me, of myself. What am I relations of deep friendship. Friendship
doing about it. I am worried about this has no bias, no lust, no greed, nothing.
nonsense, that nonsense and I am It's just friendship. It's pure relationship
deine
suppossed to be the ocean of blissfull
and we are that. So its alright to say that
nector. I am supposed to be the forest of its all love, its all affection, its all
goodness, its all very sweet thing but you
the Kalptarus, the trees that give the boon
must know that you have to come up.
to the people, huge victories and then
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 33
Seplember & October 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
The first and foremost thing that goes
These trees have come up after a long
against us is our own non-sensical ego.
struggle against the atmosphere, against
We must understand that this ego is the
the whole surrounding. They have come
up on their own, except for the Mother one greatest barrier within us. And we
have to get out of it. Kundalini has to rise
Earth, to which they are connected. So
like the tree has risen and the ego is the
you people must know that you all are
biggest, biggest hurdle for most of us. It
here. Come up, fight yourself, to find out,
what is wrong with you?
appears in many ways. We fight the
Where is your attention first of all? The Mother Earth which is giving you the
source. You are the very being of that
attention has to move in such a manner,
She
Mother Earth. She has created you.
that outward you grow and inward you
has made you. Because of her you have
hold fast to your Mother, with complete
come up. You are fighting her, you are
respect. Those who can't do it are
absolutely useless. If any tree does not
going against her. This is wrong. How wll
you go? And once you start growing the
sun can help you. The nature can help
try to hold fast the Mother Earth, it will
fall out. I mean its just what it is doing
you. But you must have complete desire
to rise above your dwarfness, above your
and for what it is rewarded. Its nothing to
do with Mother Earth. This Mother Earth
selfishness, above your conditionings
has this special quality and if this Mother
and speically your ego. All this when we
Earth is not going to be linked by you,
say that you are this, there is no need to
by your purposeful adherence,
be puffed up. You see if tell that you are
continuous identification, you are going
to fall out like a dead tree. So its very
a little tree and you are going to be a big
tree, it does not mean that it has become
important to understand that you are
a big tree.
great. No doubt. These trees are great.
One has to become the big tree by
They have fought through, they have
come up. But where is your attention and pushing forward and that quality like
Gyaneshwara, like Tukarama, like
what are you here for? What is needed
Ramdasa, you all have to become that
for sticking, sticking to things which are
against your growth? Bothered about quality. They never saw Me, I just
nourished them without their seeing me.
things which go against all the time!
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 September & COctober 2003
34
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
But they nourished themselve, on their within and that growth expresses itself
outside. So that 'growth within' is to be
own greatness. You have to be great like
that. Instead, you live with false notions done by you fully with full understanding.
about yourself, artificialities, absurd Then I don't have to tell you about
ideas, all nonsense that we have anyone. You won't be vulnerable to non-
sensical talks and jabberings. You have
gathered through our upbringing,
through our nationality, through our
some people who are intellectuals.
reading, through our Gurus and through Intellectuals have a bad habit of
our own mental projections. We are intellectualising every thing. Intelligence
is nothing for God because God has
going to be extremely dangerous for the
created it. So you have to see through.
growth of every individual Sahaja Yogi
and as a whole also it will act. So we
There are some people who are very
have to take a vow today that we are emotional and try to express themselves
going to behave in a manner which emotionally. You have to get out of those
behoves our advent, not others. Our ideas and you have to understand that
advent at this time which is being
emotions can play a very dangerous role
described and prophesied. Prophecy in life.
was made long time back. If we
Now we have decided to have so
many marriages in Bordi. It is very nice
understand that we have come on this
earth for that purpose, we really separate
thing and very auspicious thing. Very
happy about it that we are going to have
ourselves from all rest of the nonsense
so many marriages. It is very auspicious
because marriages are supported,
that goes on and try to rise towards the
sky as these trees are rising. You should
not follow any other Sahaja Yogi in all
blessed by God. You are special because
I am sitting here before you for these
marriages. Don't make a fuss out of it,
anti-growth activities. And anyone
who tries to create a kind of a bhoot
or tries to impress you by saying that Do not create a problem by becoming
superficial. These are the marriages of
he can teach you something higher,
lower, all kinds of techniques this and Brhama Eka, where one feels the
oneness of the spirit, of the All Pervading
that, you have to forget. First of all you
Power. Try to know that these marriages
must know that Sahaja Yoga is a growth
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue:9 & 10:
September & October 2003
35
are done among saints and not among
been described.
ordinary people. Try to respect the inner
quality of a person. If somebody is a इसकी प्रगति, मेरे विचार से, बहुत धीमी है। इसकी
Sahaja Yogi of a high quality that must प्रगति बहुत धीमी है। प्रगति आपकी वजह से धीमी हो
be respected and that must be loved, जाती है। ऐसी जगह चित्त अपना जाता है जहाँ हम
इस तरह से हो रहा है, और हो गया है। लेकिन अभी
अपने को गिरा लेते हैं। अपना चित्त इस पेड़ का जैसा
and not the outer quality. The outward
qualities are non-sensical. You must इस पृथ्वी से पूरी तरह से निगड़ित है, ऐसा आपको
respect each other when you marry अपनी माँ के साथ निगड़ित करना चाहिए और उसकी
because you are all saints. You are जो ऊँचाई है. उसके ओर दृष्टि होनी चाहिए। ये ऊँचाई
जो भी इन्होंने हासिल की है, वो इस वातावरण से लड़
saints of a very high quality, | have told,
and the potential is so great. It is already कर, झगड़ कर, बाहर आकर, अपना सर ऊँचा उठा
described to you that only your करके। जो लोग अपना सर दुनियाई. चीजों के लिए.
कृत्रिम चीजों के लिए, बाह्य चीजों के लिए झुका लेते
हैं वो कैसे उसे पा सकते हैं? या जो अपना चित्त इस
धरती माँ से हटा लेते हैं वो तो मर ही जाएंगे। इसलिए
assumption can fetch you that greatness.
अब मैं हिन्दी में थोड़ा सा आपको बताना चाहती हूँ
कि सहजयोग में हम लोग अब ये नहीं जानते कि हमारे
बारे में हज़ारों वर्ष पहले ये बताया गया था कि ऐसे महान
हर सहज़योगी का ये कर्त्तव्य है, ये पूरी तरह से कर्त्तव्य
लोग संसार में आयेंगे और पहाड़ के पहाड़, ऐसे बड़े बड़े
वृक्षों के बड़े बड़े अरण्य संसार में घूमेंगे, जो बोलते
चलते हुए, दुनिया को उनकी इच्छाओं की पूर्ति के
है कि वो जाने कि सारी दुनिया आपकी तरफ आँख
बैठी हुई है और आप अपने गौरव को पहचानें ।
The whole world is watching your
हुए, लगाए
कल्पतरु जैसे उनके आशीर्वाद देंगे और उनके एक एक
progress, the world is expecting this to
व्यक्ति में जैसे सागर उमड़ते हैं, जिसमें कि अमृत बोलता
happen. The whole world has already
है। ऐसे सागर, ऐसे सूरज होगे-चमकते हुए सूरज जिनके pronounced it and where are we? Our
अन्दर कोई भी अग्नि नहीं, ऐसे चन्द्रमा जिसके ऊपर progress is so slow.We are worried about
कोई कलंक नहीं। ये आपके वर्णन हज़ारों वर्ष पहले भृगु stupid things, material things, worldly
ने किए और तीन सौ वर्ष पहले ग्यानेश्वर जी ने किए things, superficial things, artificial things.
कि कितना आपका महत्त्व उन्होंने बताया, कि कितना
So one has to understand, you are here
जरूरी है-सारी दुनिया के लिए। सारी दुनिया के लिए today for this international Seminar, to
एक आशा है।
promise me.
The whole world is hoping this thing
आप लोग आज यहाँ मुझे वचन देने आए हैं इस
अन्तर्राष्ट्रीय सेमिनार (संगोष्ठी) पर कि माँ आप जितनी
to happen that they should get such
मेहनत करते हो उसी तरह से हम भी मेहनत करंगे।
people on this earth, those, which have
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9& 10
September & October 2003
36
puja today. At this time a big resrvoir
has to be opened out but it is to be
Everybody seems to be younger than
me in this puja, but you have to promise
channelised through people and how
that Mother we will work with the same
zeal, same attention as you are doing canI channelise through people who
and try to settle ourselves. Quieten are filled with vanity, with stupidity or
Guie
with small mindedness? You have to
ourselves within. We talk too much. We
talk too much, do nothing. Try to preserve
be large, huge, big hearted, great
your energy in that silence.
उस शान्तिमय गौरव में आप अपने को उतारें। अपने
people. You are all 'Born Again' who are
great today again. But some how you are
बारे में पूरी आपको कल्पना होनी चाहिए कि आप हैं
mixed up with your surroundings. So try
to understand your own importance and
क्या।
You must have full idea as to what you
the importance of the time. It is time to
are. You must understand, what you have worship yourself, to worship, but be
worshipable. You all think that by
been upto, what have you done about it?
dressing up properly or by putting up any
Talking, talking, talking! That's not the
show like that we become worshipable,
way it is going to work out. The
atmosphere is fine, everything is fine. The
we do not. We should be worshipable to
ourselves. You see that whatever we are
future seems very jubilant. Everything
doing, it has that grace and beauty and
seems to be fine but the highest about
the love and the greatness of the saints
everything is the hope of your Mother
that you are going to emancipate the who are very great saints, not ordinary
one but tremendous saints. It is being
whole world. Give attention to that. Think
described, actually, Gyaneshwara in this
poem has really worshipped you. I wish
about it that you are going to do it. You
have to be the walking, talking, moving
forests of that Divine Love, that Ritambra
we had people like Gyaneshwara but
Pragya. I hope you understand that today
they are all inside my body. You are all
outside and whatever he said has to be
is the very important day and I feel that if
fulfilled. Not only that but whatever he
this holy session works out well, may be
said is the truth.
we might achieve a lot next time.
It is my request to all of you to meditate
May God bless you.
sincerely. Now we look forward to a
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-38.txt 
 I'M THE HOLY GHOST
(New York, 30.9.81)
person who is the embodiment of this
..It is revealed that how those people
are reborn, who crucifed him again, and
Divine Power. Christians may be wrong.
again & again they are crucifying! The If Christians have tortured you, forget
Crucifixion is not the message of Christ. them. They are just the same as you are,
fanatics, fanatics, fanatics. Whether they
are Christians or they are Muslims, so
That's why I also don't like people to wear
the cross. I can't see them. Its not cross,
many arc the same as any other person.
I do not find any difference whatsoever.
of course it is very helpful because if the
bad spirits see the cross, they run away.
Dogmatic, ignorant, fanatic. Forget those
people. They do not stand for Christ.
But it is a reminder of something which
was unbearable because the Mother had
Christ himself said in the second Chapter
all the powers. She was Maha-Laxmi. He
had eleven powers. Eleven powers to of Matthews II, "You will be calling me
destroy! You can imagine. He had still "Christ, Christ, Christ, I won't recognise
those powers and he had to go through you. Who are they?"We people, who say
all that without destruction. He saw to it, Christ, we are the self solicitors of Christ,
we are the people who are incharge of
Now people may say, "How was Jesus
resurrected?" First of all there was an Christ, all of these people will be
objection to immaculate conception',
mean they have objection for everything. the hell, the way they have managed
charged and they will be thrown away in
. I
things about Christ. Some of them are
He was not a human being. He was the
Divine Power.I conceive you in my heart.
You know that and I put my Kundalini and
genuine, they don't know that this is
artificial. They are genuine, but they must
get their realization. They must ask for
I put you from my heart into it, and I get
you out of it. The way you have got your their realization and they must know
Second Birth, in the same way Christ what is Christ, within themselves they
have to awake the Christ in them.
was to be immaculate. But She put Him
I was telling you that Christ said that
in the heart and into the uterus down
you are to be 'born again'. That I am to
be born in your heart. Now the heart
below and She created Him. Its very easy
to doubt Him and say things against Him
may
centre is here as well as here. Because
because He is no more. And the Jews
must learn a lesson now. They denied the heart is controlled by the centre at
Him once and they have suffered. Now
the fontanel bone area and that's what
don't deny Him again. You can't deny, the he said that you should get your
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-39.txt 
 September & October 2003
38
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
suffer, told me that they saw their Gurus
realization, when he said he should be
giggling at them and mockring at them.
put in the heart.
Now the people of various countries, And they showed me some of the
even your country, went down to India photographs they had taken up of these
and they never told that Christ was born Gurus, which show complete mockery of
who was the Maha Vishnu. Because it these stupid disciples who were
is already described in the Puranas that suffering in their body and suffering
he is the Aadhara. He is the one who their mind in the presence of these
once awakened by the Kundalini, will Gurus. So they have a double enjoyment
suck your Karmas. They never went and : one the money and another is the
told. So the Indians went on with their kingdom and third, the greatest of all, that
Karma theory and these Gurus have their purpose is to kill you all and to
come here to teach you Karma. It is destroy you all because you are that they
achieve by their falsehood. Because
these God's men are impressed by their
amazing how you accept all these
theories of non-sense! Like they say that
you have to suffer because you have falsehood. Now see if there was any
done bad Karmas. Then they will say that false Guru here, this hall would have
been filled, the whole thing would be
to give yourself balance you go this way
or that way and you just keep it to
balance. If that is so, that you have to go
filled; on the road there would be a jam
but the real Guru, I have seen not only
here, everywhere, it starts very slowly.
to one extreme and to other extreme then
Of course in a place where people are
very simple and who are very sensitive,
is a different one. But people in the cities,
specially, they are so insensitive to
reality and so sensitive to devils that it is
surprising that they feel very much at
home with devils and very much lost with
the reality.
what are they doing here? Why are they
talking? They should shut up, because
they can't do anything. They can't give
you realization. They can't save you from
this situation, so its better that they suffer.
Why do they say, "you should suffer"?
Why should they say? Because they
want to enjoy you suffering. They want
you to suffer because they enjoy it. Now
Because you are in falsehood so you
so many of these disciples who came
from these horrible Gurus, who said you real. You have to become that which is
must know that you have to become the
must have your karmas and you must the spirit, which is not so far shining in
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-40.txt 
 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 8& 10
39
September & October 2003
to give birth to a child then everybody is
going to say that it's a very very
blasphemous thing; that it's a very very
illegitimate thing and it should not be
spoken up. Horrible fellow, and one
better than the other! Then they took it in
your central nervous system, in your
awareness, and this is the spirit which is
the one described. Not spoken before
also in the churches, but today for the first
time I am speaking about the Christ in a
church and that's why I am very happy
such a funny way because they became
that at least in this church I could say
supraconscious people. They started
speaking the languages of so many evils.
That part of Bible is wrong where they
become not realized. The wind part is
alright. But so many people, I have seen,
they come to my programme, when they
come for realization, they feel the wind
for a while and immediately they shunt
something that would establish itself and
that when people will come here, I hope,
they get their realization and that
something works out here and they get
at least awakening because so many
saints are sitting in front of me. May be
that one day will come in this church,
may be, it may work out that the people
will get one day their realization.
Christ's life was only for 3-4 years.
out and become supraconscious.
Now we will see
what is
supraconscious entity
subconscious entity. Now you see here
these are two petals. These are two
petals. One controls, of course, the
pituitary, that controls the Ego and the
Pineal, that controls the Super Ego. But
and the
Nobody allowed him to live longer than
that. Whatever possible was done but
such stupid people, such stupid people,
you could not talk to them; and that's how
they killed him. He could not speak to
them anymore and that's how his life was
this also has the capacity to blow it this
finished. But in that small life of his what
a spark, what a spark it was! The way way out and blow it out this way.
people have behaved towards him was Supposing you become supra-
atrocious. I must say, I must say that the conscious and you start thinking too
apostle themselves, because this much, some thing about the future, what
Matthews and this. He was such an must be the galaxies, we should find
intellectual, such an intellectual, that he
about this, we must find out about the
would not accept the idea of immaculate stars and about all these things and
conception. Very difficult man! He would
argue it out. He said that if a virgin is going
about future and about - say prophecies
and astrology. It is all futuristic. You
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9&
September & October 2003
40
people are mostly futuristic. You try to
plan and every plan fails of course, but who has done that work of aura picturing.
this thinking and planning is too much, Now after realization you don't get any
can push up this side too much. Actually auras in a person, can't see aura in a
have shown here it is this side. But person because he is integrated.
aura, auras I was talking to some one
actually when it is placed, it is placed like
this. The ego is placed like this and super
ego is placed like this. Here we could not
show the three dimensions. So from the
back to this side is Super Ego and from
Completely integrated. But when he is
in a mess, he starts getting the auras.
Like if he had cancer he will get auras. If
he is alcohalic, he will get auras. A kind
of a crazy auras. A normal person may
have auras, not so much crazy. But auras
you cannot see when the whole thing is
here to here is the Ego. Now this ego
bloats out into this side and when it
bloats to this side, it goes into the
Supraconscious Area. So it comes up
here. Now the supraconscious area gives
you visions, hallucinations, L.S.D.; effect.
Then you start seeing from the eyes of a
person who is a dead person but a very
ambitious person. For example you
might get the vision of Hitler and all these
horrible kings. You might get the colours,
you may say the auras and one has to
integrated. You can see in a light which
has no aberration, that means it is good
light; if there is aberration then it is a bad
light. All the seven colours, colours of the
light have to be concentrated and have
to be integrated. If they are prismatic and
if they are giving it separately then it is
not one integration, and when it is one-
integration then you cannot see seven
lights. So the person is not integrated.
understand here that these auras start
Now all these auras come to us
coming to us because we shift, we
disintegrate from our being. That's how
we start seeing something else
because we are made of seven types of
tatwas within us. But the people who are
on the right side only believe in the five
tatwas. They call them Koshas. I don't
think if I have a type for that, but these
are the Koshas that are created by the
first centre, by the second centre, by the
third centre. These are the physical
words, by the forth one, then the fifth one
separated from us. To see auras is not
a good sign in Sahaja Yoga. If you are
seeing auras, we have to bring you back
to the same position because you have
to be in the present and not in the future.
You get disintegrated. For example if
there is machine, say which takes the and the sixth and the seventh, and they
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-42.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
41
do not create auras out side. They create things which it has to work out
inside near the heart. And these are throughout. One of them is spleen,
created near the heart but as soon as another is pancreas. When it neglects the
you get realization, they all become one. pancreas, you get diabetes. Not by
They all merge into one and that is the
sugar. Of course sugar, because it has
spirit. So as if you can say, when the spirit
exists in a prismatic way, then you get
to convert it into fat. But if you do not have
sugar then it's a double work. If you have
sugar then it converts it into fat and
makes it useful for your brain. But if you
the auras of seven, but when it becomes
integrated than you become one, all the
aura become one. So integration is the
aim of Sahaja Yoga as now l think I have
told you that you could also go to the sub
think too much and you don't take sugar,
it's the double action. But if you just take
sugar and do not think also can be
conscious area, in the same way. The
problematic because it has to convert too
subconscious area is there on the left much of it into fat. You see, too much
hand side. If you move into collective sub
conscious area, you can be triggered into
cancer. By this triggering you might get
heart attack, something like that,
work is given to it. So there is no balance.
So one has to understand that too much
sugar is not good but you must take
sugar because sugar is needed, and
stop your thinking.
How do you stop your thinking,
diabetese.
only
by rising above the Agnya Chakra. This
is a very very important point at Agnya,
that you must know, that the thinking
Many people believe that sugar gives
you diabetes. It is not true. Sugar does
not give you diabetes. What gives you
diabetes is too much thinking. Those
stops, Now the thinking stops in you, like
this. There is a way, it rises the thoughts
and falls off. Another thought rises and
who do not think too much never get.
Indian farmers never get diabetes. They
don't know what this disease is. Because
think too much, you work too much. falls off. In between there is a place
you
This centre works too much. It has to called as "Vilamba' Now when the
create food for the brain. It has to replace
the brain cells and these brain cells are
thought rises, it automatically falls off.
Now this space is the place of present.
This rises either from the ego or super
fats, the new cells, the evolved cells. If it ego and goes into the past. The in-
to be replaced. For that it creates, out of
works too much, it neglects the other between space is the present. One is the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-43.txt 
 September & October 2003
42
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
the Kundalini, it has pierced through, it
future, one is the past, Now this place
pushes through and she fills these with
When it increases then what happens the grace. The grace comes on this,
is that Agnya chakra opens more and when the grace comes in, you start
has to be increased.
you become thoughtlessly aware. You relaxing, the centres also relax. The
become thoughtlessly aware. You come
centres are in tension, but when the
grace comes in they go back into normal.
So there is more, sort of, expansion and
the thoughtless awareness starts
establishing itself at the Agnya
Now the Mantra of the Agnya Chakra
is Lord's Prayer. It has got two sides
Ham' and 'Ksham', 'Ham' means
in the present. There is no thought. And
the thought is the barrier between the
creator and ourselves. For example if
Chakra.
you look at a beautiful stone that is placed
there or anything, you watch it. Now if you
want to think oh!, it looks like a man, it
am'
looks like a devil or it looks like a God or
what ever it is. There is a thought in you.
and Ksham' means 'I forgive". So if
supposing this is catching, you have to
say, I forgive. If there is ego within us, you
should say 'I forgive.' If there is Super,
Ego within us, we should say 'I am, I am:
so it is 'Ham and Ksham, is the beeja, is
So what you do when you are realized,
you just watch, you watch and whatever
the joy is put there of the creator, of an
artist, completely it is within you,
because there is no thought. There is no
wave, there is no disturbance, in a the seed. It is the seed of the prayer,
completely silent lake. All that is around Lord's prayer.
it, all that creation comes into it,
absolutely reflected and you enjoy the that the Lords prayer in not alright. I mean
thoughtless awareness called as who are you? What do you know about
Nirvichar Samadhi. There is complete it. Everybody is challenging everyone!
Nirvichara where you have no thought What do you know? What is your
and you start enjoying that creation authority? The trouble is every body is
completely. The joy of that is there. entitled to do what they like with religion
Now there are people who are talking
and with God. Though they do not know
Nothing is in between. So the
anything about it, they are absolutely
ignorant but they think they have a right
because there is no political control over
thoughtless awareness comes in when
the kundalini crosses this Agnya Chakra.
It does double work. Firstly, it makes you
thoughtlessly aware. Secondly, because it. Even Hitlar can talk about Christ;
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
43
anybody can talk about Christ, and about
the prayer that He taught you. Who are
you to challenge it? Who are you to
challenge him? I can't understand, how
enlightened can only enlighten. Now
about Christ you have to speak. I have
spoken once about Christ for seven days
one after another. There is no end to it.
Such a great incarnation that I just do not
know how to say that is. I have spoken
all about him. As it is, we have many
tapes in London. You can send for it. We
do you challenge a person, without
knowing your own position in relation to
him. But this is a very very common thing
that people do, and it is due to ego. Ego
makes you high headed, and this is the
worst I found that this high headedness
are now going to have a centre here.
Herman has offered his place and we will
that you challenge God, you challenge
Christ, you challenge everything which
be sending those tapes there. As these
300 tapes we have brought in London
which you can listen to, and see for
you don't understand!
yourself and all of these tapes are very
good because they actually are Mantras.
They work out the mantras and you also
get listening to them, opening of your
Your Mind is limíted. It's a very limited
way. You can't do anything with this mind
of yours. You have to go beyond it.
Somebody has to trigger you into space.
You have to go into that. You have to
(Sahasrara) centres and all that Now the
become the spirit. Only by realizing your
spirit you can get connected with God,
before that you are not connected. That's
why you have to become the spirit and
the spirit is the connection, is the link with
God. There is no otherway you can be
last one, which is embarrassing because
he already has told you that and I am
supposed to have been here, I think,
which is the integration. The end of it is
the integration of all these seven centres.
All these seven centres are placed
around this area called as limbic. Which
linked with God. If you want to keep
is the limbic area. Now if you cut it, the
yourself in delusion, you go ahead. But
this is the real thing I am telling you, this
is the true thing I am telling you for which
you should know, you can't pay,, you can't
purchase it, you can't demand it, and you
can't work it out.
brain, the transect section of the brain,
you will find it like a lotus. You can find
it, that there is a marking look, like a lotus,
opened out and it has thousand petals,
are like this. But the colour is not alright.
The grace of God has to come, fall You people are so fond of this pastel
upon you to do it. Or a person who is colour, so they have used it, but we can
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-45.txt 
 September & October 2003
44
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
the Swadhishthana Chakra. Then here
say that this kind of a 1000 petals are
is the Vishudhi Chakra, is the Viraat. The
there. Now it is said in the Bible that I
will appear before you like tongue of
flames', and these are, they appear, they
Vishudhi Chakra is here. When you catch
cold you find you will have the problem
here. But if you apply something here,
you will feel better. And this is the
Vishudhi Chakra which is related to your
throat. Now if you have the problem with
collectivity also you might find a big
block here. Now at the back of it is Nabhi,
here at the back. This Nabhi has the left
all appear. But these are very large ones
and they appear as living. Living flames
in different colours starting from one to
another and they are 1000 in number.
Now the doctors argue that they can't be
1000. They have to be 992. I mean just
imagine these foolish people who argue
on that! But they do not know that they
and right sides. As we have shown here
the left Nabhi and the right Nabhi. There
are 1000 in number and they are placed
are two, left and right Nabhi. I don't know
here. But in the limbic area all the seven
ifI have told you about that left and right.
centres are surrounding it. Like we have
You can find out in the book. Now, so
got now, you see from here. This is the
Agnya Chakra. Here, behind it, here at you have got left and right Nabhi and
the back exactly, just at the back is the also sometimes you feel that Nabhi is
Mooladhara. Surrounding it, is the here. Some people do feel, who have
Swadhishthana. Surrounding the problems with some kind of Gurus and
mooladhara is the Swadhishthana. If you things like that, you see, then you feel.
are catching on Swadhishthana, you can
feel it within yourself, the heavyness. If
you are catching on it you will have
diabetes. I will give one example.
But the whole void is here and this void
is called as Ekadasha Rudra. This void,
the whole of it goes like a great round,
and this is very important because you
get it from the void. If you go to a bad
Guru or someone, you get this. And this
Diabetic people get blind'after sometime,
they loose the power of the eyes
because this thing oppresses optic nerve
which is controlled by the Mooladhara
Chakra. We call it as Back Agnya. So this
is the Swadhishthana Chakra, here at the
is the one that is the rider. The rider, one
who has eleven powers of destruction.
The one who is going to come, slash out.
Then he is not going to give you any
council, he is not going to redeem you,
back in the centre, here you find a hole,
no realization. He will slash out those
that is the Mooladhara and around it is
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-46.txt 
 45
September & October 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volumo-XV Issue:9& 10
think of it, or to the bugs?
You are human beings. You should not
who are not realized. That's the last, that
you don't ask just now. Give some time
more to save more people. Because he eat flesh which is of the bigger animals
than yourself. Because that is horrible.
is not going to question anyone, he is not
going to allow any more time and that
will be the time of complete destruction
But you can eat the flesh of the animal
which are smaller than you. There is no
of all the satanic forces. So that is the
harm in eating that. And this kind of a
Ekadasha, here. That collect, because nonsensical vegetarianism! Don't do any
all these horrible gurus are here. These harm to the animals? But they don't
are the Ekadshas. One thing is to be mind, doing this. These Jains are the
understood that one could get rid of this
greatest, they are, you see, such just like
suckers and they don't mind killing
very easily. Now these two children of
people for their money. They don't mind
going for what you call, 'Shikari' hunting
and killing anything but they will not eat
a chicken or even the garlic. Now garlic
as you know is very good for heart. But
they don't eat garlic. Its very good for the
heart. Its very good for people who have
Rama who were born here and were
endowed as the sun and the moon. The
sun and the moon both are here, and the
sun, as I told you Buddha, ultimately here
and he became, ultimately, Mahavira.
They are there. But when they were on
this earth, Buddha talked about Non-
got tendency towards hardening of the
artries, where circulation is the problem,
is very good to eat that and for cold. For
people who suffer from cold, if they
regularly eat a fresh garlic, say in the
night, brush their teeth, then they will be
much better off. So these seven centres
violence and people thought non-
violence to chickens, to bugs! These
Mahavira people called Jains, we have
got horrible community called Jains in
India, and they believe in vegetarianism
to this extent that they get a Brahmin, pay
him and put him in a hut and bring all the
are there. Now at the fontanel bone is
bugs of the village and put all the bugs
in the hut and bugs drink his blood. It's a
the centre of the heart. Now just imagine,
it is at that centre. So where do I exist?
fact, even today and then they pay some
money to the Brahmin because the bugs
are fed. Now you just tell me this kind of
nonsensical vegetarianism. Am I going
to give realization to chickens? Just
I mean all of them are seven centres,
am just like a bubble, But am in
so I
your heart. So the key of Sahaja Yoga
is that you have to recognise Me. If
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-47.txt 
 September & October 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 9 & 10
46
am love. I can't help it. I really can't help
you can't recognise Me, you can't
it. I am campassion. One day I did feel
very disgusted. Really once I did feel
very disgusted with people, the way they
were and I said that just forget it. And then
progress in Sahaja Yoga. I have to
frankly admit it. I don't tell this in my first
lecture but I have to say that please now
recognise Me. As your Mother, now I
request you to recognise Me and you
don't have to give Me anything. Just take
suddenly I saw my photograph. I saw my
eyes, and I said, "Nirmala, you are
compassion, you are compassion, you
can't help it. You just can't help it." I have
to work it out. I know what it means, it
things from Me. Just have it yourself but
recognise Me, If you deny Me then this
won't open. This will be always covered.
means sometimes too much, too much,
That's why at the end when you say
but I have to work it out. Now some
people come out with question; 'why you
Mother?' I said, "Why not you?" It's the
good idea. Come along with me. I did a
lot. It would be the best for me to retire
and my husband might give you the
Mother, please give me my realization
because I have come on this earth to
give you realization. That's My job. Its one
of the worst jobs that one can have.
Because its not difficult with people to
talk to them, to tell them about it and they
are all the time up in arms, they are so pension and would be so happy that
aggressive and they start fighting. It's the have found out somebody who will
Mother's job which is a thankless job, replace me. But I have not found out
absolutely thankless job. You have to do somebody who will replace me. I wish
it, and also only the Mother can do it. you could, will be a good idea.
Because if you had the Christ, he would Now the name Nirmala itself means
have taken eleven things and finished immaculate. Means the one who is the
cleansing power and the name of the
Goddess also. My actually sign name is
off everything. If you had Krishna, he has
also 'Sanharak Shakti' to kill. But to use
the whole thing which integrated ideas, Lalita who is the name of the Primordial
balancing with understanding human Mother. That is the name of the
beings, you have to have a Mother. And Primordial Mother. But to be a human
that's why sometimes people try to being with all these centres around, we
become very familiar and start taking work in, for example, from the last three
advantage or taking liberties which is a days you don't know how much I am
wrong thing. What ever I am, I am, and I vibrating. You can ask Waren and other
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-48.txt 
 September & October 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue: 9 & 10
there. Most of them know about it, but
people. I asked them to take vibrations
they can't understand why I have come
to America? They say that why you come
here, the people here won't accept. Butl
don't think so, because I think you are
and they were doing like this but they
could not touch Me. They tried to put the
hand on the head and they were just and
then, they didn't know how to touch Me!
Even it was so much vibrating. So its not
great seekers, very great, born in this
easy to carry all this load on this human
body. Appear like a human being, to act
like a human being, to behave like a
special time. You have to work for Me.
must say that the transformation that has
taken place in the Western Sahaja Yogis
has not been achieved by Indians, so
much, though they have an advantage
because they are born ina country which
human being, so that there is a rapport.
Why an incarnation is needed. There has
to be a rapport because the unconscious
can't talk to you. Whatever you see in the
keeps the attention intact. The attention
dreams comes back to you afterwards
from the sub-conscious area. All the
is very much intact; so it is easy to work
it out there. Here it is difficult. It does not
ideas, you have such a mass, such a
confusion and you can't decide anything.
So it has to come on this earth as a
apeal to people but still you are all great
people. So many of you are not but they
can be all saints. But those who are here
human being and tell you with the knack.
I never knew English all my life. So first
time I learnt English, but stillI don't know
American English. I hope I will be able
to learn something more when I travel
around. It's a dream that, it is a desire that
should know that you have the greatest
opportunity in your life to be realized and
to give realization to others. First of all
you have to become alright, then you can
give light to others.
Now the greatest thing that is needed
you are to be realized. Its all written in
for Sahaja Yoga is wisdom. And logically
the Bible, its all written in all the books
you will reach a conclusion and
understand that Sahaja Yoga is the end
of all the problems of the world, of all
the problems; for example take the
capitalism and the communism. Sol am
the capitalist because I have all the
powers but I am the communist because
Ican't enjoy it without giving it to you. But
of scriptures. It is very large, large in the
books of Adi Shankaracharya who had
described Me in full, in a very beautiful
way and it is very easy for Indians to get
it. I mean though I have not much
disciples in the city but they are aware
of my advent and they know that I am
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-49.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue: 9 & 10
September & October 2003
48
its continuing. I have not to do anything
because I think about it and it just works.
It is like that. All the problems, political
supports it. You are completely
integrated in one being that is your spirit.
May God bless you all.
Normally I don't tell about myself but
today he forced Me as soon as I came
problems, economic problems,
everything can be solved. Krishna has
said, 'Yog Kshema Vahamayam'; when
here to tell because its not tactful. Its not
tactful to say anything. Better, that you
discover Me than I tell you. Because
Christ was crucified, everybody was
tortured. I do not want to hamper my work
because it makes no difference by telling
you get your yoga, you will get your well
being. He has summed up. He could
have said Kshema Yoga Vahamayam'.
He did not. Yoga Kshema Vahamyam'
He said first do yoga. First unite. Unite
with the spirit; then you are blessed by
you anything before realization. Its better
to tell you after realization that 'l am the
Holy Ghost. No doubt, I am the Holy
all these things. There is centre of even
material wealth, of Laxmi, which works
Ghost, and the one, about which the
out, and all the Sahaja Yogis who have
Christ has told'. I had told them, I have
been to Me are blessed by material
never said this from a platform and I told
because they have been telling me,
"Mother you must say once. I said in
America I will declare. So today I
I am the Holy Ghost, I am
wealth also but not too much like Mr.
Ford, that is an extreme case. That is a
headache. But they get wel being from
every angle in a balanced way and an
integrated way.
So the last message is of integration
that you get completely integrated.
Whatever you do, your heart supports it,
your mind supports it and your body
declare that
the Holy Spirit who has incarnated on
this earth for your realization'.
May God Bless You.
