March-April, 2003 Volume : XV Issue : 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze I bless you all to do this work, which was left half done by the saints. It is your duty to complete it. Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi OHARMA

 & 4 March- April 2003 xV Cool Volume Breeze The Divine 1 TALK TO GROOMS, SHRI GANESHA PUJA TALK TO BRIDES, SHRI GANESHA PUJA SHRI GANESHA PUJA -2002 13 NAVRATRI PUJA – 2002 25 DIWALI PUJA – 2002 32 LETTER FROM SHRI MATAJI 34 TALK AT KINGSTON – 11-06-1980 46 SPIRIT LIKE THE SUN 49 ESTONIA WITH LOVE 9,

 THE DIVINE COOL BRE EZE Co OL Published by V.J. Nalgirkar 162 A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067 Printed at Print-O-Graphics New Delhi For subscription please write to Mr. O.P. Chandna N-463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh Delhi - 110034 Ph.:(011)27013464 Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artworks to: THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple C-17, Qutub Institutional Area New Delhi 110016

 Talk to Grooms, Shri Ganesha Puja 15th September, 2002, Cabella Ligure (Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) I'm very happy that you all have decided to marry in Sahaja Yoga, but there are certain responsibilities which you must have. It's not like other marriages that today you marry, tomorrow you divorce, then do this, do that - nothing of the kind. You are marrying in Sahaja Yoga because we want to strengthen Sahaja Yoga. You'll have wife. She'll look after you. She'll be kind to you.. She'll be loving you because she's a Sahaja Yogini. And you also should be very kind to her. Don't try to dominate her. Don't try to assert your ideas. See what she wants. You must know how to love your wife, otherwise marriages are not possible. But once you divorce in Sahaja Yoga, we will never marry you again. This we have decided now. Or in any way, if you desert your wife or leave her or do

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV isue 3 & 4 March April 2003 something irresponsible about your marriage, in Sahaja Yoga you have no place. So once for all now, only you decide that you are marrying. It's a very, very big responsibility. We want Sahaja Yoga marriages to be very successful and all of you should enjoy a very happy married life. No use dominating, no use understanding that you are here to produce Sahaja Yogi children to help with Sahaja Yoga because we have to change the world. It's to be emancipated. If you have very lower level of understanding of marriage, it won't work out. So I have to make a very great respect. With great respect, Ihave to make a very humble, I should say, request to you that please, please, if you are entering into a married life in controlling, but enjoying each other's company because your wife is also Sahaja Yogini, you're also a Sahaja Yogi and we don't marry you unless and until Sahaja Yoga, you have to understand you are Sahaja Yogis. The reason is we your responsibility. It's a very great are enlightened people. We are of higher responsibility. It's a responsibility for awareness. We have our spiritual life. the whole world because we have to We have to show in our lives how you change the whole world and if you behave very much differently from behave like other husbands of your others who are stupid people, who go country or of other countries, then on fighting, spoiling everything, so that what's the use of marrying in Sahaja you will have nice children. Look after Yoga? You can go and have a nice your children, look after your family. That's your first thing. Of course, some of you will be very busy with your work. It's all right. But loving the wife, looking after her, looking after children is very important, otherwise you should become bachelor, you should not marry. But if you are marrying, you are taking the responsibility of the wife. She is the daughter of somebody and the father is giving the daughter to you. So far boys have behaved very well in Sahaja Yoga, I must say, and so now you should also have wisdom and marriage outside. But if you are marrying in Sahaja Yoga, you have to know it's a big battle against evil, against injustice and also against all kind of mismanagements. We want to make a beautiful worlId and to make a beautiful world, we need people who are beautiful, who themselves respect everyone. So I have to make again and again same request to you, that you be very good, humble and respecting husbands. Don't follow others because I've had I was surprised how funny things and

 March - April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 on the good lines of Sahaj Yoga and become good volunteers of Sahaja Yoga. They'll be very good mothers and they'll create those children which we want now, who will completely change this world. So I hope you agree with Me and if you agree, well and good. If could these people become like this in marriages in Sahaja Yoga! But we found out they all were mad, lunatics and they all behaved in a lunatic manner. So aggression and all these things are not allowed. You are marrying this girl specially for the benefit of the whole you don't agree, even now you can leave world, not only yourself, not only your and you can give up. I will not mind at all. But after marriage, if you try to misbehave or if you try to divorce something, we have no place in Sahaja Yoga. We'll not have you here. So are you all accepting it? All children, your family, but the whole world. Before the whole world you have to show that you are a very sensible, wise and highly evolved person. This is not a marriage of lower type of people. So it's a responsibility with you to show right! Whosoever is not accepting, raise that you are very mature and that you have that feeling of enlightenment within your hand. Thank you very much. I'm very happy to know this. So you have to be wiser and you have to explain to you and you are enlightened people and you can enlighten the whole world. Of course, because the wife is your wife, 'See now, this is this. This is coming from another family, another this.' And let them see that you are country maybe, so there will be little intellectually higher, not only that, but difference of understanding. So you you are very wise. Spiritually you understand and then they will listen to make her understand. You have to talk you. Be kind. Be nice. They are leaving to her. You have to tell her, 'All right, their parents. They're leaving their come along, sit down.' But no use losing families. They're leaving their countries also, some of them. So be very kind and gentle with them and don't get angry temper and getting angry. Whatever explanation you may give for that, it's not good. It's not going to help you. I want to see all of you, how you show successfully that you're very for anything at all. There's no need to get angry at all. All My life I've never been angry. So that shows unnecessarily nicely married to your wives. But I don't say you spoil them, by no means. I already told them, don't have to spoil them, but let them also be people are angry. There's no need. Just keep quiet. If you don't like something, keep quiet, but don't show your temper

 March - April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 or anger. You have to show that you're wise, dignified people. I've seen some husbands throwing things, shouting, grown up now. You understand what is the purpose of your life. Thank you very much. May God bless you. doing all kinds of things. Then how can [The grooms tell the names of their countries:] the wife have respect for you unless and until you're respectable. You have to be respectable people. You be kind to her, nice to her. I'm not saying you spoil them, not at all. If you think something See, it's global. We are all global and we should show our sense of universal understanding, how we understand and enjoy everyone from is wrong, then let her sit down, you sit down and explain to her that this won't every place, from every country. They're all our brothers and sisters. All be good from Sahaja Yoga point of view. All right! So I wanted all of you to wait and it's all these years you have right? Thank you very much. Thank You.

 Talk to Brides, Shri Ganesha Puja 15th September, 2002, Cabella Ligure it, but talk of the future and the present, all right? So be sensible. It's your sensibility I'm very happy to see you all in such beautiful dresses... and also in a good mood to get married. You must which is going to keep up your attitude, all right? make a happy married life. If you You should be become insensible, happy people and if there's по try to keep your wisdom. then husbands also marriages will fail. Some girls I've happy. Your happiness can create happiness seen dominate their husbands too for the children. much. There is no Now one need to dominate. thing I want to If you love the husband, that's warn you, not to tell your husband about anything how the domination is. The best way is which was wrong love your your past life. That's not to be in to husband, look after him, do whatever is talked of. There's needed because no по пеed because you are now Sahaja Yogis. You are need showing off that you are from a better society or a better culture or a changed people and whatever has better family background. It's only you who can show that you are really a happened has happened. You need not talk about it or tell him anything about

 March - April The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 6. 2003 it. Be attached to your husband's family, good person and your goodness will win him over. So it's only the wife who makes or spoils the marriage and I have to tell you very frankly that if you still have some doubts about your marriage husband and things around. Because if you are attached to your family, you will still spoil the relationship. I've known many couples being broken because of this. There was a girl or if you're still thinking this was not a who was very much worried about her good match, you should withdraw now father because he lost the business and and later on you should not go on finding she made the whole life miserable. So faults with your husband. You see, men the husband disappeared and he wanted to do something else and she was left in are men and women are women. Men cannot be women, but you can make them understand that women are to be the lurch and she had to go to her father and then she realized how difficult it is respected. All right? And how? That you'll have to see by your behaviour. If your behaviour is good, they'll respect to live in father's house. So it's your house, it's your home, it's your husband. All right, you don't have to, sort of, go on searching another you, but if your behaviour is childish or if your behaviour is aggressive, no man person or another woman who'll help can appreciate a woman who is you. It's you who can help yourself, all right? Because now we have very bad experiences of some girls who have left their husbands and come away to their aggressive and so you should not be aggressive. Whatever he says, you should agree and listen to him. Fundamental things, of course, is there, families with the children. Is the family but otherwise, for small, small things, going to look after them all their lives? you should not try to dominate your Who is going to look after them? husband. It's not the sign of a Sahaja Yogini. A Sahaja Yogini has to, with love and understanding and wisdom, win over the husband and not by So use your brains and don't try to show off that you are something superior or something higher or you're something more. Say something you should be humble. The humbler you are, the better it is. Otherwise, arrogance domination. This is one thing we should understand, that many marriages are broken because of domination. Second doesn't behove a woman. She doesn't thing is, you are naturally attached to your parents, attached to your family, attached to your country. But now forget look nice. She looks like a horse sometimes, and looks like, I don't know

 March - April The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 2003 doing everything for the family, specially for your husband. Little, little things can, you see, give him pleasure and happiness because he's so tired working in the office, coming home so tired and then you get after that person. like what! So it is better to be humble and to be kind and to be nice and to prove that you are a good natured person - all right? Second thing I have to tell you because you are from the West. So Western women are very much money- It's very wrong. So you must change that attitude, that 'We don't want anything. We have oriented. Even the Indians have become like that. They want a car. They want a house. They want this. They want that. You shouldn't want anything. You are going to supply to your husband, to your family. You don't need anything. That's everything. We are Sahaja Yogis. We are absolutely satisfied.' But if you go on demanding, then it is going to be very difficult, I can tell you this much. I've had very, very bad experiences of some girls. Say from Austria recently, three girls went away back to Austria - shameful. Is there anybody from Austria your beauty. That's your decoration and that will beautify you. But if you go on hankering after 'I want this. I want that,' there's no end to it, specially with Western mind. They're very money- here? No - thank God. You are from oriented and have created such Austria. Now be careful. You see, these three girls have come back with the problems. Actually, I don't know what children and the husband is so to say to them. So second thing is that you should dominated that he has to go to the father's house every Saturday, Sunday. He's spending all that money in going down. That doesn't show any wisdom, not be money-oriented, but you should be love-oriented. Express your love by different things, by making a good food, by making a good bed for your husband, for organizing the house, any wisdom. You see, the housewife not only makes the family grow, but brings keeping everything nice. Because if the good name and understanding. There's housewife is untidy, the house will nothing to suffer much, but remain untidy. It's not the job of the understanding is the point, you see. husband to look after the house. You'll Supposing if you are wise and enjoy a very beautiful house and a very something happens, take a very wise beautiful room if you keep it properly. attitude, balanced attitude, responsible So you should enjoy all that. Enjoy attitude. Wife has to be much more

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2003 responsible than men, as far as the husband. This is a Sahaja style of family is concerned, children are marriage. You can have other marriages, concerned. But if you are a hot- you can have ten marriages, that's tempered woman, God save you and different - not in Sahaja Yoga. And once save your husband. So hot temper is not suitable for any woman. If you are hot-tempered, you'll start looking old very soon. Very soon you'll start looking old. And if you you are divorced, then we don't marry you. We have given up. We've tried that. Now we don't do that because it becomes a habit of divorcing your husband. Once you are married, you had ego, if you think too much of should be all married and if you want to yourself also, same thing will happen. divorce, then know for this thing, that we'll have nothing to do with you and girl who has come to husband's house you'll be thrown away from Sahaja to love him, to look after him and to Yoga. We want to have very good mother him. You have to think that you marriages and very good children, also are his mother and he sometimes - the progeny. The future of children they're foolish according to your would be very good if you are sensible, So best thing is to behave like a little judgement. It doesn't matter. So look after them just like your wise, good and kind mothers. I've told you sufficiently. I hope baby and be nice and sweet to them, all right? And none of your family people are more important than your husband. That is very important for you now, the most important thing is your you understand that you're marrying in Sahaja Yoga and you have to keep the prestige of Sahaja Yoga, all right? You all promise that? May God bless you.

 Shri Ganesha Puja - 2002 Frankfurt Germany (Pravachana of Param Pujya Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) It's so nice to come back after such a long time. And whenever I came, you always had gathered. In a very big hall we met and that's how the Sahaja Yoga started going. It's very important for you people specially from Germany and Austria. These are the people who were in the war. And now you are in the war, with Me. We have to fight, fight the evil. You know how the world is. We have to fight them and we have to take them out of ignorance. You are such a support for this because we have to change human beings. They have to become good people very fast. Once they get their Self Realization, the change will start. Now in England and also in Italy, what they're doing is to give Realization to the people on the streets. Giving on the streets, thousands of people now have become realized souls. It's a very big thing because once you get your Realization, you become the spirit and all the goodness should come to you. If there is anything evil, bad in you, that will go away. It's spreading so fast everywhere and should spread also in those countries who are there. There's no need, no need for you to fight or quarrel because you have got the divine help. You have got all the help all the time, all the time from the

 March - April 10 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 Divine, and this is what is to be good, no good at all. Just see what is understood that we are helped by the going on in these days all kinds of Divine to transform human beings into fighting, quarrelling, killing. All this is something greater. going on, so you must know we are in the very, very bad type of Kali Yuga and we have to fight it out collectively. Look at the children, how collective they are! You all have to be collective and you must love all the people, all the Sahaja Yogis who are around. Don't try to find That's what we are and we are here because I wanted to tell people that you must have a place, an Ashram for Sahaja Yoga and I don't want anybody else, but only Sahaja Yogis there because we don't know how dirty faults with them. Don't try to fight with them because it's a very important work I am doing. people are .., what filth they do! You can't imagine to what limit they can go and can really try to harm you because they're not only negative, but they are also sometimes satanic and they'll try to ruin your children, ruin your families, do all kinds of things. So you have nothing to do with them. Keep away. Keep aloof because now you all have been cleansed. Those people who are cleansed, don't mix up with people who What I'm trying to do is to transform people, to make them good people, nice people. It's not to get anything out of them, but to give them something that they should become very good people. We have to have extremely good and nice people, people who don't hate, people who don't have greed. Like madness, people have greed. In countries where they could make money, they have cheated everyone and have made money and are muddy - do they? and so must have this much of wisdom in your head to understand that at any cost you will not mix up Sahaja Yoga with other things. It's very important to know that - I have been trying to tell this since long- that is how their children will suffer. They will suffer. So My intention is for all of you because you can help Me in this great war, war with the evil. These are evil people by that keep yourself aloof. But sometimes people don't do it and then they suffer a lot. temperament and they want to ruin it. You must understand this. Don't play We have all kinds of devils around, all kinds of satanic forces, acting as some sort of a obstruction. I don't know what they are doing, but they've done no good to people, no into their hands and you become solid because you have not come on this Earth to collect things and all that, but you

 March - April 2003 11 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 Now the problem is that people have come here to become Sahaja Yogis of a very great order. Another thing is if you don't feel your joy within yourself, if there is no joy within you, you willI trouble others. So best thing for you is to take to wrong things very easily even after Sahaja Yoga. Don't support anyone like that. On the contrary, explain to that person that Sahaja Yoga is a collective activity. We can't have meditate, not to criticize, not to use our own anything. We have to be active. your brain, but meditate. By We have to be together all the time. meditation, you will know how to Togetherness is very important and then enjoy Sahaja Yoga, how to enjoy to seek joy of that togetherness. If you can feel the joy of togetherness, you others. This has to be there and this mental activity should go away. Don't have achieved that aim of life because try to organize others. Don't try to then you'll gather other people also and give lectures to others, but what you give them this joy of being the spirit. do is to yourself introspect. See for Once they become the spirit, it starts yourself what's wrong with you and changing. But if you are collective and if you are together and you do all the children, please keep quiet. All things, then also you grow very much. Now those who talk of separating, what wrong things you are doing... right? If you don't keep quiet, we'll take you away. I don't want you to go. All right? Here also. After all, you see, these having some sort of a mad idea, please don't listen to them. You better check. Sometimes we have to be together. We cannot - we cannot separate. And anything like this will be destroyed. Because in this world, you see, how the world is, how the things are and how it is working out. So for you to understand the children are German children, so naturally, in Italy they know to be boisterous. That's why I called them here .. they'll be good children, very good children, won't you?. So not only being peaceful is everything - no. Not only being good is enough, all right, but you have to make others you have to make others good people. You have to make them beautiful people. You have to make this world beautiful through your own help beauty of modern times, is that you are born in a time when you can be transformed. You are born in a time when you can become the Self, the spirit. Everybody has tried this. Nothing has worked out. Now, with the help of your kundalini, we are working it out. and through your attention.

 12 March- April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 Germans I met before, but I see also You also know what is to be done. You know how to give Realization, how to see the vibrations, everything and once you start seeing that, then you will realize that what you were doing was a great harm to humanity. Now I leave upon you, all of you - you are such sensible, good people, you have come to Sahaja Yoga and every time I came here, you were all here. I'm other people from other countries - very sweet of them to help them. So what is important is to surrender, which is a problem with people. They cannot surrender themselves to Sahaja Yoga. That's what is your life. That is the beautiful reward of goodness. So you should try to surrender and if you cannot surrender. then there's something wrong with you. Please try to surrender and you'll be surprised that, with this surrendering only, you can get complete joy. happiness and peace. That is very important and that's what I have come to tell you, that please try to surrender. And surrendering is - I cannot say how happy so many countries are here. Only just knowing that I am coming, how much you all just love Me! I tell you, really, it's remarkable. All of you people have shown your love. All of you have come here all the way, I am here for such a short time. So may God bless you all and have sense. Have sense in your head that you are now responsible for transforming this world into a new world of very you force yourself, but you just go into thoughtless awareness. You meditate good people, spiritual people. So your responsibility is that and, and then I'm sure, with all My love as a result, what you have to do, you and with all My blessings, I'm sure will know. You all have to be very you will surrender responsible. Whatever country you may surrender, but you will develop whatever place you may come, tremendous powers to convert others but you have to be very, very also, to transform others into this responsible - responsible people and good work. You all have that and, if you try to understand what you are doing just develop and try to find out how for Sahaja Yoga. I can see so many new faces now. life to change. and go into thoughtless awareness not only come, many people you have helped really in Thank you very much. I'm happy to see them. Of course most of the Austrians I have met and ... the

 Navaratri Puja 27th October, 2002, Los Angeles (Pravachana of Param Pujya Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today we are going to worship the Goddess. That's the first the left side programmings with Her, but later on at Sahasrara, She is the Adi Shakti. And on the left side whatever She does is already written as you must have seen because She is the and that She is the wisdom. And that She protects is shown when She uses Her memory power over the ganas. There are ganas that are, as we know, responsible for all kinds of corrections in you. These are the ganas which act through the left side. As we know very well that cancer is caused by the problems of the left side. And on the left side are these ganas, which are completely in unison with the Devi's powers. She doesn't have to tell them. She doesn't have to guide them. They are already built up like that. And these ganas are the ones which, I should say, target. They target the diseases and cure it. We have cured many cancer patients and many left-sided people through the ganas.

 14 2003 March - April The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 Mahatmayam, whatever protections She gives you. So tremendous is Her protecting power and this protecting power gives you understanding how kind She is and how, I should say, how very, very protective of you, extremely protective. She'll guide you all the But ganas won't listen to anybody else. And Ganapati is their leader, I should say, their controller. So if your Ganapati is all right, then problems are less. But if the Ganapati is not all right, then all kinds of problems can come time that you should be protected- on the up and they can torture you. This is one of left side. And through Her ganas, She looks the things I am so particular about, that we after you. But on the right side also - those must get our Ganeshas correct. who are on the right side, the Goddess puts The other day, I received a big Her powers to put you right, to bring you envelope with letters saying that 'Mother, difficult to control ganas.' But difficult to control Ganapati itself. So what should we do? We get into traumas. A simple thing is that at such a point back to normal conditions, to humble you down and make you understand that you are a child of the Mother and you have to behave like a child. But if you go to extremes, then you when you are in a trauma and when you develop all kinds of complications of the cannot overcome this effect of the Ganapati, right side also, as you develop on the left side. And the right side problems these days then what you should do is to meditate. Meditation is the only way you can are very, very common, which I've seen overcome ganas. people cannot get over. So many diseases First of all is the upbringing of the children and then atmosphere as it exists. With these two important factors, you can like Alzheimer's and other diseases come up later on. First it starts with the liver. The liver is the main point, as we fall into the do well with the ganas. The problem is that trap of the liver. If you are thinking too much, if you are futuristic, if you are aggressive, human beings get lost and they don't look after their Ganapati. So as you worship the Goddess, you then liver goes out. Because you use liver's power to do all that. And when your liver's are also worshiping Shri Ganesha, who is power is over, you're finished with liver power, you can develop so many diseases, so many troubles that you cannot overcome. It's very difficult. Of course with Sahaja Yoga, so many the power behind Her. The greatest power that is belonging to the Mother is your protection-protection from all kinds of things. All the left-hand side protections are there. They are described, as you must have learned, in the Devi people's liver has been cured - so many

 March April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 15 people. And it has been doing wonderful within. That I can't say. But I've seen people with bhakti. They have achieved great work as far as the liver is concerned. But heights, though it's a left-side movement. one should humble down and try to keep With the left-side movement, they have achieved great heights. I don't know how the bhakti and shraddha has helped them the liver all right. So the protection is also built in your body by ganas on the left-hand side and by reactions on the right-hand side. But the greatest thing is the blessings of the somuch. In this, I must say, Indians are the best Goddess, the way She looks after you, the because they have this power of bhakti and way She loves you and the way She cares for you, which you should never take it for of shraddha. It's not madness. It's not madness, as they have here. I have seen granted. people who get into some sort of a cult or You must meditate. You must something. They go mad. It's not madness. meditate. It's very important.No question without meditation you can keep Bhakti is love and love which is understanding, which understands what is bhakti and shraddha. Unless and until you yourself all right. There's no question. Meditation is the most important thing, develop that bhakti and shraddha within which must be followed because that's how you, you cannot rise. You cannot rise above your problems. You cannot rise above your personality because bhakti is something you cannot impose on anyone. You can not force on anybody. You can make somebody mad you come close to Her vibrations, come to Her, I should say, to Hernature. Even aninmals are so sensitive to Mother, very sensitive to vibrations. Animals are, but human beings have their own understanding, have their and say that he can do bhakti. He can. You have to have all your qualities absolutely intact. You should be intelligent. You should own freedom, have their so-called intelligence and they fall in the trap of it. They follow things which they should not. be understanding. Everything should be there. But at that time, this - the joy of bhakti is within you. And this joy of bhakti, when it So what is necessary very much in the country like America is the devotion and bhakti. These two things are not there. Indians take to Sahaja Yoga and go deep down into it because they know what is starts flowing, Goddess Herself enters into your being, I should say. I've seen people, bhaktas, many great bhakti, what is devotion. All this ego and all saints in India, who achieve lot of heights. that melts away. But this bhakti is to be enjoyed. They're gone too far into it and, if you read I don't know how to create bhakti about them and if you understand them,

 March - April The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 2003 16 you're amazed how, without any help, Whatever is the blind bhakti can take you without any guidance, how could they go that deep and worship Devi. Worshiping is not just out of sheer to any kind of nonsense and that's how many cults have come up, many of these things have come up. But that's not a thing that reading or some sort of a chanting or anything, but it's the deep attention of your sees, that knows, that understands. It should be understood by your intelligence, by all your qualities, what is your bhakti's life. heart. I think it's spirit. If the spirit is awakened within you, you develop the Now we have through kundalini bhakti and drop out all nonsensical ideas, all different things that have crawled into your head. But you just develop the bhakti. Now all these qualities described of awakening reached a very great height, I must say, of understanding of bhakti, the power of bhakti. The greatest power of bhakti is that it protects you. It protects you. Those people who are suffering from any kind of trouble, any kind of a problem, just get out of it because this bhakti of yours gives you the right type of understanding, the Devi are left-sided, are in the brain - memory, 'Smriti rupena samsthita', other things also, whatever, are described are in the brain and then the bhakti reaches the state, it just neutralizes everything. All the problems of the brain are neutralized and you become a wise person. So the greatest boon of the Devi is to the understanding of yourself, also the understanding of surroundings, understanding of the whole universe, I should say. Why people behave like this, why they are like this - all these can be solved through give you wisdom. You can call it awareness. You can call it anything. It's a kind of a wisdom by which you become absolutely a your bhakti. It should not be blind. It should not be blind, but it should be wise bhakti, wise with wisdom - only possible through Sahaja Yoga, I think. Otherwise, whatever bhakti people do like mad, that can not be divine personality. That wisdom you must reach through your bhakti. But you see, we have people of all kinds. Some are very much in the shraddha, in the bhakti, in the bhakti. You don't become mad. You become a wise man - wise man, as we have devotion, but they are wrongly placed and so many in the past. And the way they have they don't understand to whom we should talked about everything is surprising. How worship and where we should go. Now Sahaja Yoga is an actualization. they have said things about human Sahaja Yoga is a sakshatkar, is actualization in which you know whom to worship and awareness, about your ascent is remarkable. As I some times I feel, they have really prepared the field for Me, a proper area whom to surrender. It's not blind in any way.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2003 17 for Me to talk to people. Specially in India, I don't know why traditionally we are very now it's missing. For them, the ideal is now the Western life. much devoted. Once you take to Western life, that In the same way, all over it should part is over because the whole thing is judged with ideas, what is beneficial, what is helpful in life. But bhakti and shraddha, happen. Because in India, of course, there are mad people also. There are cults. There are all kinds of things, no doubt. But actually according to them, is of no use. That doesn't help. Most of the people nowadays think there, we have saints who have guided us very well. Despite that, you find that in India, like that. But you are very few who have people are going astray, doing wrong things and wrong type of worship. It's true, no doubt, but it is, I should say, just the wipe understood what is bhakti and what is shraddha. So Iwould say the Goddess gives you bhakti and shraddha. By what? She gives (disgrace). It's a funny type of a madness where you through your meditation, that you see somany miracles happening around and you are amazed how this has happened! We Inever expected this to happen! How it has happened? How it has worked out?" Also there is no wisdom. What is between a mad and a sane person is that mad person has no wisdom. And those who have also so- called wisdom, so they say that 'we are very wise' are sadly mistaken. Because the way they behave, the way they commit mistakes, the way their whole attention is, I should She corrects you. All the time you - if you are aware- She corrects you and tells you don't go this way. You are going on the ego side or She tells you, you are going on the say, the whole working is, sometimes surprising because they have no wisdom. First of all is to test yourself and see 'Am I left side. She's the one who corrects throughout. We get into diseases and all wise? Am I wise? Am I doing wise things or kinds of - we are trapped into all kinds of things. It is because because we I'm not doing?" So many complaints come to Me about Sahaja Yogis. I'm surprised why, why are they doing like that? I would say still don't have bhakti. In the bhakti, you have to depend on the wisdom of the Mother, wisdom of the Shakti, that She looks after they have not reached the state of bhakti. you, she finds you out the way and She will Bhakti and shraddha, these two things are help you. If you start becoming on your own missing in the Westem life, I must say. We and thinking that 'I'm all right, I can do this, Ican do that,' you'll find inevitably that you should come back. We should develop. We should grow. But even in the Eastern life, are wrong; that you had a very wrong idea

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2003 18 about yourself and about the Divine. a Sahaja Yogs was killed. I said not possible. So what is the most important point And the fellow was in Rome, he was not is surrender. The word Islam means killed. So it's not possible that a young man surrender. But Mohammed-saheb has should be killed like that. Ofcourse, if somebody is old, He has to die. But that he described what you should have before surrender is your Realization. But you have seen even after Realization people take time was killed was not a right thing. So it is the protection not only to settle down. But once you are settled physical, mental, emotional - but spiritual down, you understand that you are under a protection also. protection of the Goddess, that you see Spiritual protection is that what you do is that you don't do wrong things. You don't kill anybody, you don't torture every day how it works and how it helps you. Many people who are in Sahaja Yoga, so-called, have great respect for Me, but are not fully there. Then they anybody, you are not rude to anybody. That is the situation into which you all can enter suffer and they have problems and then they ask Me, Mother, how is it I have this problem?' I don't tell them because because you are Sahaja Yogis. You can achieve it. You have a power to do it because you have so much shraddha and so much understanding that you have reached a certain state of protection, of growth, of wisdom. Now, first test your wisdom. You must test your wisdom. 'If I'm doing this, this is this way, is it good, why I'm doing it.' First test your wisdom, then you will find out that many things you do, you can't tell anything to human beings, you see. They are very aggressive. But the fact is because - because you are not one with the Divine and, with the Divine, if you are one, you'll have nothing but compassion and love, nothing else. And everything you do so smoothly, so nicely. People may not understand that they crucified Christ. They did all kinds of things, which are wrong, which should not have been done. But first your wisdom must agreed. But now you should ask for the develop and you must see that your wisdom protection of the Goddess because that is works and helps. I have seen now yesterday's drama. the greatest quality of the Goddess that She protects you from all problems, from all You must have seen that girl. She is very troubles, from all kinds of nonsensical, I sensitive and she could see through her wisdom what was good. should say, things that can happen. There are so many things that happen. If you cannot find out what is good I tell you I was told that one of the leaders, and what is bad, that means the wisdom is

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 19 2003 lacked the wisdom. And the wisdom is the lacking. If you cannot find out what you thing which really is not just assumption that should do, then the wisdom is lacking. But Iam very wise and all that, but it asserts, it if you have the wisdom, then you will immediately know that this is wrong. Apart from that, you will be saved from all kinds works out and it shows what is good and what is bad. Wisdom is the sign of a person who of problems. Is a fact I have seen with so is really a realized soul of a very high level. If you don't have wisdom, whatever you may do, you might feel satisfied about it, many people like that, who have been saved, not only from death, but from all kinds of catastrophies, all kinds. And I was amazed how these Sahaja Yogis are helped but the wisdom part is very, very important. That is the most governing part within us. by the Divine. Divine is a power. Everywhere it And, as you know, Ganesha is the giver of wisdom. That's why Ganesha must be exists. But it will only help the people who worshipped. With the proper upbringing, Shri Ganesha is established, who is nothing but are Sahaja Yogis, who are divine, not the people who are not. It will never help. On the contrary, it might punish in a way that is the giver of wisdom. And this wisdom is never expected. So one has to be careful to test oneself what I call introspection. Have innate. You don't have to judge it. It's innate within us, grown up just like any other you been wise in dealing with certain person. qualities in us. It takes time with some people. It takes time, no doubt, but once it What has been your style? Is it money- oriented or it is domination-oriented? What sort of a power it was that you are working under. comes in, such a person becomes quiet simple and absolutely truthful. He knows about it and this is the thing one should develop, this 'How far am I that? You have to introspect to find out. And you'll be amazed, very much amazed that, You see, in this world, people are even in the name of God, you can do wrong things. Lots of wrong things have been done in the name of God and that's why today protesting for this, protesting for that, fighting for this, doing all kinds of things. But if you have wisdom, then you don't have to do anything of the kind. What happens that automatically people understand that he's a wise man. From ancient times everywhere, a wise man has been praised. He's not we have such a big chaos of so-called religions. When nothing wrong was with the religion as such and those religious people who talked about it - nothing wrong. But the way people absorbed it and the way worried about his financial side or emotional people used it was wrong because they

 March - April 2003 20 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 the value of bhakti within us. You can not side - nothing. What he's worried, 'AmI being a wise person?' That is the first sign of the blessings of God. The one who has blessings of Divine is a wise person, is very wise and his wisdom is shown by his silence. superficially touch it. Those who are superficial, will never get it. Wisdom only comes through understanding what the wisdom means. You might find somebody extremely wise, maybe your servant, maybe your driver, maybe anyone and you're amazed how such a person can be so wise? Because maybe from his last life he has got it within him or he has gone into it and he And his whole power, his divine power uses that person as a media and works tremendously. That man himself is surprised how it has happened. A woman can have that. A man can have it. Anybody can have found it. It's not the state of one person. It's not the property of one person, but it can that wisdom, that profoundness, that temperament, which is so beautiful and so belong to many of them. So the Sahaja Yogi is the one who empowering. Such a person doesn't curse anyone, doesn't bother to curse anyone. But it works. He never gets angry with anyone. But it works. He doesn't lose temper, no. But some temper works and harm you, which you never expected. It is within us, has to have that wisdom. Why are you doing this? What is the need to do it? They don't have to ask any questions. They just don't do wrong. They just don't do wrong things. They're always on the right path. That is the sign of the Sahaja yogi, I believe, and which is the blessing of the Goddess. If there is the power of the Goddess working in you, within our power as human beings to be wise. I've seen animals have such a sensitivity to vibrations-extremely sensitive. you'll have the wisdom to work it out. Now you have seen many people How? Because their wisdom is intact. It coming to America, doing all kinds of things. works in them. They're not conscious of it. They all have disappeared. There's no The difference is human beings are conscious support to them. Where are they? They are finished. Because they are money-oriented of their wisdom. This is the only difference. Animals have wisdom, but automatic, we should say natural. But we have inculcated and power-oriented, I don't know what they were oriented and they have lost it. But this or we have developed this wisdom within us through what? Through our for a person who is standing in his wisdom, is the saint, as they call him, is a saint, as meditation, through our understanding bhakti they call it. Butevery Sahaja Yogi could be a saint, could be a sage. Every Sahaja Yogi and shraddha. So it is very important to understand

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Isue 3 & 4 March April 2003 21 America first, I saw such a horrible thing here, that people were running after that some horrible gurus and I never came after. After nine years I came. As I said, 'These people are mad. How do they follow these horrible people and what do they believe could be that. But if you lose your wisdom, you are no good. So I have to tell you one thing. It is your wisdom which will save you. Your wisdom will unconsciously help you. There was one gentleman, Sahaja Yogi. Once he was going somewhere in the car and suddenly decided to go onto another road, suddenly. And what happened, that on that into? They've no wisdom to understand what the truth is like.' It works out now today. You can see there are so many people. So that is what is the wisdom part and road there was a very big accident and he if this wisdom comes to Americans, they'll come to Sahaja Yoga - not only come, but they will grow into it. But the wisdom will be to see What are we going to do? What would have been in that accident. Like that, there are many incidents people have told Me, that 'Mother, how we were saved, how we were brought to the brink of death and then how we are just alive. It is because the Divine needs you. The Divine doesn't want you to die or to finish off. It needs you very much. It has to do its work and you are the instrument of that Divine. If you have wisdom are we going to get? What is our aim?" All these things must be brought to them, which is not done normally. You must talk to them and must tell them what is within you is the spirit. You should become the spirit. Every one of them has said so. So why not do that and why not become the spirit. So then they will themselves feel, you are the best instrument for the Divine to work it out. The Devi's powers, first of all, existed "Yes, that's true.' It is said that become the in Her body only and She killed so many rakshasas and evil people- She did kill it actually. But now there is no need because spirit. They'll go to church. They'll go to temples. They'll go here, there, not understanding why they are doing it. They need some sort of a protection. That's why they go. But this protection comes from your spiritual status. Where do you stand as far as spirit is concermed? Those who have enjoyed the spirit, I've seen, do not deviate from the right you all are there. You are the instruments and it will all work out in such a way that all those people who are trying to destroy your goodness, trying to destroy wise people, they will be killed, will be finished. They'll be destroyed. This is not to be done through any outside instrument or anything. It's the path. But those who haven't, they may call themselves Sahaja Yogis, anything, wisdom. It's the biggest instrument that will work it out. Do you know when I came to

 March April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 22 but they can be very wrong. So first of all the evolutionary process. Now She's brought about all the evolutions so far and, to go further, She is going to make you a find out about yourself, If you are a real Sahaja Yogi, if you really want to be an instrument of this power, then what you have very wise person. Even an ordinary sage in a village in a to do is to become full of bhakti and shraddha for that. And this bhakti and far-fetched place is respected, if he's a real sage. But if he's a stupid fellow, what can you do? He may befool you. He may do all kinds of tricks and things like that. And then does he get anything good for you? No, shraddha is very joy-giving. I know it. It never makes you tired. It never troubles you, nothing. But it's very nourishing and beautiful. But it should be at the right place, with the right aims and right understanding. nothing. So first thing is anybody who is supposed to be your guru or supposed to be the person who is guiding you, must have bhakti. Bhakti of the goddess very For all that, what you need again is wisdom and you should try to find out are you wise enough? Are you wise or are you not? It's very difficult forevery human being to find out whether you are right or wrong because you see the effects of this wisdom all around. So the bhakti and shraddha to the Goddess gives you- definitely gives you important to understand. Modern things have come to such a limit that they have respect for the Goddess - no. They don't even talk about the Goddess and they just talk about something which can not be wisdom. We have had some people in India explained and understood. If they talk about who did lots of bhakti and so-called and Christ, they won't talk about Him. that He's showed lots of shraddha, but they were not. Just they were talking about it or doing all kinds of things about it, but they were not. So wisdom is something a very the one who said at the cross, 'Behold the Mother.' What was the need to say that? Because He didn't want His Mother to get into trouble. But He said, 'Behold the Mother.' That means you are for the Mother, innate quality, very innate. It's not superficial. You cannot just say that this person is wise or not. It shows that just like a power- it's who is going to come. They all have indicated and they have a power of understanding and is supported by the power of the Goddess. So She's the giver of wisdom. This is the biggest quality said so. But still, we are busy with our own ego and our own understanding and we run after things which are not real. First of all, you must follow only things which are real, not unreal things. For that also, you will need of the Goddess, that She's the giver of wisdom. And wisdom comes as a part of

 March - April 2003 23 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 Me very much. You can support my work very much if you have that wisdom. And the wisdom is to judge yourself how many people you love, how you love, how wisdom. I think for that you need wisdom very much more. And that is something. whether you have the wisdom first or the blessings of the Mother - you see, between you talk to them, what do you want out the two. So 1 have to tell you one thing that of them. All this should come -judge yourself, introspection. Through introspection you can see it. So for a Sahaja Yogi, it is important to do introspection. before you people start spreading Sahaja Yoga, please judge yourself. Just see if you are wise? Also see for yourself if you have the blessings of the Mother? Only the wise Second one is meditation. And third are the -Imean, I should say, are the people one is to take vibrations. It's very who know whether they have the Mother's blessings or not. For that, we have so many important. What I find, some of them say, "Mother, we don't do this, we don't do that. ways of understanding. First and foremost thing is meditation and feeling your vibrations on the photograph and facing yourself clearly. If your are a realized soul, are you really a good realized soul or not? Are But why? Why don't do it? 'We do Sahaja work.' Sahaja work is what? If you are not doing these basic things, how are you a Sahaja Yogi? And then lots of complications come out of them. They also suffer. I think one has to have again the wisdom to understand what is Sahaja you deep or not? Are your vibrations working out or not? If you can see that, will realize that greater than all Yoga. No one understands that sometimes then you and they go on forming a group of people ambitions, the greatest is to become a devoted, wise personality. That is the one who are not at all understanding what is that will give you the joy. Joy for all Sahaja Yogis. Otherwise, see it is just a human being like others, going about. Sahaja Yoga. It's a very, very deep personality. Sahaja Yoga is not just by saying, 'I am a Sahaja Yogi,' but it's a very deep personality, and that deep personality has to be felt by others as the wise, very wise, Now the time has come for this to work out. It's a special time, I should say, although quite a lot of struggle for Me, no not that how much you talk or shout or give doubt, but doesn't matter. I know because lectures is important. Is with peace, the tranquility, the capacity to love within you are important. And that's how people I've landed Myself in the area where things are not so simple. It doesn't matter. But on the whole, what I feel is you can support

 24 March April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 can judge whether you are really blessed by your Mother or not. So this is one of the things very important and I've come to America just to protect America from problems, because suddenly this has gone into problems. And it was inevitable because they were blind here not to understand what's going wrong overpowering others? Those who do not know how to overpower themselves are always miserable, always in trouble because it reacts. If you try to overpower others, it reacts. For that, you have to be absolutely introspective. Again and again I have been saying this, that introspect. Of course, I must say so many good Sahaja Yogis have come out now and they have worked it out and they're very good, simple, wise people. It's such a great hope for Me. I never expected I would work it and that blindness has brought them to this point where they start seeing their ego specially, which has ruined them. Money- orientation, all this has shown how stupid they have been to believe that they're very out that good, but it has worked out. And always, always youmust know that you have that power within you and they must use that power and not fall a prey into rich people and they can do anything they want to with their money and with overpowering of other countries and other people. First overpower yourself. You have to know yourself first of all. What is this nonsensical ideas. Thank you very much.

 Diwali Puja 3rd November, 2002, Los Angeles (Pravachana of Param Pujya Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) I wish you all a very, very happy in this world. That's the real Diwali - the enlightenment of human beings. It's not candle. It's not some lamp. It's human beings. If they are enlightened, then there's no problem any more left. The problems come with the people who are not enlightened because they're Diwali. To see all of you here is itself such a joy for Me. That you all have taken to Sahaja Yoga is such a beautiful feeling. It's your own. Self is your own, spirit is your own, but to take to self, it's difficult. It's only your desires I think which is being in the darkness. They're groping in the darkness and some of them don't know also fulfilled and that's that they completely ignorant how you have got are your Self Realization. It can not be of realities. forced, as you have Once you come to Sahaja Yoga and enlighten your Self, known very well. It has to work out only you see in that light, what is good and what is bad - to begin with. And then you with your desire, only with your surrendering. No use talking about it, no it into use convincing about grow beautifully just like it-what works out is these flowers, who your desire, simple as that. The power of are all the time happy. all the time giving you joy. In the same way, when you are enlightened with that light, you don't seek anything. You have got everything within you. Keep the lights on. But the another thing you can do desire within you, works it out. There are many who are not here, who have got their Realization all over the world. I remember all of them. And all of you should remember them. Today is a nice day when we can think of all those who are enlightened is, with your light, you can enlighten other

 March - April The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 2003 26 in others also. people. Like we have done here, we 1 don't have to tell you that you had enlightened one candle. With that, we have enlightened all of them. So you all can do it because you have got that light within you. With that light, you can enlighten others and they can feel the joy of their spirit. It's love each other or anything. You just love. You just understand. You just spread your light among yourselves. Sometimes you get frustrated with other people in your country, maybe in your city, maybe in your village, that the people who are not yet enlightened. But best thing is to work it out, you have to work it out. Know, 1 had first one lady, very old lady one, who got her Realization from Me. And then, you all something to be seen now, like so many lights you have put up. In the same way, you are the lights for the whole world. It's not sufficient that you have got the light, but also you have to give light to others. You have to enlighten others just like these candles. Once you start doing are here. In the same way, you all can that, you realize what you have got and then you'll respect yourself and you'll also do the job of Realization. For that, you don't need any calculations. You don't need any thanks-giving. It's just behave in a manner that behoves a saint there and it works out. could be a sage without proclaiming anything. Inside your being, you will just develop that beautiful, extremely beautiful temperament that is joy-giving. You don't want to give any false ideas about yourself because whatever is the truth is within you. There's no need to tell something untruth about yourself. People will realize that you are realized souls- They will just feel your subtle What do you do for a light? Just see. You just put near the candle and you get the light. In the same way, it is your enlightenment is such that it will give light to thousands and thousands of people all over the world. As you know, there're many countries who you have to still approach. But we will do that. Just locate and find out where do you have to go and where you have to nature, the reality, whether you come from India or you come from England work. Firstly, you are capable of giving or from America, you all have that Realization. You are. Have confidence that you can give Realization to people, for which you don't need any help. ocean of love and knowledge within you. Be sure that it's all there, only you Single person can do it. Thousands can first enjoy your own ocean of love. First do it. It's very important for the Diwali you enjoy that and then you can enjoy

 27 March - April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 of the whole world that we should give Realization to people - very important. Now in Sahaja Yoga, many people dangerous for all of us. We have had very funny experiences also in this country, but I think they all are learning one by one that this should not have been done, that are such who are little frustrated with themselves, specially with their past. Forget the past. Past is not important. What is important is present. At this was wrong. Now what blinds you, you should find out. present moment, what have you to do? You don't have to worry about the past, In this country, it's such a money oriented country -I mean America is - which has spread all over the world and that I've done this, I've done that.' What is done is finished. Now you look being money-oriented, you do get enamoured. You do feel that you must make money out of Sahaja Yoga. There out for the future. What can you do for the future? And somehow or other, with the light, you'll see your path. You get rid of all the darkness and you know are some who do not think like that, but they are still running after making money. There is no need at all for you to make how far to go, how to meet people and money or to find for yourself a kind of a security in money. Your security is inbuilt within you. So all these outside things, which how to spread Sahaja Yoga. It's something you have already within you, but you have to, first of all, establish your connection with it. If you have established your connection with are absolutely unnecessary, should not blind you. Now, if you have the light, you can see clearly and this help of the Divine, you see that very clearly in your life and you're surprised how the Divine has helped you at different points. I get letters from people who say that ocean that you have, you can definitely work it out, work it out in such a beautiful manner. And you'll be amazed how you'll be successful. The success that you get out of all this ignorance, you are amazed at it. But you have the light. With the light, you do "Mother thank you very much, I got rid of my problem, I got rid of my enemies' remove all the darkness. Doesn't have to think about it - Just remove it because - all kinds of things. While I have done nothing. It's your light which has removed the darkness. If you're ignorant, then only the light can remove the darkness of your ignorance also. Actually, we don't know how you have got it. But if you don't have the light, then no use talking about it, no use doing it because it doesn't give any success. On the contrary, it's a failure, failure of the worst type and can be very

 March - April The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue 3 & 4 28 2003 be cheated because also you're looked much there is the power of the light. As you can see here, every light is giving such a lot of- not only eniergy, but also after by the Divine, guided all the time by the Divine. Have faith in the Divine. Have faith in the Divine. That's very complete picture. So thus, you can make out. For important as you have faith in a example, you can make out if candle. Have faith that the Divine somebody's a realized soul or not. It's will give you the light, will guide your not necessary that you have to go near path, will take you to the right place, that person or take any special care or to do the right thing. anything. You will just know that this I mean so many of these experiences are with you. I need not tell you how much people have written to. Me, how they have found things person is a realized soul or not. I had many such experiences where I found that people don't know who is a realized soul. It's very working out. surprising. If you know who is a realized soul, then half of your problem is over. Now the second one is the Despite all that we are collective, we are nice to each other, we don't tell lies, we don't try to destroy anyone. That means we are much above all problem of how to convince that fellow what he's capable of doing. I find that problem also with Sahaja Yogis. They are capable of very great work all over the world. They can find out so many things which normally normal people can not find out. But Sahaja Yogis can immediately find out to what sort of a person they are facing. This is the difference. That means you know the truth - truth about everyone, truth about human feelings and this is only because of the light. You can see where you are faltering. It's just you see for yourself. For that, I think meditation is the most important thing. Every day you should do meditation. Those who do not do meditation are capable of falling down because meditation is like putting oil into the lamp. Those who do not meditate, think they can do the whole situation, truth about who is just boasting or just making up a story without it, are sadly mistaken. They or some sort of a hypocrisy. It's not have to meditate morning and difficult because now you have the light. evening. The problem is everything comes so handy, so simple that they don't understand that meditation is very You can see with your light what's wrong or what's good with others. Such a blessing it is for you that you cannot important. Not you, but there are many,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2003 29 I know, who get Realization, who don't always hesitating, they are confused. They can't understand. And that's why meditation is the most important thing meditate and their style is different. Their nature is different. in Sahaja Yoga.Just like a light burns with the electricity flowing in it, you can say, Meditation is such a soothing thing, it is such a beautiful way of or because of the candles. In the same connection with the Divine that all your problems get solved in that way, meditation is a continuous meditative moment. If you are not availability of the Divine force. That will meditating, you are not following reduce all your apprehensions. Not only meditation, then maybe your light that, but takes out all the negative will go down. It won't give sufficient thoughts. It takes light. It's important, very important to discouraging things. And when you are find out about yourself, about others in meditating like that, in thoughtless out all the awareness, then you will be amazed how you are helped from within and people ask. Don't do anything. just without. It's a terrible power that works, the meditation. How to do meditation, many go into thoughtless awareness. Try to this thoughtless awareness. So those who do not meditate go to the thoughtless awareness. If you can get into that condition of cannot go very much far with thoughtless awareness, you have done advantages of Sahaja Yoga. One your job because that's the point should try to meditate and go up to where you are with the truth, with the the point of thoughtlessness. reality, with the joy, with everything that is so fundamental. When you meditate try not to - not happens to you is that you get the to make some sort of a function out of confidence, complete confidence of it- no. Meditation is something silence Divinity. You know you have that. in yourself, silence in your thoughts and going to that deep ocean which is within our school in Dharamshala, extremely you, itself. But supposing you don't do confident and extremely humble. Iasked that, if you don't meditate, I can make them, "What do you do?" They said, out immediately those who are "Mother we meditate, we meditate in the meditating and those who are not. It's school, in the evening," and that meditation So what happens to you? If you are in thoughtless awareness, what I have seen children coming from helps. Imagine these small children can say not difficult for Me. Those who do not meditate are that, so why do not you also understand that

 March- April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 30 Mediation will give you security, that it will give you a real enlightenment and a complete connection with the Divine. Without the connection of the Divine, what's the use of doing Sahaja Yoga? I know the people who are meditating, who have gone down into their being and who are very developed. Also I know people who are a little superficial. Your depth is in thoughtless awareness. It's a very important point which you should reach. Looking at anything, if you are thoughtlessly aware, then you really it. So thoughtless awareness is the first point all of you should achieve - very important. After that, you can achieve something else, but the first step is thoughtless awareness. It's very important to become thoughtlessly aware because then there are no thoughts coming from the left or the right, from the past or the future. Just in the present you are there. It's something you all have. It's not that I'm saying that to you, but all of you have this, but steady yourself. You have to steady yourself at thoughtless become reflective about it. Just works out that way. I don't know how far you can awareness. remain in that condition, but even for a How long - that's not the point. second if you can achieve it, you start The point is once you've touched it, achieving it more and more. I've talked so you'll go on touching it. much about meditation before, but today Many people meditate, but their thought process is going on. They're not thoughtlessly silent. Now this is the one point which is very important. If you have to grow, you should be absolutely in connection with the Divine through thoughtless awareness. You don't have to pray. You don't have to call anyone- nothing. It just works because it is within you. All these thoughts are bombarding you from both the sides in your mind. These thoughts that are coming to you, have no meaning with you. They do not substantiate you. Yourself, you are an when I see all these candles burning, I think they are all meditating. They are all in meditation and that's how they're buming. In the same way, Sahaja Yogis who meditate, I know. And those who don't, I know. And if they have problems, I know why the problems are there. Main thing is your connection with the Divine. It's only possible when you meditate and become thoughtlessly aware. That's the point where your mind works. It helps. It comes to your help in such a way that you don't know how you have achieved ocean and you have to get into that state of thoughtless awareness.

 March April 2003 31 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 It is always described in all the great books, but not so clearly as I am telling you. I don't say that some of you đo not get thoughtless awareness, so they're good for nothing - no. But please try. You can all get into that state of thoughtless awareness. Even for a second, if you get it, it's a very good idea. Then you go on increasing that Try. Try that. I don't believe you cannot get it. All of you can get that thought that 'I can get it.' And you will get it. In that, you don't have to discard anything. you don't have to see anything, just go into meditation and you will be amazed how it will work out. Of course, you are very much there, most of you, but still, 1 would say, increase that thoughtless awareness, second. I think it's a reflecting mind. When that area. Today is very important you look at something, you can become because of this day of Diwali. Diwali is thoughtlessly aware and then your mind supposed to be enlightenment day, but reflects to the depth of what you see. enlightenment within is how much you That's how you all will become really are in thoughtless awareness and everything works out because you are What I find that this state of the ocean of it. You have it within thoughtless awareness is not established yourself. Only you have to tap it. If you by you. It is not good. Today on this don't tap it, then it doesn't work out. day of Diwali, I would say that you You have to just tap it and you will be enlighten yourself with thoughtless amazed that you are a source of such awareness. It is not difficult. It's within joy, source of such happiness, I should you because thoughts are coming from say a source of real enlightenment. So today's message is that while meditating, go into thoughtless own reactions. But in case you meditate awareness. No thought is important, in the real sense of the word, then you'll because it's your own creation. But if get into that thoughtless awareness, you have to become one with the divine which is a very important point and all creation, you have to get to that state these nonsensical thoughts, which are of of thoughtless awareness, minimum of no use to you, will disappear. They minimum. And that comes to you. won't be there and then your growth is gradually it will grow and you'll be amazed how you'll be able to grow into very creative Sahaja Yogis. this side and that side and they are not the waves of your brain no, just your possible and you grow very well. Many people are here who will Sahaja Yoga in a very big way. Thank you very much. say, 'Mother, we don't get that state."

 Letter from Shri Mataji March, 1982 "Dear Mr. Rahul, I received a very detailed letter from Damle. It was a very wise step on your part to have met Shri Gagan Gadh Maharaj. What he says about the miracle of Sahaja Yoga is absolutely true. The reason why this great sanctuary never manifested in reality was that whenever Adishakti descended as incarnation She did not have all the chakras integrated through Sahasrara. The complete harmony and unison merged into an integrated instrument of her personality bringing forth these fantastic results. So much so that1 am surprised at myself. I think he Gagan Gadh Maharaj also cannot imagine the dynamics of this discovery and hence he feels that "Avdhuts" have to be away in the forests and

 March April 2003 33 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 that Cancer can give you reaction. You have cured the Cancer of Phadke and others. Did it give you any reaction? When you are at a giving end how can you receive anyhing? You are reborn as Lotus which does not take anything bad from muddy surroundings but transforms its surroundings with its beauty and fills it with frangance. This is the magic of a realised soul. Do you think doctors will accept that there exists the Kingdom of God and that it creates us and that the Lord of our autonomous nervous system is our spirit which is the reflection of God? You can quote the names of people like Mr. Bose and Mr. Daftary and Mr. Sharma who are miraculously cured of his colour blindness through Sahaja Yoga, In any case I am going to America next year. One of my dear Sons Dr. Lanjewar has now become the president of the Medical Practitioners Association of New York and is very anxious to have a conference next year in New York. Due to our slavery for so many years, doctors in India have lost the capacity to know that we are the people born on the Yoga Bhumi. Their thinking is so slavish that they think all our ideas about medicine are stupid while western knowledge is very sensible. Ibless you with all my heart that Dr. Ramlingam has good vibrations. Shri Rama in him would have wisdom to understand the ways of God Almighty. I send you my love and protection so that you can break the barriers of ignorance of our medical men. Let them know that the time has come for them to accept that science is not everything. It only discovers whatever exists and appears before the gross being. Once we become subtle rising in the fourth dimension, we see the subtle. being, the spirit and contentment and DIVINE working of this love cannot be done by argument. One has to be realised. One has to evolve through Sahaja Yoga spontaneously as this is a living process. For carcer best treatment is of water, i.e. putting feet in the river, sea or in the water at home with the photograph. Water has the religion (Dharma) of cleansing and hence Shri VISHNU and DATTATREYA responsible for the religion (Dharma) of human beings are to be worshipped. They help you to cure and also the local Deity of the chakra that is attacked. Put the patient before the photograph with the candle and his feet in the water, bring down your hands across the sympathetic nervous system towards the water. The patient will cool down gradually. If he gets realization, then he is cured. More in the next. YOURS LOVING MOTHER NIRMALA"

 Talk at Kingston Kingston, 11-6-1980 (Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today we have gathered here to know something about ourselves. If the knowledge is from the books, all forms because it was written long time back, thousands of years back. Christ has said it that you have to be Born Again, that of the person who says that he knows about the self, how far will it reach us? you have to be Baptised, not by theological college people but It can only go upto mental level and we can only understand it through our mental understanding. The mental understanding comes to us through our rationality, through our intellect which in itself is a limited thing. So we enter into another understanding which is still very somebody like "John the Baptist', who had the authority from the Divine. This power does lie, dormant within you, but every body writes differently about it. Very few really agree. This is another confusion one faces that there is a power lying within us and some say that it gives limited. For example, if I tell you that you electric shocks, some say you start jumping like a frog and some say you start flying in the air. Such a confusion! While you are seekers, seekers of ages. there is a self within us, in our heart which resides and that there is a power within us which is all the time waiting for an occasion to give you your second birth, if I tell you that, then you will only understand me mentally. This is all being You have been seeking. You are genuine seekers and then while seeking you don't know where to go, what to expect said already. What is so new about it? At the most I might give it in a very modern fashion campaign like intellectual which will make you have more mental feats and you jump into problems. The other day, when I went to Switzerland, one of my children, who had arranged the programme, he told me, Mother here to go round and round and sit down and people are very sceptical about Indian gurus. I am happy about it, really very analyse and reach no where. I see there is a power, no doubt, which is called as very happy. At least they have started thinking about them. Because they have Kundalini within us. So many say that

 March - April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 35 finding the real you must know that you must keep yourself absolutely alert about it that we are not going to accept anything but real. But you can be been deluded, they have been deceived and now they are disillusioned completely and they find it impossible to believe anyone who talks of God. So the first topic that he wanted me to hypnotised. You can be brain-washed discuss, in my stay there, was, because you don't know all these things. Somebody says some words in Sanskrit language you get so enamoured by that as if Sanskrit language is something out of the blue. For example some of the disciples who went to demystification of gurus. Quite a challenging one. But this I said in 1970 in India, in 1973 in America but nobody would like me for that. They say why should you criticize others? Falsehood is falsehood and reality is reality. You will now know through some of those certain gurus, got mantras which if you tell an Indian, he will laugh out his stomach. Like a mantra given 'ainga". Now tell an Indian, he will laugh and that people had paid three hundred people, who are here, that how you have been misled, how you have been deceived? For money which you cannot understand because you have gone pounds for such a nonsense like that beyond it now, you are seeking beyond money. You know that money is not which mean nothing, which cannot be a mantra. going to give you joy, you know that very well but those who had not yet mantra? There is a science about it. known that still they are sort of climbing Because we do not go into the up the cusp, have not seen the ditch understanding of it and just jump onto down below. Such people try to come it. They want you because they want up and give you some sort of a charming money, simple thing. It's an enterprise. and receive lot of money from you. It's You have given up everything for the a very shameful affair, I feel myself. But sake of your seeking. You have seen that does not mean that there is no that the value of these material things reality. If there is no reality, how can will not take you anywhere, you have you have copies of that? If there are no seen beyond. Your value system is flowers, how will you create plastic different but if the value system of some flowers, So, if you find somebody so people is different from your, they can unreal you must know that you have to exploit you. So the natural reaction, I Why do you need a guru for a find out the real and when you are can understand very well, should be

 March - April 36 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 out of it all drunk and others are attracted much more, seeing them being drunk like that. Its impossible to such but there is reality and that it exists within you and that there is self within you and once discovered you find your absolute to tell you that you should understand human nature! And when the reality stands before you, you crucify that! How do you explain all this and the acceptance of reality is your glorification! Are you going to add anything to reality. Supposing I wear a diamond necklace, it is going to adorn become a very quiet, serene person, could be absurd. To tell you that you should be such a master over your passions and your lust and your greed, that nothing should sort of dominate you, this is just giving a big lecture to you. It has no meaning. You have gripped it yourself, these things and how will you have it when your grip is so strong? You have to grip something else. It is a me and not to the diamond necklace but this is billions and billions times brilliant than all these things which adorn us. If you accept that you will be glorious and you will be lustrous, isn't it? Think about simple common sense. If you find it. Because we are charmed by these something much more valuable, much outside things, their deceptive ways, their cunning ways, and that we are hypnotised, that's the only explanation can give you. That's how they have managed so more dynamic, much more joy giving, establishing your sense of security, you will give up all these nonsensical things. But see how this works out. A I gentleman who come from a horrible far and one after another this hypnosis spreads like fire. You ask them, what guru to me, he was absolutely pestered and finished by that guru. He used to did you find? Don't ask us. We are very happy people. After three days, you deliver only introductory lectures.I don't know if he is here? He said I used to get three hundred people for this introductory lecture Mother, in the same find, the person has committed suicide! We are not aware still that this is the most important, the most fatal and vital hall where you were giving lecture. What do you say to people then? Isn't time in the history of human beings. The it clear? He is a well known person, last judgement has started. We are facing the last judgement today. We are who charges you money, who gives you courses. He has ruined so many people. not aware of it and all the satanic forces have come out like the wolves in sheep's Its like just now you were watching clothes and they are trying to attract you people going into the put and coming

 37 2003 March - April The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 and you do not judge them. You only sit down and judge the reality. It has elephant. He saved so many animals and so many were discarded one by one all these years. In the same way human started. Its a fact. It has started. beings who have been very much in the Now let us see, from God's point of view how He is going to judge you. It is easy to say that we don't believe in extremes have been discarded. You see the history. Now I mean you won't find anyone killing his seven wives these days. It God, very easy to say that we don't believe in this government. But if you is impossible. One cannot do it. Person like Hitler came up, finished. Anybody do anything wrong then you know there who came up with any extreme ideas of is a government acting. In the same way it is very easy to say that we do not domination or anything was finished by Him. Those ideas die out, people are believe in God. He is so compassionate, ashamed of them and new ideas come he is so loving, he is so kind that he has given us our freedom to know ourselves up into human beings, accepting and we rely on it, we take Him for balance, tranquility and peace. They are talking about it, people talk about peace granted. He has made us human beings but are you really wanting peace within from amoeba to this stage. He has ourselves? And if we are really wanting it what are we doing about it? Actually the judgement has started spread out such beautiful world around us! He has done all that! But there is a judgement which we have to face now and the judgement that is going to come from God is not going to be the way we and to judge you God has already placed whole Magistracy within you. All the magistrates are already sitting down there. Christ has said Those who are understand that He sits like a Magistrate and calls you one by one come along then you have a pleader there sitting. But in a subtler way He has already put the judging forces within you. See in the not against me are with me'. These are the magistrates. And these magistrates are settled down within you, on different centres in your spinal cord and in your evolution he has worked it out. In the brain. I am sorry we don't have any evolution how beautifully he has worked maps to show you the magistrates and their seats. It's very interesting and all it out, from amoeba to this stage that these seats are, like a panel, sitting in we have come! Many animals were discarded. He saved some animals like your brain and when the light of Kundalini rises through these centres, from the mammoth family he saved

 March - April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 38 naked eyes. This is what is Kundalini when these centres are enlightened within you, you start enlightenment being manifested on your fingers. The end of awakening, not that some people say we started jumping like a frog. Now we your fingers get enlightened. The sesitivity of your fingers tells you, what centres are there affected, within you. This must use our brains. Brains have to be intact in modern times. Are we going to become frogs? Now, after becoming human being, are we going to become birds after becoming human being? Your science, like psychology Kundalini rises and comes upto this point, the fontanelle bone area, we can call it, or the "Taalu', as the soft bone itself, I mean many of them believe that here, in your childhood and it breaks it, you have to jump into your unconscious, achieving your collective consciousness. Very clearly it is being said by these people. Then we must expect something of that nature where we jump into our collective consciousness. It's not that because I am saying or anybody saying it but it has to happen to you. The other day I was in Hampstead. I know what is happening with someone. Some people did get their vibrations. They did feel the cool breeze coming actually it breaks it. You can see in a person, who doesn't have much hair here, the thing just going down like a little child. First it pulsates, you can see it with your own eyes. You can even see the pulsation of the Kundalini in the triangular bone which is sacrum and when this Kundalini rises you can see even the movement of this Kundalini, not in all in some. Because if the person is first class or you can say if the aeroplane is first class, the landing is first class you from their hands but some did not and see, the shooting off is first class and in they said 'Yes we have, got it' and they such a person there is no obstruction. just disappeared! This is not the way you are going to treat yourself you have to love yourself and you have to adore your seeking and you have to get your You do not see the Kundalini pushing up. For example when I came to this place there was no problem on the traffic. So we just moved, smoothly we came away. Nobody noticed us. But if there was a traffic we would be jamming here and jamming there. In the same way when this Kundalini rises in a person who has a little problem on his centres which shows, you can see with your fulfilment. As your mother, I must tell you this is a very serious matter. There is no gurushopping going on here. You have to get your realization. You have to get it. It's so fortunate that the time has come when you are living and that

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2003 39 'Sadhakas' who were searching God in you can have it because of that you took your birth during this time because you the hills and dales and in the caves will are seekers of very ancient times, as I come back as ordinary householders told you. It is written in one of our and they will get the reality. In this scriptures is India called as 'Nala- confusion only they are going to get the Akhyan'. Where 'Nala', one of the vision of reality, they are going to tortured souls, by Kali, caught hold of become the reality, they are going to get the Kali. Now it is said, it is the rule of their self-realization. And Nala forgot all Kali. Kali is the sinister fellow, is the his vindictiveness and his anger and one who brings all confusion and confuses people. He confused Nala. By that he was separated from his wife. So when Nala got hold of this Kali, he said, "Now I am going to kill you, I am going what he had done to him. He said, on this point I forgive because I respect them so much, for that collective good I give up all my personal problems. Let this happen. That only in Kaliyuga, the Sun of Satyayuga, the world of truth, the age of enlightenment is going to come and to kill you once for all, so you do not create confusion into people any more." So Kali said, "Alright, you can kill me, I'll accept. But first you know my importance, 'Mahatamya', know my importance. I too have an importance.' those saints who were seeking the reality in the forest are born today in this world. You can see them. They are saintly. They can see the joke of the He said, what importance can you have? You create confusion in the minds of the artificial life so clearly. They know it's people, what importance can you have?" He said, that when I will be all absurd but then they don't know what is the real. But the time has come and it ruling, means when he will be in these modern times ruling, means creating confusion in our minds, everything has become relating. We talk like that. Yes may be alright, may not be alright. May be good, may not be good. That is a time when the confusion will be raining on this earth. That's Kaliyuga, the Modern Times. Those great saints and has to be worked out and it will be worked out. It has worked out in your great country. Now I would say atleast thousand people are there very much in it, we can say, who have understood it. There must be about at least three hundred people who are actively working it out, at different places and I am very happy to come at this old city those people, the seekers, the of Kingston, where the stone for the

 March - April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 40 enthroning of the king was put. Must be point, how much you are sincerely something special about this place, But wishing your ascent, that's all. She people have lost their sensitivity to knows you out and out. reality. Everywhere, not only in this country, much more in India, you will symptoms. She shows what's wrong be surprised! They are all getting with you. But she is your own, sophisticated. They are developed. absolutely. There is no one greater than They are getting developed. They do her, who is your own. She is your friend When she rises she shows those and she judges you because you must not know what you have found by your development and anybody tells them they think O you are just want to enjoy all that fruit of development and you are get the best, because she knows what is the best. For a child may like to put his hand into the socket but the mother just telling us lies. says, no, don't do it. But the child So, it is very necessary for you to doesn't listen. He gets angry. Still she says, no you cannot do it. She puts the hand aside because She loves you, loves in the purest form, where you do not understand what definite purpose is that the judgement has started and for that Kundalini is placed within you. But she expect anything from another person. And such a power lies dormant within you, which is just waiting for an occasion that when she rises, when she sprouts is a great judge, I must say. You will never find such a judge anywhere in the whole universe. Because she is your own Mother and She is Nirvajya means She is just giving. She doesn't want like the germinating power in a seed, when she comes up then there should be someone who look after you. There should be someone who should guide you. There should be someone who should decode and tell you that what you feel in your fingers means this, what is happening to you means that. anything from you, nothing whatsoever. She wants that you must get your property. You must get your Self. You must get all your powers. She doesn't want anything from you, that you should know your Self, that you should become your absolute, that's what she wants. She is your Mother, born again and Otherwise you will not know your moorings, you will not know where you again with you. She has recorded all the are going and you can fall into the trap of ignorance or may be you may be still problems you have created for yourself, for her ascent. She knows everything there, not knowing much. So she wants about you and she judges you on this

 March - April 41 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 very bad physical problems. There were to use somebody as the mouth piece for Her. It is necessary the unconscious has some who had blood cancer. Some of them had other type of physical problems. With all these things you are to speak to you through someone and that someone has to be a person of the faced with, the Divine Love of God, His same nature as the Kundalini is. Kundalini is the representative desire Those who make money from you of His Desire, Desire of the Ocean of and exploit you and leave you in the compassion and love. That He wants to lurch, how can they be called as gurus? bestow this kingdom upon you, that He wants to make you the prince of His Kingdom. This is a very very serious thing and we have to concentrate upon this point. Concentrate on this point that the judgement has to be done and there is a power within us which is going to judge us. Now this power is the Desire of God, of that God who is Almighty, They are the thieves standing outside the door and they are just waiting for an opportunity to catch hold of you because they are already being judged, discarded and they are going to the jail and they want more people to be there, with them. This Kundalini, when she rises, she first soothes you physically, really She soothes you physically, that's who has given us our freedom. She is how as a, you can say, as a by - product, not going to challenge it. His might, His strength and His powers are not going you get your health. For example, cancer cannot be cured without to stand against our freedom. But His Kundalini awakening. This I have been desire is within you, existing on the saying. When the doctors get cancer, Kundalini and this desire rises within they come to me and they get cured. But I am not sitting down here to cure you. It enlightens you but it doesn't force you. It doesn't take away your cancer patients at all, nor any Sahaja freedom. Yogi is interested in cancer patients as It enlightens you to see. You have yet. But if you want to have your freedom to be in this world. It is not realization, your cancer will be cured, your troubles will be cured, your health will be alright. I mean those who have got realization, who are sitting here, have been all, most of them, suffering something, physically or mentally. Some of them were even epileptic and had forced that you sit here or there or walk this way or that way, nothing is forced on you. But you are given a room which is enlightened. So you use your freedom in a better way, with more understanding. Because you are

 March - April 2003 42 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 enlightened, you can see. Then you been able to thank Him for what He has know what to accept what not to done for us and how kind He has been accept. First thing is to enlighten you. to us. For a small thing we try to get rid of Him from our hearts. Still He exists. Unless and until you are enlightened, you are in confusion and you cannot see through. Then it is left to your freedom The Kundalini exists within us. You try anything against it, She exists. I have seen some people having Kundalini to decide. So She cures you. She cures She improves you. She bestows all the blissful things upon you. She takes you away from the worries of grosser which has been beaten up. There has you. been horrible marks of pain and anguish and she is just turning her sides in anguish. But still she exists for that moment where She will give you what She is there for. What a blessing! Where can you find all this! Is all within you, which has to work out. But when giving realization I find people just disappear. Even after realization can you imagine! The progress in the west has been like that-you move three steps forward and four steps backwards, Really you will be amazed at people. I don't know level, like after realization many people have solved their material problems. Now that they have become Mr. Ford or someone like that but the attitude changes and the material problems get solved. Yes, because there is a centre for that also, within us. Your family problems get solved, husband - wife's problems get solved. So that you are free. Your grip over these things, that worries you is released and that now what's gone wrong with the western you can see it with greater freedom for mind which is so disillussioned about your self. What you have to choose and what course you have to take in your life? After giving all - these concessions and all these advantages and all the possible help, then you are judged. Can material things. When it comes to Sahaja Yoga their caliber is just of the lowest type sometimes. You cannot understand that how can these people have no self- you think of any magistrate that esteem, where as in villages in India generous? And such a thing exists within people just get it and they are just there. us. We have to be very thankful to God There is no rambling, nothing. They are for what He has done for us. We have just there. The complications are there no idea, we have taken Him for granted. Iagree. But you must have self-esteem. For every thing that is within us, we have It is sometimes, sometimes makes you feel sick. Perhaps you do not know that taken Him for granted. We have not

 March April 2003 43 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 dirty - filthy circle, it just clicks. Whom should I blame for this? in this country I have worked for four years on seven or eight people, four These horrible gurus or these horrible years, can you believe it? Not that there is something wrong with you, You are seekers, you are saints born in this country. But what has happened to your saintliness. Why so flippant, why so superficial? Why don't you touch it deeply? Why don't you understand yourself? I just fail to understand this. people who have put up a show for you or it is your naive attitude towards spirituality? I shudder to see the way things are sometimes and the way people are taking for granted all this. It is your responsibility today, the ones who are supposed to be the seekers, to see that you bring forth the reality to Why don't you respect yourself? Irespect you and I love you very much because I know you. I know you for ages, you are the lost children I know that I don't know how to establish the people and tell them that please see it and get it? Because you are their fellow-being. They are your kith & kins. How can you leave them even if you get your realization and even if you enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, you will not forget them, you will think of them. that within you, and sometimes my condition is the same as that of your Kundalini. I can tell you. You have to be in a great haste to get it. You have to You cannot be happy with your become absolutely dynamic and plough realization also, unless and until all those it out and talk to people and tell them saints, who out of ignorance are lost, that, this is the situation-an emergency. Can't you see what's happening to the you'll think of them. I have to work out through you. I cannot work it out alone. If I could there world? Can't you see the confusion? But the situation is taken for granted or if it would have been no difficulty. If God is even faced, it is faced in a very intellectual way, that you feel guilty about, say Vietnam. Very good idea. Sit could work out just like this, give them realization, finished. It will not because you have the freedom. Why you have down here, easy chair politicians the freedom because without your thinking about Vietnam or file it up, whole thing. You are the chosen ones who have to receive it and who have to have it. But to take to reality you will freedom you cannot come to that caliber by which you are raised. We do not realize it where are we today, we do not realize it. Sometimes I feel I am think hundred times and to get into a talking to walls. For example, you will

 March - April 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 44 find that some people are slaves of watches. They have no time for, 'Oh we have no time very busy people'. Why are you saving time? Why this idea has come to you? Our forefathers never did that. Why are you so much saving time, for what? You are saving time for the becoming not for wasting it in the pubs hundred people went into that courage and some came in here walking, going up and down, some walked in, some got out, they were deciding, still no proximity to sensitivity, no sensitivity towards the reality. They cannot feel it! May be, may be it will work out. I am sure it will. I am the most optimistic or in the horrible places like races and person you can ever see. Real optimism is my nature, I believe. It is going to work out. Only thing your, so called freedom, comes in the way. So try to understand that this freedom is given to you so that you can become yourself, not that you should become an animal. What's the use of giving realization to a all these things, not for that. You are saving time for becoming because you are a diamond. You have to be chiselled- out, you have to chisel-out yourself. You are not serving it to waste it. I mean the best advertisement would be, save fifty pounds to spend three thousand. Its something like that. You are saving your time not to waste it. Saving it for chicken? Can I give also, is another point? Many people say Mother, I have done lots of good things. I say, what good things you have done. I don't eat chicken. I say now why are you saving something extremely precious, extremely vital and important, something that you have been seeking, But I do not chickens for me. You better save know how sometimes to keep you on that level of depth. Of course some of yourself. So all sorts of funny ideas they have. It is you, the seekers, the buds on this beautiful tree of life, they are the the people are of such high caliber, in this country, that even they are very ones for whom this creation is created. satisfied. You do not know how much They are the ones who have to get it. has been done in this country also by God. For example I went to see stone They are the ones who have to have it. The whole universe has blossomed into Hunch, Stone Hunch is the creation of the Mother Earth. You can see the them and they want to become what? Worms? Just think about it. Just think vibrations. You can feel it. There are so many things done in this country. Kingston itself is so vibrated, I was amazed! And what do you find, at least about it. By God's grace we will start the programme of realization which may

 March - April The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 2003 45 take even in a split of a second, might you start feeling that cool breeze have already worked out in you. coming from your hand, the cool breeze Because today I was little too much, I of the Holy Ghost. And you start feeling think. Kingston is a good place. May it every where and you can find out. be one day it will become a very great place, I feel. That's why I told felicitations for this. It's a good thing Now you can judge others and yourself and you can help others, automatically. You don't have to go anywhere for that. You don't have to have medicines, you that you are in Kingston. But let's see how much you use what power is don't have to anything, just you be there. flowing in the area. I hope something will work out. Now after realization you have to take it up seriously. You have to work it out because after finding it You help others in their salvation, as if the whole mechanism starts working, the whole technique starts acting like a television set, you put in and you start also, it is not that you suddenly jump seeing the whole thing. Just you are amazed at yourself. But you have to know the engineering and you have to onto the sun or turn to the moon. Even going to the moon, what did you get? You couldn't understand anything. So know how to work it out on yourself and on others. It's a great fun. We are all in a great fun mood and you should also join us. It's wonderful. No time for you have to go into all the areas of your being because the movement will start inside. You have to take your attention miseries, only thing one feels that why to all the areas within you. You have to these people are doing like this, you settle down your attention and now the attention will lose the grip over nonsensical things. All the priorities will see, like grown ups the mature people look at little children Oh! Why are they change. The greatest thing is that putting their hands into the fire? Kundalini, when she pierces the May God Bless You all Sahasrara, the joy starts pouring in and

 Spirit Like the Sun 18th June, 1983 (Talk by Param Pujya Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) I am so happy and joyous to be can try to remove the clouds. The first and foremost thing is the assumption, the faith that we are the Spirit and that the rest is superimposition. You have to here with so many Sahaja Yogis and so many of them very new, not very new to Me. Perhaps I have known all of you thousand of years back. assume that within yourself. After In Sahaja Yoga, you have all to Realization, it should become very easy understand one simple thing, that you that you are something much more, something very different from what you are the Spirit and whatever is not the Spirit is not yourself. We can compare the Spirit with have known so far. Intellect Working the Spirit So now the new situation arises that you do not have a blind faith, but the sun. The sun can be covered with the clouds. There be can you have a faith that has come out of an superimposition on the sun, but sun experience. So your intellect should not fight it. It should not try to challenge it. If it starts challenging it and if you hear your intellect, you will again go down. Even if you get the glimpses of a remains as it is at this point. You cannot enlighten the sun. It is illumined by itself. Now, when the clouds are removed, the superimposition is removed, the sun shines through the star in the sky, then the scientist believes atmosphere. So our Spirit is also superimposed that there is a star. So, in the same by ignorance. As long as there is manner, even if you get the glimpses of your Realization, you have to at least believe that you are also the Spirit. You go on sticking to that experience and superimposition, you cannot see the Spirit. And even when few clouds disappear, the superimposition exists. keeping your attention on the fact that One has to have a clear sky to see the light of the Spirit shining through. you are the Spirit. Tell your intellect not There are many ways by which we to cheat you anymore. You can turn the

 March - April 2003 47 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 difficult to get out of form to formless face of your intellect by this. Now your intellect will start and even to concentrate on abstract or working for the pursuit of the Spirit. This is what faith means. Faith gives rise to formless was another impossible task, as the Muslims did or many others tried to do, pure intelligence. Under these circumstances it was The Form and Formless Now, once you have seen clouds necessary that the formless had to take removed, stilII there are clouds. So you a form, so that there were no more have to use the wind to remove the complications. As soon as you concentrated on the form, you become clouds, wind of the Holy Ghost. And - that you know – there are many ways of taking advantage of the wind. So the wind comes from some formless. Like if you have ice before you, as soon as you start touching the ice, it melts away and you start feeling other source. That is the source of the the cool. The Meaning of Puja So the problem is very easily Holy Ghost, your own kundalini. And also you have, in person, the Primordial Kundalini before you. solved now. Puja is one of the things by Compared to many other seekers who came before you, you are very for- which you can excite the forms into formless. tunate. Because worshipping any Vigraha, any statue of self-created Now your centres are the centres of energies, but they too have a guiding deity sitting on all these chakras. They are also the formless made into forms. And when you do the puja, the forms melt into formless energies. And these formless energies start flowing and then vibrations of the Mother Earth, people had big problems. They had to first of all do a meditation, which was called as Savikalpa Samadhi. That means in that state you had to concentrate on such a statue, Vigraha – Vigraha means the one which is a vibrating statue and then go on looking at that statue blows the wind. And that is how these misidentifications, these super- impositions on the Spirit are remnoved, Now you cannot think abour the and try to raise your kundalini. And kundalini used to come up to Agnya, but puja. These are things which happen into a realm which is beyond thinking. So you the jumping beyond the Sahasrara was have to understand that you cannot an impossible task because one has to go from form to formless. And it was so rationalize the puja. You should have the

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 March - April 2003 48 maximum advantage on your chakras. For Me sometimes it is For that, you must fully just concentrate on the puja and how the wind is blowing. burdensome because there should be some parity between you and the And the wind will see to it that it drives deities, some balance must be there. out all the clouds. Here you are saying all the mantras and the deities are awakened and there you So your only work is - your only method is – just to concentrate on the puja and witness. You are a seer. Seer has double meaning- the are who do not want to receive anything within your heart. So I am the One who has to stock up all the extra energy that is produced in My Body. So it would be better if you all keep your hearts opened and watch the puja without thinking about it... Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, one who sees only, just sees and he is only knowledge. He is a seer, without any thought, without any reaction, just sees and absorbs automatically. June 18, 1983 Spontaneously, he is the seer.

 Estonia with love Estonia is situated on the Baltic Sea coast. It is a small and beauti full country. Our neighbours are Russia, Latvia and Finland. Our history is connected with such countries as Germany, Denmark, /Sweden and Russia. All these countries left some traces in Estonian architecture, art and even in the people's souls. Estonians are closed when it comes to other people and they don't let anybody come to their mind or heart. They prefer living alone or with family on their farm. This is the classic portrait of an Estonian. The Estonian language is very melodic, like a song. Estonian music is like our nature, a mixture of wind and sea, although Estonian bhajans are not like that. The population of Estonia is about 1.3 million people. About sixty per-cent are ethnic Estonians. Most of people live in the capital, Tallinn, but not most of the yogis. In the beginning of the 90s, Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi travelled with Her husband, Sir C.P. from Finland to Russia through Tallinn. Soon after that, in 1992, Finnish and Estonian yogis held a public pro-gram in Tallinn, but Sahaja Yoga didn't start very well. It was at first only a few realized people in different towns. Sahaja Yoga started to grow in 1993 in Parnu and Kohtla-Jarve. Sahaja Yoga has now spread to six towns-Parnu (the summer capital of Estonia), Narva (on the Russian border), Kohtla-Jarve (an industrial town with fabric mills and mines), Johvi (like Kohtla-Jarve and Narva, a town with mostly Russian-speaking people) and Tallinn (the capital of Estonia). We had presidential elections in Estonia in August 2001. Before the elections, all the Sahaja Yogis of Estonia had a Havan and asked Shri Mataji to give us a president. In the two rounds of voting, none of the candidates had the dharmic majority. The pundits said that Estonia would stay without a president for the next five years, but, in the end, Arnold Ruutel was chosen. His surname can be translated as "knight." He had no chance of being elected, nobody expected he would

 March - April 2003 50 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4 become president, but he was the only dharmic person among the candidates. Time will tell if he is a good choice. There are a lot of examples of how Paramchaitanya works here. We just enjoy watching this work. In November, we had public programs in Tallinn, Johvi, Narva, Parnu, Kunda and Sindi. From Sahaja Yoga collective of Estonia with a lot of love! Viktor Korotkov

 dawo000000O



----------------------

2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 March-April, 2003
Volume : XV Issue : 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
I bless you all to do this work, which was left half done by the saints. It is
your duty to complete it.
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
OHARMA
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 & 4 March-
April 2003
xV
Cool
Volume
Breeze
The Divine
1
TALK TO GROOMS, SHRI GANESHA PUJA
TALK TO BRIDES, SHRI GANESHA PUJA
SHRI GANESHA PUJA -2002
13
NAVRATRI PUJA – 2002
25 DIWALI PUJA
– 2002
32
LETTER FROM SHRI MATAJI
34
TALK AT KINGSTON – 11-06-1980
46
SPIRIT LIKE THE SUN
49
ESTONIA WITH LOVE
9,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BRE EZE
Co OL
Published by
V.J. Nalgirkar
162 A, Munirka Vihar, New Delhi - 110067
Printed at
Print-O-Graphics
New Delhi
For subscription please write to
Mr. O.P. Chandna
N-463, Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh
Delhi - 110034
Ph.:(011)27013464
Please send your experiences, miracle photographs and artworks to:
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
C/o Sahaja Yoga Temple
C-17, Qutub Institutional Area
New Delhi 110016
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Talk to Grooms, Shri Ganesha Puja
15th September, 2002, Cabella Ligure
(Pravachana of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
I'm very happy that you all have decided to marry in Sahaja Yoga, but there
are certain responsibilities which you must have. It's not like other marriages that
today you marry, tomorrow you divorce, then do this, do that - nothing of the
kind. You are marrying in Sahaja Yoga because we want to strengthen Sahaja
Yoga. You'll have wife. She'll look after you. She'll be kind to you.. She'll be
loving you because she's a Sahaja Yogini. And you also should be very kind to
her. Don't try to dominate her. Don't try to assert your ideas. See what she wants.
You must know how to love your wife, otherwise marriages are not possible.
But once you divorce in Sahaja Yoga, we will never marry you again. This
we have decided now. Or in any way, if you desert your wife or leave her or do
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV isue 3 & 4
March April 2003
something irresponsible about your
marriage, in Sahaja Yoga you have no
place. So once for all now, only you
decide that you are marrying. It's a very,
very big responsibility. We want Sahaja
Yoga marriages to be very successful
and all of you should enjoy a very happy
married life. No use dominating, no use
understanding that you are here to
produce Sahaja Yogi children to help
with Sahaja Yoga because we have to
change the world. It's to be
emancipated. If you have very lower
level of understanding of marriage, it
won't work out. So I have to make a
very great respect. With great respect,
Ihave to make a very humble, I should
say, request to you that please, please,
if you are entering into a married life in
controlling, but enjoying each other's
company because your wife is also
Sahaja Yogini, you're also a Sahaja Yogi
and we don't marry you unless and until
Sahaja Yoga, you have to understand
you are Sahaja Yogis. The reason is we
your responsibility. It's a very great
are enlightened people. We are of higher
responsibility. It's a responsibility for
awareness. We have our spiritual life.
the whole world because we have to
We have to show in our lives how you
change the whole world and if you
behave very much differently from behave like other husbands of your
others who are stupid people, who go country or of other countries, then
on fighting, spoiling everything, so that
what's the use of marrying in Sahaja
you will have nice children. Look after Yoga? You can go and have a nice
your children, look after your family.
That's your first thing. Of course, some
of you will be very busy with your work.
It's all right. But loving the wife, looking
after her, looking after children is very
important, otherwise you should
become bachelor, you should not marry.
But if you are marrying, you are taking
the responsibility of the wife. She is the
daughter of somebody and the father is
giving the daughter to you.
So far boys have behaved very well
in Sahaja Yoga, I must say, and so now
you should also have wisdom and
marriage outside. But if you are
marrying in Sahaja Yoga, you have to
know it's a big battle against evil,
against injustice and also against all kind
of mismanagements. We want to make
a beautiful worlId and to make a
beautiful world, we need people who
are beautiful, who themselves respect
everyone.
So I have to make again and again
same request to you, that you be very
good, humble and respecting husbands.
Don't follow others because I've had
I was surprised how
funny things and
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 March - April 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
on the good lines of Sahaj Yoga and
become good volunteers of Sahaja
Yoga. They'll be very good mothers and
they'll create those children which we
want now, who will completely change
this world. So I hope you agree with
Me and if you agree, well and good. If
could these people become like this in
marriages in Sahaja Yoga! But we found
out they all were mad, lunatics and they
all behaved in a lunatic manner. So
aggression and all these things are not
allowed. You are marrying this girl
specially for the benefit of the whole
you don't agree, even now you can leave
world, not only yourself, not only your
and you can give up. I will not mind at
all. But after marriage, if you try to
misbehave or if you try to divorce
something, we have no place in Sahaja
Yoga. We'll not have you here.
So are you all accepting it? All
children, your family, but the whole
world. Before the whole world you have
to show that you are a very sensible,
wise and highly evolved person. This is
not a marriage of lower type of people.
So it's a responsibility with you to show
right! Whosoever is not accepting, raise
that you are very mature and that you
have that feeling of enlightenment within
your hand. Thank you very much. I'm
very happy to know this. So you have
to be wiser and you have to explain to
you and you are enlightened people and
you can enlighten the whole world.
Of course, because the wife is
your wife, 'See now, this is this. This is
coming from another family, another this.' And let them see that you are
country maybe, so there will be little intellectually higher, not only that, but
difference of understanding. So you you are very wise. Spiritually you
understand and then they will listen to
make her understand. You have to talk
you. Be kind. Be nice. They are leaving
to her. You have to tell her, 'All right,
their parents. They're leaving their
come along, sit down.' But no use losing
families. They're leaving their countries
also, some of them. So be very kind and
gentle with them and don't get angry
temper and getting angry. Whatever
explanation you may give for that, it's
not good. It's not going to help you.
I want to see all of you, how you
show successfully that you're very
for
anything at all. There's no need to get
angry at all. All My life I've never been
angry. So that shows unnecessarily
nicely married to your wives.
But I don't say you spoil them, by
no means. I already told them, don't
have to spoil them, but let them also be
people are angry. There's no need. Just
keep quiet. If you don't like something,
keep quiet, but don't show your temper
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 March - April 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
or anger. You have to show that you're
wise, dignified people. I've seen some
husbands throwing things, shouting,
grown up now. You understand what is
the purpose of your life. Thank you very
much. May God bless you.
doing all kinds of things. Then how can
[The grooms tell the names of their
countries:]
the wife have respect for you unless and
until you're respectable. You have to be
respectable people. You be kind to her,
nice to her. I'm not saying you spoil
them, not at all. If you think something
See, it's global. We are all
global and we should show our sense
of universal understanding, how we
understand and enjoy everyone from
is wrong, then let her sit down, you sit
down and explain to her that this won't
every place, from every country.
They're all our brothers and sisters. All
be good from Sahaja Yoga point of
view. All right! So I wanted all of you
to wait and it's all these years you have
right? Thank you very much. Thank
You.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Talk to Brides, Shri Ganesha Puja
15th September, 2002, Cabella Ligure
it, but talk of the future and the present,
all right?
So be sensible. It's your sensibility
I'm very happy to see you all in
such beautiful dresses... and also in a
good mood to get married. You must
which is going to
keep up your
attitude, all right?
make a happy
married life. If you
You should be
become insensible,
happy people and
if there's
по
try to keep your
wisdom.
then
husbands also
marriages will fail.
Some girls I've
happy.
Your
happiness can
create happiness
seen dominate their
husbands
too
for the children.
much. There is no
Now one
need to dominate.
thing I want to
If you love the
husband, that's
warn you, not to
tell your husband
about anything
how the domination
is. The best way is
which was wrong
love your
your past life.
That's not to be
in
to
husband, look after
him, do whatever is
talked of. There's
needed because no
по пеed because
you are now Sahaja Yogis. You are need showing off that you are from a
better society or a better culture or a
changed people and whatever has
better family background. It's only you
who can show that you are really a
happened has happened. You need not
talk about it or tell him anything about
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 March - April
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
6.
2003
it. Be attached to your husband's family,
good person and your goodness will win
him over. So it's only the wife who
makes or spoils the marriage and I have
to tell you very frankly that if you still
have some doubts about your marriage
husband and things around. Because if
you are attached to your family, you will
still spoil the relationship.
I've known many couples being
broken because of this. There was a girl
or if you're still thinking this was not a
who was very much worried about her
good match, you should withdraw now
father because he lost the business and
and later on you should not go on finding
she made the whole life miserable. So
faults with your husband. You see, men
the husband disappeared and he wanted
to do something else and she was left in
are men and women are women. Men
cannot be women, but you can make
them understand that women are to be
the lurch and she had to go to her father
and then she realized how difficult it is
respected. All right? And how? That
you'll have to see by your behaviour. If
your behaviour is good, they'll respect
to live in father's house.
So it's your house, it's your home,
it's your husband. All right, you don't
have to, sort of, go on searching another
you, but if your behaviour is childish or
if your behaviour is aggressive, no man
person or another woman who'll help
can appreciate a woman who is
you. It's you who can help yourself, all
right? Because now we have very bad
experiences of some girls who have left
their husbands and come away to their
aggressive and so you should not be
aggressive. Whatever he says, you
should agree and listen to him.
Fundamental things, of course, is there,
families with the children. Is the family
but otherwise, for small, small things,
going to look after them all their lives?
you should not try to dominate your
Who is going to look after them?
husband. It's not the sign of a Sahaja
Yogini. A Sahaja Yogini has to, with love
and understanding and wisdom, win
over the husband and not by
So use your brains and don't try
to show off that you are something
superior or something higher or you're
something more. Say something you
should be humble. The humbler you are,
the better it is. Otherwise, arrogance
domination. This is one thing we should
understand, that many marriages are
broken because of domination. Second
doesn't behove a woman. She doesn't
thing is, you are naturally attached to
your parents, attached to your family,
attached to your country. But now forget
look nice. She looks like a horse
sometimes, and looks like, I don't know
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 March - April
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
2003
doing everything for the family, specially
for your husband. Little, little things can,
you see, give him pleasure and
happiness because he's so tired
working in the office, coming home so
tired and then you get after that person.
like what! So it is better to be humble
and to be kind and to be nice and to
prove that you are a good natured
person - all right?
Second thing I have to tell you
because you are from the West. So
Western women are very much money-
It's very wrong.
So you must change that attitude,
that 'We don't want anything. We have
oriented. Even the Indians have become
like that. They want a car. They want a
house. They want this. They want that.
You shouldn't want anything. You are
going to supply to your husband, to your
family. You don't need anything. That's
everything. We are Sahaja Yogis. We
are absolutely satisfied.' But if you go
on demanding, then it is going to be very
difficult, I can tell you this much. I've
had very, very bad experiences of some
girls. Say from Austria recently, three
girls went away back to Austria -
shameful. Is there anybody from Austria
your beauty. That's your decoration and
that will beautify you. But if you go on
hankering after 'I want this. I want that,'
there's no end to it, specially with
Western mind. They're very money- here? No - thank God. You are from
oriented and have created such
Austria. Now be careful. You see, these
three girls have come back with the
problems. Actually, I don't know what
children and the husband is so
to say to them.
So second thing is that you should
dominated that he has to go to the
father's house every Saturday, Sunday.
He's spending all that money in going
down. That doesn't show any wisdom,
not be money-oriented, but you should
be love-oriented. Express your love by
different things, by making a good food,
by making a good bed for your
husband, for organizing the house,
any wisdom. You see, the housewife not
only makes the family grow, but brings
keeping everything nice. Because if the good name and understanding. There's
housewife is untidy, the house will nothing to suffer much, but
remain untidy. It's not the job of the understanding is the point, you see.
husband to look after the house. You'll Supposing if you are wise and
enjoy a very beautiful house and a very something happens, take a very wise
beautiful room if you keep it properly. attitude, balanced attitude, responsible
So you should enjoy all that. Enjoy attitude. Wife has to be much more
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2003
responsible than men, as far as the husband. This is a Sahaja style of
family is concerned, children are marriage. You can have other marriages,
concerned. But if you are a hot- you can have ten marriages, that's
tempered woman, God save you and different - not in Sahaja Yoga. And once
save your husband.
So hot temper is not suitable for
any woman. If you are hot-tempered,
you'll start looking old very soon. Very
soon you'll start looking old. And if you
you are divorced, then we don't marry
you. We have given up. We've tried that.
Now we don't do that because it
becomes a habit of divorcing your
husband. Once you are married, you
had ego, if you think too much of should be all married and if you want to
yourself also, same thing will happen.
divorce, then know for this thing, that
we'll have nothing to do with you and
girl who has come to husband's house you'll be thrown away from Sahaja
to love him, to look after him and to Yoga. We want to have very good
mother him. You have to think that you marriages and very good children, also
are his mother and he sometimes - the progeny. The future of children
they're foolish according to your would be very good if you are sensible,
So best thing is to behave like a little
judgement. It doesn't matter.
So look after them just like your
wise, good and kind mothers.
I've told you sufficiently. I hope
baby and be nice and sweet to them, all
right? And none of your family people
are more important than your husband.
That is very important for you
now, the most important thing is your
you understand that you're marrying in
Sahaja Yoga and you have to keep the
prestige of Sahaja Yoga, all right? You
all promise that?
May God bless you.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Shri Ganesha Puja -
2002
Frankfurt Germany
(Pravachana of Param Pujya Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
It's so nice to come back after such a long time. And whenever I came, you
always had gathered. In a very big hall we met and that's how the Sahaja Yoga
started going.
It's very important for you people specially from Germany and Austria. These
are the people who were in the war. And now you are in the war, with Me. We
have to fight, fight the evil. You know how the world is. We have to fight them and
we have to take them out of ignorance.
You are such a support for this because we have to change human beings.
They have to become good people very fast. Once they get their Self Realization,
the change will start.
Now in England and also in Italy, what they're doing is to give Realization to
the people on the streets. Giving on the streets, thousands of people now have
become realized souls. It's a very big thing because once you get your Realization,
you become the spirit and all the goodness should come to you. If there is anything
evil, bad in you, that will go away.
It's spreading so fast everywhere and should spread also in those countries
who are there. There's no need, no need for you to fight or quarrel because you
have got the divine help. You have got all the help all the time, all the time from the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 March - April
10
2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
Divine, and this is what is to be good, no good at all. Just see what is
understood that we are helped by the going on in these days all kinds of
Divine to transform human beings into fighting, quarrelling, killing. All this is
something greater.
going on, so you must know we are in
the very, very bad type of Kali Yuga and
we have to fight it out collectively. Look
at the children, how collective they are!
You all have to be collective and you
must love all the people, all the Sahaja
Yogis who are around. Don't try to find
That's what we are and we are
here because I wanted to tell people
that you must have a place, an Ashram
for Sahaja Yoga and I don't want
anybody else, but only Sahaja Yogis
there because we don't know how dirty
faults with them. Don't try to fight with
them because it's a very important work
I am doing.
people are .., what filth they do! You
can't imagine to what limit they can go
and can really try to harm you because
they're not only negative, but they are
also sometimes satanic and they'll try
to ruin your children, ruin your families,
do all kinds of things. So you have
nothing to do with them. Keep away.
Keep aloof because now you all have
been cleansed. Those people who are
cleansed, don't mix up with people who
What I'm trying to do is to
transform people, to make them good
people, nice people. It's not to get
anything out of them, but to give them
something that they should become very
good people. We have to have
extremely good and nice people, people
who don't hate, people who don't have
greed. Like madness, people have
greed. In countries where they could
make money, they have cheated
everyone and have made money and
are muddy - do they? and so must
have this much of wisdom in your head
to understand that at any cost you will
not mix up Sahaja Yoga with other
things. It's very important to know that
- I have been trying to tell this since long-
that is how their children will suffer.
They will suffer. So My intention is for
all of you because you can help Me in
this great war, war with the evil.
These are evil people by
that keep yourself aloof. But sometimes
people don't do it and then they suffer
a lot.
temperament and they want to ruin it.
You must understand this. Don't play
We have all kinds of devils
around, all kinds of satanic forces,
acting as some sort of a obstruction. I
don't know what they are doing, but
they've done no good to people, no
into their hands and you become solid
because you have not come on this Earth
to collect things and all that, but you
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 March - April
2003
11
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
Now the problem is that people
have come here to become Sahaja
Yogis of a very great order.
Another thing is if you don't feel
your joy within yourself, if there is no
joy within you, you willI trouble
others. So best thing for you is to
take to wrong things very easily even
after Sahaja Yoga. Don't support
anyone like that. On the contrary,
explain to that person that Sahaja Yoga
is a collective activity. We can't have
meditate, not to criticize, not to use
our own anything. We have to be active.
your brain, but meditate. By We have to be together all the time.
meditation, you will know how to Togetherness is very important and then
enjoy Sahaja Yoga, how to enjoy to seek joy of that togetherness. If you
can feel the joy of togetherness, you
others. This has to be there and this
mental activity should go away. Don't have achieved that aim of life because
try to organize others. Don't try to then you'll gather other people also and
give lectures to others, but what you give them this joy of being the spirit.
do is to yourself introspect. See for Once they become the spirit, it starts
yourself what's wrong with you and changing. But if you are collective and
if you are together and you do all the
children, please keep quiet. All things, then also you grow very much.
Now those who talk of separating,
what wrong things you are doing...
right? If you don't keep quiet, we'll take
you away. I don't want you to go. All
right?
Here also. After all, you see, these
having some sort of a mad idea, please
don't listen to them. You better check.
Sometimes we have to be together. We
cannot - we cannot separate. And
anything like this will be destroyed.
Because in this world, you see, how the
world is, how the things are and how it
is working out.
So for you to understand the
children are German children, so
naturally, in Italy they know to be
boisterous. That's why I called them
here .. they'll be good children, very
good children, won't you?.
So not only being peaceful is
everything - no. Not only being good is
enough, all right, but you have to make
others you have to make others good
people. You have to make them
beautiful people. You have to make this
world beautiful through your own help
beauty of modern times, is that you are
born in a time when you can be
transformed. You are born in a time
when you can become the Self, the
spirit. Everybody has tried this. Nothing
has worked out. Now, with the help of
your kundalini, we are working it out.
and through your attention.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 12
March- April 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
Germans I met before, but I see also
You also know what is to be done. You
know how to give Realization, how to
see the vibrations, everything and once
you start seeing that, then you will
realize that what you were doing was a
great harm to humanity.
Now I leave upon you, all of you
- you are such sensible, good people,
you have come to Sahaja Yoga and every
time I came here, you were all here. I'm
other people from other countries - very
sweet of them to help them.
So what is important is to
surrender, which is a problem with
people. They cannot surrender
themselves to Sahaja Yoga. That's what
is your life. That is the beautiful reward
of goodness.
So you should try to surrender
and if you cannot surrender. then
there's something wrong with you.
Please try to surrender and you'll be
surprised that, with this surrendering
only, you can get complete joy.
happiness and peace. That is very
important and that's what I have come
to tell you, that please try to surrender.
And surrendering is - I cannot say how
happy so many countries are here. Only
just knowing that I am coming, how
much you all just love Me! I tell you,
really, it's remarkable. All of you people
have shown your love. All of you have
come here all the way, I am here for
such a short time.
So may God bless you all and have
sense. Have sense in your head that you
are now responsible for transforming
this world into a new world of very
you force yourself, but you just go into
thoughtless awareness. You meditate
good people, spiritual people.
So your responsibility is that and, and then I'm sure, with all My love
as a result, what you have to do, you and with all My blessings, I'm sure
will know. You all have to be very you will surrender
responsible. Whatever country you may surrender, but you will develop
whatever place you may come, tremendous powers to convert others
but you have to be very, very also, to transform others into this
responsible - responsible people and good work. You all have that and, if you
try to understand what you are doing just develop and try to find out how
for Sahaja Yoga.
I can see so many new faces now. life to change.
and go into thoughtless awareness
not only
come,
many people you have helped really in
Thank you very much.
I'm happy to see them. Of course most
of the Austrians I have met and ... the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Navaratri Puja
27th October, 2002, Los Angeles
(Pravachana of Param Pujya Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today we are going to worship the Goddess. That's the first the left side
programmings with Her, but later on at Sahasrara, She is the Adi Shakti. And on the left
side whatever She does is already written as you must have seen because She is the
and that She is the wisdom. And that She protects is shown when She uses Her
memory
power over the ganas.
There are ganas that are, as we know, responsible for all kinds of corrections in you.
These are the ganas which act through the left side. As we know very well that cancer is
caused by the problems of the left side. And on the left side are these ganas, which are
completely in unison with the Devi's powers. She doesn't have to tell them. She doesn't
have to guide them. They are already built up like that. And these ganas are the ones
which, I should say, target. They target the diseases and cure it.
We have cured many cancer patients and many left-sided people through the ganas.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 14
2003
March - April
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
Mahatmayam, whatever protections She
gives you. So tremendous is Her protecting
power and this protecting power gives you
understanding how kind She is and how, I
should say, how very, very protective of you,
extremely protective. She'll guide you all the
But ganas won't listen to anybody else. And
Ganapati is their leader, I should say, their
controller.
So if your Ganapati is all right, then
problems are less. But if the Ganapati is not
all right, then all kinds of problems can come
time that you should be protected- on the
up and they can torture you. This is one of
left side. And through Her ganas, She looks
the things I am so particular about, that we
after you. But on the right side also - those
must get our Ganeshas correct.
who are on the right side, the Goddess puts
The other day, I received a big
Her powers to put you right, to bring you
envelope with letters saying that 'Mother,
difficult to control ganas.' But difficult to
control Ganapati itself. So what should we
do? We get into traumas.
A simple thing is that at such a point
back to normal conditions, to humble you
down and make you understand that you
are a child of the Mother and you
have to
behave like a child.
But if you go to extremes, then you
when you are in a trauma and when you
develop all kinds of complications of the
cannot overcome this effect of the Ganapati,
right side also, as you develop on the left
side. And the right side problems these days
then what you should do is to meditate.
Meditation is the only way you can
are very, very common, which I've seen
overcome ganas.
people cannot get over. So many diseases
First of all is the upbringing of the
children and then atmosphere as it exists.
With these two important factors, you can
like Alzheimer's and other diseases come
up later on. First it starts with the liver. The
liver is the main point, as we fall into the
do well with the ganas. The problem is that
trap of the liver. If you are thinking too much,
if you are futuristic, if you are aggressive,
human beings get lost and they don't look
after their Ganapati.
So as you worship the Goddess, you
then liver goes out. Because you use liver's
power to do all that. And when your liver's
are also worshiping Shri Ganesha, who is
power is over, you're finished with liver
power, you can develop so many diseases,
so many troubles that you cannot
overcome. It's very difficult.
Of course with Sahaja Yoga, so many
the power behind Her.
The greatest power that is belonging
to the Mother is your protection-protection
from all kinds of things. All the left-hand side
protections are there. They are described,
as you must have learned, in the Devi
people's liver has been cured - so many
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 March April 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
15
people. And it has been doing wonderful
within. That I can't say. But I've seen people
with bhakti. They have achieved great
work as far as the liver is concerned. But
heights, though it's a left-side movement.
one should humble down and try to keep
With the left-side movement, they have
achieved great heights. I don't know how
the bhakti and shraddha has helped them
the liver all right. So the protection is also
built in your body by ganas on the left-hand
side and by reactions on the right-hand side.
But the greatest thing is the blessings of the
somuch.
In this, I must say, Indians are the best
Goddess, the way She looks after you, the
because they have this power of bhakti and
way She loves you and the way She cares
for you, which you should never take it for
of shraddha. It's not madness. It's not
madness, as they have here. I have seen
granted.
people who get into some sort of a cult or
You must meditate. You must
something. They go mad. It's not madness.
meditate. It's very important.No question
without meditation you can keep Bhakti is love and love which is
understanding, which understands what is
bhakti and shraddha. Unless and until you
yourself all right. There's no question.
Meditation is the most important thing,
develop that bhakti and shraddha within
which must be followed because that's how
you, you cannot rise. You cannot rise above
your problems. You cannot rise above your
personality because bhakti is something you
cannot impose on anyone. You can not force
on anybody. You can make somebody mad
you come close to Her vibrations, come to
Her, I should say, to Hernature. Even aninmals
are so sensitive to Mother, very sensitive to
vibrations. Animals are, but human beings
have their own understanding, have their
and say that he can do bhakti. He can. You
have to have all your qualities absolutely
intact. You should be intelligent. You should
own freedom, have their so-called
intelligence and they fall in the trap of it. They
follow things which they should not.
be understanding. Everything should be
there. But at that time, this - the joy of bhakti
is within you. And this joy of bhakti, when it
So what is necessary very much in the
country like America is the devotion and
bhakti. These two things are not there.
Indians take to Sahaja Yoga and go deep
down into it because they know what is
starts flowing, Goddess Herself enters into
your being, I should say.
I've seen people, bhaktas, many great
bhakti, what is devotion. All this ego and all
saints in India, who achieve lot of heights.
that melts away. But this bhakti is to be
enjoyed.
They're gone too far into it and, if you read
I don't know how to create bhakti
about them and if you understand them,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 March - April
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
2003
16
you're amazed how, without any help,
Whatever is the blind bhakti can take you
without any guidance, how could they go
that deep and worship Devi.
Worshiping is not just out of sheer
to any kind of nonsense and that's how many
cults have come up, many of these things
have come up. But that's not a thing that
reading or some sort of a chanting or
anything, but it's the deep attention of your
sees, that knows, that understands. It should
be understood by your intelligence, by all
your qualities, what is your bhakti's life.
heart. I think it's spirit. If the spirit is
awakened within you, you develop the
Now we have through kundalini
bhakti and drop out all nonsensical ideas,
all different things that have crawled into your
head. But you just develop the bhakti.
Now all these qualities described of
awakening reached a very great height, I
must say, of understanding of bhakti, the
power of bhakti. The greatest power of
bhakti is that it protects you. It protects you.
Those people who are suffering from any
kind of trouble, any kind of a problem, just
get out of it because this bhakti of yours
gives you the right type of understanding,
the Devi are left-sided, are in the brain -
memory, 'Smriti rupena samsthita', other
things also, whatever, are described are in
the brain and then the bhakti reaches the
state, it just neutralizes everything. All the
problems of the brain are neutralized and
you become a wise person.
So the greatest boon of the Devi is to
the understanding of yourself, also the
understanding of surroundings,
understanding of the whole universe, I should
say. Why people behave like this, why they
are like this - all these can be solved through
give you wisdom. You can call it awareness.
You can call it anything. It's a kind of a
wisdom by which you become absolutely a
your bhakti. It should not be blind. It should
not be blind, but it should be wise bhakti,
wise with wisdom - only possible through
Sahaja Yoga, I think. Otherwise, whatever
bhakti people do like mad, that can not be
divine personality. That wisdom you must
reach through your bhakti. But you see, we
have people of all kinds. Some are very
much in the shraddha, in the bhakti, in the
bhakti. You don't become mad. You
become a wise man - wise man, as we have
devotion, but they are wrongly placed and
so many in the past. And the way they have
they don't understand to whom we should
talked about everything is surprising. How
worship and where we should go.
Now Sahaja Yoga is an actualization. they have said things about human
Sahaja Yoga is a sakshatkar, is actualization
in which you know whom to worship and
awareness, about your ascent is remarkable.
As I some times I feel, they have really
prepared the field for Me, a proper area
whom to surrender. It's not blind in any way.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2003
17
for Me to talk to people. Specially in India,
I don't know why traditionally we are very
now it's missing. For them, the ideal is now
the Western life.
much devoted.
Once you take to Western life, that
In the same way, all over it should
part is over because the whole thing is
judged with ideas, what is beneficial, what
is helpful in life. But bhakti and shraddha,
happen. Because in India, of course, there
are mad people also. There are cults. There
are all kinds of things, no doubt. But actually
according to them, is of no use. That doesn't
help. Most of the people nowadays think
there, we have saints who have guided us
very well. Despite that, you find that in India,
like that. But you are very few who have
people are going astray, doing wrong things
and wrong type of worship. It's true, no
doubt, but it is, I should say, just the wipe
understood what is bhakti and what is
shraddha.
So Iwould say the Goddess gives you
bhakti and shraddha. By what? She gives
(disgrace).
It's a funny type of a madness where
you through your meditation, that you see
somany miracles happening around and you
are amazed how this has happened! We
Inever expected this to happen! How it has
happened? How it has worked out?" Also
there is no wisdom. What is between a mad
and a sane person is that mad person has
no wisdom. And those who have also so-
called wisdom, so they say that 'we are very
wise' are sadly mistaken. Because the way
they behave, the way they commit mistakes,
the way their whole attention is, I should
She corrects you. All the time you - if you
are aware- She corrects you and tells you
don't go this way. You are going on the ego
side or She tells you, you are going on the
say, the whole working is, sometimes
surprising because they have no wisdom.
First of all is to test yourself and see 'Am I
left side. She's the one who corrects
throughout. We get into diseases and all
wise? Am I wise? Am I doing wise things or
kinds of - we are trapped into all kinds
of things. It is because because we
I'm not doing?"
So many complaints come to Me
about Sahaja Yogis. I'm surprised why, why
are they doing like that? I would say still
don't have bhakti. In the bhakti, you have
to depend on the wisdom of the Mother,
wisdom of the Shakti, that She looks after
they have not reached the state of bhakti.
you, she finds you out the way and She will
Bhakti and shraddha, these two things are
help you. If you start becoming on your own
missing in the Westem life, I must say. We
and thinking that 'I'm all right, I can do this,
Ican do that,' you'll find inevitably that you
should come back. We should develop. We
should grow. But even in the Eastern life,
are wrong; that you had a very wrong idea
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2003
18
about yourself and about the Divine.
a Sahaja Yogs was killed. I said not possible.
So what is the most important point
And the fellow was in Rome, he was not
is surrender. The word Islam means
killed. So it's not possible that a young man
surrender. But Mohammed-saheb has should be killed like that. Ofcourse, if
somebody is old, He has to die. But that he
described what you should have before
surrender is your Realization. But you have
seen even after Realization people take time
was killed was not a right thing.
So it is the protection not only
to settle down. But once you are settled
physical, mental, emotional - but spiritual
down, you understand that you are under a
protection also.
protection of the Goddess, that you see
Spiritual protection is that what you
do is that you don't do wrong things. You
don't kill anybody, you don't torture
every day how it works and how it helps
you. Many people who are in Sahaja
Yoga, so-called, have great respect for
Me, but are not fully there. Then they
anybody, you are not rude to anybody. That
is the situation into which you all can enter
suffer and they have problems and then
they ask Me, Mother, how is it I have
this problem?' I don't tell them because
because you are Sahaja Yogis. You can
achieve it. You have a power to do it
because you have so much shraddha and
so much understanding that you have
reached a certain state of protection, of
growth, of wisdom. Now, first test your
wisdom. You must test your wisdom. 'If I'm
doing this, this is this way, is it good, why
I'm doing it.' First test your wisdom, then
you will find out that many things you do,
you can't tell anything to human beings, you
see. They are very aggressive. But the fact
is because - because you are not one with
the Divine and, with the Divine, if you
are one, you'll have nothing but
compassion and love, nothing else. And
everything you do so smoothly, so nicely.
People may not understand that they
crucified Christ. They did all kinds of things,
which are wrong, which should not have
been done. But first your wisdom must
agreed. But now you should ask for the
develop and you must see that your wisdom
protection of the Goddess because that is
works and helps.
I have seen now yesterday's drama.
the greatest quality of the Goddess that She
protects you from all problems, from all You must have seen that girl. She is very
troubles, from all kinds of nonsensical, I sensitive and she could see through her
wisdom what was good.
should say, things that can happen.
There are so many things that happen.
If you cannot find out what is good
I tell you I was told that one of the leaders,
and what is bad, that means the wisdom is
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
March - April
19
2003
lacked the wisdom. And the wisdom is the
lacking. If you cannot find out what you
thing which really is not just assumption that
should do, then the wisdom is lacking. But
Iam very wise and all that, but it asserts, it
if you have the wisdom, then you will
immediately know that this is wrong. Apart
from that, you will be saved from all kinds
works out and it shows what is good and
what is bad.
Wisdom is the sign of a person who
of problems. Is a fact I have seen with so
is really a realized soul of a very high level.
If you don't have wisdom, whatever you
may do, you might feel satisfied about it,
many people like that, who have been
saved, not only from death, but from all
kinds of catastrophies, all kinds. And I was
amazed how these Sahaja Yogis are helped
but the wisdom part is very, very important.
That is the most governing part within us.
by the Divine.
Divine is a power. Everywhere it
And, as you know, Ganesha is the giver of
wisdom. That's why Ganesha must be
exists. But it will only help the people who
worshipped.
With the proper upbringing, Shri
Ganesha is established, who is nothing but
are Sahaja Yogis, who are divine, not the
people who are not. It will never help. On
the contrary, it might punish in a way that is
the giver of wisdom. And this wisdom is
never expected. So one has to be careful to
test oneself what I call introspection. Have
innate. You don't have to judge it. It's innate
within us, grown up just like any other
you been wise in dealing with certain person.
qualities in us. It takes time with some
people. It takes time, no doubt, but once it
What has been your style? Is it money-
oriented or it is domination-oriented? What
sort of a power it was that you are working
under.
comes in, such a person becomes quiet
simple and absolutely truthful. He knows
about it and this is the thing one should
develop, this 'How far am I that?
You have to introspect to find out. And
you'll be amazed, very much amazed that,
You see, in this world, people are
even in the name of God, you can do wrong
things. Lots of wrong things have been done
in the name of God and that's why today
protesting for this, protesting for that, fighting
for this, doing all kinds of things. But if you
have wisdom, then you don't have to do
anything of the kind. What happens that
automatically people understand that he's a
wise man. From ancient times everywhere,
a wise man has been praised. He's not
we have such a big chaos of so-called
religions. When nothing wrong was with the
religion as such and those religious people
who talked about it - nothing wrong. But
the way people absorbed it and the way
worried about his financial side or emotional
people used it was wrong because they
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 March - April 2003
20
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
the value of bhakti within us. You can not
side - nothing. What he's worried, 'AmI
being a wise person?' That is the first sign
of the blessings of God. The one who has
blessings of Divine is a wise person, is very
wise and his wisdom is shown by his silence.
superficially touch it. Those who are
superficial, will never get it. Wisdom only
comes through understanding what the
wisdom means. You might find somebody
extremely wise, maybe your servant, maybe
your driver, maybe anyone and you're
amazed how such a person can be so wise?
Because maybe from his last life he has got
it within him or he has gone into it and he
And his whole power, his divine power uses
that person as a media and works
tremendously. That man himself is surprised
how it has happened. A woman can have
that. A man can have it. Anybody can have
found it. It's not the state of one person. It's
not the property of one person, but it can
that wisdom, that profoundness, that
temperament, which is so beautiful and so
belong to many of them.
So the Sahaja Yogi is the one who
empowering.
Such a person doesn't curse anyone,
doesn't bother to curse anyone. But it
works. He never gets angry with anyone.
But it works. He doesn't lose temper, no.
But some temper works and harm you,
which you never expected. It is within us,
has to have that wisdom. Why are you doing
this? What is the need to do it? They don't
have to ask any questions. They just don't
do wrong. They just don't do wrong things.
They're always on the right path. That is
the sign of the Sahaja yogi, I believe, and
which is the blessing of the Goddess. If there
is the power of the Goddess working in you,
within our power as human beings to be
wise.
I've seen animals have such a
sensitivity to vibrations-extremely sensitive.
you'll have the wisdom to work it out.
Now you have seen many people
How? Because their wisdom is intact. It
coming to America, doing all kinds of things.
works in them. They're not conscious of it.
They all have disappeared. There's no
The difference is human beings are conscious
support to them. Where are they? They are
finished. Because they are money-oriented
of their wisdom. This is the only difference.
Animals have wisdom, but automatic, we
should say natural. But we have inculcated
and power-oriented, I don't know what
they were oriented and they have lost it. But
this or we have developed this wisdom
within us through what? Through our
for a person who is standing in his wisdom,
is the saint, as they call him, is a saint, as
meditation, through our understanding bhakti
they call it. Butevery Sahaja Yogi could be
a saint, could be a sage. Every Sahaja Yogi
and shraddha.
So it is very important to understand
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Isue 3 & 4
March April 2003
21
America first, I saw such a horrible thing
here, that people were running after that
some horrible gurus and I never came after.
After nine years I came. As I said, 'These
people are mad. How do they follow these
horrible people and what do they believe
could be that. But if you lose your wisdom,
you are no good.
So I have to tell you one thing. It is
your wisdom which will save you. Your
wisdom will unconsciously help you. There
was one gentleman, Sahaja Yogi. Once he
was going somewhere in the car and
suddenly decided to go onto another road,
suddenly. And what happened, that on that
into? They've no wisdom to understand
what the truth is like.' It works out now
today. You can see there are so many people.
So that is what is the wisdom part and
road there was a very big accident and he
if this wisdom comes to Americans, they'll
come to Sahaja Yoga - not only come, but
they will grow into it. But the wisdom will
be to see What are we going to do? What
would have been in that accident. Like that,
there are many incidents people have told
Me, that 'Mother, how we were saved, how
we were brought to the brink of death and
then how we are just alive. It is because the
Divine needs you. The Divine doesn't want
you to die or to finish off. It needs you very
much. It has to do its work and you are the
instrument of that Divine. If you have wisdom
are we going to get? What is our aim?" All
these things must be brought to them, which
is not done normally. You must talk to them
and must tell them what is within you is the
spirit. You should become the spirit. Every
one of them has said so. So why not do that
and why not become the spirit.
So then they will themselves feel,
you are the best instrument for the Divine to
work it out.
The Devi's powers, first of all, existed
"Yes, that's true.' It is said that become the
in Her body only and She killed so many
rakshasas and evil people- She did kill it
actually. But now there is no need because
spirit. They'll go to church. They'll go to
temples. They'll go here, there, not
understanding why they are doing it. They
need some sort of a protection. That's why
they go. But this protection comes from your
spiritual status. Where do you stand as far
as spirit is concermed?
Those who have enjoyed the spirit,
I've seen, do not deviate from the right
you all are there. You are the instruments
and it will all work out in such a way that all
those people who are trying to destroy your
goodness, trying to destroy wise people,
they will be killed, will be finished. They'll
be destroyed. This is not to be done through
any outside instrument or anything. It's the
path. But those who haven't, they may
call themselves Sahaja Yogis, anything,
wisdom. It's the biggest instrument that will
work it out. Do you know when I came to
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 March April 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
22
but they can be very wrong. So first of all
the evolutionary process. Now She's
brought about all the evolutions so far and,
to go further, She is going to make you a
find out about yourself, If you are a real
Sahaja Yogi, if you really want to be an
instrument of this power, then what you have
very wise person.
Even an ordinary sage in a village in a
to do is to become full of bhakti and
shraddha for that. And this bhakti and
far-fetched place is respected, if he's a real
sage. But if he's a stupid fellow, what can
you do? He may befool you. He may do all
kinds of tricks and things like that. And then
does he get anything good for you? No,
shraddha is very joy-giving. I know it. It
never makes you tired. It never troubles you,
nothing. But it's very nourishing and
beautiful. But it should be at the right place,
with the right aims and right understanding.
nothing.
So first thing is anybody who is
supposed to be your guru or supposed to
be the person who is guiding you, must have
bhakti. Bhakti of the goddess very
For all that, what you need again is wisdom
and you should try to find out are you wise
enough? Are you wise or are you not? It's
very difficult forevery human being to find
out whether you are right or wrong because
you see the effects of this wisdom all around.
So the bhakti and shraddha to the
Goddess gives you- definitely gives you
important to understand. Modern things
have come to such a limit that they have
respect for the Goddess - no. They don't
even talk about the Goddess and they just
talk about something which can not be
wisdom.
We have had some people in India
explained and understood. If they talk about
who did lots of bhakti and so-called and
Christ, they won't talk about Him. that He's
showed lots of shraddha, but they were not.
Just they were talking about it or doing all
kinds of things about it, but they were not.
So wisdom is something a very
the one who said at the cross, 'Behold the
Mother.' What was the need to say that?
Because He didn't want His Mother to get
into trouble. But He said, 'Behold the
Mother.' That means you are for the Mother,
innate quality, very innate. It's not superficial.
You cannot just say that this person is wise
or not. It shows that just like a power- it's
who is going to come.
They all have indicated and they have
a power of understanding and is supported
by the power of the Goddess. So She's the
giver of wisdom. This is the biggest quality
said so. But still, we are busy with our own
ego and our own understanding and we run
after things which are not real. First of all,
you must follow only things which are real,
not unreal things. For that also, you will need
of the
Goddess, that She's the giver of
wisdom. And wisdom comes as a part of
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 March - April 2003
23
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
Me very much. You can support my work
very much if you have that wisdom. And
the wisdom is to judge yourself how
many people you love, how you love, how
wisdom. I think for that you need wisdom
very much more. And that is something.
whether you have the wisdom first or the
blessings of the Mother - you see, between
you talk to them, what do you want out
the two.
So 1 have to tell you one thing that
of them. All this should come -judge
yourself, introspection. Through
introspection you can see it. So for a
Sahaja Yogi, it is important to do
introspection.
before you people start spreading Sahaja
Yoga, please judge yourself. Just see if you
are wise? Also see for yourself if you have
the blessings of the Mother? Only the wise
Second one is meditation. And third
are the -Imean, I should say, are the people
one is to take vibrations. It's very
who know whether they have the Mother's
blessings or not. For that, we have so many
important. What I find, some of them say,
"Mother, we don't do this, we don't do that.
ways of understanding.
First and foremost thing is
meditation and feeling your vibrations on
the photograph and facing yourself
clearly. If your are a realized soul, are you
really a good realized soul or not? Are
But why? Why don't do it? 'We do Sahaja
work.' Sahaja work is what? If you are
not doing these basic things, how are you
a Sahaja Yogi? And then lots of
complications come out of them. They
also suffer. I think one has to have again
the wisdom to understand what is Sahaja
you deep or not? Are your vibrations
working out or not? If you can see that,
will realize that greater than all
Yoga. No one understands that sometimes
then you
and they go on forming a group of people
ambitions, the greatest is to become a
devoted, wise personality. That is the one
who are not at all understanding what is
that will give you the joy. Joy for all
Sahaja Yogis. Otherwise, see it is just a
human being like others, going about.
Sahaja Yoga.
It's a very, very deep personality.
Sahaja Yoga is not just by saying, 'I am
a Sahaja Yogi,' but it's a very deep
personality, and that deep personality has
to be felt by others as the wise, very wise,
Now the time has come for this to
work out. It's a special time, I should say,
although quite a lot of struggle for Me, no
not that how much you talk or shout or give
doubt, but doesn't matter. I know because
lectures is important. Is with peace, the
tranquility, the capacity to love within
you are important. And that's how people
I've landed Myself in the area where things
are not so simple. It doesn't matter. But on
the whole, what I feel is you can support
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 24
March April 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
can judge whether you are really blessed
by your Mother or not.
So this is one of the things very
important and I've come to America just to
protect America from problems, because
suddenly this has gone into problems. And
it was inevitable because they were blind
here not to understand what's going wrong
overpowering others? Those who do not
know how to overpower themselves are
always miserable, always in trouble
because it reacts. If you try to overpower
others, it reacts. For that, you have to be
absolutely introspective. Again and again I
have been saying this, that introspect.
Of course, I must say so many good
Sahaja Yogis have come out now and they
have worked it out and they're very good,
simple, wise people. It's such a great hope
for Me. I never expected I would work it
and that blindness has brought them to this
point where they start seeing their ego
specially, which has ruined them. Money-
orientation, all this has shown how stupid
they have been to believe that they're very
out that good, but it has worked out. And
always, always youmust know that you have
that power within you and they must use
that power and not fall a prey into
rich people and they can do anything they
want to with their money and with
overpowering of other countries and other
people.
First overpower yourself. You have
to know yourself first of all. What is this
nonsensical ideas.
Thank you very much.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Diwali Puja
3rd November, 2002, Los Angeles
(Pravachana of Param Pujya Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
I wish you all a very, very happy
in this world. That's the real Diwali -
the enlightenment of human beings. It's
not candle. It's not some lamp. It's
human beings. If they are enlightened,
then there's no problem any more left.
The problems come with the people
who are not enlightened because they're
Diwali.
To see all of you here is itself such
a joy for Me. That you all have taken
to Sahaja Yoga is such a beautiful
feeling. It's your own. Self is your own,
spirit is your own, but to take to self,
it's difficult. It's only your desires I think
which is being
in the darkness. They're groping in the
darkness and some of
them don't know also
fulfilled and that's
that they
completely ignorant
how you have got
are
your Self Realization.
It can not be
of realities.
forced, as you have
Once you come
to Sahaja Yoga and
enlighten your Self,
known very well. It
has to work out only
you see in that light,
what is good and
what is bad - to begin
with. And then you
with your desire,
only with your
surrendering. No use
talking about it, no
it
into
use convincing about
grow
beautifully just like
it-what works out is
these flowers, who
your desire, simple
as that. The power of
are all the time happy.
all the time giving you joy. In the same
way, when you are enlightened with that
light, you don't seek anything. You have
got everything within you. Keep the
lights on.
But the another thing you can do
desire within you, works it out.
There are many who are not here,
who have got their Realization all over
the world. I remember all of them. And
all of you should remember them.
Today is a nice day when we can
think of all those who are enlightened
is, with your light, you can enlighten other
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 March - April
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
2003
26
in others also.
people. Like we have done here, we
1 don't have to tell you that you
had enlightened one candle. With that,
we have enlightened all of them.
So you all can do it because you
have got that light within you. With that
light, you can enlighten others and they
can feel the joy of their spirit. It's
love each other or anything. You just
love. You just understand. You just
spread your light among yourselves.
Sometimes you get frustrated with
other people in your country, maybe in
your city, maybe in your village, that the
people who are not yet enlightened. But
best thing is to work it out, you have to
work it out. Know, 1 had first one lady,
very old lady one, who got her
Realization from Me. And then, you all
something to be seen now, like so many
lights you have put up. In the same way,
you are the lights for the whole world.
It's not sufficient that you have got the
light, but also you have to give light to
others. You have to enlighten others just
like these candles. Once you start doing
are here. In the same way, you all can
that, you realize what you have got and
then you'll respect yourself and you'll
also do the job of Realization. For that,
you don't need any calculations. You
don't need any thanks-giving. It's just
behave in a manner that behoves a saint
there and it works out.
could be a sage
without proclaiming
anything.
Inside your being, you will just
develop that beautiful, extremely
beautiful temperament that is joy-giving.
You don't want to give any false ideas
about yourself because whatever is the
truth is within you. There's no need to
tell something untruth about yourself.
People will realize that you are realized
souls- They will just feel your subtle
What do you do for a light? Just
see. You just put near the candle and
you get the light. In the same way, it is
your enlightenment is such that it will
give light to thousands and thousands
of people all over the world. As you
know, there're many countries who you
have to still approach. But we will do
that. Just locate and find out where do
you have to go and where you have to
nature, the reality, whether you come
from India or you come from England
work.
Firstly, you are capable of giving
or from America, you all have that
Realization. You are. Have confidence
that you can give Realization to people,
for which you don't need any help.
ocean of love and knowledge within
you. Be sure that it's all there, only you
Single person can do it. Thousands can
first enjoy your own ocean of love. First
do it. It's very important for the Diwali
you enjoy that and then you can enjoy
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 27
March - April
2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
of the whole world that we should give
Realization to people - very important.
Now in Sahaja Yoga, many people
dangerous for all of us.
We have had very funny
experiences also in this country, but I
think they all are learning one by one
that this should not have been done, that
are such who are little frustrated with
themselves, specially with their past.
Forget the past. Past is not important.
What is important is present. At this
was wrong. Now what blinds you, you
should find out.
present moment, what have you to do?
You don't have to worry about the past,
In this country, it's such a money
oriented country -I mean America is -
which has spread all over the world and
that I've done this, I've done that.'
What is done is finished. Now you look
being money-oriented, you do get
enamoured. You do feel that you must
make money out of Sahaja Yoga. There
out for the future. What can you do for
the future? And somehow or other, with
the light, you'll see your path. You get
rid of all the darkness and you know
are some who do not think like that, but
they are still running after making money.
There is no need at all for you to make
how far to go, how to meet people and
money or to find for yourself a kind
of a security in money. Your security
is inbuilt within you.
So all these outside things, which
how to spread Sahaja Yoga.
It's something you have already
within you, but you have to, first of all,
establish your connection with it. If you
have established your connection with
are absolutely unnecessary, should not
blind you. Now, if you have the light,
you can see clearly and this help of the
Divine, you see that very clearly in your
life and you're surprised how the Divine
has helped you at different points.
I get letters from people who say
that ocean that you have, you can
definitely work it out, work it out in such
a beautiful manner. And you'll be
amazed how you'll be successful. The
success that you get out of all this
ignorance, you are amazed at it. But you
have the light. With the light, you do
"Mother thank you very much, I got rid
of my problem, I got rid of my enemies'
remove all the darkness. Doesn't have
to think about it - Just remove it because
- all kinds of things. While I have done
nothing. It's your light which has
removed the darkness. If you're
ignorant, then only the light can remove
the darkness of your ignorance also.
Actually, we don't know how
you have got it. But if you don't have the
light, then no use talking about it, no use
doing it because it doesn't give any
success. On the contrary, it's a failure,
failure of the worst type and can be very
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 March - April
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue 3 & 4
28
2003
be cheated because also you're looked
much there is the power of the light. As
you can see here, every light is giving
such a lot of- not only eniergy, but also
after by the Divine, guided all the time
by the Divine. Have faith in the Divine.
Have faith in the Divine. That's very
complete picture.
So thus, you can make out. For important as you have faith in a
example, you can make out if candle. Have faith that the Divine
somebody's a realized soul or not. It's will give you the light, will guide your
not necessary that you have to go near path, will take you to the right place,
that person or take any special care or to do the right thing.
anything. You will just know that this
I mean so many of these
experiences are with you. I need not tell
you how much people have written to.
Me, how they have found things
person is a realized soul or not.
I had many such experiences
where I found that people don't know
who is a realized soul. It's very working out.
surprising. If you know who is a realized
soul, then half of your problem is over.
Now the second one is the
Despite all that we are collective,
we are nice to each other, we don't tell
lies, we don't try to destroy anyone.
That means we are much above all
problem of how to convince that fellow
what he's capable of doing. I find that
problem also with Sahaja Yogis. They
are capable of very great work all over
the world. They can find out so many
things which normally normal people can
not find out. But Sahaja Yogis can
immediately find out to what sort of a
person they are facing. This is the
difference. That means you know the
truth - truth about everyone, truth about
human feelings and this is only because
of the light. You can see where you are
faltering. It's just you see for yourself.
For that, I think meditation is the most
important thing.
Every day you should do
meditation. Those who do not do
meditation are capable of falling
down because meditation is like
putting oil into the lamp. Those who
do not meditate, think they can do
the whole situation, truth about who is
just boasting or just making up a story without it, are sadly mistaken. They
or some sort of a hypocrisy. It's not have to meditate morning and
difficult because now you have the light. evening. The problem is everything
comes so handy, so simple that they
don't understand that meditation is very
You can see with your light what's
wrong or what's good with others. Such
a blessing it is for you that you cannot
important. Not you, but there are many,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
March - April
2003
29
I know, who get Realization, who don't
always hesitating, they are confused.
They can't understand. And that's why
meditation is the most important thing
meditate and their style is different.
Their nature is different.
in Sahaja Yoga.Just like a light burns with
the electricity flowing in it, you can say,
Meditation is such a soothing
thing, it is such a beautiful way of
or because of the candles. In the same
connection with the Divine that all
your problems get solved in that way, meditation is a continuous
meditative moment. If you are not availability of the Divine force. That will
meditating, you are not following reduce all your apprehensions. Not only
meditation, then maybe your light that, but takes out all the negative
will go down. It won't give sufficient thoughts. It takes
light. It's important, very important to discouraging things. And when you are
find out about yourself, about others in meditating like that, in thoughtless
out all the
awareness, then you will be amazed
how you are helped from within and
people ask. Don't do anything. just without. It's a terrible power that works,
the meditation.
How to do meditation, many
go into thoughtless awareness. Try to
this thoughtless awareness.
So those who do not meditate
go to the thoughtless awareness. If
you can get into that condition of cannot go very much far with
thoughtless awareness, you have done advantages of Sahaja Yoga. One
your job because that's the point should try to meditate and go up to
where you are with the truth, with the the point of thoughtlessness.
reality, with the joy, with everything
that is so fundamental.
When you meditate try not to - not happens to you is that you get the
to make some sort of a function out of confidence, complete confidence of
it- no. Meditation is something silence Divinity. You know you have that.
in yourself, silence in your thoughts and
going to that deep ocean which is within our school in Dharamshala, extremely
you, itself. But supposing you don't do confident and extremely humble. Iasked
that, if you don't meditate, I can make them, "What do you do?" They said,
out immediately those who are "Mother we meditate, we meditate in the
meditating and those who are not. It's school, in the evening," and that meditation
So what happens to you? If you
are in thoughtless awareness, what
I have seen children coming from
helps. Imagine these small children can say
not difficult for Me.
Those who do not meditate are
that, so why do not you also understand that
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 March- April 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
30
Mediation will give you security, that it
will give you a real enlightenment and a
complete connection with the Divine.
Without the connection of the Divine,
what's the use of doing Sahaja Yoga?
I know the people who are meditating,
who have gone down into their being and
who are very developed. Also I know
people who are a little superficial. Your
depth is in thoughtless awareness. It's
a very important point which you should
reach. Looking at anything, if you are
thoughtlessly aware, then you really
it.
So thoughtless awareness is the
first point all of you should achieve -
very important. After that, you can
achieve something else, but the first
step is thoughtless awareness. It's very
important to become thoughtlessly
aware because then there are no
thoughts coming from the left or the
right, from the past or the future. Just in
the present you are there.
It's something you all have. It's not
that I'm saying that to you, but all of
you have this, but steady yourself. You
have to steady yourself at thoughtless
become reflective about it. Just works
out that way.
I don't know how far you can awareness.
remain in that condition, but even for a
How long - that's not the point.
second if you can achieve it, you start The point is once you've touched it,
achieving it more and more. I've talked so you'll go on touching it.
much about meditation before, but today
Many people meditate, but their
thought process is going on. They're not
thoughtlessly silent. Now this is the one
point which is very important. If you
have to grow, you should be absolutely
in connection with the Divine through
thoughtless awareness. You don't have
to pray. You don't have to call anyone-
nothing. It just works because it is within
you. All these thoughts are bombarding
you from both the sides in your mind.
These thoughts that are coming to you,
have no meaning with you. They do not
substantiate you. Yourself, you are an
when I see all these candles burning, I
think they are all meditating. They are
all in meditation and that's how they're
buming.
In the same way, Sahaja Yogis
who meditate, I know. And those who
don't, I know. And if they have
problems, I know why the problems are
there. Main thing is your connection
with the Divine. It's only possible
when you meditate and become
thoughtlessly aware. That's the point
where your mind works. It helps. It
comes to your help in such a way that
you don't know how you have achieved
ocean and you have to get into that state
of thoughtless awareness.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 March April 2003
31
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
It is always described in all the
great books, but not so clearly as I am
telling you. I don't say that some of you
đo not get thoughtless awareness, so
they're good for nothing - no. But
please try. You can all get into that state
of thoughtless awareness. Even for a
second, if you get it, it's a very good
idea. Then you go on increasing that
Try. Try that. I don't believe you cannot
get it. All of you can get that thought
that 'I can get it.' And you will get it. In
that, you don't have to discard anything.
you don't have to see anything, just go
into meditation and you will be amazed
how it will work out.
Of course, you are very much
there, most of you, but still, 1 would say,
increase that thoughtless awareness,
second.
I think it's a reflecting mind. When that area. Today is very important
you look at something, you can become because of this day of Diwali. Diwali is
thoughtlessly aware and then your mind supposed to be enlightenment day, but
reflects to the depth of what you see. enlightenment within is how much you
That's how you all will become really are in thoughtless awareness and
everything works out because you are
What I find that this state of the ocean of it. You have it within
thoughtless awareness is not established yourself. Only you have to tap it. If you
by you. It is not good. Today on this don't tap it, then it doesn't work out.
day of Diwali, I would say that you You have to just tap it and you will be
enlighten yourself with thoughtless amazed that you are a source of such
awareness. It is not difficult. It's within joy, source of such happiness, I should
you because thoughts are coming from say a source of real enlightenment.
So today's message is that while
meditating, go into thoughtless
own reactions. But in case you meditate awareness. No thought is important,
in the real sense of the word, then you'll because it's your own creation. But if
get into that thoughtless awareness, you have to become one with the divine
which is a very important point and all creation, you have to get to that state
these nonsensical thoughts, which are of of thoughtless awareness, minimum of
no use to you, will disappear. They minimum. And that comes to you.
won't be there and then your growth is gradually it will grow and you'll be
amazed how you'll be able to grow into
very creative Sahaja Yogis.
this side and that side and they are not
the waves of your brain
no, just your
possible and you grow very well.
Many people are here who will
Sahaja Yoga in a very big way.
Thank you very much.
say, 'Mother, we don't get that state."
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Letter from Shri Mataji
March, 1982
"Dear Mr. Rahul,
I received a very detailed letter from Damle. It was a very wise step on your
part to have met Shri Gagan Gadh Maharaj.
What he says about the miracle of Sahaja Yoga is absolutely true. The reason
why this great sanctuary never manifested in reality was that whenever Adishakti
descended as incarnation She did not have all the chakras integrated through
Sahasrara. The complete harmony and unison merged into an integrated instrument
of her
personality bringing forth these fantastic results. So much so that1 am
surprised at myself.
I think he Gagan Gadh Maharaj also cannot imagine the dynamics of this
discovery and hence he feels that "Avdhuts" have to be away in the forests and
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 March April 2003
33
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
that Cancer can give you reaction. You have cured the Cancer of Phadke and
others. Did it give you any reaction? When you are at a giving end how can you
receive anyhing?
You are reborn as Lotus which does not take anything bad from muddy
surroundings but transforms its surroundings with its beauty and fills it with
frangance. This is the magic of a realised soul. Do you think doctors will accept
that there exists the Kingdom of God and that it creates us and that the Lord of
our autonomous nervous system is our spirit which is the reflection of God? You
can quote the names of people like Mr. Bose and Mr. Daftary and Mr. Sharma
who are miraculously cured of his colour blindness through Sahaja Yoga, In any
case I am going to America next year. One of my dear Sons Dr. Lanjewar has
now become the president of the Medical Practitioners Association of New York
and is very anxious to have a conference next year in New York. Due to our
slavery for so many years, doctors in India have lost the capacity to know that we
are the people born on the Yoga Bhumi. Their thinking is so slavish that they think
all our ideas about medicine are stupid while western knowledge is very sensible.
Ibless you with all my heart that Dr. Ramlingam has good vibrations. Shri Rama
in him would have wisdom to understand the ways of God Almighty. I send you
my love and protection so that you can break the barriers of ignorance of our
medical men. Let them know that the time has come for them to accept that science
is not everything. It only discovers whatever exists and appears before the gross
being. Once we become subtle rising in the fourth dimension, we see the subtle.
being, the spirit and contentment and DIVINE working of this love cannot be
done by argument. One has to be realised. One has to evolve through Sahaja
Yoga spontaneously as this is a living process.
For carcer best treatment is of water, i.e. putting feet in the river, sea or in
the water at home with the photograph. Water has the religion (Dharma) of cleansing
and hence Shri VISHNU and DATTATREYA responsible for the religion
(Dharma) of human beings are to be worshipped. They help you to cure and also
the local Deity of the chakra that is attacked. Put the patient before the photograph
with the candle and his feet in the water, bring down your hands across the
sympathetic nervous system towards the water. The patient will cool down
gradually. If he gets realization, then he is cured. More in the next.
YOURS LOVING MOTHER NIRMALA"
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Talk at Kingston
Kingston, 11-6-1980
(Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today we have gathered here to
know something about ourselves. If the
knowledge is from the books, all forms
because it was written long time back,
thousands of years back. Christ has said
it that you have to be Born Again, that
of the person who says that he knows
about the self, how far will it reach us?
you have to be Baptised, not by
theological college people but
It can only go upto mental level and we
can only understand it through our
mental understanding. The mental
understanding comes to us through our
rationality, through our intellect which in
itself is a limited thing. So we enter into
another understanding which is still very
somebody like "John the Baptist', who
had the authority from the Divine. This
power does lie, dormant within you, but
every body writes differently about it.
Very few really agree. This is another
confusion one faces that there is a power
lying within us and some say that it gives
limited. For example, if I tell you that
you electric shocks, some say you start
jumping like a frog and some say you
start flying in the air. Such a confusion!
While you are seekers, seekers of ages.
there is a self within us, in our heart
which resides and that there is a power
within us which is all the time waiting
for an occasion to give you your second
birth, if I tell you that, then you will only
understand me mentally. This is all being
You have been seeking. You are genuine
seekers and then while seeking you
don't know where to go, what to expect
said already. What is so new about it?
At the most I might give it in a very
modern fashion campaign like intellectual
which will make you have more mental feats
and you jump into problems. The other
day, when I went to Switzerland, one
of my children, who had arranged the
programme, he told me, Mother here
to go round and round and sit down and
people are very sceptical about Indian
gurus. I am happy about it, really very
analyse and reach no where. I see there
is a power, no doubt, which is called as
very happy. At least they have started
thinking about them. Because they have
Kundalini within us. So many say that
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 March - April 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
35
finding the real you must know that you
must keep yourself absolutely alert
about it that we are not going to accept
anything but real. But you can be
been deluded, they have been deceived
and now they are disillusioned
completely and they find it impossible
to believe anyone who talks of God. So
the first topic that he wanted me to hypnotised. You can be brain-washed
discuss, in my stay there, was,
because you don't know all these
things. Somebody says some words in
Sanskrit language you get so enamoured
by that as if Sanskrit language is
something out of the blue. For example
some of the disciples who went to
demystification of gurus. Quite a
challenging one. But this I said in 1970
in India, in 1973 in America but nobody
would like me for that. They say why
should you criticize others? Falsehood
is falsehood and reality is reality. You
will now know through some of those
certain gurus, got mantras which if you
tell an Indian, he will laugh out his
stomach. Like a mantra given 'ainga".
Now tell an Indian, he will laugh and
that people had paid three hundred
people, who are here, that how you
have been misled, how you have been
deceived? For money which you cannot
understand because you have gone pounds for such a nonsense like that
beyond it now, you are seeking beyond
money. You know that money is not
which mean nothing, which cannot be a
mantra.
going to give you joy, you know that
very well but those who had not yet mantra? There is a science about it.
known that still they are sort of climbing Because we do not go into the
up the cusp, have not seen the ditch understanding of it and just jump onto
down below. Such people try to come it. They want you because they want
up and give you some sort of a charming money, simple thing. It's an enterprise.
and receive lot of money from you. It's You have given up everything for the
a very shameful affair, I feel myself. But sake of your seeking. You have seen
that does not mean that there is no that the value of these material things
reality. If there is no reality, how can will not take you anywhere, you have
you have copies of that? If there are no seen beyond. Your value system is
flowers, how will you create plastic different but if the value system of some
flowers, So, if you find somebody so people is different from your, they can
unreal you must know that you have to exploit you. So the natural reaction, I
Why do you need a guru for a
find out the real and when you are
can understand very well, should be
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 March - April
36
2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
out of it all drunk and others are
attracted much more, seeing them being
drunk like that. Its impossible to
such but there is reality and that it exists
within you and that there is self within
you and once discovered you find your
absolute to tell you that you should understand human nature! And when the
reality stands before you, you crucify
that! How do you explain all this and
the acceptance of reality is your
glorification! Are you going to add
anything to reality. Supposing I wear a
diamond necklace, it is going to adorn
become a very quiet, serene person,
could be absurd. To tell you that you
should be such a master over your
passions and your lust and your greed,
that nothing should sort of dominate
you, this is just giving a big lecture to
you. It has no meaning. You have
gripped it yourself, these things and how
will you have it when your grip is so strong?
You have to grip something else. It is a
me and not to the diamond necklace but
this is billions and billions times brilliant
than all these things which adorn us. If
you accept that you will be glorious and
you will be lustrous, isn't it? Think about
simple common sense. If you find
it. Because we are charmed by these
something much more valuable, much
outside things, their deceptive ways,
their cunning ways, and that we are
hypnotised, that's the only explanation
can give you.
That's how they have managed so
more dynamic, much more joy giving,
establishing your sense of security, you
will give up all these nonsensical things.
But see how this works out. A I
gentleman who come from a horrible
far and one after another this hypnosis
spreads like fire. You ask them, what
guru to me, he was absolutely pestered
and finished by that guru. He used to
did you find? Don't ask us. We are very
happy people. After three days, you
deliver only introductory lectures.I
don't know if he is here? He said I used
to get three hundred people for this
introductory lecture Mother, in the same
find, the person has committed suicide!
We are not aware still that this is the
most important, the most fatal and vital
hall where you were giving lecture.
What do you say to people then? Isn't
time in the history of human beings. The
it clear? He is a well known person, last judgement has started. We are
facing the last judgement today. We are
who charges you money, who gives you
courses. He has ruined so many people.
not aware of it and all the satanic forces
have come out like the wolves in sheep's
Its like just now you were watching
clothes and they are trying to attract you
people going into the put and coming
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 37
2003
March - April
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
and you do not judge them. You only sit
down and judge the reality. It has
elephant. He saved so many animals and
so many were discarded one by one all
these years. In the same way human
started. Its a fact. It has started.
beings who have been very much in the
Now let us see, from God's point
of view how He is going to judge you.
It is easy to say that we don't believe in
extremes have been discarded. You see
the history. Now I mean you won't find
anyone killing his seven wives these days. It
God, very easy to say that we don't
believe in this government. But if you
is impossible. One cannot do it. Person
like Hitler came up, finished. Anybody
do anything wrong then you know there
who came up with any extreme ideas of
is a government acting. In the same way
it is very easy to say that we do not
domination or anything was finished by
Him. Those ideas die out, people are
believe in God. He is so compassionate,
ashamed of them and new ideas come
he is so loving, he is so kind that he has
given us our freedom to know ourselves up into human beings, accepting
and we rely on it, we take Him for balance, tranquility and peace. They are
talking about it, people talk about peace
granted.
He has made us human beings but are you really wanting peace within
from amoeba to this stage. He has ourselves? And if we are really wanting
it what are we doing about it?
Actually the judgement has started
spread out such beautiful world around
us! He has done all that! But there is a
judgement which we have to face now
and the judgement that is going to come
from God is not going to be the way we
and to judge you God has already placed
whole Magistracy within you. All the
magistrates are already sitting down
there. Christ has said Those who are
understand that He sits like a Magistrate
and calls you one by one come along
then you have a pleader there sitting.
But in a subtler way He has already put
the judging forces within you. See in the
not against me are with me'. These are
the magistrates. And these magistrates
are settled down within you, on different
centres in your spinal cord and in your
evolution he has worked it out. In the
brain. I am sorry we don't have any
evolution how beautifully he has worked
maps to show you the magistrates and
their seats. It's very interesting and all
it out, from amoeba to this stage that
these seats are, like a panel, sitting in
we have come! Many animals were
discarded. He saved some animals like
your brain and when the light of
Kundalini rises through these centres,
from the mammoth family he saved
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 March - April 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
38
naked eyes. This is what is Kundalini
when these centres are enlightened
within you, you start enlightenment being
manifested on your fingers. The end of
awakening, not that some people say we
started jumping like a frog. Now we
your fingers get enlightened. The sesitivity
of your fingers tells you, what centres are
there affected, within you. This
must use our brains. Brains have to be
intact in modern times. Are we going to
become frogs? Now, after becoming
human being, are we going to become
birds after becoming human being?
Your science, like psychology
Kundalini rises and comes upto this
point, the fontanelle bone area, we can
call it, or the "Taalu', as the soft bone
itself, I mean many of them believe that
here, in your childhood and it breaks it,
you have to jump into your unconscious,
achieving your collective consciousness.
Very clearly it is being said by these
people. Then we must expect
something of that nature where we jump
into our collective consciousness. It's
not that because I am saying or anybody
saying it but it has to happen to you.
The other day I was in Hampstead. I
know what is happening with someone.
Some people did get their vibrations.
They did feel the cool breeze coming
actually it breaks it. You can see in a
person, who doesn't have much hair
here, the thing just going down like a
little child. First it pulsates, you can see
it with your own eyes. You can even see
the pulsation of the Kundalini in the
triangular bone which is sacrum and
when this Kundalini rises you can see
even the movement of this Kundalini, not
in all in some. Because if the person is
first class or you can say if the aeroplane
is first class, the landing is first class you
from their hands but some did not and
see, the shooting off is first class and in
they said 'Yes we have, got it' and they
such a person there is no obstruction.
just disappeared! This is not the way
you are going to treat yourself you have
to love yourself and you have to adore
your seeking and you have to get your
You do not see the Kundalini pushing
up. For example when I came to this
place there was no problem on the
traffic. So we just moved, smoothly we
came away. Nobody noticed us. But if
there was a traffic we would be jamming
here and jamming there. In the same way
when this Kundalini rises in a person
who has a little problem on his centres
which shows, you can see with your
fulfilment. As your mother, I must tell
you this is a very serious matter. There
is no gurushopping going on here. You
have to get your realization. You have
to get it. It's so fortunate that the time
has come when you are living and that
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
March - April 2003
39
'Sadhakas' who were searching God in
you can have it because of that you took
your birth during this time because you the hills and dales and in the caves will
are seekers of very ancient times, as I come back as ordinary householders
told you. It is written in one of our and they will get the reality. In this
scriptures is India called as 'Nala- confusion only they are going to get the
Akhyan'. Where 'Nala', one of the vision of reality, they are going to
tortured souls, by Kali, caught hold of become the reality, they are going to get
the Kali. Now it is said, it is the rule of their self-realization. And Nala forgot all
Kali. Kali is the sinister fellow, is the
his vindictiveness and his anger and
one who brings all confusion and
confuses people. He confused Nala. By
that he was separated from his wife. So
when Nala got hold of this Kali, he said,
"Now I am going to kill you, I am going
what he had done to him. He said, on
this point I forgive because I respect
them so much, for that collective good I
give up all my personal problems. Let
this happen.
That only in Kaliyuga, the Sun of
Satyayuga, the world of truth, the age
of enlightenment is going to come and
to kill you once for all, so you do not
create confusion into people any more."
So Kali said, "Alright, you can kill me,
I'll accept. But first you know my
importance, 'Mahatamya', know my
importance. I too have an importance.'
those saints who were seeking the
reality in the forest are born today in
this world. You can see them. They are
saintly. They can see the joke of the
He said, what importance can you have?
You create confusion in the minds of the
artificial life so clearly. They know it's
people, what importance can you
have?" He said, that when I will be
all absurd but then they don't know what
is the real. But the time has come and it
ruling, means when he will be in these
modern times ruling, means creating
confusion in our minds, everything has
become relating. We talk like that. Yes
may be alright, may not be alright. May
be good, may not be good. That is a
time when the confusion will be raining
on this earth. That's Kaliyuga, the
Modern Times. Those great saints and
has to be worked out and it will be
worked out. It has worked out in your
great country. Now I would say atleast
thousand people are there very much in
it, we can say, who have understood it.
There must be about at least three
hundred people who are actively
working it out, at different places and I
am very happy to come at this old city
those people, the seekers, the
of Kingston, where the stone for the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-43.txt 
 March - April
2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
40
enthroning of the king was put. Must be point, how much you are sincerely
something special about this place, But wishing your ascent, that's all. She
people have lost their sensitivity to knows you out and out.
reality. Everywhere, not only in this
country, much more in India, you will symptoms. She shows what's wrong
be surprised! They are all getting with you. But she is your own,
sophisticated. They are developed. absolutely. There is no one greater than
They are getting developed. They do her, who is your own. She is your friend
When she rises she shows those
and she judges you because you must
not know what you have found by your
development and anybody tells them
they think O you are just want to enjoy
all that fruit of development and you are
get the best, because she knows what
is the best. For a child may like to put
his hand into the socket but the mother
just telling us lies.
says, no, don't do it. But the child
So, it is very necessary for you to
doesn't listen. He gets angry. Still she
says, no you cannot do it. She puts the
hand aside because She loves you, loves
in the purest form, where you do not
understand what definite purpose is that
the judgement has started and for that
Kundalini is placed within you. But she
expect anything from another person.
And such a power lies dormant within
you, which is just waiting for an occasion
that when she rises, when she sprouts
is a great judge, I must say. You will
never find such a judge anywhere in the
whole universe. Because she is your
own Mother and She is Nirvajya means
She is just giving. She doesn't want
like the germinating power in a seed,
when she comes up then there should
be someone who look after you. There
should be someone who should guide
you. There should be someone who
should decode and tell you that what
you feel in your fingers means this, what
is happening to you means that.
anything from you, nothing whatsoever.
She wants that you must get your
property. You must get your Self. You
must get all your powers. She doesn't
want anything from you, that you should
know your Self, that you should become
your absolute, that's what she wants.
She is your Mother, born again and Otherwise you will not know your
moorings, you will not know where you
again with you. She has recorded all the
are going and you can fall into the trap
of ignorance or may be you may be still
problems you have created for yourself,
for her ascent. She knows everything
there, not knowing much. So she wants
about you and she judges you on this
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-44.txt 
 March - April
41
2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
very bad physical problems. There were
to use somebody as the mouth piece for
Her. It is necessary the unconscious has
some who had blood cancer. Some of
them had other type of physical
problems. With all these things you are
to speak to you through someone and
that someone has to be a person of the
faced with, the Divine Love of God, His
same nature as the Kundalini is.
Kundalini is the representative
desire
Those who make money from you
of His Desire, Desire of the Ocean of
and exploit you and leave you in the
compassion and love. That He wants to
lurch, how can they be called as gurus?
bestow this kingdom upon you, that He
wants to make you the prince of His
Kingdom. This is a very very serious
thing and we have to concentrate upon
this point. Concentrate on this point that
the judgement has to be done and there
is a power within us which is going to
judge us. Now this power is the Desire
of God, of that God who is Almighty,
They are the thieves standing outside
the door and they are just waiting for
an opportunity to catch hold of you
because they are already being judged,
discarded and they are going to the jail
and they want more people to be there,
with them. This Kundalini, when she
rises, she first soothes you physically,
really She soothes you physically, that's
who has given us our freedom. She is
how as a, you can say, as a by - product,
not going to challenge it. His might, His
strength and His powers are not going
you get your health. For example,
cancer cannot be cured without
to stand against our freedom. But His
Kundalini awakening. This I have been
desire is within you, existing on the
saying. When the doctors get cancer,
Kundalini and this desire rises within
they come to me and they get cured.
But I am not sitting down here to cure
you. It enlightens you but it doesn't
force you. It doesn't take away your
cancer patients at all, nor any Sahaja
freedom.
Yogi is interested in cancer patients as
It enlightens you to see. You have
yet. But if you want to have your
freedom to be in this world. It is not
realization, your cancer will be cured,
your troubles will be cured, your health
will be alright. I mean those who have
got realization, who are sitting here,
have been all, most of them, suffering
something, physically or mentally. Some
of them were even epileptic and had
forced that you sit here or there or walk
this way or that way, nothing is forced
on you. But you are given a room which
is enlightened. So you use your freedom
in a better way, with more
understanding. Because you are
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-45.txt 
 March - April 2003
42
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
enlightened, you can see. Then you been able to thank Him for what He has
know what to accept what not to
done for us and how kind He has been
accept. First thing is to enlighten you.
to us. For a small thing we try to get rid
of Him from our hearts. Still He exists.
Unless and until you are enlightened,
you are in confusion and you cannot see
through. Then it is left to your freedom
The Kundalini exists within us. You try
anything against it, She exists. I have
seen some people having Kundalini
to decide. So She cures you. She cures
She improves you. She bestows all
the blissful things upon you. She takes
you away from the worries of grosser
which has been beaten up. There has
you.
been horrible marks of pain and anguish
and she is just turning her sides in
anguish. But still she exists for that
moment where She will give you what
She is there for. What a blessing! Where
can you find all this! Is all within you,
which has to work out. But when giving
realization I find people just disappear.
Even after realization can you imagine!
The progress in the west has been like
that-you move three steps forward and
four steps backwards, Really you will
be amazed at people. I don't know
level, like after realization many people
have solved their material problems.
Now that they have become Mr. Ford
or someone like that but the attitude
changes and the material problems get
solved. Yes, because there is a centre
for that also, within us. Your family
problems get solved, husband - wife's
problems get solved. So that you are
free. Your grip over these things, that
worries you is released and that now
what's gone wrong with the western
you can see it with greater freedom for
mind which is so disillussioned about
your self. What you have to choose and
what course you have to take in your
life? After giving all - these concessions
and all these advantages and all the
possible help, then you are judged. Can
material things. When it comes to Sahaja
Yoga their caliber is just of the lowest
type sometimes. You cannot understand
that how can these people have no self-
you think of any magistrate that esteem, where as in villages in India
generous? And such a thing exists within people just get it and they are just there.
us. We have to be very thankful to God There is no rambling, nothing. They are
for what He has done for us. We have just there. The complications are there
no idea, we have taken Him for granted. Iagree. But you must have self-esteem.
For every thing that is within us, we have It is sometimes, sometimes makes you
feel sick. Perhaps you do not know that
taken Him for granted. We have not
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-46.txt 
 March April 2003
43
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
dirty - filthy circle, it just clicks.
Whom should I blame for this?
in this country I have worked for four
years on seven or eight people, four
These horrible gurus or these horrible
years, can you believe it? Not that there
is something wrong with you, You are
seekers, you are saints born in this
country. But what has happened to your
saintliness. Why so flippant, why so
superficial? Why don't you touch it
deeply? Why don't you understand
yourself? I just fail to understand this.
people who have put up a show for you
or it is your naive attitude towards
spirituality? I shudder to see the way
things are sometimes and the way
people are taking for granted all this. It
is your responsibility today, the ones
who are supposed to be the seekers,
to see that you bring forth the reality to
Why don't you respect yourself?
Irespect you and I love you very
much because I know you. I know you
for ages, you are the lost children I
know that I don't know how to establish
the people and tell them that please see
it and get it? Because you are their
fellow-being. They are your kith & kins.
How can you leave them even if you get
your realization and even if you enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, you will
not forget them, you will think of them.
that within you, and sometimes my
condition is the same as that of your
Kundalini. I can tell you. You have to
be in a great haste to get it. You have to
You cannot be happy with your
become absolutely dynamic and plough
realization also, unless and until all those
it out and talk to people and tell them
saints, who out of ignorance are lost,
that, this is the situation-an emergency.
Can't you see what's happening to the
you'll think of them.
I have to work out through you. I
cannot work it out alone. If I could there
world? Can't you see the confusion? But
the situation is taken for granted or if it
would have been no difficulty. If God
is even faced, it is faced in a very
intellectual way, that you feel guilty
about, say Vietnam. Very good idea. Sit
could work out just like this, give them
realization, finished. It will not because
you have the freedom. Why you have
down here, easy chair politicians the freedom because without your
thinking about Vietnam or file it up,
whole thing. You are the chosen ones
who have to receive it and who have to
have it. But to take to reality you will
freedom you cannot come to that caliber
by which you are raised. We do not
realize it where are we today, we do
not realize it. Sometimes I feel I am
think hundred times and to get into a
talking to walls. For example, you will
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-47.txt 
 March - April 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
44
find that some people are slaves of
watches. They have no time for, 'Oh we
have no time very busy people'. Why
are you saving time? Why this idea has
come to you? Our forefathers never did
that. Why are you so much saving time,
for what? You are saving time for the
becoming not for wasting it in the pubs
hundred people went into that courage
and some came in here walking, going
up and down, some walked in, some got
out, they were deciding, still no
proximity to sensitivity, no sensitivity
towards the reality. They cannot feel it!
May be, may be it will work out. I am
sure it will. I am the most optimistic
or in the horrible places like races and
person you can ever see. Real optimism
is my nature, I believe. It is going to
work out. Only thing your, so called
freedom, comes in the way. So try to
understand that this freedom is given to
you so that you can become yourself,
not that you should become an animal.
What's the use of giving realization to a
all these things, not for that. You are
saving time for becoming because you
are a diamond. You have to be chiselled-
out, you have to chisel-out yourself. You
are not serving it to waste it. I mean the
best advertisement would be, save fifty
pounds to spend three thousand. Its
something like that. You are saving your
time not to waste it. Saving it for
chicken? Can I give also, is another
point? Many people say Mother, I have
done lots of good things. I say, what
good things you have done. I don't eat
chicken. I say now why are you saving
something extremely precious,
extremely vital and important, something
that you have been seeking, But I do not
chickens for me. You better save
know how sometimes to keep you on
that level of depth. Of course some of
yourself. So all sorts of funny ideas they
have. It is you, the seekers, the buds
on this beautiful tree of life, they are the
the people are of such high caliber, in
this country, that even they are very
ones for whom this creation is created.
satisfied. You do not know how much
They are the ones who have to get it.
has been done in this country also by
God. For example I went to see stone
They are the ones who have to have it.
The whole universe has blossomed into
Hunch, Stone Hunch is the creation of
the Mother Earth. You can see the them and they want to become what?
Worms? Just think about it. Just think
vibrations. You can feel it. There are so
many things done in this country.
Kingston itself is so vibrated, I was
amazed! And what do you find, at least
about it.
By God's grace we will start the
programme of realization which may
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-48.txt 
 March - April
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
2003
45
take even in a split of a second, might you start feeling that cool breeze
have already worked out in you. coming from your hand, the cool breeze
Because today I was little too much, I of the Holy Ghost. And you start feeling
think. Kingston is a good place. May it every where and you can find out.
be one day it will become a very great
place, I feel. That's why I told
felicitations for this. It's a good thing
Now you can judge others and yourself
and you can help others, automatically.
You don't have to go anywhere for that.
You don't have to have medicines, you
that you are in Kingston. But let's see
how much you use what power is
don't have to anything, just you be there.
flowing in the area. I hope something
will work out. Now after realization you
have to take it up seriously. You have
to work it out because after finding it
You help others in their salvation, as if
the whole mechanism starts working, the
whole technique starts acting like a
television set, you put in and you start
also, it is not that you suddenly jump
seeing the whole thing. Just you are
amazed at yourself. But you have to
know the engineering and you have to
onto the sun or turn to the moon. Even
going to the moon, what did you get?
You couldn't understand anything. So
know how to work it out on yourself
and on others. It's a great fun. We are
all in a great fun mood and you should
also join us. It's wonderful. No time for
you have to go into all the areas of your
being because the movement will start
inside. You have to take your attention
miseries, only thing one feels that why
to all the areas within you. You have to
these people are doing like this, you
settle down your attention and now the
attention will lose the grip over
nonsensical things. All the priorities will
see, like grown ups the mature people
look at little children Oh! Why are they
change. The greatest thing is that putting their hands into the fire?
Kundalini, when she pierces the
May God Bless You all
Sahasrara, the joy starts pouring in and
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-49.txt 
 Spirit Like the Sun
18th June, 1983
(Talk by Param Pujya Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
I am so happy and joyous to be
can try to remove the clouds. The first
and foremost thing is the assumption,
the faith that we are the Spirit and that
the rest is superimposition. You have to
here with so many Sahaja Yogis and so
many of them very new, not very new
to Me. Perhaps I have known all of you
thousand of years back.
assume that within yourself. After
In Sahaja Yoga, you have all to
Realization, it should become very easy
understand one simple thing, that you that you are something much more,
something very different from what you
are the Spirit and whatever is not the
Spirit is not yourself.
We can compare the Spirit with
have known so far.
Intellect Working the Spirit
So now the new situation arises
that you do not have a blind faith, but
the sun. The sun can be covered with
the
clouds.
There
be
can
you have a faith that has come out of an
superimposition on the sun, but sun
experience. So your intellect should not
fight it. It should not try to challenge it.
If it starts challenging it and if you hear
your intellect, you will again go down.
Even if you get the glimpses of a
remains as it is at this point. You cannot
enlighten the sun. It is illumined by itself.
Now, when the clouds are
removed, the superimposition is
removed, the sun shines through the
star in the sky, then the scientist believes
atmosphere.
So our Spirit is also superimposed that there is a star. So, in the same
by ignorance. As long as there is manner, even if you get the glimpses of
your Realization, you have to at least
believe that you are also the Spirit. You
go on sticking to that experience and
superimposition, you cannot see the
Spirit. And even when few clouds
disappear, the superimposition exists.
keeping your attention on the fact that
One has to have a clear sky to see the
light of the Spirit shining through.
you are the Spirit. Tell your intellect not
There are many ways by which we
to cheat you anymore. You can turn the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-50.txt 
 March - April 2003
47
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
difficult to get out of form to formless
face of your intellect by this.
Now your intellect will start
and even to concentrate on abstract or
working for the pursuit of the Spirit. This
is what faith means. Faith gives rise to
formless was another impossible task,
as the Muslims did or many others tried
to do,
pure intelligence.
Under these circumstances it was
The Form and Formless
Now, once you have seen clouds
necessary that the formless had to take
removed, stilII there are clouds. So you a form, so that there were no more
have to use the wind to remove the complications. As soon as you
concentrated on the form, you become
clouds, wind of the Holy Ghost. And
- that you know – there are many
ways of taking advantage of the wind.
So the wind comes from some
formless. Like if you have ice before
you, as soon as you start touching the
ice, it melts away and you start feeling
other source. That is the source of the
the cool.
The Meaning of Puja
So the problem is very easily
Holy Ghost, your own kundalini. And
also you have, in person, the Primordial
Kundalini before you.
solved now. Puja is one of the things by
Compared to many other seekers
who came before you, you are very for-
which you can excite the forms into
formless.
tunate. Because worshipping any
Vigraha, any statue of self-created
Now your centres are the centres
of energies, but they too have a guiding
deity sitting on all these chakras. They
are also the formless made into forms.
And when you do the puja, the forms
melt into formless energies. And these
formless energies start flowing and then
vibrations of the Mother Earth, people
had big problems. They had to first of
all do a meditation, which was called
as Savikalpa Samadhi. That means in
that state you had to concentrate on
such a statue, Vigraha – Vigraha
means the one which is a vibrating statue
and then go on looking at that statue
blows the wind. And that is how these
misidentifications, these super-
impositions on the Spirit are remnoved,
Now
you cannot think abour the
and try to raise your kundalini. And
kundalini used to come up to Agnya, but
puja. These are things which happen into
a realm which is beyond thinking. So you
the jumping beyond the Sahasrara was
have to understand that you cannot
an impossible task because one has to
go from form to formless. And it was so
rationalize the puja. You should have the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-51.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
March - April
2003
48
maximum advantage on your chakras.
For Me sometimes it is
For that, you must fully just concentrate
on the puja and how the wind is blowing.
burdensome because there should be
some parity between you and the
And the wind will see to it that it drives
deities, some balance must be there.
out all the clouds.
Here you are saying all the mantras and
the deities are awakened and there you
So your only work is - your
only method is – just to concentrate
on the puja and witness. You are a seer.
Seer has double meaning- the
are who do not want to receive anything
within your heart. So I am the One who
has to stock up all the extra energy that
is produced in My Body.
So it would be better if you all
keep your hearts opened and watch the
puja without thinking about it...
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
one who sees only, just sees and he is
only knowledge. He is a seer, without
any thought, without any reaction, just
sees and absorbs automatically.
June 18, 1983
Spontaneously, he is the seer.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-52.txt 
 Estonia with love
Estonia is situated on the Baltic Sea coast. It is a small and beauti full country.
Our neighbours are Russia, Latvia and Finland. Our history is connected with
such countries as Germany, Denmark, /Sweden and Russia.
All these countries left some traces in Estonian architecture, art and even in
the people's souls.
Estonians are closed when it comes to other people and they don't let
anybody come to their mind or heart. They prefer living alone or with family on
their farm. This is the classic portrait of an Estonian.
The Estonian language is very melodic, like a song. Estonian music is like
our nature, a mixture of wind and sea, although Estonian bhajans are not like that.
The population of Estonia is about 1.3 million people. About sixty per-cent
are ethnic Estonians. Most of people live in the capital, Tallinn, but not most of the
yogis.
In the beginning of the 90s, Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi travelled
with Her husband, Sir C.P. from Finland to Russia through Tallinn.
Soon after that, in 1992, Finnish and Estonian yogis held a public pro-gram
in Tallinn, but Sahaja Yoga didn't start very well. It was at first only a few realized
people in different towns.
Sahaja Yoga started to grow in 1993 in Parnu and Kohtla-Jarve. Sahaja
Yoga has now spread to six towns-Parnu (the summer capital of Estonia), Narva
(on the Russian border), Kohtla-Jarve (an industrial town with fabric mills and
mines), Johvi (like Kohtla-Jarve and Narva, a town with mostly Russian-speaking
people) and Tallinn (the capital of Estonia).
We had presidential elections in Estonia in August 2001. Before the elections,
all the Sahaja Yogis of Estonia had a Havan and asked Shri Mataji to give us a
president. In the two rounds of voting, none of the candidates had the
dharmic
majority. The pundits said that Estonia would stay without a president for the next
five years, but, in the end, Arnold Ruutel was chosen. His surname can be translated
as "knight." He had no chance of being elected, nobody expected he would
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-53.txt 
 March - April
2003
50
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 3 & 4
become president, but he was the only dharmic person among the candidates.
Time will tell if he is a good choice.
There are a lot of examples of how Paramchaitanya works here. We just
enjoy watching this work.
In November, we had public programs in Tallinn, Johvi, Narva, Parnu, Kunda
and Sindi.
From Sahaja Yoga collective of Estonia with a lot of love!
Viktor Korotkov
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-54.txt 
 dawo000000O
