SIRMALA May - June, 2003 Volume: XV Issue: 5 & 6 VIVERSAL PURE The Divine Cool Breeze 00 19 VISHWA DHARMA RELIGION

 In This Issue 1 Shri Ganesha Puja - 14.9.2002 Christmas Puja - 25.12.2002 12 Puja at Vaitarna - 31.12.2002 19 24 Inauguration of Music Academy - 1.1.2003 26 Makar Sankranti Puja Message - 14.1.2003 Birthday Felicitations - 23.3.03 27 Birthday Puja - 21.3.03 29 Mahasahasrara Puja - 5.5.1983 36 46 Gratitude Expressed

 Shri Ganesha Puja Cabella - 14.09.2002 (Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Today we have gathered here to so pure that nothing can spoil them and worship Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is malign them. This is such a great biessing the deity of innocence. When we are born we have that innocence is actually created as children it is Shri Ganesha who is in us and it was created much before. All acting and we are very innocent. It is such the innocence, everything was created a powerful thing that with this innocence much-much before we were created. It's children survive under many such a great quality for us to become circumstances and we love them because innocent. they are innocent. We enjoy them The greatest quality of Shri Ganesha is because they are innocent. Once we start joy, it gives you joy. As small children may growing, our Sahasrara also gets closed not speak even, but they give us so much and we develop all kinds of funny things joy. Joy giving quality comes from Shri Ganesha. Even after coming to Sahaja that enter into us. It doesn't go out, it's just there, it doesn't go out. Innocence has a Yoga, I have seen, people are not full of joy. great effect on our character and on our They are very serious, they don't know sense of chastity. Actually when you are how to laugh, how to enjoy anything. That's the sign that they are still lacking in innocent you don't know what is not chastity, what is being unchaste, what is innocence. being cunning? If you are innocent then So, it's important to understand that if you are looked after by Shri Ganesha you are Sahajayogis, you should be joyous himself. Anybody who tries to harm an and give joy to others, just like children. Innocent person, Shri Ganesha looks after How sweet they are! They may be newly born but how much joy they give you! But him and manages. Many people who are supposing you do not have that capacity to innocent in this world, of course they are very few, but they become so detached enjoy the innocence of children then from all worldly problems like lust and nobody can help you, Ganesha cannot help you, because there's an innate quality greed and many others, because they are

 May-June 2003 2. The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 Now the beauty of Shri Ganesha is this human beings have, and if you don't have that quality, no use having any other that it looks after your Kundalini, it guards your Kundalini, it guides your Kundalini sense. Some people like food, they like and throughout, on all the chakras. He has colours, they like all other things but if you don't have Shri Ganesha you cannot to bless you. If you don't have the purely enjoy anything. So it is only Shri blessings of Shri Ganesha, you will be Ganesha's blessing that we really enjoy completely useless fellow as a Sahaja everything in its full measure. Otherwise Yogi because all the time you are seeing the bad points of others, all the time you we start judging it, we start criticizing it. are dividing, I should say, you are getting People raise so many questions. If you into a problem by which you cannot enjoy see something and it gives you joy then anything. By temperament you think you you are supposed to give the explanation are very serious, you are very mature, you for that. As we have many critics in this world and they are all the time criticizing are very developed but you are not innocent. Such a person gives such a one or another. Now the critics are criticizing critics. That's the biggest headache to everyone. If there's one like that in the family, people want to get rid of problem. That's their job because him. Ganesha is not there and they go on So you should have the quality of Shri criticizing others, never criticizing Ganesha which is of giving joy to others, themselves and thinking no end of depends on how much joy you can give to themselves. With that they create very bad others. It doesn't want anything. Such a kind of a community which is actually very harmful. It's very dangerous. It's like person won't say that I must get this, I must have this position, I should be leader, having some sort of a boil or some sort of I should be this and that. No. He just enjoys a septic thing in your body, in your being. So if you cannot appreciate it and if you giving joy, joy to others and being humorous and kind and never-never tries cannot enjoy it then Shri Ganesha is to insult anyone and hurt anyone. If such a missing from you. You should be able to person hurts by mistake also he goes on enjoy everything, enjoy your Children, repenting about it and hundred times he enjoy children of other people. That's the will beg your pardon if he has hurt you. sign of your being completely blessed by Such a happy person is a real Sahaja Yogi. Shri Ganesha.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 That's the one we want to have all around- enlightened, then he sees it and enjoys the those who have no hatred for anyone, no humour behind it, the humour of all these malice for anyone and not finding faults people. What they are mad after, how they with another but trying to find what is the behave. I mean the way he understands the jokes behind it, jokes which is avoiding good point of that person, what is so reality. And reality is only possible if you are special about that person. He is not bothered as to what colour you are, in the realm of joy, otherwise all the time whether you are black or white, whether you find something wrong, something you are tall or short. It makes no difference upsetting, something disturbing. But if you because it is absolute-absolute joy and for see the humour behind everything then this absolute joy you don't criticize and you you are perfectly alright. For example, I don't try to find faults with others. Now the would say that I have had many such problem is that people are getting very experiences that people have told me, much advanced in this modern era, very Mother, such and such fellow is like that, advanced and they are very much more such and such fellow is like that. So I advanced in criticizing others, I think that's would ask that person 'Are you like that, direct. He will say, no l am not like that', but the thing they do, to criticize others. Also I said, 'why everybody sees that in you? All they have another very bad quality to identify themselves with the countries in of them must be wrong or you are wrong? which they live or with the family in which Then he would say 'may be myself', and they are. I have seen it creates such a that's how you see you can mould also problem. Also they identify themselves such people who think that they are with the different religions they follow. correct and the rest of the would is all bad Imagine from this, how many problems and they have every right to hate them and have come up that you start differentiating to think in the wrong direction. What between one and another! For example happens with that is that you lose the now supposing who is born say in one essence of joy. Essence of joy is in seeing in place, so he says he is the best, his everything, the source of joy. Supposing country is the best, his people are the best you see something here now if it is odd, it and there's nothing wrong with them. On the contrary, if a person is a real should give you also great sense of humour, if it is beautiful it should give you Sahajayogi, who has Ganesha within him

 May-June 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 wrong with you? Why do you think like that, another sense of appreciation. But I can't understand people who go on harping on why do you look at those things and always think that another person, some sort of a thing that has no meaning in their lives nor in the lives of others. I something wrong with him, and then you form groups and then you fight, you can would say my father had a great capacity have even wars with this kind of an idea to do that. Once I went home, so I said, that the other person is not alright and you 'my brother was praising this man for his are absolutely perfect. This is also with the music, what do you think?' He said, 'he is a musician, no doubt, but he is very country, I have seen. For example, even in Sahajayoga I have seen, if somebody is courageous'. I said, 'why?' 'Because he may go on singing anything, he never feels coming, say from India or from another bad about it, everybody might be nervous country anywhere, the leader will be anxious that he should or she should put or everybody might be laughing at it but he her candidate before. It's such an is not at all bothered. He goes on singing in his own ways.' So that is the beauty of identification which they are not still conscious of it. But then I play my tricks. Al understanding. Every defect in a person such things when they do, when they try to can be enjoyed, is very much a sense, I should say, very subtle sense by which support one party, one type of people, from one religion, we should say not religion you can enjoy every person. If he has now but countries. So this country defects then you enjoy them as humorous thing and if he has something very good identification is so much still in Sahaja Yoga that you come from one country then then also you can enjoy. So, why do you you want to support that country. I am from shun people? Why should you get out of that country. You will never appreciate that people, criticize them for nothing at all? Now these people have built up big whosoever is coming from any country is a Sahaja Yogi. We are a global community, organizations. For example, the Catholics we are not to be identified with one will hate the Protestants, the Protestants will hate the people who are Catholics. country, that our people should be married, What's the use of that? What's the use of that we should get our people there. All this I have noticed and I feel very kind of things hating each other on that point that sorry that you have not understood the somebody is a Protestant or somebody is nature of Sahajayoga. a Catholic? Just see yourself, see what is

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Isue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 Sahajayoga is a global thing, absolutely very good. They tell me what's going global. It has nothing to do with one wrong in their own country, what's the country or with one person. It's such a trouble in their own country, how the countrymen are? You see, very surprising! global thing that if you see the subtle side of it, it's very joy giving. God almighty has I was surprised how people told me that created this world as one. They might how some people who are in their country have United Nations, they might have this, are so misidentified and they are so they might have that but still they'are so against Sahaja Yoga, in a subtle manner. much identified with their country that they was surprised how they felt it that way. cannot correct also that country. Now for They said, Mother see they are not at all example, something is wrong with your global. Once you become global, all your country, they cannot accept. For them problems of provinces and things are everything is alright because they were finished. But that doesn't come into their born in that particular country or they head that we have to be global, we are appreciate some other country so they go Sahaja Yogis, we cannot identify ourselves on praising that country to such an extent with one country or another country. If we that they are destroyed and their ideas are do that then we are still lacking in our also destroyed. So, best thing is to see the universal personality. This universal personality comes to us joke behind being identified with one country. There is a big joke about it. I enjoy from Shri Ganesha. He is a universal, it very much. Among Sahaja Yogis also, I personality whether He is in India, whether have seen it's very common that they are He is in Italy, or in England. What is that identified with one country. If you are personality is innocence, very innocent, identified then you should try to correct very much innocent and not only that but that country. You should try to correct he is a joy giving personality. All such those countrymen who are following a people who are joy giving are recognized. particular type of ideologies. They never It's not that the world doesn't recognize. see that because they are so much They may not be knowing that they are involved with them that they don't see global but those who are global people write books on global ways, thinking about what's wrong with them. They will always see what's wrong with others. But I have global things and they can criticize also seen, those who are real Sahaja Yogis, are people of their own country. They can

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 6. spoilt with that. You have your own criticize people of their own clan, they can go on like that but they can be slavish also chastity. You have your own life of very to some other country and try to praise chaste moments. It is now-a-days such a them too much. So, you are not to be modern style of thinking towards unchaste slavish, you have to not to be identified but life and all kinds of wrong ideas about chastity. If somebody now talks of chastity, you should be identified with your Self and people think he must be mad, how can that whatever your Self enjoys that should be expressed. That is the sign that your be? Everything is done these days. If you see-all the fashions are there. Once the Ganesha is there and that Ganesha is fashion starts, goes on spreading. Then working out. It's very important for leaders everybody will dress up in the same to understand this, because I have seen manner. They have no personality of their the way they are identified with their own. Everybody will be going wrong in the countrymen is sometimes shocking to me. I am really shocked how could they same manner, specially the women have lost their sense of chastity. They have lost be? They are not belonging to any country, their sense of chastity because the way they are no more, they are in the country of Shri Ganesha which is the country of love they dress up sometimes shocks me What is the need to dress up like this? and joy. If you cannot give love and joy then there's something wrong. Why can't you dress up properly? But it With His this quality only, people just-just shows that they have no character of their own. Actually they may become chaste, because chastity is a say, I am this, I am that but they are not. very joy giving thing, very joy giving. It is not a thing that you have to tell somebody or to They are nothing because they take to all force somebody or to restrict somebody kinds forces that run around. But look at the children, children are not like that. They but it is to enjoy it, to enjoy yourself and do not have all these funny ideas of enjoy the chastity of another person. It's impressing people with their unchaste life, such a great blessing of Shri Ganesha, none of them. On the contrary, children are such a great blessing that you enjoy your very conscious and they want to become own chastity. You are not bothered about very chaste people. This has an effect on the another person, he is chaste or not, if the eyes. I must say, Shri Ganesha acts he is doing bad things, if he is a ruined person, doesn't matter! You don't get through your eyes. How you look at a

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 possession is so grotesque, is so person is very important. I have seen aggressive. So, one should look at things people losing complete control over their from Ganesha's angle-how will he do it, eyes. They go on looking at this person, looking at another person, looking at how will he use it? You learn from children. How they another person, just for nothing at all. But it's a matter of no Ganesha controlling watch things and how they work it out, them, and with this the eyes are spoilt. How they think. You will be amazed, how Spoilt means that you cannot look at sensible they are and the very sensible anything concentratedly. Then how can things they talk! Like, I met a child, so the you penetrate in to anything? Any child told me, I love the moon. I said, penetration is possible only if you can alright. Now, what's wrong with the moon? Nothing, but it hides itself under the clouds really adjust your eyes in such a manner all the time. 'So, I said why does he do that you see something at that time, for that? Because it walks too much, so he is that time, and not go on shifting your eyes tired and he has to rest and that's why he from one to another. It can be anything, it does it. So, if he doesn't walk so much if can come from anything. That means he keeps steady he won't have to do it.' Ganesha is the one who is a detector of our faults. For example, people have Just imagine a little child watching all greed. So they will start seeing who's these things! And I mean I was amazed how a little child knows what is right and wearing what clothes, what clothes they should wear. If they have greed then they what is wrong, how to behave, how to will see somebody has a nice house, I understand the proper way of doing things! They are not taught anything, they are should also have a nice house; but they never see the beauty of that house, they not conditioned, nothing, but they know never see the actual essence of that how to behave and they are always looked house but just they go on seeing thatI after by the Divine. I have known children should have this house of this kind, I who have fallen from great heights. nothing happened to them, and also should have that. They have no sense of snakes and all these things don't bite beauty I should say, they have only sense them. Even they say that tigers never try to of possession and that is such a bad thing eat children. What is it? What is so to say because sense of beauty is something so deep and sense of powerful about them that children are so

 May-June 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 person is definitely a person who has got safe and allowed to grow. But they grow his Self expressing through his joy. Such a person is so joy giving, so humorous and never degrading anyone. In every smal into such horrible creatures who are unchaste, who are running after women or women running after men is common play these days%3; thing he sees beauty and the nature of every creation is so beautiful. I am really It is' unbelievable how can people who are, even Sahaja Yogis, do this! Of course, surprised that how is it that poetry comes to very few people because they go on they don't, but some of them, they are still in this kind of a mess. So, when you have describing Ilove affairs, this that, all your Ganesha already established, just nonsensical things. What things make you before creating the whole universe the unhappy? Unhappy is not the sign of a Mother created Shri Ganesha. If He is person who is a realized soul. So, if you have that problem of unhappiness, just be there then life is very easy. Such a society is very easy to live, such a friendship also is so easy because there's nothing that is on the watch out and see why-why have you developed this kind of a funny attitude towards everything, why can't you enjoy possessiveness or any kind of a, you can call, perversity. When you have bad eyes everything? You go on watching this for women, bad eyes for money, bad eyes person, that person, you will never enjoy: while if you watch the children, it's very for possessions, Ganesha is spoilt. He just knows how to enjoy-enjoy everything. interesting. They look at, like I saw one If it belongs to you it doesn't matter, if it joke; there was a joke about a child-they belongs to me it doesn't matter but you had a guest in their house for food and he was eating. So this child saw that man should know how to enjoy the beauty of it eating, he said, 'mama, he doesn't eat like and that's enjoyment when you have within a horse. You said, he eats like a horse'. yourself, you don't grow old because all So, that's what they are-very simple, very the time you are enjoying. What is there to grow old? But normally it doesn't happen. simple hearted and that's how they correct people, correct. What you should talk to You are very critical, you are very, I should say, selfish and stupid sometimes, very children, what you should tell them about, it's very important because if you tell them much stupid. All that you lose on that grip over yourself which is joy. What is your something-don't do it, so they will do it in Self? Self is nothing but joy. A joyous such a manner that it will be ridiculous,

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 absolutely ridiculous and they are so say, I would say, you should all write it obedient to begin with. They think that we down what your children talk. Because it are children, we should obey and this would be such a book of interesting obedience comes out of their simple episodes. Instead of writing about wars nature. But we should not try to tell them and horrible things that they have done in too many things and we should not control this world, better write what good things them with 'don't do this, don't do that. All there are which children can tell you. the time if you do like that, the children Children don't believe in all this kind of a won't understand. You don't have to tell mass nonsense of a fashion, they don't. them, But if they are chaste children, if See them they are properly dressed they are brought up in a chaste society, always, they are not bothered about that's why I always say 'send your children behaving in a mass way. So that means to our school.' Because children have to they are very independent on their own. be chaste. They must understand the They are not slaves of any society and value of chastity and this modern society they do not want to follow anything that is in the Western area, specially, are just generally followed, no! They follow destroying our children's innocence. We their own pattern and live in a very dignified should have learnt so much from the manner. They are extremely dignified and children, how innocent they are, how their sense of chastity is very well simple they are! They are very generous developed. They would not wear and children will give away everything that something that will expose their body or they have, everything. They don't will show that there is something wrong understand possession of things, just with them. Sometimes we neglect our imagine! If somebody likes something, children very much, because of money 'alright have it,' and they will keep problems may be, I don't know what something for a person who likes husband-wife problems there are and the something. They are wonderful people and children are neglected. Once they are we have to learn a lot from children. Their neglected, anything can happen to them, and I think it's a very great sin on the part of smiling faces and their joy should teach us how to behave because Ganesha shines people to produce children and to neglect through them, very clearly. All the them. intelligence, all the beautiful things they Children should be given the first, the

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 10 are towards nice things and good things. primary place in the household, in the family and they should be looked after by They don't sort of take to all these things. everyone. They are the most important Then also because of modern life children thing, not somebody who is the head of the have developed a kind of funny character family, he can shout at the children. when they grow up. I don't like this, I don't like that and they fall into funny-funny, I Nothing of the kind. Moreover I have seen that the way we take to all odd things and should say, ideas about life which we must bad habits, children never take. They know try to guard because these days the that it is bad, this should not be done. By society is growing so fast. There are their innocence they know, it should not be televisions, there are so many I should say done. They may sometimes, you know, propagating things which are not good for play with fire, do something like that. But children. They should not see them also. If the children are realized souls they don't once they get burnt by it, they will never touch it again. They are extremely fast in like to see. They don't like to see violence, they don't like to see nonsense, I have learning because that is the age they are, seen it. They don't like, but the parents are in growing; but actually what is needed now is that the elders must grow. The sitting and enjoying nonsense, so they are children are growing, they learn, what also sitting. Gradually it might crawl into their heads but normally children don't like about the elders! They have to learn also, how to be nice and kind to everyone and to any violence, any beating any kind of a be compassionate with all the rest of thing. So we have to learn a lot from them them. This idea of criticism comes from where I don't know. But like, they will go because they are innocent, because they anywhere, they will start criticizing. have the quality of innocence. So they are to be respected. I don't like people beating Children never criticize, they never see these things, never. They will just get into their children or hitting them and fulflling that house or place and just enjoy it and their ambitions through the children. It's see the good points of that house. Always very-very wrong. You should leave them as they come in and tell, see, they had one alone, they are perfect. Only thing is they very nice Shri Ganesha's, this thing. The should be given proper ideas at a time, house may be dirty, there might be smell, appreciation for their chastity, for their well anything, doesn't matter. See their eyes behaviour. That should be done, What

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 11 should not be given a kind of a idea of the Shri Ganesha who is on the left side, not on the right side. First you develop your left society in which they live, where the children get spoiled and I was surprised I side then you come to right, you are met one child the other day and the child alright. That's why we have our said, I want to have a car. Which car? Sahajayoga completely built in on Shri Mercedes. I said, why don't you go for a Ganesha. Once he is there you are Ferrari? So, you see this money completely alright and no problem. There's no lack of wisdom. Once you are with Shri orientation also comes from childhood. From childhood if you talk of all these Ganesha, you see the point absolutely clearly, how to behave, how to live and you things, money orientation, children also don't take to stupid things like lust, greed know this and they talk like that. There are and nonsense. But people are mad, you many other things for children we should just avoid. Don't allow them to go near all know. They take to any kind of thing when such things which are creating money they grow up but as children if they have orientation because that is the problem of an influence, very beautiful influence of today that everywhere you find people who proper family life, proper school life, proper have made money illegally, so much guidance, proper love and help in money has been made, and there's no everyway in their growth then children need to do that but still you see they do. become extremely, extremely good, beautiful. I bless all the Sahaja Yogis to This money orientation is a funny thing; it's greed, it's madness I tell you it's real have children of that nature and to look madness. A person wants to have say after their children. That's very important twenty five cars. Is he going to sit on the because they are tomorrow's Sahaja twenty five cars? He wants to have twenty Yogis, and they should be of better quality. five aero planes, what is he going to do Because you are coming from another lot, with that? For that he is cheating they are coming from the innocence. So they are very pure and their purity must be everyone, troubling everyone, taking the respected and must be guarded. May be money of others. It's better to be poor than that we understand the importance of to be like that. So, this is what is happening today is children and develop Ganesha qualities in that people have gone. The track is wrong. them. It's the right side track, right side track. I Thank you very much. should say we start our Sahaja Yoga from

 CHRISTMAS PUJA Ganpatipule - 25-12-02 (Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) sacrifice because he had a power, Power Merry Christmas to you all. According to Sahaja Yoga Christ is settled on your Agya of the spirit that he could sacrifice Chakra, His whole life is depicting the anything, Even sacrifice his own life. So qualities of a person who is a realized you can understand, the greatness of soul. What he has suggested in his owı Christ was coming from his great personality of spirituality. But the same life is that you should not have any greed Christ is worshipped all over the world, or lust. The way these days people are specially in the western countries, and you greedy all over the world is really shocking. Right from the childhood our children also will be amazed to know how they are learn to ask for this or ask for that. Only running after things! All their industries are complete satisfaction in life can give you running with the big stories about what that equanimity, that balance by which you they make. And how people boast of their do not hanker after things. These days wealth! They will have a cross in their even India has become very much necks to show that they are Christians. Westernized in the sense, they are also First of all one should never wear that cross on which Christ was crucitied. But very much wanting to have this or that. they do make up by this hypocrisy and they Actually now in America suddenly with this are the another extreme of Christ. Not only happening, people are getting to spirituality. They come to spirituality they but even their wives and Children are because they think they have not found ail very greedy people. They should have this, they should have that. But now India any satisfaction anywhere. What we have to receive from his life, the great life of is very much in the same run. And what do they ask for? They think by getting all these Christ? First he was born is a small little things around them they will be very hut and he was put in a cradle which was all covered with dry, very dry grass. Can comfortable. Its not so. They are all the you imagine? And then he sacrificed his time hankring and they cannot even enjoy what ever they have achieved. It is life on the cross. Whole thing is a story of a

 May-June 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 13 helped the needy because he understood something very surprising that in a country their problems. Because he could feel like America where there was no them, he tried to help all kinds of diseased corruption but there were people making people under-priviledged, while today's big big big money. They are supposed to be disciples of Christ! Its beyond me. India world has come to such a nonsense that was once upon a time a real saintly they help countries to fight. They create Christianity to fight. What is Christianity country, where saints were respected. But doing in this country? Is just to create a big now a days India has fallen down to such a low level of greed that its impossible to power of creating lots of Christians. I have understand these people. They can say heard from many places, how they are they had not such a great following of converting people to Christianity. Christ Christ and those who follow Christ also, never converted even a single person. He the Christians here, they are the worst. wanted to give transformation as you all have got it, but not changing the religion or They are the ones who have taken to all changing your birth mark. No. And what did kinds of western life of greed. And they call he achieve is this kind of, useles, third rate themselves Christian! But Christ has shown that you don't people who are running after lust and greed. need anything in this world. He was such a I get worried sometimes about myself great personality, such a great incarnation. He is respected everywhere, why? that I hope my disciples and my children won't do things which are against Sahaja, Because his power of sacrificing was the which are against the principles of Sahaja. highest. Not because he was owning a big And one of the principles of Sahaja is that car or any big house, nothing. Only because he was such a humble man. His you have to help people, those who are life is remarkable and that today he down trodden, those who are not yet realized. You have to give them realization. governs the hearts of so many, despite the It is not the way world is going on that we fact that he was born a very-very poor man give help to people who have ruined in this and was crucified also as a very poor man. So those people who are running after world. If you have to save this country, if you have to save the whole world, then we money are no way Christians, are have to become like Christ. Develop your nowhere near Christ. And so happy and sacrificing temperament. It should be very joyous he was, and be helped the poor, he

 14 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 Actually you should find out atleast in one very powerful thing because you are all A year, have we given one of our things to realized souls. Try to develop that? temperament of helping others. I have others? Not that I say you crucify your self, No. That will be too much. But can you at known some very great people in my life who were always willing to give, to people least sacrifice at least a little bit of your comfort for the people? Sahaja Yogis have who have not got it and they have been of to be extremely kind. Extremely kind and such a great temperament, they were never sort of given any big award or loving. If you are not that you are not anything. But very happy if they could help Sahaja Yogis. First thing you should be kind and loving, and understanding the others. It's very very sad today in this problems around and try to help as many country where so many people have people as you can. But that is not so, even their lives sacrificed achieve to independence and freedom and what is Sahaja Yogis do not understand what is happening is now today same people, or the value of their life! They are on the same path as Christ was. They are may be their children, may be, not the same, are supposed to be governing, realized souls. They must have that supposed to be incharge, are making feeling. They must have that oneness with the rest of the people and they should feel money! Why this situation has come? In the sacrifice of Christ within themselves. this country we had so many people who How He sacrificed his life is to improve our were extremely sacrificing. They were the Agya, to remove our Ego, to fight our ego. leaders, but how many of you are like that? How many of you would like to give away We are so egoistical. Whatever he has done is a waste, is something people don't some thing of yours to others? What understand and they do not imbibe his would you do to help others? character and his life. Its very bad. For us Its very sad that the Christian nations he has a very great massage, for all the have never followed Christ and we also are becoming the same. I don't say that we people who are realized souls, he is a very should not do business or we should not great example. There are so many things to be done. make money. You can, but with all that you My mind is always with the needy and I must remember for whom are you doing have started many such organizations. it? What are you going to do with it? With You know that very well. Recently I started this money what are you going to do?

 May-June 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 15 two parts. One is the rich and the other is something for the destitute women and orphans in Delhi. I paid most of the money very poor people. These very poor people just make my heart wrench. Wrench with but at just the finishing, I said why not ask pain! I don't know how to help them! It's the Sahaja Yogis to pay that little money to finish. And they did, they did pay. In Delhi, I such a vast community. But if you people must congratulate them for showing the decide, you can go round, you can go round, and you can find out ways and way to other Sahaja Yogis. I was amazed how they could raise so methods of helping the people who are extremely poor. They need your help by all much money for this big organization! It is means and you are capable. With the something we never see how the women are suffering in our country. How the Mahalaxmi's blessings you are well destitute women are suffering! They are equipped and try to help the poor. Try to help the people who are in great left out by their husbands for no fault. Just trouble. I know they are not Sahaja Yogis. like that for some whim they are left on the street with their children, more in the Don't expect them to be Sahaja Yogis. They cann't be. At the time of Christ, how muslims, it is worse and I felt very much that I should try to do some thing, atleast many were there who were Sahaja Yogis? How many people were there who could bring the attention of the people to their lot understand the depth of human problems? and to their problems so that they come up into life and earn their living. But Christ did and he sacrificed his life for think it's the duty of all the Sahaja the sins of the people. Can you imagine? It's a day to celebrate his birthday with Yogis to go and see around who needs your help? Just don't live for yourself, very great joy. What a birth and what a life earning for yourself, making money for that he had to go through! Nobody would like to have that kind of a life but the yourself but try to help. Help those people essence of it you must understand. who can really be helped and they should Running after greed is madness. There's say these are the Sahaja Yogis who have done. So many ideas I have of helping no end to greed. Those who are greedy, people and I am going to try them with are greedy all the time. They are asking for whatever money I have, but I wish you money, asking for this, asking for that. could decide to do something for them. Why not see to others, What do they Specially this country is divided into atleast want? Because we are in collective

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 16 have seen people who are so mad! Like in consciousness. We should understand America they found out those people at the what do these people want? What can we do for them? I know its very difficult in top of every organization, corporators, who are so rich that they had 25 these modern times with all the advertisements going on but we are eroplanes and about fifty, over fifty cars. Are they going to travel by these fifty cars? Sahaja Yogis. We have to be normal How are they going to travel? One foot in people, we have to face it in a way that a one car and other foot in another car? But saint has to face, and try to eradicate al these ills by your special powers. they had it. All this kind of madness, and Today is a day of great joy to me and to they said that now there is nothing to say as such but now these are all confiscated. all of you. Also at the same time, when I What will you do with all the people of see the life of the Christ, such a short life, this kind of temperament? Is it not how miserable it was! Not because of poverty. No, but because of hatred and madness to have 25 aeroplanes and about 50 motor cars? And they thought no end of because of tortures he had to go through. He didn't mind poverty. Didn't write themselves! Stupid as they were, when anything about it. What he felt bad was they will die, all this will finish. They are really the way things are wrong and the fighting about something. In America it is such a funny thing. Well you do way they were oppressed. And he took up understand where are we going with our all that upon himself. To solve the greed? There is one incident where a very problems He created the Christians and what they are doing is nonsense, just a young girl married a very very old man, very old man and when this old man died nonsense. It has no meaning. It has no meaning to Christ's life and it has no he left all his money to this young lady. So the son came over and made a case that I meaning to the richness of his great work. So when we are celebrating his have been his son for so many years and how can this lady get all the money? She birthday we should also celebrate his sacrificing capacity, his power of loving. got billions and billions, but still she wanted to have the whole! So she gave excuses Now Sahaja Yogis have become very good saying, I have done so much for this old people, very loving people. No doubt about man, I have sacrificed so many things and it, but still I think the greed lingers on. this and that. So shameless thing the way There is no end to greed. I must tell you, I

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 17 have got your.realization. So what are you people are and they are not ashamed that they are asking for money, money money: doing? Are you demanding money from for comfort, comfort, comfort. It is very every one or you are giving love to difficult to understand human beings. everyone? Let me hear the stories of Once they have gone in a strange way, Sahaja Yogis who are giving love and. they can go to very great extent. They don't compassion. know how to sacrifice. I have seen when I am sorry today on the day of his Birthday I have to tell about his life which Gandhiji asked people to sacrifice, all the women gave away their ornaments, gave was very very painful otherwise, For us to such a glorious away their lives, went to jails, did all kinds that understand of things to achieve independence. But personality, such a great Sahaja Yogi, He what independence they have got? had to go through so many problems in his Immediately all the thugs of the world life and his own people troubled him. His own people tried to take advantage of him. became incharge, all the thieves of the world became incharge. What do you say I too have this experience from Sahaja Yogis who got well out of Sahaja Yoga and to such a country where every thing that is they tried to trouble me. They tried to make great and noble goes into waste? Have you been a noble person? Ask yourself. money out of me. Everyone knows. They Have you been noble? Have you tried to have such a bad value system that how help others? From the life of Christ we can you say they are realized souls! So we have to know that he lived in poverty. He have to think where we can help others, what we can do for them. This is one of the was king of kings but he lived in poverty, in things one has to learn from the life of the Greece, and he did everything for people Christ. I was actually born in a Christian who were sinful, who were in trouble. Such I found out among the a lot, one person. Now you are so many. family and what so many of you. You all have to do Christians that extremely they are mean something. Don't live like these dirty people. They are planning against each other and very money oriented. corporators but try to do. That you have to sacrifice something of your earnings, When my father went to jail they threw us out of Church. To love your country is a something of your luxuries for the sake of sin, it? They did it and when he came back your countries, because you are Sahaja and he became the Mayor of Nagpur, they Yogis. You are not ordinary people. You

 18 May-June 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 stupid thing to do is very common, very were his greatest admirers. They took out a procession. So my father just smiled at it and he said, "See these stupid people." bad. I want you all to be above money, to be above all these wordly things and This is complete stupidity and this kind of you will never starve, you will never greed and this kind of stupidity must be have problems. But do not get mixed up with this kind of nonsensical things. stopped. They run after money, they run after positions, they run after also very bad This is God's work and you should not FLibn. things. Some of them, not the Sahaja make money out of it, in no way. So we have to learn a lot from the great Yogis, but they do. But even among Sahaja Yogis I have found people who are very life of Christ who was born as a very humble man and he did such great things. money oriented. They have made money He tried to improve our Agyas and even out of Sahaja Yoga. I am such a useless now if you think of him, your agya will be person, I don't understand money. So they could befool me. Alright, does not matter. alright. It will be finished. I know also And for years together they were befooling among Sahaja Yogis there are many me! Its alright. Now what to do? What do I people who are very pushing. All the times need money for? That is the trouble; the pushing themselves. For what? What do trouble is if you are not careful, if you are you want? All the time they are pushing around just like all other stupid people. not very money oriented, others can rob So to feel the satisfaction within you. I said, 'let them rob', let them do what they like, but I can't develop the yourself, just like Christ. you have to meditate and introspect and find out "Are can get after temperament by which I I accept what you satisfied with life? You have to be very people for money. I cannot. much satisfied in life, otherwise there is no ever account you give me. I accept use having Sahaja Yoga. No use getting whatever you say. I know it is sinful, it is your self realization. I bless you from my wrong. They are not aware of it, I cannot heart that you take the character of Christ help. They all will be ruined. All such people. I as a model for you and to understand the know that. But what to do if they do not problems of the world, from the whole world as your own problems. realize themselves. Making money out of May God bless you. Sahaja Yoga, can you imagine? Such a

 Puja at Vaitarna 31.12.2002 (Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) I am very very happy to see so many of not here today to see you all. He has done so much work relentlessly without you coming down here for the programme. Actually I bought this land at least twenty- expecting any reward whatsoever. And I five years back and could not do any thing wish you could have him as your ideal and that will work out everything in that way. about it, as there were lots of objections, this and that. But then somehow I planned There is one thing about him, I know, he never tried to show off anything. He was a the whole thing and it all worked out. very intelligent, educated man but he Happy to see you all here, that with all the difficulties, ultimately now you find so caught hold of all the people of ordinary many Sahaj Yogis attending this living and he looked after them and promoted their skill of music and art. With programme of my Puja. I must remember the same idea, I decided to have this place my brother Baba who has worked very dedicated to his idea of propagating music hard for the propagation of Indian music, and art. And I am happy to see, that, that classical music, all types of art, what ever he could do. It is a very sad thing that he is idea has materialized. But I wish my

 20 May-June 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 brother was here to make you feel very Maharashtra? No point doing anything for these Maharashtrian people. They fight for happy about it! He was a very loving and a kind person. Never he used to get angry some reason or the other. No shame, nothing. If they don't find space to sit, what with anyone, I have seen that. Always he can we do? No maturity at all. I don't know gave a very good picture of every person to how there is music in these quarrelsome me. But you cannot help it. (Translated from Marathi Part of Speech) people and it has grown so much and I am It is the speciality of Maharashtra - fed up with it. Everybody is complaining Fighting. Very good at fighting. Do any about something. Have you not found peace in Sahajayoga? Great Saints and thing for them but nothing enters into their head. They have no understanding, Sages have told so much knowledge in always ready to fight, even with swords. I this land but it has no effect at removing our quarrelsome nature. They will fight am fed up with your quarreling nature. This beautiful, building has been constructed even on their name, keep behaving don't know when this foolishly. for our classical music. They fought even foolishness is going to be removed from on this and many times I felt why build it in

 21 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 being able to sit or not getting to see? I did Maharashtra? They just don't understand peacefull living and absorbing everything not want to speak anything but I had no start shouting option when I saw you and I had to say. Just peacefully. Now if anybody fights, he will be thrown out immediately. Our foreign Sahaja Yogis of Sahajayoga. If you cannot live lovingly say, are they uncivilized people? No, No. with everyone then why are you in they are very well educated, but very quarrelsome, and why they fight, they only Sahajayoga? Babamama never got angry know. Atleast please don't fight in with any body. He would praise everybody. I was thinking how could everybody have Sahajayoga and be a bit peaceful. At least try, we want to change, isn't it? Instead of such a good state. But Baba brought seeing what is wrong with others, see what people together with love, it may be just youR lot of work in Maharashtra, at Nagpur. never sit in My car, never come to My house. He was very understanding. He People in Nagpur are very active and they also belonged to this Maharashtra, but he helped him. But nobody understands that. You must understand Sahaj Yoga and was not so aggressive. You have joined the work of such a great personality, so become a Sadhu. They think very lowly of atleast follow some of his good qualities. just making money somehow, run here or We have built this temple for music and there for it. How can you be a Sahajayogi? One must feel that I am a realized soul and other arts. Your children must progress in these fields. They must understand our Mother has worked out so much for us; we must achieve some good state. So music. These foreigners understand your music very well, isn't it shameful? We resolve today to stop fighting and don't be don't understand that, just nothing, what's greedy for money. Greed for money has made things difficult for Sahajayoga in the use? You must have knowledge about Maharashtra. I have worked a lot in music even though you may not be a student of this place. Unless you know Maharashtra and have had all sort of experiences. Now please realize that you what Tala' is this, what Raga is this, you cannot enjoy music. I request you all to are a Sahajayogi and live gracefully and be leave aside quarreling nature and develop proud of being a Sahajayogi. What is there to fight in Sahajayoga? Is this a political goodness within you, this is the work of Sahajayoga, but I sometimes feel that you meeting that you must complain about not

 May-June 2003 22 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 Vaitarna 31-12-02 cannot reap anything if you sow seeds (Translated from Hindi) in unfertile land. But now things are better Luckily I know Hindi Language. What I with many people coming to Sahajayoga. have to say is that life should be musical. So don't just come to learn Music here. You must learn to behave in a Sahaja 'Musical' means to improve the state of mind of human beings, to make it rhythmic way, understand the greatness of Sahaja, and systematic. Without achieving it there or else it is useless. There are many ordinary music schools around. By is no use; what will be the difference between you and other people? You learning music from these if you are going to break heads of others, it is people also keep on quarreling like others! Most important thing is that we should better you do not learn music. So have more love and devotion in our hearts. please, with music bring the music of It will bring peace to you and also to others. your life into day-to-day behaviour. Without peace music has no meaning. We Without bringing that music this have constructed this beautiful building as programme will not achieve its end. Per the ideals of Baba Mama. The purpose is to inculcate music in the lives of people Take a vow today, let anybody sav anything. The second problem out here and to make the whole atmosphere is about making money. It has become rather too much. I am fed up with it. People peaceful. The world needs peace today, everything else is meaningless. make money even in Sahajayoga. Are you We have to see how peaceful we are. If going to change or not? Most important the effect of our peace is not there on the is people of our country then where else our thing that there should be music in our lives peace is going to have its effects? All over Instead of having rhythm and ragdari in our it is said that India is the messenger of lives we just keep fighting, thinking bad of peace. But the reality does not appear to be like that. There is quarreling and fighting others and seeing only self-interest. It is bad. every where. I don't know what to say? So Now forget what happened in the past. those who want to learn music they should hereforth only people with have music is their hearts. They should But will be think that it does not behove a musician to understanding, compassion brought forward, who will bring all the run after money and women. I bless that this institution blossoms people together.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 23 and those who join it should learn music yourself to be beggars on the street which and make their lives musical. I hope you you were before coming to Sahaja Yoga. will fulfill this desire of mine. Whenever Today I bless you specially that you should all be musical. May god bless you. you feel angry, whenever you get the fit of temper, whenever you complain, (Speech in English) tell yourselves that I am a Sahaj Yogi. I Today I wanted to bless you all that you am a different person. How the Mother has completely musical in become transformed me! If you just understand temperament, rhythmic and entertaining to this thing then the feeling of self respect others and not quarrelsome. As you have will awaken in you. If this feeling is not seen, how the Western music is taking to wrong side, to wrong progress, I don't awakened then there is no use, there is no want you to fall in that trap. use of material objects. It does not behove This will all disappear, I know, as it is you (Sahaja yogis) to quarrel over small small things. Now you have become very destructive. But after coming to Saints and seers, very high caliber Sahaja also if you have the same personalities. But you are not sensitive to destructive idea then how can anybody help you? So I hope you will fulfill my ideal. this fact. You do not understand that you May God bless you. are saints and seers. You just think

 Inauguration of the Music Academy Vaitarna, India, 1st January, 2003 (Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) I'm sorry I spoke in Hindi language, know human beings have those failings, I because to talk about My father in any didn't know. I was absolutely beyond them. came to know After reading everything, other language is very difficult, though he was a master of English language and he that there are human beings, mostly, who used to read a lot. He had a big library of have some failings. Maybe because of ego his own where I also learnt English, or may be because of some bad training, because of mother, may be father, because my medium of instruction was whatever it is, the family. And that's how I Marathi. I'd never studied Hindi or English. understood human beings, as they are. But because of his library, because I was very fond of reading, I picked up English, Gradually, when I came to Sahaja Yoga, - all over, met many like that, not one whatever it is, and also Hindi. Now they all whether in India or outside I saw. But most say I speak very good English and very good Hindi. I am surprised, because to Me of them, 99%, Improved. One per cent are still there, hanging in there. they were foreign languages. And when I did my matriculation also, I The greatest problem of human beings is ego. If there is ego, you can't do anything had a very small book of English, and for Inter-Science also I had a very small book. about it, because it thinks, "I've done something great that I have this ego". And And in the Medical College of course there was no question of any language, but they cannot appreciate other people, leave because I used to read a lot. So I would alone loving anybody else. 'Ego' means you love yourself, think no end of yourself. suggest to all of you to read, read more. So, India is full of it. Abroad also I've seen But don't read nonsensical books, very it's quite a lot, but at least they know there good famous books you must read. That's how I developed my language, and I had to is ego and they can face it. But this country, I don't know what sort of things do so well. By reading that, I could know also so they do that they develop this ego, and much about the human failings. I didn't they think they're quite right.

 May-June 2003 25 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 Every country has its own problems, position he was occupying. His humble nature was natural, very natural, very but we have something very great with us sweet. And he has been with me since his is our music. Not musicians, but music. So the musicians should take to Sahaja very childhood, so I noticed him. He never Yoga. They should meditate. And if a had any malice against any one. He never musician is money-oriented, then you wanted to surpass anyone. Always wanted cannot help him. Either he should be to be at a zero point. And if anybody music-oriented, or money-oriented. When troubled him, he used to make him go somewhere with his own tricks. He was they are money-oriented, they never value themselves, I think. Because if you have very clever. And he had found out that 'I am no good for these crooks,' so he used to music, the talent of music, why should you handle them very cleverly, and he used to care for money? And whatever money you give them, they'll be never satisfied. I have see that they go about. He knew who were the show-offs, and he used to tell me seen very great musicians who were about them: "These people are very big never, never money-oriented, who didn't care for power. But we have even now show-offs, and they will try to dominate others, they don't know anything." But the many musicians who I would not say are best part of his heart is his poetry. He the last word in music. Those who are, are wrote beautiful poetry. very humble. They'll always tell you, "We He was horrible to begin with! I used to have to still learn a lot. We have to write his essays in the school. So his understand a lot." teachers used to say: "Can you write such So I was very much touched, and I was very much enamoured, by the statue of good essays? And when it comes to exams, then why do you get a big zero?" Babamama and of My father being there. Not because they were My brother, or So he didn't tell them that I'm writing the father, but they were very, very great essays. But then, suddenly, he developed an aptitude for languages: for Marathi, for people, and their greatness has touched Me. Baba's quality was that he was a Hindi, for Urdu, also for English, very loving man, extremely loving, and very surprising! He was very good at forgiving person. Extremely unassuming Mathematics, because My mother was a mathematician, but suddenly became and very loving. He never cared for publicity, or he never cared for what equipped in languages. And I used to give

 May-June 2003 26 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 him my poetry to correct, so good he was! temperament. He never tried to show off. Never. Very simple man, very simple And he knew Urdu words, Hindi words, habits, and always he tried to convince in English, and Marathi also. So he used to tell me: "The Marathi is very good. If you the people that they should lead such and such life. Without telling them, I don't know want to find somebody's faults, Marathi is how he managed it. the best, and the way you can tell them." So with his love and attention, now we And lots of words he told me, and so interesting, in Marathi. I said: "Baba, when have so many musicians, so many people here. I am thankful to him and thankful to did you study Marathi?" He said: "I've just My father, for whatever they have done for come to know." So his knowledge was all innate, and Sahaja Yoga. May God bless you all. of everybody loved him because Makar Sankranti Message 2003 based on the Sun and it never changes, On 14th of January there were about 20 every year Makar Sankranti is celebrated on 14th Jan. The vegetables are grown of us at Shri Mataji's daughter's house to celebrate Makar Sankaranti Puja. We and the farmer is dependent on the Sun started decorating the living hall and after about two hours, one could not recognize God who also creates the Rain. So best is the place. We had flowers, fruits and vegetables (This is also known at His help in keeping you cool. Shakambhari Devi Puja) and also to be a worshipper of the Sun and ask for After this, Shri Mataji asked us to perform Aarti and asked if there was a organized an outside caterer. Harmonium (a very unfortunate situation At about 7.45 pm, Shri Mataji came and for us.) Then Shri Mataji asked if any one was looking marvelous and very fresh-like of us had any questions? Of course not!! A a true Goddess. She talked about the Sun lovely small puja! She then asked all of us channel. How we should now worship the Sun and how the Sun protects us during to have dinner after the Prasad. hot summer months. India being an She waited until all of us had had the Prasad dinner and then we sat around Shri agricultural country, was very dependent Mataji for 15-20 minutes and chatted about on the Sun. How some of us get too Hot, the local state of affairs of the Govt. of (excessive right-sidedness) due to the Maharashtra - (a new Chief Minister Sushil Sun channel. Try to be in balance and ask Kumar Shinde was today appointed in place of Deshmukh). the Sun to help in keeping cool. Shri Mataji also mentioned that this is the day which is

 Birthday Felicitations Programme 20 March, 2003 Nirmal Dham., Delhi (Pravachan of her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) there won't be any problem of any kind- no Today everybody is trying to talk to you in English language because I think they political problem, no economic problem, feel the majority of you are speaking nothing of the kind. All these problems are created by mind, English. which is not yet fully developed, I should wish I could tell you something new say. And once it is developed, you are not about life. Life goes on moving. Whether bothered. You are bothered about others, you are eighty or ninety makes no difference. Only thing is how much you you are bothered about emancipation of others. It is automatic. I don't have to say have used the light that you have got in that. But you have seen in your lives how Sahaja Yoga. your attitudes have changed towards life All of you are now enlightened in Sahaja Yoga. All your kundalinis are up and I think and that is what is more important than you know most of it. But despite that, it's anything else. Some of you are very successful important how much time you devote for people in politics, in business and this and the emancipation of human beings, for helping them to come up. Instead of that. But you are not satisfied till you give criticizing them, instead of condemning Realization to people, till you make them perfect like yourself. them, your duty is to put them on a higher (I'm) so very happy to see so many pedestal, so they respect themselves and people being helped by Sahaja Yoga. I respect their Self Realization. never expected that in My lifetime only I'l It's very important because l met many see this, but (it) just worked out, worked Sahaja Yogis to begin with who were very out so wonderfully. I'm really amazed how much critical of their colleagues and all other things, but since they have got things grew so fast and how it has grown Realization, they think it's a matter of duty into so many countries, into so many people's heart and how they have taken to for them, that they should attend to the emancipation of human beings. Then Sahaja Yoga! They're working not only in

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 28 that and making others rise also? their own country, but also outside. After all, I can't go everywhere now. But despite We can change the whole world and that, Sahaja Yoga is spreading, which is you start understanding the problems of such a great thing for Me-so satisfying! the world and you can get rid of them with You have no idea when I hear that Sahaja your kundalini awakening. Such a great thing is this kundalini, I tell Yoga has gone to this country and gone to that country. you, that it makes human beings something superlative. It's all described as sayings of Practically, they say, in forty-three saints and this and that, but a Sahaja Yogi countries Sahaja Yoga is settled down in a has a greater power and the greater power very large way and, in a smaller way, may is that he can make others Sahaja Yogis. He be, it is in many more. But to hear this can give Realizations to others. They must also, I never expected that it would work that fast. It's all thanks to you, to you use their powers and should try to change the whole world. That's My desire. I don't Sahaja Yogis who have achieved this know in My lifetime I'll achieve it or not. But miracle. I'm thankful to you all, from India and you all should decide that way and I'm sure it will all work out. abroad, those who have taken up the flag May God bless you. Thank you very of emancipation and are moving forward, much. instead of criticizing, instead of degrading some people. It's very easy to do that. But Thank you very much. what about you, yourself rising above al

 80th Birthday Puja 21-03-03 Nirmal Dham Delhi (Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) (Translated from Hindi) shows it was the need of the world. It was Eternal blessings to all of you. In such a the need of the people. That's why they big number you have come here to have taken to Sahaja Yoga with such celebrate my birthday! I do not know how enthusiasm. I could understand in a country like do I thank you? So many people have come from abroad and many have come India, where they have talked about Self from all over our own country to Realization, but in a country which is not participate. It moves my heart. I don't know what extraordinary feat I have should appreciate, assimilate and enjoy aware of a higher spiritual life, you all performed that you all have gathered here Sahaja Yoga as a very great blessing of to celebrate my birthday! it is the the times. These are special times, I think, that greatness of your hearts that you have come to this far fetched place and you have fallen into this trap of love and honoured me this day. I have no words to enlightenment. I Myself was not very sure that you tell you as to how overjoyed I am! would appreciate the love that one can (English Pravachan) What I was telling them, the way you are celebrating My birthday, I am overjoyed enjoy within yourself. What is the spiritual understanding? I didn't know how you and I don't know how to express that joy would appreciate and enjoy yourself. which is really overflowing. That means you are all very much I really don't know what have I done for capable of this tremendous love and this you that you have come up with such spiritual awakening. No doubt about it. enthusiasm, with such love. It's your great How is it that it has worked out so heart which is appreciating My humble beautifully? Very surprising and also the way you have got your spiritual powers work. All over the world, Sahaja Yoga has and the way you are using it, is really beyond understanding, any human spread and again spreading like fire. That

 30 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 understanding. That's why people don't please try to give them awakening believe that there's something like Sahaja because they are all human beings born at Yoga, that there is a power in every human this time and so they deserve it. You have being which is universal and which can be to just try meeting them, talking to them enlightened. It's something beyond the and giving them Self Realization. It's not very difficult. Every one of you can do that. conception of human beings that they can achieve this kind of a spiritual growth Every one of you have to give to only ten to fifteen people and will change the world. within themselves. I wonder how many of you also realize That is our ambition, to change the world to the new style of understanding that we that whatever you have achieved is have to live peacefully as human beings. something great. It is the climax of human Without any discretion of colour, without development, human growth and all the advancement we have made. This will any discreation of nations, we all have to live together as human beings. This is the change, definitely change the world and its only difference between human beings understanding. and animals. I'm talking to you today at the time when As long as we are not spiritual, it's all the war of Iraq is on in a very big way. I right. But if you can transform them into don't know what to say, how it is going to spiritual personalities, I'm sure everything work out, but with all your efforts towards will change. As we have seen now in peace, it will get solved, I'm sure, and will Sahaja Yoga, it doesn't bother a Sahaja bring peace everywhere. Yogi to quarrel or to fight, but they are so We don't want to have wars, but we peaceful and gentle with each other. have to change human beings, otherwise So today we have to pray that Sahaja you cannot trust them. This is a very big Yoga must spread all over the world and challenge to all of you. You have to work very hard to get to this idea of giving that everyone in the world should get realized. You have to promise that you will Realization to everyone, otherwise you go out of the way and try to change the cannot stop it just by giving them lectures human beings who are just mislaid on their or threatening them. The awakening is needed within, which way somewhere. I'm sure once it starts working out, everybody will understand the of course, I don't know if everyone will try value of peaceful life as Sahaja Yogis. to have, but as many as can have it,

 May-June 2003 31 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 their self realization immediately. They get We have to do intensive work because all the blessings. You should go and and you can see human beings needed this. tell such people that there is no need to Today that is the need of the hour. At the stand on the head (in Shirsha Asna). right time, we are now ready to do Sahaja Yoga and spread it all over, as much as Sahaja Yoga will come to you without doing any penance. To begin with, they will possible, wherever you will see the not believe that it is so easy, but they will necessity. be convinced when they see that one after Of course it will work, but otherwise another thousands of people of this also, whether there is necessity or not, there's an urge in the human beings to country have come to Sahaja Yoga. It is desire that Sahaja Yoga should spread rise, rise above all these human failures. my in a big way in this country. The problems I bless you from My heart, bless you of the people of this country are very small very much, that you carry on your work of Sahaja Yoga, of spreading Sahaja Yoga, of and insignificant. Once you get your realization in Sahaja Yoga, nothing will giving Realization. You have got powers. remain to be done. If the people of this You know you have. Only use that power country make little efforts, they could and give Realization to people. That is one spread Sahaja Yoga and give realization promise you have to make on My birthday. very easily. My eternal blessings to all of Thank you very much you that each one of you gives realization 80th Birthday Puja Pravachan to at least one hundred people. Our (Translated from Hindi) Today I told them in English language numbers have not yet increased so much. Our state is not so immature. It is so easy but there is no need to tell it to you (Indians) because the people of this to understand that Sahaja Yoga is the country know as to how significant easiest way and seekers are ready to get spiritual life is. They wish to ascend it. To the villages or cities, wherever you spiritually and make efforts to achieve this go, it is suitable for Sahaja Yoga. It is, therefore my desire that you should do it end. Some go to Himalayas and others go whole-heartedly and next year the number and sit near the seas. For hours together of Sahaja Yogis, who come here, gets they work hard and observe fasts. There is no need to do all this penance. doubled. I thank you very much for the respect When they come to Sahaja Yoga, they get

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 32 and love that you have given to me. But the way I have desired, each one of you should give realization to at least one hundred people. That is all. Try. If you have faith, then it is my promise that in a year each one of you will give realization to hundred people very easily. Eternal blessings to you all; eternal blessings. This can be done. Those who do not know this language are doing it, then what is the difficulty for you? The whole preparation has been made for you. Saints and seers have done a lot of work in this country. In no other country, so much was done. So as an Indian, you should think as to how much responsibility lies on your shoulders and how much you could do this work. My hearty blessings to all of you that you succeed in your mission. May your resolve be crowned. This is my hearty blessing. It is hearty and I hope you will imbibe it fully and continue to give Sell- realization to people. Eternal blessings to you all

 From Hindu Daily - A Report March - 2003 (A message for one and all.. A very special person descended at with the key to the Brazilian Capital. In 1995 the Indian dispensation gave her a New Delhi's Nirmal Dham the other day to shower her blessings. To felicitate Her one-hour prime time television series. Even the Chinese Government invited her Holiness, Mataji Nirmala Devi, on her 80th birthday yogis gathered to honour this seer to speak at the International Women's Conference in Beijing. for her tireless work spanning across 33 On the occasion the Deputy Prime years in nearly 100 countries. The yogis had come not only from every nook and Minister, L.K. Advani said, "Unlike contributions in spheres such as corner of the country but also from across the world. Not only those immersed into education, which affects only a section of spirituality were present but also the society normally wthin the national boundary, contributions in the sphere of politicians, civil servants and people from spirituality cut across national boundaries." different walks of life collected to catch a Gregoire, a leader from Switzeriand, glimpse of the venerated Mother and seek mentioned Her methodology on self her blessings. creating and transformation An erudite speaker, Mataji Nrmala Devi is the founder and director of Sahaja Yoga consciousness that leads to a happy and blissful life. Dr. Wells from the United Vishwa Nirmala Dharma, or an Non-Governmental Kingdom acknowledged the fact that she established Organisation operating in many countries. taught him and numerous followers the For her selfless work and spiritual technique for overcoming anxiety normally "human level with teachings she has been recognized associated consciousness," Debu Choudhary, one of worldwide by several renowned institutions. In 1993, she was appointed as the doyens of the music world, opined that honorary member of the Presidium of as music was meditation, it was route to get closer to Mataji Nirmala Devi. Petrovskaya Academy of Art and Science. Born into a Christian family of Prasad One year after that she was presented

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 34 and Cornelia Salve, at Chhindwara in along with other freedom fighters. She Madhya Pradesh, Mataji Nirmala Devi, married C.P. Srivastava, one of India's then only Nirmala, lived with her parents in best civil servants, who was conferred knighthood by the Queen of England. Later Mahatma Gandhi's ashram. Her father a close associate of Mahatma Gandhi - was on, she came to know through self- a renowned scholar, who translated the realisation that she had a unique gift which Quran into Marathi. Her mother was the had to be made available to all humankind. On the occasion, she said, "Most of the first woman to receive an honours degree in Mathematics. Actively involved in the problems that emanate in the society today can be traced to the mind that is not freedom struggle to oust the British, Mataji Nirmala Devi participated at the historic fully developed.' She also urged people to apply themselves in the emancipation of Quit India Movement. Consequently, she was imprisoned humankind.

 Blessings of the Nature March - 2003 whole scene formed again into a yellow On the night of 26th December, 2001 i.e. early morning at 3:30 A.M. of 27th glittering mass in the form of Shri Ganesha.Oh!!! We were really blessed by December 2001 while returning from the H.H. Shri Mataji. Pandal after having the Divine Darshan of Shri Mataji, towards M.T.D.C. Hotel, we This whole divine scenario was such as if some experienced artist had drawn it saw a yellow glittering mass of clouds in the sky-nearly above the bungalow where with the brush of an expert and a skillful goldsmith had decorated this divine Shiva Shri Mataji was staying. This mass of cloud formed into the Lingam with gold, silver and precious stones. Shiva Lingam and then into Shri I wanted to share this divine experience Ganesha's shape. This formation and happiness with all my Sahaj Parivar. occurred within (maybe) 90 seconds. It breathtaking and a divine We could not take any photo of the a was Lingam. So I had to try my best to draw/ scenario!!!!!!!! 'sketch this unique scenario with suitable The whole Shva Lingam and its base colours, which were available at home. was of black colour as if made from black The persons in the auto rickshaw were marble stone. The outer lining of the my self i.e. Mrs. Shakuntala Talpady from Lingam and its base was shining and Baroda, Mrs. Raul (akka) from Baroda, luminiscent with yellow or golden light. The and Mrs. Pushpa Rao from New York. rim of the base was also sparkling as if some precious stones were studded. Mrs. Shakuntala Talpady Behind this whole Shiva Lingam were 604/B, Grow More Apts. white spiral like arranged clouds and each Nr. Rameshwar Mahadev Mandir cloud was having a silver lining. Behind Ashram Road Subhampura, these clouds rays of light were coming out. Vadodara-390-023. scenario This whole was very (Gujarat) Tele : (0265) 390767 But within no time this beautiful!!!!!!!!

 Maha Sahasrara Day 5th May, 1983 (From Nirmala Yoga) are two more Chakras, about which you On behalf of all of you, I thank the do not talk much-they are the Chakra of Sahaja Yogi organizers of Bombay, who Moon (Lalita) & charka of Sun (Shri). Then have made these arrangements and on there is "Hamsa" Chakra. Thus there are my own behalf also, I thank them a lot. This is a beautiful place they have chosen three more-seven plus three make ten. Then-there are four chakras above the for us. It is also a gift of God, that at this Sahasrara. And about these chakras also, time the thing about which I was going to speak, sitting under the same trees the I have told you - Ardha-Bindu, Bindu, talk of Sahasrara is taking place. Fourteen Valaya and Pradakshina. These are the four. After coming to Sahaja Yoga and after years ago or we could say already thirteen your Sahasrara has opened, you have to have passed and now the fourteenth years year has started, this great work of pass through these four chakras, Ardha- Bindu, Bindu, Valaya and Pradakshina. opening the Sahasrara was accomplished After passing through these four charkas in this world. I have told you about this only, can you say that you have become a many times on every Sahasrara day, as to Sahaja Yogi. what had happened, how it was done and And if you see from another angle, we what is its importance. But the fourteenth birthday is very have to cross fourteen stages in reaching up to Sahasrara; if you divide them then important because man lives at fourteen there are seven chakras situated on Idā levels and the day he crosses over the Nadi (Channel) and seven on Pingla Nādi. fourteenth level, he becomes a complete When man makes his ascent, he does Sahaja Yogi. Therefore, today Sahaja Yoga not do so in straight direction. He comes has also become Sahaja Yogi. first to left then goes to right, then again to Like this, God has created fourteen left and then again to right. And when levels within us. If you simply count them, Kundalini ascends, it also does so, then you know that there are seven Chakras within us. Besides these, there dividing Herself into these two. The reason

 May-June 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 37 for it can be understood if I take the Rājanā, Birājanā-these words I have example two ropes. These two ropes said to you many times earlier, also; but together, side by side-in the process of today, specially, we should understand that on Sahasrara day what is Rajanā to going up or coming down-cross over reign, to be the master, what is Birājanā to twice. (Here Shri Mataji explained the rising of Kundalini along Ida & Pingala assume. Nadis; and making 4 loops-two each in Now, you are sitting, you look at these trees. This is the tree of Shriphala. Nariyal opposite directions-(clockwise and anti is called Shriphala. Coconut is called clockwise) at every chakra.) When Shriphala. Shriphala, which is coconut- Kundalini ascends, you see on the chakra whether you have ever thought about it or whether the left is caught or the right is not, I don't know. But it is a thing to be caught. Although Kundalini is only one, but on every charka you see both the things- really thought about-'Why is it called Shriphala?" thus you know whether left is caught or the This grows along the sea-coast and right. Thus, within us, if each chakra is nowhere else. The best fruit grows at the divided into these two-left and right-then sea coast. The reason is this, that the sea- it is the 'Dharma'. Wherever there is seven two's are, fourteen; similarly within dharma, only there, the Shriphala us first of all fourteen stages have to be blossoms. Where there is no dharma, crossed before reaching the Sahasrara. And if you understand this-that these Shriphala will not grow there. But 'all' things are contained in the sea. seven, and seven above-this way also a All sorts of-cleanliness, dirt; everything is path of fourteen is created. Therefore this thing 'fourteen' is very inside it. This water is also full af salt. It has salt in important in Kundalini Shastra. Very it. Christ had said that "You are the salt of the important. It's a very important thing. We earth'. Means, you can enter into should fully understand that we become entitled to the Blessings of everything. You can impart taste to Sahaja Yoga only after rising above everything. 'Are the salt'-without salt man cannot live. The 'prana-shakti' (Life force) these fourteen stages. We should that we take-in, if we don't have salt within unceasingly march forward and as we us, then even that prāna-shakti cannot imbibe it, get completely 'dyed' in it.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 38 work. It is a catalyst. And this salt-it fully has hair on the outside for protection. The organizes for us to live, to live in this world, protection from death is provided to us by to live in the 'prapancha' (illusary world). the hair. Therefore hair have been given Without salt man would be of no use. great respect; hair are great and a very But when this thing rises towards God powerful thing-because they protect you. (Paramātma), then it leaves all the salt You are protected by them. And inside this- below - everything is left. And when the like we have cranial bones-that too you see, light of the sun falls on these trees, and that inside the Shriphala there's a hard kind with the falling of sun-light as the sap of its of a covering on the outside, like this. After leaves and the sap of the whole tree is that inside us-grey matter and white matter-two such things are inside us. In the sucked upwards-because evaporation takes place-then, this water flows Shriphala too, you see-white matter and upwards through the trunk;-leaving grey matter,... and inside that is water, which is the cerebrospinal fluid inside us. 'everything' it crosses those fourteen things and on reaching the top, is formed Inside that Shriphala also there is water- that is the limbic area. Shriphala. So this sākshāt Shriphala, itself is-if, for You are that same Shriphala. And it is essential to offer Shriphala to the Devi. them (trees) this is the fruit, then for us, 'this' is the fruit. Our brain is the fruit of the Without the offering of Shriphala, the puja 'Sampanna' whole of our evolution. Whatever has been considered is not our evolution to date-that from amoeba, (accomplished). today we have become humans-we have Also Shriphala is made up in a strange got all that, as a result of this brain. From way. There is no 'phala' (fruit) in the world the brain, all this-whatever we have got-is like the Shriphala. No part of it (tree) goes waste. Each and every part of it is used. through this brain. Within this are all kinds From its leaves down to everything is of powers; of all kind. Within this is used. And of Shriphala itself-each and collected all the wealth that has been received by us. every thing is used. Now, the Atma (Spirit) resides inside You can see that the Shriphala is also like human being's Sahasrara. Like the hair this heart and after Sahaja-Yoga its light spreads within us in seven layers, from we have, the same way Shriphala also has both sides- that can happen only when hair. 'This Sahasrara is the Shriphala'. This

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 39 one's Sahasrāra is open. dharma; and joy within our Atma-start Till now, we have been doing the same getting enlightened. Its light spreads job with our brain; before realization-ego gradually at first, this you all know. Its light and superego, through these two grows slowly and slowly. It's a subtle thing, very subtle at first, because the gross whatever work is to be done, that we do; nothing except this. Ego and superego, or set-up we live in, in that set-up, it becomes difficult to catch hold of that subtle. you can say, 'manas' and ego-with the help of these two we do all our work. But Gradually that hold also develops. After after realization, we work with the help of that you start to grow, to progress. With our Atma. Atma, before realization resides the opening of a single curtain of within the heart,-absolutely separate-as a Sahasrāra, the Kundalini comes up. But "Kshétragyá' (witness of the field). Its job : its light does not start spreading all around whatsoever it may be-just to witness-it just then. The Kundalini has just come up keeps doings. But its light is not in our and you have saluted the seat of chitta (attention), it is separate from us. It Sadashiva. Within you, the light of Atma has started flowing hazily. But it has not is not in our chitta. After realization, it comes into our yet fully blossomed in the brain. chitta, first. First it comes into the chitta. Now, the surprising thing is, that if you And chitta, you know, is in the Void. After want to spread it through your brain, you cannot. Our brain and our heart-now a that, its light comes into the truth, because with the entering of light into our brain (as perfect balance of these will have to be shown. You know well, that when you work the brain gets enlightened) we know the truth. "Know". Doesn't mean that we know too much with your intellect, heart-failure occurs. And when you work too much with through the intellect, but know in reality your heart, the brain fails. There exists a (Sākshāt) that 'this is the truth'. After that its light is seen in the heart. The heart relationship between them, it already exists. It's a very deep relationship. And profound, becomes starts heart because of this deep relationship, when expanding, starts becoming vast, its power of love starts increasing. That's you get your realization their relationship why-'Sacchidananda'-Sat, Chitta and has to become deeper. The relationship Anand (Truth, atrtention and bliss (joy). between the heart and this brain should be Truth within our brain, chitta, within our very deep. The moment it gets completely

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 40 brain : "look here, there's nothing to fear. integrated, your (chitta) attention becomes completely Parameshwer-Swarup, (one There was no reason to be afraid. Now take a light and see." Although he understands it with supreme God). This very thing is also said in Hatha- through his brain, yet he is frightened. Yoga, that Manas (super-ego) and But when both the things become one- Ahamkāra (ego) both get dissolved, 'Laya'. you try to understand this point-that the But just by telling like this nobody is going brain, through which you think, which to understand, how could the ego and makes your Manas understand, and takes care of it; if that brain itself becomes your super-ego get dissolved? Sa they keep on Mana (), I mean if there's such an struggling with super-ego, and ego. Super ego shoots up by overpowering 'Ego' and instrument which could assume the vice versa. They cannot just understand function of accelerator and brake; and both what this madness is? How will this go? become "one', knowing everything, then, How to win over the super-ego and the only after achieving such a state, you become the perfect Master (Guru). We ego? There's only one way out for that- have to achieve such a state. 'Agnyā Chakra'. By working on the Agnya- By now, you people have progressed a chakra the two, ego and super-ego get lot; you have reached quite a high level. No fully dissolved, And as soon as they get doubt now you have become Shriphalas. dissolved, is Butlalways talk of what is ahead because if complete concord established between the heart and the this tree is to be climbed, then-have you brain. But there is no harmony. It is this seen how people climb? If you make some hormony between the heart and the brain one climb and see, then you will understand that we have to achieve. that he ties a rope around himself and So, your heart, becomes the Sahasrära keeps hooking that rope higher. When that your Sahasrāra, becomes, the heart. What rope is hooked higher up, then with its help, he climbs. In the same way, as we climb, you think is in your heart; and whatever is in our own rope has always to be kept hooked your heart, thatonly you think. When you get higher. And only when you learn this, can this state then there remain, no doubts, no disbeliefs, no fear; no such thing remains. your climbing be very quick. But mostly we keep hooking the rope Like, when a person fears, what is done to him? He is made to believe through the lower. Even after coming to Sahaja Yoga,

 May-June 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 41 we hook the rope lower and say that can they get Surya nor do this work, nor could we become Shriphalas. "Mother' we have made no progress at all". Tree should be very well observed and Now, how could there be progress when understood. You can learn Sahaja Yoga you hook the rope in the opposite direction very well from a tree. These are very great and make arrangements for coming down? While coming down, you do not Gurus for you. Like, when we look towards even need to hook the rope. You just a tree, we should first observe how it settles its roots. First, it takes care of and loosen it a bit and zoom, you will come fixes its roots. And to take care of and fix its down! That arrangement is already made- for coming down. It is to climb up, for roots, what does it do? It keeps which arrangement has to be made. So, to penetrating and going deep into the roots. This is our dharma, this is to go deep, And achieve something, hard work has to be with that attention it-sucks, the all put in. And to lose whatever has been achieved, no hard work is required-you prevading power. This is an inverted tree- its better to say this way. These roots Start come straight down, to the ground; there's sucking that all pervading power; and after no doubt about it. If you understand this point then you will absorbing it, what has it to do after all? realize that you have to look up always. Then its sight goes up and this way that Shriphala is formed. Standing on any step of the ladder if one is Your Sahasrara is also like this looking up then his state is higher than the Shriphala. It is extremely dear to Mother%3B one looking down from the higher step of and this very Sahasrara should be the ladder. This is why sometimes even surrendered to Her. Many people said to very old Sahaja Yogis, come down Me yesterday that: Mother, we feel the suddenly. People say that "Mother, he/she coolness (of vibrations) in the hands; also was such an old Sahaja Yogi; was for so in the feet, but not here (Sahasrara)." many years with you; did this, did that"-But "Who" sits there?"-just know this; the they always looked down. Their attitude coolness will come from here. brought them down. What could I do? And the one, who is sitting there, is the Sight should always be set higher. 'fruit' of 'all' things. The roots of this tree, you want to see this fruit (Shriphala), If fixed in the soil below, are also born of it. you have to look up. Everyone is looking It's trunk, its hard work, its evolution-'all' up. Why? Because-they know-that 'neither

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 42 this in the end become that fruit. dancing to its tunes. They are also Everything is inherent in that fruit. You put understanding the significance of the that fruit in the soil and again the whole whole thing. Similarly you also have Shriphalas. thing will be born. They are to be fully ripened and the only "it is the essence of all, it is the ultimate of all." way to ripen it is to eastablish concord with So far whatever Divine work has been the heart. This concord with the heart is done in this world, whatever has been important. Their is no difference between the heart and the brain. The heart desires done, the quintessence of it all today is our Maha Yoga. And who is the Mistress of it? and brain fullfills it. When complete You know. harmony is established between the two So, on such an auspicious time you only then you get the full benefit. Now for common people Sahaja Yoga is a have come on this earth and received it. So you should feel blessed and becoming very secret thing. They are not going to understand because their daily life is of that like this "Shriphala" you should surrender level only. Accordingly they move. But your yourself. The fruit is picked from the tree when it level is different. You must live at 'your own' is ripe, otherwise it is useless.. Unripe fruit level. When you look towards others, mostly could not be offered to the Mother. it is with compassion because what are these poor people? What is going to happen to So maturity, must be achieved and childishness given up. Till childishness them? Where will they go? They don't understand. What is their state?Onwhat path remains, you will keep sticking to the tree. How could such a fruit be offered? When it are they going to reach? Understand this, you is picked up from the tree and offered, only people try to understand that:if, by explaining to them, they understand Sahaja Yoga, even then is the Puja considered accomplished. So Shriphala is there before you as a then its very good. Try to make them symbol to understand Sahaja Yoga. It is understand. But if they do not bother, then Divine grace that we all have gathered there's no use of breaking one's Shriphala. here today and these trees have also Keep it safeiy protected. helped us in this great celebration. These Its job is much higher. You have got it for are all resounding (if), vibrating (i) and are listining to the music and a very much higher purpose and keep it at that higher level and only on attaining that

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 43 level it could be accomplished. this breeze does not blow then one doesn't Accomplished ( ), wonderful (3 know how much further they may bend! ), Because they know that 'It' (Sea) is the unique state you can consider yourself one who is the Giver of everything. Being blessed. Therefore, there's no need to break our reverent and extremely humble, (TR) heads for meaningless things. There is no they are bowing to it. And the one 'the Giver', is the 'Dharma'. The dharma which need to argue with anyone. But your own is inside us, when it gets fully awakened, state must be maintained and you must not come down. Until this happens, the full starts fully manifesting, only then will the Shriphala inside us be so sweet, beautiful surrender which was to be achieved within you, that you have not achieved in Sahaja and nourishing. And then the world will get to know from your life itself, and not from Yoga. Whatever was to be imbibed, that is not achieved. Whatever growth was to anything else, that 'what you are'. occur, that is not achieved. Whatever was Now, fourteen times you have celebrated the birthday of this Sahasrara, to be your mastery and full growth, that is not achieved and you have got caught in a and no one knows how many more years misconception. Therefore on no false you will celebrate. But till this Sahasrara grounds should you think that 'I have day, whenever you celebrated the birthday, become some great Sahaja Yogi' or your Sahasrara has also been opening and growing, along with it. anything. Greatness makes you humble, Accepting any kind of compromise, or you become humble. Look at these three trees. The breeze letting oneself loose, does not behove a from the opposite direction is flowing to Sahaja Yogi. A person who is a Sahaja them. Actually the trees should bend Yogi, should bravely make his path and move forward.Facing all obstacles-the towards this side, when the breeze is flowing in this direction. But in which family, this, that, all such pulls have no direction are the trees bending? Have you meaning. These have been with you a ever marked why all the trees are taking thousand times. In this life you have to that direction? Why? The breeze is achieve and with you, if others also get, then it is their good luck. It is their fortune, if coming from that direction (Sea) and pushing them, even then, why are the they don't get it, will you pull them up by trees bending towards that side? And if your hands?

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue 5 & 6 May-June 2003 44 It is like tieing big stones to legs and progressed in Sahaja Yoga'. How could it there be'? You yourself are after your own going into the sea and requesting the sea, to take you across'. The sea will reply, life! There are some small rules in Sahaja "First remove those stones tied to your feet, otherwise how can I carry you Yoga-'very simple and straight-forward'. across?" To your feet you have tied these You have to use the power that has been huge rocks. It is better to get rid of them, given to you, Practice it in your behaviour. and if you can't cut them off then at least The biggest quality of these trees is their do this,-keep yourself away from them. humility towards the sea and the expression of their innate love. Dedicating You have to discard all such things with which you have tied your feet and rise the gift of the Divine love to its giver-The higher. Tell them to do 'whatever Almighty, you have to remember that this you want to but have nothing to do is to be given to all. Finally, it should be said that I do not with us'. Because there are so many more badhas which are useless to be reside in the brain, or the Sahasrara in which there is no love. The only thought attached to. that the brain should have is - 'what is to be Look at the way these trees hold such a heavy fruit so high. How heavy is this fruit- done to express this love'? By deep it has water inside! It holds this fruit high. In thinking you will know that I am saying the same thing: "How can we fill our hearts the same way you have to hold your head high and while holding it high, remember with love?" We should only consider3; 'whether-l am doing, it in love? Is this being that the head should be respectfully bowed towards the sea-the sea, which is the done in love? All that I am doing, is it in love? Is my talking and all my activities are symbol of dharma. One should humbly bow down before the Dharma. Many being done in love?" In love you can even Sahaja Yogis do not understand that beat someone, there is no harm in that. But is it really being done in love? unless and until we get established in the The Devi killed so many Rakshasas. dharma, we cannot be Sahaja yogis. They go on committing all kinds of mistakes. But She killed them in love. Even they were Many of them take tobacco, smoke loved! And so, in order that they may not further deteriorate from Rakshas to cigarettes and drink liquor; keep doing all this and then they say, 'We have not Maharakshas and aiso for the love for Her

 May-June 2003 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6 45 other thing looks beautiful but is incapable Bhaktas (devotees), in order to save them, She killed the Rakshasas. That Anant of giving any joy (# Neeras), is Shakti (limitless power) also, is the absolutely hollow. One is without joy and the other quite hollow. There could be no expression of love only. All that she does is harmony between these two because they real good to them (Hita). It is love. So, are you expressing that sort of love are contrary to each other. But after realization and after coming to which does them real good? This has to be thought about. And if you are really Sahaja Yoga, all contrariness is lost, and doing that then you have accomplished the two things which appeared to be against each other seem to become two which I have been speaking, namely "that parts of one thing only. And this happening concord" Then that concord has got established in you. There is only one should take place within you. Only the day Shakti (power) which we may call 'Love' when this happening takes place within us, and it is only 'Love' that shapes things to can we accept that we have fully become beautiful, shapely and fully celebrated the 14th birthday of our Sahasrara. organized. Dry thoughts are meaningless. May God bless you. And on this And you know that dry thoughts emanate from ego. Some thing which comes from auspicious occasion, on My own behalf, on behalf of all Devatas (Deities) and on super-ego may well make it look extremely behalf of Paramatma eternal blessings beautiful but within it is quite hollow. Therefore, one thing is dirty but dry, the (Anant Ashirvad) to you all.

 Gratitude Expressed March 21, 2003. Phalgun Krishana Chaturthi of Shaliwahan Shaka 1924 HER HOLINESS SRI ADISHAKTI MATAJI months of March & April, spring season is Today, we all the Sahaja Yogi brothers, and sisters of the world offer our sincere leisurely poised on the polls of flowers. One can observe & gaze at the tender leaves of Salutatins at your lotus feet. As indicated by your Holiness, by your the trees every where, attracting ones incarnation in this world, the blossom time attention. These banners of transparent of evolution of Humanity has begun, About rosy leaves of the trees are dancing with the the blossom time, Lord Srikrishna in Hymn cool breeze and are hailing like the banners of the glamour of Sahaja Yoga, Which are 35 of Chapter X of the 'Bhagvat Gita eye catching. In these months, many a (entitled "The Yoga of Divine Glories i.e. Brahmavidya) describes as under :- trees, are adorned with blossom of immaculately white (Nirmal) flowers MASANAM MARGSHIRSHOHAM, RITUNAM KUSUMAKARAH (II) spreading the aroma in the atmosphere and Months of Phalgun & Chaitra of Indian some are carrying the bumper crop of green fruits like grapes, Mangos, Guavas etc. Calender, which are usually March & April The beauty of Chaitra month (Starting are considered as 'Spring Season'. So at the end March or April) increases, with Lord Krishna says in the above Hymn, the nests of birds hanging on the trees and I am Margshisha Month (out of 12 gives the sense of fulfillment as per the months of Indian Calendar) am Kusumakara i.e. Spring Season manifestation of souls of Sahaja Yogis. These yellowish, grayish nests of different (out of seasons of Indian Subcontinent) Spring Season is considered as the sizes appearing everywhere in the pictorial language of the spring season appear king of Seasons. beautiful & give solace to the human mind, Poet Mukteshwara while upholding the description of this spring season says, that like the magic of semicolons (visible clearly in the photographs due 'The Spring is usually, leisurely resting on Vishnumaya) that emanate in the divine the dust of flower petals (as the flowers are vibrations flowing by your grace. abundant at this time of the year), In these

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5& 6 May-June 2003 & Sahaja Yoginis throughout the world will welcomes The cuckoo these have the opportunity to celebrate this Amrit eyecatching sweet months, by enchanting cooling; similar to the amazing musical Yoga. We all the Sahaja Yoga family of the sounds of 'Anahat Chakra' emanating from the hearts of Sahaja Yogis. And all the world pray with full reverence at your lotus feet, that, the coming year (80th year) be Sahaja Yoga family throughout the world Celebrates the first day of Chaitra month joyful for you in every way & become the by raising the 'gudis' (traditional most fortunate one to witness all round development of Sahaja Yoga. Similarly the welcoming of the deities) & hanging flower decorations on down entrances, as if attention of all Sahaja Yogi brothers & entrances to the hearts in the form of Sisters throughout the world be unitedly fulfillment & satisfaction. fixed at your lotus feet with permanent sense of dedication & devotion enjoying By sweet chance of time, 21st March, 2004, The holiest day of your 81 birthday, your Divine Vibrations. Jai Shri Mataji falls on the first day of chaitra (Gudi All your Children Padwa) of Shaliwahan Shaka 1926 & Throughout the world Sahaja Yoga Shaka 24 & all Sahaja Yogis



----------------------

2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 SIRMALA
May - June, 2003
Volume: XV Issue: 5 & 6
VIVERSAL PURE
The
Divine Cool Breeze
00
19
VISHWA
DHARMA
RELIGION
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 In This Issue
1
Shri Ganesha Puja - 14.9.2002
Christmas Puja - 25.12.2002
12
Puja at Vaitarna - 31.12.2002
19
24
Inauguration of Music Academy - 1.1.2003
26
Makar Sankranti Puja Message - 14.1.2003
Birthday Felicitations - 23.3.03
27
Birthday Puja - 21.3.03
29
Mahasahasrara Puja - 5.5.1983
36
46 Gratitude Expressed
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Shri Ganesha Puja
Cabella - 14.09.2002
(Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Today we have gathered here to so pure that nothing can spoil them and
worship Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is
malign them. This is such a great biessing
the deity of innocence. When we are born
we have that innocence is actually created
as children it is Shri Ganesha who is in us and it was created much before. All
acting and we are very innocent. It is such
the innocence, everything was created
a powerful thing that with this innocence
much-much before we were created. It's
children
survive
under
many such a great quality for us to become
circumstances and we love them because
innocent.
they are innocent. We enjoy them
The greatest quality of Shri Ganesha is
because they are innocent. Once we start
joy, it gives you joy. As small children may
growing, our Sahasrara also gets closed
not speak even, but they give us so much
and we develop all kinds of funny things joy. Joy giving quality comes from Shri
Ganesha. Even after coming to Sahaja
that enter into us. It doesn't go out, it's just
there, it doesn't go out. Innocence has a
Yoga, I have seen, people are not full of joy.
great effect on our character and on our They are very serious, they don't know
sense of chastity. Actually when you are
how to laugh, how to enjoy anything. That's
the sign that they are still lacking in
innocent you don't know what is not
chastity, what is being unchaste, what is innocence.
being cunning? If you are innocent then
So, it's important to understand that if
you are looked after by Shri Ganesha
you are Sahajayogis, you should be joyous
himself. Anybody who tries to harm an and give joy to others, just like children.
Innocent person, Shri Ganesha looks after
How sweet they are! They may be newly
born but how much joy they give you! But
him and manages. Many people who are
supposing you do not have that capacity to
innocent in this world, of course they are
very few, but they become so detached enjoy the innocence of children then
from all worldly problems like lust and nobody can help you, Ganesha cannot
help you, because there's an innate quality
greed and many others, because they are
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 May-June 2003
2.
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
Now the beauty of Shri Ganesha is this
human beings have, and if you don't have
that quality, no use having any other that it looks after your Kundalini, it guards
your Kundalini, it guides your Kundalini
sense. Some people like food, they like
and throughout, on all the chakras. He has
colours, they like all other things but if you
don't have Shri Ganesha you cannot
to bless you. If you don't have the
purely enjoy anything. So it is only Shri blessings of Shri Ganesha, you will be
Ganesha's blessing that we really enjoy completely useless fellow as a Sahaja
everything in its full measure. Otherwise Yogi because all the time you are seeing
the bad points of others, all the time you
we start judging it, we start criticizing it.
are dividing, I should say, you are getting
People raise so many questions. If you
into a problem by which you cannot enjoy
see something and it gives you joy then
anything. By temperament you think you
you are supposed to give the explanation
are very serious, you are very mature, you
for that. As we have many critics in this
world and they are all the time criticizing
are very developed but you are not
innocent. Such a person gives such a
one or another. Now the critics are
criticizing critics. That's the biggest headache to everyone. If there's one like
that in the family, people want to get rid of
problem. That's their job because
him.
Ganesha is not there and they go on
So you should have the quality of Shri
criticizing others, never criticizing
Ganesha which is of giving joy to others,
themselves and thinking no end of
depends on how much joy you can give to
themselves. With that they create very bad
others. It doesn't want anything. Such a
kind of a community which is actually very
harmful. It's very dangerous. It's like person won't say that I must get this, I
must have this position, I should be leader,
having some sort of a boil or some sort of
I should be this and that. No. He just enjoys
a septic thing in your body, in your being.
So if you cannot appreciate it and if you giving joy, joy to others and being
humorous and kind and never-never tries
cannot enjoy it then Shri Ganesha is
to insult anyone and hurt anyone. If such a
missing from you. You should be able to
person hurts by mistake also he goes on
enjoy everything, enjoy your Children,
repenting about it and hundred times he
enjoy children of other people. That's the
will beg your pardon if he has hurt you.
sign of your being completely blessed by
Such a happy person is a real Sahaja Yogi.
Shri Ganesha.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
That's the one we want to have all around-
enlightened, then he sees it and enjoys the
those who have no hatred for anyone, no humour behind it, the humour of all these
malice for anyone and not finding faults
people. What they are mad after, how they
with another but trying to find what is the
behave. I mean the way he understands
the jokes behind it, jokes which is avoiding
good point of that person, what is so
reality. And reality is only possible if you are
special about that person. He is not
bothered as to what colour you are,
in the realm of joy, otherwise all the time
whether you are black or white, whether you find something wrong, something
you are tall or short. It makes no difference
upsetting, something disturbing. But if you
because it is absolute-absolute joy and for see the humour behind everything then
this absolute joy you don't criticize and you you are perfectly alright. For example, I
don't try to find faults with others. Now the
would say that I have had many such
problem is that people are getting very
experiences that people have told me,
much advanced in this modern era, very Mother, such and such fellow is like that,
advanced and they are very much more such and such fellow is like that. So I
advanced in criticizing others, I think that's
would ask that person 'Are you like that,
direct. He will say, no l am not like that', but
the thing they do, to criticize others. Also
I said, 'why everybody sees that in you? All
they have another very bad quality to
identify themselves with the countries in
of them must be wrong or you are wrong?
which they live or with the family in which Then he would say 'may be myself', and
they are. I have seen it creates such a that's how you see you can mould also
problem. Also they identify themselves such people who think that they
are
with the different religions they follow.
correct and the rest of the would is all bad
Imagine from this, how many problems
and they have every right to hate them and
have come up that you start differentiating to think in the wrong direction. What
between one and another! For example happens with that is that you lose the
now supposing who is born say in one essence of joy.
Essence of joy is in seeing in
place, so he says he is the best, his
everything, the source of joy. Supposing
country is the best, his people are the best
you see something here now if it is odd, it
and there's nothing wrong with them. On
the contrary, if a person is a real should give you also great sense of
humour, if it is beautiful it should give you
Sahajayogi, who has Ganesha within him
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 May-June 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
wrong with you? Why do you think like that,
another sense of appreciation. But I can't
understand people who go on harping on why do you look at those things and
always think that another person,
some sort of a thing that has no meaning
in their lives nor in the lives of others. I something wrong with him, and then you
form groups and then you fight, you can
would say my father had a great capacity
have even wars with this kind of an idea
to do that. Once I went home, so I said,
that the other person is not alright and you
'my brother was praising this man for his
are absolutely perfect. This is also with the
music, what do you think?' He said, 'he is a
musician, no doubt, but he is very country, I have seen. For example, even in
Sahajayoga I have seen, if somebody is
courageous'. I said, 'why?' 'Because he
may go on singing anything, he never feels coming, say from India or from another
bad about it, everybody might be nervous
country anywhere, the leader will be
anxious that he should or she should put
or everybody might be laughing at it but he
her candidate before. It's such an
is not at all bothered. He goes on singing in
his own ways.' So that is the beauty of identification which they are not still
conscious of it. But then I play my tricks. Al
understanding. Every defect in a person
such things when they do, when they try to
can be enjoyed, is very much a sense, I
should say, very subtle sense by which support one party, one type of people, from
one religion, we should say not religion
you can enjoy every person. If he has
now but countries. So this country
defects then you enjoy them as humorous
thing and if he has something very good identification is so much still in Sahaja
Yoga that you come from one country then
then also you can enjoy. So, why do you
you want to support that country. I am from
shun people? Why should you get out of
that country. You will never appreciate that
people, criticize them for nothing at all?
Now these people have built up big whosoever is coming from any country is
a Sahaja Yogi. We are a global community,
organizations. For example, the Catholics
we are not to be identified with one
will hate the Protestants, the Protestants
will hate the people who are Catholics. country, that our people should be married,
What's the use of that? What's the use of
that we should get our people there. All this
I have noticed and I feel very
kind of things
hating each other on that point that
sorry that you have not understood the
somebody is a Protestant or somebody is
nature of Sahajayoga.
a Catholic? Just see yourself, see what is
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Isue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
Sahajayoga is a global thing, absolutely very good. They tell me what's going
global. It has nothing to do with one wrong in their own country, what's the
country or with one person. It's such a
trouble in their own country, how the
countrymen are? You see, very surprising!
global thing that if you see the subtle side
of it, it's very joy giving. God almighty has
I was surprised how people told me that
created this world as one. They might how some people who are in their country
have United Nations, they might have this, are so misidentified and they are so
they might have that but still they'are so
against Sahaja Yoga, in a subtle manner.
much identified with their country that they was surprised how they felt it that way.
cannot correct also that country. Now for
They said, Mother see they are not at all
example, something is wrong with your global. Once you become global, all your
country, they cannot accept. For them problems of provinces and things are
everything is alright because they were finished. But that doesn't come into their
born in that particular country or they head that we have to be global, we are
appreciate some other country so they go Sahaja Yogis, we cannot identify ourselves
on praising that country to such an extent
with one country or another country. If we
that they are destroyed and their ideas are do that then we are still lacking in our
also destroyed. So, best thing is to see the
universal personality.
This universal personality comes to us
joke behind being identified with one
country. There is a big joke about it. I enjoy
from Shri Ganesha. He is a universal,
it very much. Among Sahaja Yogis also, I
personality whether He is in India, whether
have seen it's very common that they are
He is in Italy, or in England. What is that
identified with one country. If you are personality is innocence, very innocent,
identified then you should try to correct
very much innocent and not only that but
that country. You should try to correct he is a joy giving personality. All such
those countrymen who are following a people who are joy giving are recognized.
particular type of ideologies. They never It's not that the world doesn't recognize.
see that because they are so much They may not be knowing that they are
involved with them that they don't see global but those who are global people
write books on global ways, thinking about
what's wrong with them. They will always
see what's wrong with others. But I have global things and they can criticize also
seen, those who are real Sahaja Yogis, are people of their own country. They can
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
6.
spoilt with that. You have your own
criticize people of their own clan, they can
go on like that but they can be slavish also chastity. You have your own life of very
to some other country and try to praise
chaste moments. It is now-a-days such a
them too much. So, you are not to be
modern style of thinking towards unchaste
slavish, you have to not to be identified but life and all kinds of wrong ideas about
chastity. If somebody now talks of chastity,
you should be identified with your Self and
people think he must be mad, how can that
whatever your Self enjoys that should be
expressed. That is the sign that your be? Everything is done these days. If you
see-all the fashions are there. Once the
Ganesha is there and that Ganesha is
fashion starts, goes on spreading. Then
working out. It's very important for leaders
everybody will dress up in the same
to understand this, because I have seen
manner. They have no personality of their
the way they are identified with their
own. Everybody will be going wrong in the
countrymen is sometimes shocking to
me. I am really shocked how could they same manner, specially the women have
lost their sense of chastity. They have lost
be? They are not belonging to any country,
their sense of chastity because the way
they are no more, they are in the country of
Shri Ganesha which is the country of love
they dress up sometimes shocks me
What is the need to dress up like this?
and joy. If you cannot give love and joy then
there's something wrong.
Why can't you dress up properly? But it
With His this quality only, people just-just shows that they have no
character of their own. Actually they may
become chaste, because chastity is a
say, I am this, I am that but they are not.
very joy giving thing, very joy giving. It is not
a thing that you have to tell somebody or to They are nothing because they take to all
force somebody or to restrict somebody kinds forces that run around. But look at
the children, children are not like that. They
but it is to enjoy it, to enjoy yourself and
do not have all these funny ideas of
enjoy the chastity of another person. It's
impressing people with their unchaste life,
such a great blessing of Shri Ganesha,
none of them. On the contrary, children are
such a great blessing that you enjoy your
very conscious and they want to become
own chastity. You are not bothered about
very chaste people. This has an effect on
the another person, he is chaste or not, if
the eyes. I must say, Shri Ganesha acts
he is doing bad things, if he is a ruined
person, doesn't matter! You don't get through your eyes. How you look at a
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
possession is so grotesque, is so
person is very important. I have seen
aggressive. So, one should look at things
people losing complete control over their
from Ganesha's angle-how will he do it,
eyes. They go on looking at this person,
looking at another person, looking at how will he use it?
You learn from children. How they
another person, just for nothing at all. But
it's a matter of no Ganesha controlling watch things and how they work it out,
them, and with this the eyes are spoilt. How they think. You will be amazed, how
Spoilt means that you cannot look at sensible they are and the very sensible
anything concentratedly. Then how can things they talk! Like, I met a child, so the
you penetrate in to anything? Any child told me, I love the moon. I said,
penetration is possible only if you can alright. Now, what's wrong with the moon?
Nothing, but it hides itself under the clouds
really adjust your eyes in such a manner
all the time. 'So, I said why does he do
that you see something at that time, for
that? Because it walks too much, so he is
that time, and not go on shifting your eyes
tired and he has to rest and that's why he
from one to another. It can be anything, it
does it. So, if he doesn't walk so much if
can come from anything. That means
he keeps steady he won't have to do it.'
Ganesha is the one who is a detector of
our faults. For example, people have Just imagine a little child watching all
greed. So they will start seeing who's these things! And I mean I was amazed
how a little child knows what is right and
wearing what clothes, what clothes they
should wear. If they have greed then they what is wrong, how to behave, how to
will see somebody has a nice house, I understand the proper way of doing things!
They are not taught anything, they are
should also have a nice house; but they
never see the beauty of that house, they not conditioned, nothing, but they know
never see the actual essence of that how to behave and they are always looked
house but just they go on seeing thatI after by the Divine. I have known children
should have this house of this kind, I who have fallen from great heights.
nothing happened to them, and also
should have that. They have no sense of
snakes and all these things don't bite
beauty I should say, they have only sense
them. Even they say that tigers never try to
of possession and that is such a bad thing
eat children. What is it? What is so
to say because sense of beauty is
something so deep and sense of powerful about them that children are so
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 May-June 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
person is definitely a person who has got
safe and allowed to grow. But they grow
his Self expressing through his joy. Such a
person is so joy giving, so humorous and
never degrading anyone. In every smal
into such horrible creatures who are
unchaste, who are running after women or
women running after men is common play
these days%3;
thing he sees beauty and the nature of
every creation is so beautiful. I am really
It is' unbelievable how can people who
are, even Sahaja Yogis, do this! Of course,
surprised that how is it that poetry comes
to very few people because they go on
they don't, but some of them, they are still
in this kind of a mess. So, when you have
describing Ilove affairs, this that, all
your Ganesha already established, just nonsensical things. What things make you
before creating the whole universe the unhappy? Unhappy is not the sign of a
Mother created Shri Ganesha. If He is
person who is a realized soul. So, if you
have that problem of unhappiness, just be
there then life is very easy. Such a society
is very easy to live, such a friendship also
is so easy because there's nothing that is
on the watch out and see why-why have
you developed this kind of a funny attitude
towards everything, why can't you enjoy
possessiveness or any kind of a, you can
call, perversity. When you have bad eyes everything? You go on watching this
for women, bad eyes for money, bad eyes
person, that person, you will never enjoy:
while if you watch the children, it's very
for possessions, Ganesha is spoilt. He
just knows how to enjoy-enjoy everything. interesting. They look at, like I saw one
If it belongs to you it doesn't matter, if it joke; there was a joke about a child-they
belongs to me it doesn't matter but you
had a guest in their house for food and he
was eating. So this child saw that man
should know how to enjoy the beauty of it
eating, he said, 'mama, he doesn't eat like
and that's enjoyment when you have within
a horse. You said, he eats like a horse'.
yourself, you don't grow old because all
So, that's what they are-very simple, very
the time you are enjoying. What is there to
grow old? But normally it doesn't happen.
simple hearted and that's how they correct
people, correct. What you should talk to
You are very critical, you are very, I should
say, selfish and stupid sometimes, very children, what you should tell them about,
it's very important because if you tell them
much stupid. All that you lose on that grip
over yourself which is joy. What is your something-don't do it, so they will do it in
Self? Self is nothing but joy. A joyous such a manner that it will be ridiculous,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
absolutely ridiculous and they are so say, I would say, you should all write it
obedient to begin with. They think that we
down what your children talk. Because it
are children, we should obey and this would be such a book of interesting
obedience comes out of their simple episodes. Instead of writing about wars
nature. But we should not try to tell them
and horrible things that they have done in
too many things and we should not control
this world, better write what good things
them with 'don't do this, don't do that. All
there are which children can tell you.
the time if you do like that, the children
Children don't believe in all this kind of a
won't understand. You don't have to tell
mass nonsense of a fashion, they don't.
them, But if they are chaste children, if See them they are properly dressed
they are brought up in a chaste society, always, they are not bothered about
that's why I always say 'send your children behaving in a mass way. So that means
to our school.' Because children have to they are very independent on their own.
be chaste. They must understand the They are not slaves of any society and
value of chastity and this modern society
they do not want to follow anything that is
in the Western area, specially, are just generally followed, no! They follow
destroying our children's innocence. We their own pattern and live in a very dignified
should have learnt so much from the manner. They are extremely dignified and
children, how innocent they are, how their sense of chastity is very well
simple they are! They are very generous
developed. They would not wear
and children will give away everything that
something that will expose their body or
they have, everything. They don't will show that there is something wrong
understand possession of things, just with them. Sometimes we neglect our
imagine! If somebody likes something, children very much, because of money
'alright have it,' and they will keep problems may be, I don't know what
something for a person who likes husband-wife problems there are and the
something. They are wonderful people and
children are neglected. Once they are
we have to learn a lot from children. Their
neglected, anything can happen to them,
and I think it's a very great sin on the part of
smiling faces and their joy should teach us
how to behave because Ganesha shines
people to produce children and to neglect
through them, very clearly. All the them.
intelligence, all the beautiful things they
Children should be given the first, the
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
10
are towards nice things and good things.
primary place in the household, in the
family and they should be looked after by
They don't sort of take to all these things.
everyone. They are the most important
Then also because of modern life children
thing, not somebody who is the head of the
have developed a kind of funny character
family, he can shout at the children.
when they grow up. I don't like this, I don't
like that and they fall into funny-funny, I
Nothing of the kind. Moreover I have seen
that the way we take to all odd things and
should say, ideas about life which we must
bad habits, children never take. They know try to guard because these days the
that it is bad, this should not be done. By society is growing so fast. There are
their innocence they know, it should not be
televisions, there are so many I should say
done. They may sometimes, you know, propagating things which are not good for
play with fire, do something like that. But
children. They should not see them also. If
the children are realized souls they don't
once they get burnt by it, they will never
touch it again. They are extremely fast in
like to see. They don't like to see violence,
they don't like to see nonsense, I have
learning because that is the age they are,
seen it. They don't like, but the parents are
in growing; but actually what is needed
now is that the elders must grow. The sitting and enjoying nonsense, so they are
children are growing, they learn, what
also sitting. Gradually it might crawl into
their heads but normally children don't like
about the elders! They have to learn also,
how to be nice and kind to everyone and to
any violence, any beating any kind of a
be compassionate with all the rest of thing.
So we have to learn a lot from them
them. This idea of criticism comes from
where I don't know. But like, they will go
because they are innocent, because they
anywhere, they will start criticizing.
have the quality of innocence. So they are
to be respected. I don't like people beating
Children never criticize, they never see
these things, never. They will just get into
their children or hitting them and fulflling
that house or place and just enjoy it and
their ambitions through the children. It's
see the good points of that house. Always
very-very wrong. You should leave them
as they come in and tell, see, they had one
alone, they are perfect. Only thing is they
very nice Shri Ganesha's, this thing. The
should be given proper ideas at a time,
house may be dirty, there might be smell,
appreciation for their chastity, for their well
anything, doesn't matter. See their eyes
behaviour. That should be done, What
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
11
should not be given a kind of a idea of the
Shri Ganesha who is on the left side, not
on the right side. First you develop your left
society in which they live, where the
children get spoiled and I was surprised I side then you come to right, you are
met one child the other day and the child
alright. That's why we have our
said, I want to have a car. Which car? Sahajayoga completely built in on Shri
Mercedes. I said, why don't you go for a Ganesha. Once he is there you are
Ferrari? So, you see this money completely alright and no problem. There's
no lack of wisdom. Once you are with Shri
orientation also comes from childhood.
From childhood if you talk of all these Ganesha, you see the point absolutely
clearly, how to behave, how to live and you
things, money orientation, children also
don't take to stupid things like lust, greed
know this and they talk like that. There are
and nonsense. But people are mad, you
many other things for children we should
just avoid. Don't allow them to go near all
know. They take to any kind of thing when
such things which are creating money they grow up but as children if they have
orientation because that is the problem of an influence, very beautiful influence of
today that everywhere you find people who
proper family life, proper school life, proper
have made money illegally, so much guidance, proper love and help in
money has been made, and there's no
everyway in their growth then children
need to do that but still you see they do.
become extremely, extremely good,
beautiful. I bless all the Sahaja Yogis to
This money orientation is a funny thing; it's
greed, it's madness I tell you it's real have children of that nature and to look
madness. A person wants to have say after their children. That's very important
twenty five cars. Is he going to sit on the
because they are tomorrow's Sahaja
twenty five cars? He wants to have twenty
Yogis, and they should be of better quality.
five aero planes, what is he going to do Because you are coming from another lot,
with that? For that he is cheating they are coming from the innocence. So
they are very pure and their purity must be
everyone, troubling everyone, taking the
respected and must be guarded. May be
money of others. It's better to be poor than
that we understand the importance of
to be like that.
So, this is what is happening today is
children and develop Ganesha qualities in
that people have gone. The track is wrong.
them.
It's the right side track, right side track. I
Thank you very much.
should say we start our Sahaja Yoga from
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 CHRISTMAS PUJA
Ganpatipule - 25-12-02
(Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
sacrifice because he had a power, Power
Merry Christmas to you all. According to
Sahaja Yoga Christ is settled on your Agya of the spirit that he could sacrifice
Chakra, His whole life is depicting the anything, Even sacrifice his own life. So
qualities of a person who is a realized you can understand, the greatness of
soul. What he has suggested in his owı
Christ was coming from his great
personality of spirituality. But the same
life is that you should not have any greed
Christ is worshipped all over the world,
or lust. The way these days people are
specially in the western countries, and you
greedy all over the world is really shocking.
Right from the childhood our children also will be amazed to know how they are
learn to ask for this or ask for that. Only
running after things! All their industries are
complete satisfaction in life can give you running with the big stories about what
that equanimity, that balance by which you they make. And how people boast of their
do not hanker after things. These days wealth! They will have a cross in their
even India has become very much necks to show that they are Christians.
Westernized in the sense, they are also First of all one should never wear that
cross on which Christ was crucitied. But
very much wanting to have this or that.
they do make up by this hypocrisy and they
Actually now in America suddenly with this
are the another extreme of Christ. Not only
happening, people are getting to
spirituality. They come to spirituality they but even their wives and Children are
because they think they have not found ail very greedy people. They should have
this, they should have that. But now India
any satisfaction anywhere. What we have
to receive from his life, the great life of is very much in the same run. And what do
they ask for? They think by getting all these
Christ? First he was born is a small little
things around them they will be very
hut and he was put in a cradle which was
all covered with dry, very dry grass. Can comfortable. Its not so. They are all the
you imagine? And then he sacrificed his
time hankring and they cannot even enjoy
what ever they have achieved. It is
life on the cross. Whole thing is a story of a
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 May-June 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
13
helped the needy because he understood
something very surprising that in a country
their problems. Because he could feel
like America where there was no
them, he tried to help all kinds of diseased
corruption but there were people making
people under-priviledged, while today's
big big big money. They are supposed to
be disciples of Christ! Its beyond me. India
world has come to such a nonsense that
was once upon a time a real saintly they help countries to fight. They create
Christianity to fight. What is Christianity
country, where saints were respected. But
doing in this country? Is just to create a big
now a days India has fallen down to such a
low level of greed that its impossible to
power of creating lots of Christians. I have
understand these people. They can say heard from many places, how they are
they had not such a great following of converting people to Christianity. Christ
Christ and those who follow Christ also,
never converted even a single person. He
the Christians here, they are the worst. wanted to give transformation as you all
have got it, but not changing the religion or
They are the ones who have taken to all
changing your birth mark. No. And what did
kinds of western life of greed. And they call
he achieve is this kind of, useles, third rate
themselves Christian!
But Christ has shown that you don't people who are running after lust and
greed.
need anything in this world. He was such a
I get worried sometimes about myself
great personality, such a great incarnation.
He is respected everywhere, why? that I hope my disciples and my children
won't do things which are against Sahaja,
Because his power of sacrificing was the
which are against the principles of Sahaja.
highest. Not because he was owning a big
And one of the principles of Sahaja is that
car or any big house, nothing. Only
because he was such a humble man. His
you have to help people, those who are
life is remarkable and that today he down trodden, those who are not yet
realized. You have to give them realization.
governs the hearts of so many, despite the
It is not the way world is going on that we
fact that he was born a very-very poor man
give help to people who have ruined in this
and was crucified also as a very poor man.
So those people who are running after world. If you have to save this country, if
you have to save the whole world, then we
money are no way Christians, are
have to become like Christ. Develop your
nowhere near Christ. And so happy and
sacrificing temperament. It should be very
joyous he was, and be helped the poor, he
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 14
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
Actually you should find out atleast in one
very powerful thing because you are all
A year, have we given one of our things to
realized souls. Try to develop that?
temperament of helping others. I have
others? Not that I say you crucify your self,
No. That will be too much. But can you at
known some very great people in my life
who were always willing to give, to people least sacrifice at least a little bit of your
comfort for the people? Sahaja Yogis have
who have not got it and they have been of
to be extremely kind. Extremely kind and
such a great temperament, they were
never sort of given any big award or loving. If you are not that you are not
anything. But very happy if they could help Sahaja Yogis. First thing you should be
kind and loving, and understanding the
others. It's very very sad today in this
problems around and try to help as many
country where so many people have
people as you can. But that is not so, even
their lives
sacrificed
achieve
to
independence and freedom and what is Sahaja Yogis do not understand what is
happening is now today same people, or the value of their life! They are on the
same path as Christ was. They are
may be their children, may be, not the
same, are supposed to be governing, realized souls. They must have that
supposed to be incharge, are making feeling. They must have that oneness with
the rest of the people and they should feel
money! Why this situation has come? In
the sacrifice of Christ within themselves.
this country we had so many people who
How He sacrificed his life is to improve our
were extremely sacrificing. They were the
Agya, to remove our Ego, to fight our ego.
leaders, but how many of you are like that?
How many of you would like to give away
We are so egoistical. Whatever he has
done is a waste, is something people don't
some thing of yours to others? What
understand and they do not imbibe his
would you do to help others?
character and his life. Its very bad. For us
Its very sad that the Christian nations
he has a very great massage, for all the
have never followed Christ and we also
are becoming the same. I don't say that we
people who are realized souls, he is a very
should not do business or we should not
great example.
There are so many things to be done.
make money. You can, but with all that you
My mind is always with the needy and I
must remember for whom are you doing
have started many such organizations.
it? What are you going to do with it? With
You know that very well. Recently I started
this money what are you going to do?
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 May-June 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
15
two parts. One is the rich and the other is
something for the destitute women and
orphans in Delhi. I paid most of the money
very poor people. These very poor people
just make my heart wrench. Wrench with
but at just the finishing, I said why not ask
pain! I don't know how to help them! It's
the Sahaja Yogis to pay that little money to
finish. And they did, they did pay. In Delhi, I
such a vast community. But if you people
must congratulate them for showing the decide, you can go round, you can go
round, and you can find out ways and
way to other Sahaja Yogis.
I was amazed how they could raise so
methods of helping the people who are
extremely poor. They need your help by all
much money for this big organization! It is
means and you are capable. With the
something we never see how the women
are suffering in our country. How the Mahalaxmi's blessings you are well
destitute women are suffering! They are equipped and try to help the poor.
Try to help the people who are in great
left out by their husbands for no fault. Just
trouble. I know they are not Sahaja Yogis.
like that for some whim they are left on the
street with their children, more in the Don't expect them to be Sahaja Yogis.
They cann't be. At the time of Christ, how
muslims, it is worse and I felt very much
that I should try to do some thing, atleast
many were there who were Sahaja Yogis?
How many people were there who could
bring the attention of the people to their lot
understand the depth of human problems?
and to their problems so that they come up
into life and earn their living.
But Christ did and he sacrificed his life for
think it's the duty of all the Sahaja the sins of the people. Can you imagine?
It's a day to celebrate his birthday with
Yogis to go and see around who needs
your help? Just don't live for yourself, very great joy. What a birth and what a life
earning for yourself, making money for that he had to go through! Nobody would
like to have that kind of a life but the
yourself but try to help. Help those people
essence of it you must understand.
who can really be helped and they should
Running after greed is madness. There's
say these are the Sahaja Yogis who have
done. So many ideas I have of helping no end to greed. Those who are greedy,
people and I am going to try them with are greedy all the time. They are asking for
whatever money I have, but I wish you money, asking for this, asking for that.
could decide to do something for them. Why not see to others, What do they
Specially this country is divided into atleast want? Because we are in collective
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
16
have seen people who are so mad! Like in
consciousness. We should understand
America they found out those people at the
what do these people want? What can we
do for them? I know its very difficult in top of every organization, corporators,
who are so rich that they had 25
these modern times with all the
advertisements going on but we are eroplanes and about fifty, over fifty cars.
Are they going to travel by these fifty cars?
Sahaja Yogis. We have to be normal
How are they going to travel? One foot in
people, we have to face it in a way that a
one car and other foot in another car? But
saint has to face, and try to eradicate al
these ills by your special powers.
they had it. All this kind of madness, and
Today is a day of great joy to me and to
they said that now there is nothing to say
as such but now these are all confiscated.
all of you. Also at the same time, when I
What will you do with all the people of
see the life of the Christ, such a short life,
this kind of temperament? Is it not
how miserable it was! Not because of
poverty. No, but because of hatred and madness to have 25 aeroplanes and about
50 motor cars? And they thought no end of
because of tortures he had to go through.
He didn't mind poverty. Didn't write themselves! Stupid as they were, when
anything about it. What he felt bad was they will die, all this will finish. They are
really the way things are wrong and the fighting about something. In America it is
such a funny thing. Well you do
way they were oppressed. And he took up
understand where are we going with our
all that upon himself. To solve the
greed? There is one incident where a very
problems He created the Christians and
what they are doing is nonsense, just a young girl married a very very old man,
very old man and when this old man died
nonsense. It has no meaning. It has no
meaning to Christ's life and it has no
he left all his money to this young lady. So
the son came over and made a case that I
meaning to the richness of his great work.
So when we are celebrating his
have been his son for so many years and
how can this lady get all the money? She
birthday we should also celebrate his
sacrificing capacity, his power of loving. got billions and billions, but still she wanted
to have the whole! So she gave excuses
Now Sahaja Yogis have become very good
saying, I have done so much for this old
people, very loving people. No doubt about
man, I have sacrificed so many things and
it, but still I think the greed lingers on.
this and that. So shameless thing the way
There is no end to greed. I must tell you, I
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
17
have got your.realization. So what are you
people are and they are not ashamed that
they are asking for money, money money: doing? Are you demanding money from
for comfort, comfort, comfort. It is very
every one or you are giving love to
difficult to understand human beings. everyone? Let me hear the stories of
Once they have gone in a strange way, Sahaja Yogis who are giving love and.
they can go to very great extent. They don't
compassion.
know how to sacrifice. I have seen when
I am sorry today on the day of his
Birthday I have to tell about his life which
Gandhiji asked people to sacrifice, all the
women gave away their ornaments, gave
was very very painful otherwise, For us to
such a glorious
away their lives, went to jails, did all kinds
that
understand
of things to achieve independence. But
personality, such a great Sahaja Yogi, He
what independence they have got?
had to go through so many problems in his
Immediately all the thugs of the world life and his own people troubled him. His
own people tried to take advantage of him.
became incharge, all the thieves of the
world became incharge. What do you say
I too have this experience from Sahaja
Yogis who got well out of Sahaja Yoga and
to such a country where every thing that is
they tried to trouble me. They tried to make
great and noble goes into waste? Have
you been a noble person? Ask yourself. money out of me. Everyone knows. They
Have you been noble? Have you tried to have such a bad value system that how
help others? From the life of Christ we
can you say they are realized souls! So we
have to know that he lived in poverty. He have to think where we can help others,
what we can do for them. This is one of the
was king of kings but he lived in poverty, in
things one has to learn from the life of the
Greece, and he did everything for people
Christ. I was actually born in a Christian
who were sinful, who were in trouble. Such
I found out among the
a lot, one person. Now you are so many.
family and what
so many of you. You all have to do Christians that extremely they are mean
something. Don't live like these dirty people. They are planning against
each other and very money oriented.
corporators but try to do. That you have to
sacrifice something of your earnings,
When my father went to jail they threw us
out of Church. To love your country is a
something of your luxuries for the sake of
sin, it? They did it and when he came back
your countries, because you are Sahaja
and he became the Mayor of Nagpur, they
Yogis. You are not ordinary people. You
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 18
May-June 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
stupid thing to do is very common, very
were his greatest admirers. They took out
a procession. So my father just smiled at
it and he said, "See these stupid people."
bad. I want you all to be above money,
to be above all these wordly things and
This is complete stupidity and this kind of you will never starve, you will never
greed and this kind of stupidity must be have problems. But do not get mixed
up with this kind of nonsensical things.
stopped. They run after money, they run
after positions, they run after also very bad This is God's work and you should not
FLibn.
things. Some of them, not the Sahaja make money out of it, in no way.
So we have to learn a lot from the great
Yogis, but they do. But even among Sahaja
Yogis I have found people who are very life of Christ who was born as a very
humble man and he did such great things.
money oriented. They have made money
He tried to improve our Agyas and even
out of Sahaja Yoga. I am such a useless
now if you think of him, your agya will be
person, I don't understand money. So they
could befool me. Alright, does not matter. alright. It will be finished. I know also
And for years together they were befooling among Sahaja Yogis there are many
me! Its alright. Now what to do? What do I people who are very pushing. All the times
need money for? That is the trouble; the pushing themselves. For what? What do
trouble is if you are not careful, if you are you want? All the time they are pushing
around just like all other stupid people.
not very money oriented, others can rob
So to feel the satisfaction within
you. I said, 'let them rob', let them do what
they like, but I can't develop the yourself, just like Christ. you have to
meditate and introspect and find out "Are
can get after
temperament by which I
I accept what
you satisfied with life? You have to be very
people for money. I cannot.
much satisfied in life, otherwise there is no
ever account you give me. I accept
use having Sahaja Yoga. No use getting
whatever you say. I know it is sinful, it is
your self realization. I bless you from my
wrong. They are not aware of it, I cannot
heart that you take the character of Christ
help.
They all will be ruined. All such people. I as a model for you and to understand the
know that. But what to do if they do not problems of the world, from the whole
world as your own problems.
realize themselves. Making money out of
May God bless you.
Sahaja Yoga, can you imagine? Such a
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Puja at Vaitarna
31.12.2002
(Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
I am very very happy to see so many of
not here today to see you all. He has done
so much work relentlessly without
you coming down here for the programme.
Actually I bought this land at least twenty-
expecting any reward whatsoever. And I
five years back and could not do any thing
wish you could have him as your ideal and
that will work out everything in that way.
about it, as there were lots of objections,
this and that. But then somehow I planned
There is one thing about him, I know, he
never tried to show off anything. He was a
the whole thing and it all worked out.
very intelligent, educated man but he
Happy to see you all here, that with all the
difficulties, ultimately now you find so caught hold of all the people of ordinary
many Sahaj Yogis attending this living and he looked after them and
promoted their skill of music and art. With
programme of my Puja. I must remember
the same idea, I decided to have this place
my brother Baba who has worked very
dedicated to his idea of propagating music
hard for the propagation of Indian music,
and art. And I am happy to see, that, that
classical music, all types of art, what ever
he could do. It is a very sad thing that he is
idea has materialized. But I wish my
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 20
May-June 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
brother was here to make you feel very Maharashtra? No point doing anything for
these Maharashtrian people. They fight for
happy about it! He was a very loving and a
kind person. Never he used to get angry some reason or the other. No shame,
nothing. If they don't find space to sit, what
with anyone, I have seen that. Always he
can we do? No maturity at all. I don't know
gave a very good picture of every person to
how there is music in these quarrelsome
me. But you cannot help it.
(Translated from Marathi Part of Speech) people and it has grown so much and I am
It is the speciality of Maharashtra - fed up with it. Everybody is complaining
Fighting. Very good at fighting. Do any
about something. Have you not found
peace in Sahajayoga? Great Saints and
thing for them but nothing enters into their
head. They have no understanding, Sages have told so much knowledge in
always ready to fight, even with swords. I this land but it has no effect at removing
our quarrelsome nature. They will fight
am fed up with your quarreling nature. This
beautiful, building has been constructed even on their name, keep behaving
don't know when this
foolishly.
for our classical music. They fought even
foolishness is going to be removed from
on this and many times I felt why build it in
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 21
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
being able to sit or not getting to see? I did
Maharashtra? They just don't understand
peacefull living and absorbing everything not want to speak anything but I had no
start shouting option when I saw you and I had to say.
Just
peacefully.
Now if anybody fights, he will be thrown out
immediately. Our foreign Sahaja Yogis
of Sahajayoga. If you cannot live lovingly
say, are they uncivilized people? No, No.
with everyone then why are you in
they are very well educated, but very
quarrelsome, and why they fight, they only
Sahajayoga? Babamama never got angry
know. Atleast please don't fight in with any body. He would praise everybody.
I was thinking how could everybody have
Sahajayoga and be a bit peaceful. At least
try, we want to change, isn't it? Instead of such a good state. But Baba brought
seeing what is wrong with others, see what people together with love, it may be just
youR
lot of work in Maharashtra, at Nagpur. never sit in My car, never come to My
house. He was very understanding. He
People in Nagpur are very active and they
also belonged to this Maharashtra, but he
helped him. But nobody understands that.
You must understand Sahaj Yoga and was not so aggressive. You have joined
the work of such a great personality, so
become a Sadhu. They think very lowly of
atleast follow some of his good qualities.
just making money somehow, run here or
We have built this temple for music and
there for it. How can you be a Sahajayogi?
One must feel that I am a realized soul and
other arts. Your children must progress in
these fields. They must understand our
Mother has worked out so much for us; we
must achieve some good state. So music. These foreigners understand your
music very well, isn't it shameful? We
resolve today to stop fighting and don't be
don't understand that, just nothing, what's
greedy for money. Greed for money has
made things difficult for Sahajayoga in the use? You must have knowledge about
Maharashtra. I have worked a lot in
music even though you may not be a
student of this place. Unless you know
Maharashtra and have had all sort of
experiences. Now please realize that you what Tala' is this, what Raga is this, you
cannot enjoy music. I request you all to
are a Sahajayogi and live gracefully and be
leave aside quarreling nature and develop
proud of being a Sahajayogi. What is there
to fight in Sahajayoga? Is this a political goodness within you, this is the work of
Sahajayoga, but I sometimes feel that you
meeting that you must complain about not
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 May-June 2003
22
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
Vaitarna 31-12-02
cannot reap anything if you sow seeds
(Translated from Hindi)
in unfertile land. But now things are better
Luckily I know Hindi Language. What I
with many people coming to Sahajayoga.
have to say is that life should be musical.
So don't just come to learn Music here.
You must learn to behave in a Sahaja 'Musical' means to improve the state of
mind of human beings, to make it rhythmic
way, understand the greatness of Sahaja,
and systematic. Without achieving it there
or else it is useless. There are many
ordinary music schools around. By is no use; what will be the difference
between you and other people? You
learning music from these if you are
going to break heads of others, it is people also keep on quarreling like others!
Most important thing is that we should
better you do not learn music. So
have more love and devotion in our hearts.
please, with music bring the music of
It will bring peace to you and also to others.
your life into day-to-day behaviour.
Without peace music has no meaning. We
Without bringing that music this
have constructed this beautiful building as
programme will not achieve its end.
Per the ideals of Baba Mama. The purpose
is to inculcate music in the lives of people
Take a vow today, let anybody sav
anything. The second problem out here
and to make the whole atmosphere
is about making money. It has become
rather too much. I am fed up with it. People
peaceful. The world needs peace today,
everything else is meaningless.
make money even in Sahajayoga. Are you
We have to see how peaceful we are. If
going to change or not? Most important
the effect of our peace is not there on the
is
people of our country then where else our
thing
that there should be music in our lives peace is going to have its effects? All over
Instead of having rhythm and ragdari in our
it is said that India is the messenger of
lives we just keep fighting, thinking bad of
peace. But the reality does not appear to
be like that. There is quarreling and fighting
others and seeing only self-interest.
It is bad.
every where. I don't know what to say? So
Now forget what happened in the past.
those who want to learn music they should
hereforth only people
with
have music is their hearts. They should
But
will be
think that it does not behove a musician to
understanding, compassion
brought forward, who will bring all the
run after money and women.
I bless that this institution blossoms
people together.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Valume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
23
and those who join it should learn music
yourself to be beggars on the street which
and make their lives musical. I hope you you were before coming to Sahaja Yoga.
will fulfill this desire of mine. Whenever Today I bless you specially that you should
all be musical. May god bless you.
you feel angry, whenever you get the
fit of temper, whenever you complain,
(Speech in English)
tell yourselves that I am a Sahaj Yogi. I
Today I wanted to bless you all that you
am a different person. How the Mother has
completely musical
in
become
transformed me! If you just understand
temperament, rhythmic and entertaining to
this thing then the feeling of self respect others and not quarrelsome. As you have
will awaken in you. If this feeling is not
seen, how the Western music is taking to
wrong side, to wrong progress, I don't
awakened then there is no use, there is no
want you to fall in that trap.
use of material objects. It does not behove
This will all disappear, I know, as it is
you (Sahaja yogis) to quarrel over small
small things. Now you have become very destructive. But after coming to
Saints and seers, very high caliber Sahaja also if you have the same
personalities. But you are not sensitive to destructive idea then how can anybody
help you? So I hope you will fulfill my ideal.
this fact. You do not understand that you
May God bless you.
are saints and seers. You just think
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Inauguration of the Music Academy
Vaitarna, India, 1st January, 2003
(Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
I'm sorry I spoke in Hindi language, know human beings have those failings, I
because to talk about My father in any didn't know. I was absolutely beyond them.
came to know
After reading everything,
other language is very difficult, though he
was a master of English language and he
that there are human beings, mostly, who
used to read a lot. He had a big library of
have some failings. Maybe because of ego
his own where I also learnt English,
or may be because of some bad training,
because of mother, may be father,
because my medium of instruction was
whatever it is, the family. And that's how I
Marathi. I'd never studied Hindi or English.
understood human beings, as they are.
But because of his library, because I was
very fond of reading, I picked up English,
Gradually, when I came to Sahaja Yoga,
- all over,
met many like that, not one
whatever it is, and also Hindi. Now they all
whether in India or outside I saw. But most
say I speak very good English and very
good Hindi. I am surprised, because to Me
of them, 99%, Improved. One per cent are
still there, hanging in there.
they were foreign languages.
And when I did my matriculation also, I
The greatest problem of human beings
is ego. If there is ego, you can't do anything
had a very small book of English, and for
Inter-Science also I had a very small book.
about it, because it thinks, "I've done
something great that I have this ego". And
And in the Medical College of course there
was no question of any language, but they cannot appreciate other people, leave
because I used to read a lot. So I would alone loving anybody else. 'Ego' means
you love yourself, think no end of yourself.
suggest to all of you to read, read more.
So, India is full of it. Abroad also I've seen
But don't read nonsensical books, very
it's quite a lot, but at least they know there
good famous books you must read. That's
how I developed my language, and I had to is ego and they can face it. But this
country, I don't know what sort of things
do so well.
By reading that, I could know also so they do that they develop this ego, and
much about the human failings. I didn't they think they're quite right.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 May-June 2003
25
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
Every country has its own problems, position he was occupying. His humble
nature was natural, very natural, very
but we have something very great with us
sweet. And he has been with me since his
is our music. Not musicians, but music.
So the musicians should take to Sahaja very childhood, so I noticed him. He never
Yoga. They should meditate. And if a had any malice against any one. He never
musician is money-oriented, then you wanted to surpass anyone. Always wanted
cannot help him. Either he should be to be at a zero point. And if anybody
music-oriented, or money-oriented. When troubled him, he used to make him go
somewhere with his own tricks. He was
they are money-oriented, they never value
themselves, I think. Because if you have
very clever. And he had found out that 'I am
no good for these crooks,' so he used to
music, the talent of music, why should you
handle them very cleverly, and he used to
care for money? And whatever money you
give them, they'll be never satisfied. I have
see that they go about. He knew who were
the show-offs, and he used to tell me
seen very great musicians who were
about them: "These people are very big
never, never money-oriented, who didn't
care for power. But we have even now show-offs, and they will try to dominate
others, they don't know anything." But the
many musicians who I would not say are
best part of his heart is his poetry. He
the last word in music. Those who are, are
wrote beautiful poetry.
very humble. They'll always tell you, "We
He was horrible to begin with! I used to
have to still learn a lot. We have to
write his essays in the school. So his
understand a lot."
teachers used to say: "Can you write such
So I was very much touched, and I was
very much enamoured, by the statue of good essays? And when it comes to
exams, then why do you get a big zero?"
Babamama and of My father being there.
Not because they were My brother, or So he didn't tell them that I'm writing the
father, but they were very, very great essays. But then, suddenly, he developed
an aptitude for languages: for Marathi, for
people, and their greatness has touched
Me. Baba's quality was that he was a Hindi, for Urdu, also for English, very
loving man, extremely loving, and very surprising! He was very good at
forgiving person. Extremely unassuming Mathematics, because My mother was a
mathematician, but suddenly became
and very loving. He never cared for
publicity, or he never cared for what equipped in languages. And I used to give
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 May-June 2003
26
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
him my poetry to correct, so good he was!
temperament. He never tried to show off.
Never. Very simple man, very simple
And he knew Urdu words, Hindi words,
habits, and always he tried to convince in
English, and Marathi also. So he used to
tell me: "The Marathi is very good. If you
the people that they should lead such and
such life. Without telling them, I don't know
want to find somebody's faults, Marathi is
how he managed it.
the best, and the way you can tell them."
So with his love and attention, now we
And lots of words he told me, and so
interesting, in Marathi. I said: "Baba, when
have so many musicians, so many people
here. I am thankful to him and thankful to
did you study Marathi?" He said: "I've just
My father, for whatever they have done for
come to know."
So his knowledge was all innate, and Sahaja Yoga.
May God bless you all.
of
everybody loved him because
Makar Sankranti Message 2003
based on the Sun and it never changes,
On 14th of January there were about 20
every year Makar Sankranti is celebrated
on 14th Jan. The vegetables are grown
of us at Shri Mataji's daughter's house to
celebrate Makar Sankaranti Puja. We
and the farmer is dependent on the Sun
started decorating the living hall and after
about two hours, one could not recognize God who also creates the Rain. So best is
the place. We had flowers, fruits and
vegetables (This is also known at His help in keeping you cool.
Shakambhari Devi Puja) and also
to be a worshipper of the Sun and ask for
After this, Shri Mataji asked us to
perform Aarti and asked if there was a
organized an outside caterer.
Harmonium (a very unfortunate situation
At about 7.45 pm, Shri Mataji came and
for us.) Then Shri Mataji asked if any one
was looking marvelous and very fresh-like
of us had any questions? Of course not!! A
a true Goddess. She talked about the Sun
lovely small puja! She then asked all of us
channel. How we should now worship the
Sun and how the Sun protects us during to have dinner after the Prasad.
hot summer months. India being an
She waited until all of us had had the
Prasad dinner and then we sat around Shri
agricultural country, was very dependent
Mataji for 15-20 minutes and chatted about
on the Sun. How some of us get too Hot,
the local state of affairs of the Govt. of
(excessive right-sidedness) due to the
Maharashtra - (a new Chief Minister Sushil
Sun channel. Try to be in balance and ask
Kumar Shinde was today appointed in
place of Deshmukh).
the Sun to help in keeping cool. Shri Mataji
also mentioned that this is the day which is
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Birthday Felicitations Programme
20 March, 2003
Nirmal Dham., Delhi
(Pravachan of her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
there won't be any problem of any kind- no
Today everybody is trying to talk to you
in English language because I think they political problem, no economic problem,
feel the majority of you are speaking nothing of the kind.
All these problems are created by mind,
English.
which is not yet fully developed, I should
wish I could tell you something new
say. And once it is developed, you are not
about life. Life goes on moving. Whether
bothered. You are bothered about others,
you are eighty or ninety makes no
difference. Only thing is how much you you are bothered about emancipation of
others. It is automatic. I don't have to say
have used the light that you have got in
that. But you have seen in your lives how
Sahaja Yoga.
your attitudes have changed towards life
All of you are now enlightened in Sahaja
Yoga. All your kundalinis are up and I think and that is what is more important than
you know most of it. But despite that, it's
anything else.
Some of you are very successful
important how much time you devote for
people in politics, in business and this and
the emancipation of human beings, for
helping them to come up. Instead of
that. But you are not satisfied till you give
criticizing them, instead of condemning Realization to people, till you make them
perfect like yourself.
them, your duty is to put them on a higher
(I'm) so very happy to see so many
pedestal, so they respect themselves and
people being helped by Sahaja Yoga. I
respect their Self Realization.
never expected that in My lifetime only I'l
It's very important because l met many
see this, but (it) just worked out, worked
Sahaja Yogis to begin with who were very
out so wonderfully. I'm really amazed how
much critical of their colleagues and all
other things, but since they have got things grew so fast and how it has
grown
Realization, they think it's a matter of duty
into so many countries, into so many
people's heart and how they have taken to
for them, that they should attend to the
emancipation of human beings. Then Sahaja Yoga! They're working not only in
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
28
that and making others rise also?
their own country, but also outside. After
all, I can't go everywhere now. But despite
We can change the whole world and
that, Sahaja Yoga is spreading, which is you start understanding the problems of
such a great thing for Me-so satisfying!
the world and you can get rid of them with
You have no idea when I hear that Sahaja
your kundalini awakening.
Such a great thing is this kundalini, I tell
Yoga has gone to this country and gone to
that country.
you, that it makes human beings something
superlative. It's all described as sayings of
Practically, they say, in forty-three
saints and this and that, but a Sahaja Yogi
countries Sahaja Yoga is settled down in a
has a greater power and the greater power
very large way and, in a smaller way, may
is that he can make others Sahaja Yogis. He
be, it is in many more. But to hear this
can give Realizations to others. They must
also, I never expected that it would work
that fast. It's all thanks to you, to you use their powers and should try to change
the whole world. That's My desire. I don't
Sahaja Yogis who have achieved this
know in My lifetime I'll achieve it or not. But
miracle.
I'm thankful to you all, from India and
you all should decide that way and I'm sure
it will all work out.
abroad, those who have taken up the flag
May God bless you. Thank you very
of emancipation and are moving forward,
much.
instead of criticizing, instead of degrading
some people. It's very easy to do that. But
Thank you very much.
what about you, yourself rising above al
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 80th Birthday Puja
21-03-03
Nirmal Dham Delhi
(Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
(Translated from Hindi)
shows it was the need of the world. It was
Eternal blessings to all of you. In such a
the need of the people. That's why they
big number you have come here to have taken to Sahaja Yoga with such
celebrate my birthday! I do not know how
enthusiasm.
I could understand in a country like
do I thank you? So many people have
come from abroad and many have come India, where they have talked about Self
from all over our own country to Realization, but in a country which is not
participate. It moves my heart. I don't
know what extraordinary feat I have should appreciate, assimilate and enjoy
aware of a higher spiritual life, you all
performed that you all have gathered here Sahaja Yoga as a very great blessing of
to celebrate my birthday! it is the the times.
These are special times, I think, that
greatness of your hearts that you have
come to this far fetched place and you have fallen into this trap of love and
honoured me this day. I have no words to enlightenment.
I Myself was not very sure that you
tell you as to how overjoyed I am!
would appreciate the love that one can
(English Pravachan)
What I was telling them, the way you
are celebrating My birthday, I am overjoyed
enjoy within yourself. What is the spiritual
understanding? I didn't know how you
and I don't know how to express that joy
would appreciate and enjoy yourself.
which is really overflowing.
That means you are all very much
I really don't know what have I done for
capable of this tremendous love and this
you that you have come up with such spiritual awakening. No doubt about it.
enthusiasm, with such love. It's your great How is it that it has worked out so
heart which is appreciating My humble beautifully? Very surprising and also the
way you have got your spiritual powers
work.
All over the world, Sahaja Yoga has and the way you are using it, is really
beyond understanding, any human
spread and again spreading like fire. That
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 30
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
understanding. That's why people don't please try to give them awakening
believe that there's something like Sahaja
because they are all human beings born at
Yoga, that there is a power in every human
this time and so they deserve it. You have
being which is universal and which can be to just try meeting them, talking to them
enlightened. It's something beyond the and giving them Self Realization. It's not
very difficult. Every one of you can do that.
conception of human beings that they can
achieve this kind of a spiritual growth
Every one of you have to give to only ten to
fifteen people and will change the world.
within themselves.
I wonder how many of you also realize
That is our ambition, to change the world
to the new style of understanding that we
that whatever you have achieved is
have to live peacefully as human beings.
something great. It is the climax of human
Without any discretion of colour, without
development, human growth and all the
advancement we have made. This will
any discreation of nations, we all have to
live together as human beings. This is the
change, definitely change the world and its
only difference between human beings
understanding.
and animals.
I'm talking to you today at the time when
As long as we are not spiritual, it's all
the war of Iraq is on in a very big way. I
right. But if you can transform them into
don't know what to say, how it is going to
spiritual personalities, I'm sure everything
work out, but with all your efforts towards
will change. As we have seen now in
peace, it will get solved, I'm sure, and will
Sahaja Yoga, it doesn't bother a Sahaja
bring peace everywhere.
Yogi to quarrel or to fight, but they are so
We don't want to have wars, but we
peaceful and gentle with each other.
have to change human beings, otherwise
So today we have to pray that Sahaja
you cannot trust them. This is a very big
Yoga must spread all over the world and
challenge to all of you. You have to work
very hard to get to this idea of giving that everyone in the world should get
realized. You have to promise that you will
Realization to everyone, otherwise you
go out of the way and try to change the
cannot stop it just by giving them lectures
human beings who are just mislaid on their
or threatening them.
The awakening is needed within, which
way somewhere. I'm sure once it starts
working out, everybody will understand the
of course, I don't know if everyone will try
value of peaceful life as Sahaja Yogis.
to have, but as many as can have it,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 May-June 2003
31
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
their self realization immediately. They get
We have to do intensive work because
all the blessings. You should go and and
you can see human beings needed this.
tell such people that there is no need to
Today that is the need of the hour. At the
stand on the head (in Shirsha Asna).
right time, we are now ready to do Sahaja
Yoga and spread it all over, as much as Sahaja Yoga will come to you without
doing any penance. To begin with, they will
possible, wherever you will see the
not believe that it is so easy, but they will
necessity.
be convinced when they see that one after
Of course it will work, but otherwise
another thousands of people of this
also, whether there is necessity or not,
there's an urge in the human beings to country have come to Sahaja Yoga. It is
desire that Sahaja Yoga should spread
rise, rise above all these human failures.
my
in a big way in this country. The problems
I bless you from My heart, bless you
of the people of this country are very small
very much, that you carry on your work of
Sahaja Yoga, of spreading Sahaja Yoga, of and insignificant. Once you get your
realization in Sahaja Yoga, nothing will
giving Realization. You have got powers.
remain to be done. If the people of this
You know you have. Only use that power
country make little efforts, they could
and give Realization to people. That is one
spread Sahaja Yoga and give realization
promise you have to make on My birthday.
very easily. My eternal blessings to all of
Thank you very much
you that each one of you gives realization
80th Birthday Puja Pravachan
to at least one hundred people. Our
(Translated from Hindi)
Today I told them in English language numbers have not yet increased so much.
Our state is not so immature. It is so easy
but there is no need to tell it to you
(Indians) because the people of this to understand that Sahaja Yoga is the
country know as to how significant easiest way and seekers are ready to get
spiritual life is. They wish to ascend it. To the villages or cities, wherever you
spiritually and make efforts to achieve this go, it is suitable for Sahaja Yoga. It is,
therefore my desire that you should do it
end. Some go to Himalayas and others go
whole-heartedly and next year the number
and sit near the seas. For hours together
of Sahaja Yogis, who come here, gets
they work hard and observe fasts.
There is no need to do all this penance.
doubled.
I thank you very much for the respect
When they come to Sahaja Yoga, they get
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
32
and love that you have given to me. But the
way I have desired, each one of you should
give realization to at least one hundred
people. That is all. Try. If you have faith,
then it is my promise that in a year each
one of you will give realization to hundred
people very easily.
Eternal blessings to you all; eternal
blessings. This can be done. Those who
do not know this language are doing it,
then what is the difficulty for you? The
whole preparation has been made for you.
Saints and seers have done a lot of work in
this country. In no other country, so much
was done. So as an Indian, you should
think as to how much responsibility lies on
your shoulders and how much you could
do this work. My hearty blessings to all of
you that you succeed in your mission. May
your resolve be crowned. This is my
hearty blessing. It is hearty and I hope you
will imbibe it fully and continue to give Sell-
realization to people.
Eternal blessings to you all
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 From Hindu Daily - A Report
March - 2003
(A message for one and all..
A very special person descended at with the key to the Brazilian Capital. In
1995 the Indian dispensation gave her a
New Delhi's Nirmal Dham the other day to
shower her blessings. To felicitate Her one-hour prime time television series.
Even the Chinese Government invited her
Holiness, Mataji Nirmala Devi, on her 80th
birthday yogis gathered to honour this seer
to speak at the International Women's
Conference in Beijing.
for her tireless work spanning across 33
On the occasion the Deputy Prime
years in nearly 100 countries. The yogis
had come not only from every nook and Minister, L.K. Advani said, "Unlike
contributions in spheres such as
corner of the country but also from across
the world. Not only those immersed into education, which affects only a section of
spirituality were present but also the society normally wthin the national
boundary, contributions in the sphere of
politicians, civil servants and people from
spirituality cut across national boundaries."
different walks of life collected to catch a
Gregoire, a leader from Switzeriand,
glimpse of the venerated Mother and seek
mentioned Her methodology on self
her blessings.
creating
and
transformation
An erudite speaker, Mataji Nrmala Devi
is the founder and director of Sahaja Yoga
consciousness that leads to a happy and
blissful life. Dr. Wells from the United
Vishwa Nirmala Dharma,
or
an
Non-Governmental Kingdom acknowledged the fact that she
established
Organisation operating in many countries. taught him and numerous followers the
For her selfless work and spiritual technique for overcoming anxiety normally
"human
level
with
teachings she has been recognized associated
consciousness," Debu Choudhary, one of
worldwide by several
renowned
institutions. In 1993, she was appointed as
the doyens of the music world, opined that
honorary member of the Presidium of as music was meditation, it was route to
get closer to Mataji Nirmala Devi.
Petrovskaya Academy of Art and Science.
Born into a Christian family of Prasad
One year after that she was presented
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
34
and Cornelia Salve, at Chhindwara in along with other freedom fighters. She
Madhya Pradesh, Mataji Nirmala Devi, married C.P. Srivastava, one of India's
then only Nirmala, lived with her parents in
best civil servants, who was conferred
knighthood by the Queen of England. Later
Mahatma Gandhi's ashram. Her father a
close associate of Mahatma Gandhi - was on, she came to know through self-
a renowned scholar, who translated the
realisation that she had a unique gift which
Quran into Marathi. Her mother was the
had to be made available to all humankind.
On the occasion, she said, "Most of the
first woman to receive an honours degree
in Mathematics. Actively involved in the problems that emanate in the society
today can be traced to the mind that is not
freedom struggle to oust the British, Mataji
Nirmala Devi participated at the historic
fully developed.' She also urged people to
apply themselves in the emancipation of
Quit India Movement.
Consequently, she was imprisoned humankind.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Blessings of the Nature
March - 2003
whole scene formed again into a yellow
On the night of 26th December, 2001
i.e. early morning at 3:30 A.M. of 27th glittering mass in the form of Shri
Ganesha.Oh!!! We were really blessed by
December 2001 while returning from the
H.H. Shri Mataji.
Pandal after having the Divine Darshan of
Shri Mataji, towards M.T.D.C. Hotel, we
This whole divine scenario was such as
if some experienced artist had drawn it
saw a yellow glittering mass of clouds in
the sky-nearly above the bungalow where with the brush of an expert and a skillful
goldsmith had decorated this divine Shiva
Shri Mataji was staying.
This mass of cloud formed into the Lingam with gold, silver and precious
stones.
Shiva Lingam and then into Shri
I wanted to share this divine experience
Ganesha's shape. This formation
and happiness with all my Sahaj Parivar.
occurred within (maybe) 90 seconds. It
breathtaking and a divine We could not take any photo of the
a
was
Lingam. So I had to try my best to draw/
scenario!!!!!!!!
'sketch this unique scenario with suitable
The whole Shva Lingam and its base
colours, which were available at home.
was of black colour as if made from black
The persons in the auto rickshaw were
marble stone. The outer lining of the
my self i.e. Mrs. Shakuntala Talpady from
Lingam and its base was shining and
Baroda, Mrs. Raul (akka) from Baroda,
luminiscent with yellow or golden light. The
and Mrs. Pushpa Rao from New York.
rim of the base was also sparkling as if
some precious stones were studded.
Mrs. Shakuntala Talpady
Behind this whole Shiva Lingam were
604/B, Grow More Apts.
white spiral like arranged clouds and each
Nr. Rameshwar Mahadev Mandir
cloud was having a silver lining. Behind
Ashram Road Subhampura,
these clouds rays of light were coming out.
Vadodara-390-023.
scenario
This
whole
was
very
(Gujarat)
Tele : (0265) 390767
But within no time this
beautiful!!!!!!!!
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Maha Sahasrara Day
5th May, 1983
(From Nirmala Yoga)
are two more Chakras, about which you
On behalf of all of you, I thank the
do not talk much-they are the Chakra of
Sahaja Yogi organizers of Bombay, who
Moon (Lalita) & charka of Sun (Shri). Then
have made these arrangements and on
there is "Hamsa" Chakra. Thus there are
my own behalf also, I thank them a lot.
This is a beautiful place they have chosen
three more-seven plus three make ten.
Then-there are four chakras above the
for us. It is also a gift of God, that at this
Sahasrara. And about these chakras also,
time the thing about which I was going to
speak, sitting under the same trees the I have told you - Ardha-Bindu, Bindu,
talk of Sahasrara is taking place. Fourteen Valaya and Pradakshina. These are the
four. After coming to Sahaja Yoga and after
years ago or we could say already thirteen
your Sahasrara has opened, you have to
have passed and now the fourteenth
years
year has started, this great work of pass through these four chakras, Ardha-
Bindu, Bindu, Valaya and Pradakshina.
opening the Sahasrara was accomplished
After passing through these four charkas
in this world. I have told you about this
only, can you say that you have become a
many times on every Sahasrara day, as to
Sahaja Yogi.
what had happened, how it was done and
And if you see from another angle, we
what is its importance.
But the fourteenth birthday is very have to cross fourteen stages in reaching
up to Sahasrara; if you divide them then
important because man lives at fourteen
there are seven chakras situated on Idā
levels and the day he crosses over the
Nadi (Channel) and seven on Pingla Nādi.
fourteenth level, he becomes a complete
When man makes his ascent, he does
Sahaja Yogi. Therefore, today Sahaja Yoga
not do so in straight direction. He comes
has also become Sahaja Yogi.
first to left then goes to right, then again to
Like this, God has created fourteen
left and then again to right. And when
levels within us. If you simply count them,
Kundalini ascends, it also does so,
then you know that there are seven
Chakras within us. Besides these, there dividing Herself into these two. The reason
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-39.txt 
 May-June 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
37
for it can be understood if I take the
Rājanā, Birājanā-these words I have
example two ropes. These two ropes
said to you many times earlier, also; but
together, side by side-in the process of today, specially, we should understand
that on Sahasrara day what is Rajanā to
going up or coming down-cross over
reign, to be the master, what is Birājanā to
twice. (Here Shri Mataji explained the
rising of Kundalini along Ida & Pingala
assume.
Nadis; and making 4 loops-two each in
Now, you are sitting, you look at these
trees. This is the tree of Shriphala. Nariyal
opposite directions-(clockwise and anti
is called Shriphala. Coconut is called
clockwise) at every chakra.) When
Shriphala. Shriphala, which is coconut-
Kundalini ascends, you see on the chakra
whether you have ever thought about it or
whether the left is caught or the right is
not, I don't know. But it is a thing to be
caught. Although Kundalini is only one, but
on every charka you see both the things- really thought about-'Why is it called
Shriphala?"
thus you know whether left is caught or the
This grows along the sea-coast and
right.
Thus, within us, if each chakra is nowhere else. The best fruit grows at the
divided into these two-left and right-then
sea coast. The reason is this, that the sea-
it is the 'Dharma'. Wherever there is
seven two's are, fourteen; similarly within
dharma, only there, the Shriphala
us first of all fourteen stages have to be
blossoms. Where there is no dharma,
crossed before reaching the Sahasrara.
And if you understand this-that these Shriphala will not grow there.
But 'all' things are contained in the sea.
seven, and seven above-this way also a
All sorts of-cleanliness, dirt; everything is
path of fourteen is created.
Therefore this thing 'fourteen' is very inside it.
This water is also full af salt. It has salt in
important in Kundalini Shastra. Very
it. Christ had said that "You are the salt of the
important. It's a very important thing. We
earth'. Means, you can enter into
should fully understand that we
become entitled to the Blessings of everything. You can impart taste to
Sahaja Yoga only after rising above everything. 'Are the salt'-without salt man
cannot live. The 'prana-shakti' (Life force)
these fourteen stages. We should
that we take-in, if we don't have salt within
unceasingly march forward and as we
us, then even that prāna-shakti cannot
imbibe it, get completely 'dyed' in it.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-40.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
38
work. It is a catalyst. And this salt-it fully
has hair on the outside for protection. The
organizes for us to live, to live in this world,
protection from death is provided to us by
to live in the 'prapancha' (illusary world).
the hair. Therefore hair have been given
Without salt man would be of no use.
great respect; hair are great and a very
But when this thing rises towards God
powerful thing-because they protect you.
(Paramātma), then it leaves all the salt You are protected by them. And inside this-
below - everything is left. And when the
like we have cranial bones-that too you see,
light of the sun falls on these trees, and that inside the Shriphala there's a hard kind
with the falling of sun-light as the sap of its
of a covering on the outside, like this. After
leaves and the sap of the whole tree is
that inside us-grey matter and white
matter-two such things are inside us. In the
sucked upwards-because evaporation
takes place-then, this water flows Shriphala too, you see-white matter and
upwards through the trunk;-leaving
grey matter,... and inside that is water,
which is the cerebrospinal fluid inside us.
'everything' it crosses those fourteen
things and on reaching the top, is formed
Inside that Shriphala also there is water-
that is the limbic area.
Shriphala.
So this sākshāt Shriphala, itself is-if, for
You are that same Shriphala. And it is
essential to offer Shriphala to the Devi. them (trees) this is the fruit, then for us,
'this' is the fruit. Our brain is the fruit of the
Without the offering of Shriphala, the puja
'Sampanna'
whole of our evolution. Whatever has been
considered
is
not
our evolution to date-that from amoeba,
(accomplished).
today we have become humans-we have
Also Shriphala is made up in a strange
got all that, as a result of this brain. From
way. There is no 'phala' (fruit) in the world
the brain, all this-whatever we have got-is
like the Shriphala. No part of it (tree) goes
waste. Each and every part of it is used.
through this brain. Within this are all kinds
From its leaves down to everything is of powers; of all kind. Within this is
used. And of Shriphala itself-each and collected all the wealth that has been
received by us.
every thing is used.
Now, the Atma (Spirit) resides inside
You can see that the Shriphala is also
like human being's Sahasrara. Like the hair this heart and after Sahaja-Yoga its light
spreads within us in seven layers, from
we have, the same way Shriphala also has
both sides- that can happen only when
hair. 'This Sahasrara is the Shriphala'. This
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
39
one's Sahasrāra is open.
dharma; and joy within our Atma-start
Till now, we have been doing the same
getting enlightened. Its light spreads
job with our brain; before realization-ego gradually at first, this you all know. Its light
and superego, through these two
grows slowly and slowly. It's a subtle thing,
very subtle at first, because the gross
whatever work is to be done, that we do;
nothing except this. Ego and superego, or
set-up we live in, in that set-up, it becomes
difficult to catch hold of that subtle.
you can say, 'manas' and ego-with the
help of these two we do all our work. But
Gradually that hold also develops. After
after realization, we work with the help of that you start to grow, to progress. With
our Atma. Atma, before realization resides the opening of a single curtain of
within the heart,-absolutely separate-as a
Sahasrāra, the Kundalini comes up. But
"Kshétragyá' (witness of the field). Its job :
its light does not start spreading all around
whatsoever it may be-just to witness-it just then. The Kundalini has just come up
keeps doings. But its light is not in our
and you have saluted the seat of
chitta (attention), it is separate from us. It
Sadashiva. Within you, the light of Atma
has started flowing hazily. But it has not
is not in our chitta.
After realization, it comes into our yet fully blossomed in the brain.
chitta, first. First it comes into the chitta.
Now, the surprising thing is, that if you
And chitta, you know, is in the Void. After want to spread it through your brain, you
cannot. Our brain and our heart-now a
that, its light comes into the truth, because
with the entering of light into our brain (as perfect balance of these will have to be
shown. You know well, that when you work
the brain gets enlightened) we know the
truth. "Know". Doesn't mean that we know
too much with your intellect, heart-failure
occurs. And when you work too much with
through the intellect, but know in reality
your heart, the brain fails. There exists a
(Sākshāt) that 'this is the truth'. After that
its light is seen in the heart. The heart relationship between them, it already
exists. It's a very deep relationship. And
profound,
becomes
starts
heart
because of this deep relationship, when
expanding, starts becoming vast, its
power of love starts increasing. That's
you get your realization their relationship
why-'Sacchidananda'-Sat, Chitta and
has to become deeper. The relationship
Anand (Truth, atrtention and bliss (joy).
between the heart and this brain should be
Truth within our brain, chitta, within our
very deep. The moment it gets completely
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-42.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
40
brain : "look here, there's nothing to fear.
integrated, your (chitta) attention becomes
completely Parameshwer-Swarup, (one
There was no reason to be afraid. Now take
a light and see." Although he understands it
with supreme God).
This very thing is also said in Hatha- through his brain, yet he is frightened.
Yoga, that Manas (super-ego) and
But when both the things become one-
Ahamkāra (ego) both get dissolved, 'Laya'. you try to understand this point-that the
But just by telling like this nobody is going
brain, through which you think, which
to understand, how could the ego and makes your Manas understand, and takes
care of it; if that brain itself becomes your
super-ego get dissolved? Sa they keep on
Mana (), I mean if there's such an
struggling with super-ego, and ego. Super
ego shoots up by overpowering 'Ego' and
instrument which could assume the
vice versa. They cannot just understand
function of accelerator and brake; and both
what this madness is? How will this go?
become "one', knowing everything, then,
How to win over the super-ego and the only after achieving such a state, you
become the perfect Master (Guru). We
ego?
There's only one way out for that-
have to achieve such a state.
'Agnyā Chakra'. By working on the Agnya-
By now, you people have progressed a
chakra the two, ego and super-ego get
lot; you have reached quite a high level. No
fully
dissolved, And as soon as they get doubt now you have become Shriphalas.
dissolved,
is Butlalways talk of what is ahead because if
complete
concord
established between the heart and the this tree is to be climbed, then-have you
brain. But there is no harmony. It is this seen how people climb? If you make some
hormony between the heart and the brain
one climb and see, then you will understand
that we have to achieve.
that he ties a rope around himself and
So, your heart, becomes the Sahasrära
keeps hooking that rope higher. When that
your Sahasrāra, becomes, the heart. What
rope is hooked higher up, then with its help,
he climbs. In the same way, as we climb,
you think is in your heart; and whatever is in
our own rope has always to be kept hooked
your heart, thatonly you think. When you get
higher. And only when you learn this, can
this state then there remain, no doubts, no
disbeliefs, no fear; no such thing remains.
your climbing be very quick.
But mostly we keep hooking the rope
Like, when a person fears, what is done
to him? He is made to believe through the
lower. Even after coming to Sahaja Yoga,
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-43.txt 
 May-June 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
41
we hook the rope lower and say that
can they get Surya nor do this work, nor
could we become Shriphalas.
"Mother' we have made no progress at all".
Tree should be very well observed and
Now, how could there be progress when
understood. You can learn Sahaja Yoga
you hook the rope in the opposite direction
very well from a tree. These are very great
and make arrangements for coming
down? While coming down, you do not Gurus for you. Like, when we look towards
even need to hook the rope. You just a tree, we should first observe how it
settles its roots. First, it takes care of and
loosen it a bit and zoom, you will come
fixes its roots. And to take care of and fix its
down! That arrangement is already made-
for coming down. It is to climb up, for roots, what does it do? It keeps
which arrangement has to be made. So, to
penetrating and going deep into the roots.
This is our dharma, this is to go deep, And
achieve something, hard work has to be
with that attention it-sucks, the all
put in. And to lose whatever has been
achieved, no hard work is required-you prevading power. This is an inverted tree-
its better to say this way. These roots Start
come straight down, to the ground; there's
sucking that all pervading power; and after
no doubt about it.
If you understand this point then you will absorbing it, what has it to do after all?
realize that you have to look up always. Then its sight goes up and this way that
Shriphala is formed.
Standing on any step of the ladder if one is
Your Sahasrara is also like this
looking up then his state is higher than the
Shriphala. It is extremely dear to Mother%3B
one looking down from the higher step of
and this very Sahasrara should be
the ladder. This is why sometimes even
surrendered to Her. Many people said to
very old Sahaja Yogis, come down
Me yesterday that: Mother, we feel the
suddenly. People say that "Mother, he/she
coolness (of vibrations) in the hands; also
was such an old Sahaja Yogi; was for so
in the feet, but not here (Sahasrara)."
many years with you; did this, did that"-But
"Who" sits there?"-just know this; the
they always looked down. Their attitude
coolness will come from here.
brought them down. What could I do?
And the one, who is sitting there, is the
Sight should always be set higher.
'fruit' of 'all' things. The roots of this tree,
you want to see this fruit (Shriphala),
If
fixed in the soil below, are also born of it.
you have to look up. Everyone is looking
It's trunk, its hard work, its evolution-'all'
up. Why? Because-they know-that 'neither
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
42
this in the end become that fruit. dancing to its tunes. They are also
Everything is inherent in that fruit. You put
understanding the significance of the
that fruit in the soil and again the whole whole thing.
Similarly you also have Shriphalas.
thing will be born.
They are to be fully ripened and the only
"it is the essence of all, it is the ultimate
of all."
way to ripen it is to eastablish concord with
So far whatever Divine work has been
the heart. This concord with the heart is
done in this world, whatever has been important. Their is no difference between
the heart and the brain. The heart desires
done, the quintessence of it all today is our
Maha Yoga. And who is the Mistress of it?
and brain fullfills it. When complete
You know.
harmony is established between the two
So, on such an auspicious time you
only then you get the full benefit.
Now for common people Sahaja Yoga is a
have come on this earth and received it.
So you should feel blessed and becoming
very secret thing. They are not going to
understand because their daily life is of that
like this "Shriphala" you should surrender
level only. Accordingly they move. But your
yourself.
The fruit is picked from the tree when it
level is different. You must live at 'your own'
is ripe, otherwise it is useless.. Unripe fruit
level. When you look towards others, mostly
could not be offered to the Mother.
it is with compassion because what are these
poor people? What is going to happen to
So maturity, must be achieved and
childishness given up. Till childishness them? Where will they go? They don't
understand. What is their state?Onwhat path
remains, you will keep sticking to the tree.
How could such a fruit be offered? When it
are they going to reach? Understand this,
you
is picked up from the tree and offered, only
people try to understand that:if, by explaining
to them, they understand Sahaja Yoga, even
then is the Puja considered accomplished.
So Shriphala is there before you as a then its very good. Try to make them
symbol to understand Sahaja Yoga. It is understand. But if they do not bother, then
Divine grace that we all have gathered there's no use of breaking one's Shriphala.
here today and these trees have also Keep it safeiy protected.
helped us in this great celebration. These
Its job is much higher. You have got it for
are all resounding (if), vibrating
(i) and are listining to the music and
a very much higher purpose and keep it at
that higher level and only on attaining that
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-45.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
43
level it could be accomplished.
this breeze does not blow then one doesn't
Accomplished (
), wonderful (3
know how much further they may bend!
),
Because they know that 'It' (Sea) is the
unique state you can consider yourself
one who is the Giver of everything. Being
blessed.
Therefore, there's no need to break our
reverent and extremely humble, (TR)
heads for meaningless things. There is no
they are bowing to it. And the one 'the
Giver', is the 'Dharma'. The dharma which
need to argue with anyone. But your own
is inside us, when it gets fully awakened,
state must be maintained and you must
not come down. Until this happens, the full
starts fully manifesting, only then will the
Shriphala inside us be so sweet, beautiful
surrender which was to be achieved within
you, that you have not achieved in Sahaja
and nourishing. And then the world will get
to know from your life itself, and not from
Yoga. Whatever was to be imbibed, that is
not achieved. Whatever growth was to
anything else, that 'what you are'.
occur, that is not achieved. Whatever was
Now, fourteen times you have
celebrated the birthday of this Sahasrara,
to be your mastery and full growth, that is
not achieved and you have got caught in a
and no one knows how many more years
misconception. Therefore on no false you will celebrate. But till this Sahasrara
grounds should you think that 'I have
day, whenever you celebrated the birthday,
become some great Sahaja Yogi' or your Sahasrara has also been opening
and growing, along with it.
anything. Greatness makes you humble,
Accepting any kind of compromise, or
you become humble.
Look at these three trees. The breeze letting oneself loose, does not behove a
from the opposite direction is flowing to Sahaja Yogi. A person who is a Sahaja
them. Actually the trees should bend Yogi, should bravely make his path and
move forward.Facing all obstacles-the
towards this side, when the breeze is
flowing in this direction. But in which family, this, that, all such pulls have no
direction are the trees bending? Have you meaning. These have been with you a
ever marked why all the trees are taking thousand times. In this life you have to
that direction? Why? The breeze is achieve and with you, if others also get,
then it is their good luck. It is their fortune, if
coming from that direction (Sea) and
pushing them, even then, why are the they don't get it, will you pull them up by
trees bending towards that side? And if your hands?
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-46.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV issue 5 & 6
May-June 2003
44
It is like tieing big stones to legs and
progressed in Sahaja Yoga'. How could it
there be'? You yourself are after your own
going into the sea and requesting the sea,
to take you across'. The sea will reply, life!
There are some small rules in Sahaja
"First remove those stones tied to your
feet, otherwise how can I carry you Yoga-'very simple and straight-forward'.
across?" To your feet you have tied these
You have to use the power that has been
huge rocks. It is better to get rid of them,
given to you, Practice it in your behaviour.
and if you can't cut them off then at least
The biggest quality of these trees is their
do this,-keep yourself away from them. humility towards the sea and the
expression of their innate love. Dedicating
You have to discard all such things with
which you have tied your feet and rise
the gift of the Divine love to its giver-The
higher. Tell them to do 'whatever Almighty, you have to remember that this
you want to but have nothing to do is to be given to all.
Finally, it should be said that I do not
with us'. Because there are so many
more badhas which are useless to be reside in the brain, or the Sahasrara in
which there is no love. The only thought
attached to.
that the brain should have is - 'what is to be
Look at the way these trees hold such a
heavy fruit so high. How heavy is this fruit-
done to express this love'? By deep
it has water inside! It holds this fruit high. In
thinking you will know that I am saying the
same thing: "How can we fill our hearts
the same way you have to hold your head
high and while holding it high, remember with love?" We should only consider3;
'whether-l am doing, it in love? Is this being
that the head should be respectfully bowed
towards the sea-the sea, which is the done in love? All that I am doing, is it in
love? Is my talking and all my activities are
symbol of dharma. One should humbly
bow down before the Dharma. Many
being done in love?" In love you can even
Sahaja Yogis do not understand that beat someone, there is no harm in that.
But is it really being done in love?
unless and until we get established in the
The Devi killed so many Rakshasas.
dharma, we cannot be Sahaja yogis. They
go on committing all kinds of mistakes.
But She killed them in love. Even they were
Many of them take tobacco, smoke loved! And so, in order that they may not
further deteriorate from Rakshas to
cigarettes and drink liquor; keep doing all
this and then they say, 'We have not
Maharakshas and aiso for the love for Her
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-47.txt 
 May-June 2003
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5 & 6
45
other thing looks beautiful but is incapable
Bhaktas (devotees), in order to save them,
She killed the Rakshasas. That Anant of giving any joy (# Neeras), is
Shakti (limitless power) also, is the absolutely hollow. One is without joy and
the other quite hollow. There could be no
expression of love only. All that she does is
harmony between these two because they
real good to them (Hita). It is love.
So, are you expressing that sort of love
are contrary to each other.
But after realization and after coming to
which does them real good? This has to
be thought about. And if you are really Sahaja Yoga, all contrariness is lost, and
doing that then you have accomplished the two things which appeared to be
against each other seem to become two
which I have been speaking, namely "that
parts of one thing only. And this happening
concord" Then that concord has got
established in you. There is only one should take place within you. Only the day
Shakti (power) which we may call 'Love' when this happening takes place within us,
and it is only 'Love' that shapes things to can we accept that we have fully
become beautiful, shapely and fully celebrated the 14th birthday of our
Sahasrara.
organized. Dry thoughts are meaningless.
May God bless you. And on this
And you know that dry thoughts emanate
from ego. Some thing which comes from auspicious occasion, on My own behalf,
on behalf of all Devatas (Deities) and on
super-ego may well make it look extremely
behalf of Paramatma eternal blessings
beautiful but within it is quite hollow.
Therefore, one thing is dirty but dry, the (Anant Ashirvad) to you all.
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-48.txt 
 Gratitude Expressed
March 21, 2003.
Phalgun Krishana
Chaturthi of Shaliwahan Shaka 1924
HER HOLINESS SRI ADISHAKTI MATAJI
months of March & April, spring season is
Today, we all the Sahaja Yogi brothers,
and sisters of the world offer our sincere
leisurely poised on the polls of flowers. One
can observe & gaze at the tender leaves of
Salutatins at your lotus feet.
As indicated by your Holiness, by your
the trees every where, attracting ones
incarnation in this world, the blossom time
attention. These banners of transparent
of evolution of Humanity has begun, About
rosy leaves of the trees are dancing with the
the blossom time, Lord Srikrishna in Hymn
cool breeze and are hailing like the banners
of the glamour of Sahaja Yoga, Which are
35 of Chapter X of the 'Bhagvat Gita
eye catching. In these months, many a
(entitled "The Yoga of Divine Glories i.e.
Brahmavidya) describes as under :-
trees, are adorned with blossom of
immaculately white (Nirmal) flowers
MASANAM MARGSHIRSHOHAM,
RITUNAM KUSUMAKARAH (II)
spreading the aroma in the atmosphere and
Months of Phalgun & Chaitra of Indian
some are carrying the bumper crop of green
fruits like grapes, Mangos, Guavas etc.
Calender, which are usually March & April
The beauty of Chaitra month (Starting
are considered as 'Spring Season'. So
at the end March or April) increases, with
Lord Krishna says in the above Hymn,
the nests of birds hanging on the trees and
I am Margshisha Month (out of 12
gives the sense of fulfillment as per
the
months of Indian Calendar)
am Kusumakara i.e. Spring Season manifestation of souls of Sahaja Yogis.
These yellowish, grayish nests of different
(out of seasons of Indian Subcontinent)
Spring Season is considered as the sizes appearing everywhere in the pictorial
language of the spring season appear
king of Seasons.
beautiful & give solace to the human mind,
Poet Mukteshwara while upholding the
description of this spring season says, that like the magic of semicolons (visible
clearly in the photographs due
'The Spring is usually, leisurely resting on
Vishnumaya) that emanate in the divine
the dust of flower petals (as the flowers are
vibrations flowing by your grace.
abundant at this time of the year), In these
 2003_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-49.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XV Issue 5& 6
May-June 2003
& Sahaja Yoginis throughout the world will
welcomes
The
cuckoo
these
have the opportunity to celebrate this Amrit
eyecatching sweet months, by enchanting
cooling; similar to the amazing musical Yoga.
We all the Sahaja Yoga family of the
sounds of 'Anahat Chakra' emanating
from the hearts of Sahaja Yogis. And all the
world pray with full reverence at your lotus
feet, that, the coming year (80th year) be
Sahaja Yoga family throughout the world
Celebrates the first day of Chaitra month
joyful for you in every way & become the
by raising the 'gudis' (traditional most fortunate one to witness all round
development of Sahaja Yoga. Similarly the
welcoming of the deities) & hanging flower
decorations on down entrances, as if attention of all Sahaja Yogi brothers &
entrances to the hearts in the form of Sisters throughout the world be unitedly
fulfillment & satisfaction.
fixed at your lotus feet with permanent
sense of dedication & devotion enjoying
By sweet chance of time, 21st March,
2004, The holiest day of your 81 birthday, your Divine Vibrations.
Jai Shri Mataji
falls on the first day of chaitra (Gudi
All your Children
Padwa) of Shaliwahan Shaka 1926 &
Throughout the world
Sahaja Yoga Shaka 24 & all Sahaja Yogis
