"Divine Cool Breeze The 1V11 March April, 2004 Volume: XVI Issue: 3 & 4

 Maha Shivratri Puja, Pune 15-2-2004 2. The Advice of Shri Mataji, 11-3-1981 7 From Nirmala Yoga 16 AHAVAN A Letter of Shri Mataji - London 2-9-1980 Reception to Sir C.P. Shrivastava Report from Rahuri Words of Christ The Lord Sir C.P.'s Reply Shri Adi Shakti Puja, Canajoharie 35 38 Inherent hurdles Memories of the Divine Mother 52

 There would be no Kalyana without Self-Realisation this power is your wellbeing (Kalyana). The one who gets this power should know that now he has been blessed. It is difficult to explain the word 'Kalyana'. 'Kalyana' means success in every way: to be nourished and glorified fully. What should be the meaning when someone blesses us and says, May you have Kalyana (get blessed)?' What does it mean? What is this Kalyana? This Kalyana is what we call Self-Realisation (Atma Sakshatkara). There would be no Kalyana without Self-Realisation. It could neither be understood nor absorbed. All these things become blissfull and the person finds oneself very comfortable and splendid (Tejaswi). All that could be done for you to achieve this state has been done. All the labour has been done. But now when you Mahashivratri Puja have got this path of the Kalyana, what will Pune Feb. 15, 2004 (Hindi Pravachan - Translated) happen? Complete solution to everything (Samadhana) comes in you. Now there is Today we are present here to nothing to search for, you have become worship the Guru, The Guru is regarded guru yourselves. Nothing special is now going to be achieved. But you will to be the highest of all the dieties. Who is blessings of this experience the this guru in reality? Which is the power that is of this state that samadhana, flows in it in abundance. This Gurutatva is samadhana. You will understand it and get the Shiva. The power that is in the form of Shiva is to be regarded as the power of established in it. First and foremost thing is Physical- the Guru. When you get this power of the Guru and it starts flowing in you, then you Physical Problems, Physical Weaknesses. become Guru yourselves. But the job of All these problems disappear with this path

 biggest of them is 'Peace'-Mental Peace, of Kalyana. You will get rid of your physical Physical Peace and, above all, Woridly problems. If it has not yet taken place then Peace. Many problems and difficulties are one has to think that the state of kalyana there in the world. They could all be got rid has not yet been achieved. Secondly of after achieving this Kalyana-Self- Mental Weaknesses, the obstructions that persist in your achieving the state of Realezation. They cease to exist. You find Kalyana will be finished-the mental many people in this world, who, after weakness that still persists in you and achieving this power, get established in meditation while acting at their places. This because of which you connot blossom. That power lies in it. When you achieve is the Kalayana through which man gets this power then you reaily have the complete balance. You should take refuge in the Guru kalyana-solution to all the problems, means you get self-realized. Shri to attain this balance. By taking refuge at the Holy Feet of the Guru, you will get such Mahadeva is helpful in it too. When your a perfect balance that you will feel as if you Kundalini pierces the Sahsrara, Shri had achieved everything and have nothing Mahadeva is there. That is why He is called more to get. Mahadeva - The God of Gods is Mahadeva. Such a balance gives tremendous other There many are power. I call it the power of love. When one achievéments in this path of Kalyana The

 people put lot of effort to attain this power. But this power could be got from other some people, from someone who himself has a 1ге аdy A achieved it and become has Godly. (Pravachan in English) receives it, the whole body gets thrilled as This is a Subject which you can it some Divine Power had embraced him. In that state, the person rises above all the only explain in Hindi Langauge which says that this 'Gurupada' you get from somebody worldly turmoils and inbalances and lives in perfect balance. That is the reason why else. But that somebody else himself is

 Mairch - April, 2004 The Givine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVi, lssue endowed with the power, the power of the only way you can get to it is through 'Dhyana'. Dhyana is meditation. When you Peace of Mind to begin with and also the power to overcome all kinds of Earthly meditate, just meditate and meditate, do not ask anything. Meditation itself gives you Problems, Mental Problems, Physical that instrument which can bear this great Problems, All these problems you can power of the Guru and then solve through your mental balance and you mental blessings from your Guru. When automatically give this power to others. You don't have to work it out. Just in your you become Guru, you yourself have the power to bless others. With your blessing presence people can get this power of complete satisfaction and there is salvation power you can create a Guru out of mnany for you and for others. So all the problems and once the Guru is created and there is Guru who has this power, it's very which are faced for the jouney of ascent are finished and you are drenched in the satisfying and this is very ennobling. The satisfaction is so much that you don't want bliss of heavenly peace and joy. That's why it is called as 'Kevalya', means only-only anything. This is the power of Shiva. You the blessings. See that means there is no other word to translate it. There is no other have seen, Shiva doesn't have much way of explaining it. It is a state, it is a 'Sthiti, a state. In that state you have to clothes, He doesn't decorate himself, He is just sitting in meditative mood all the time. He doesn't want anything. He is so you are in that state. It rise. You know that is a very remarkable thing that once you satified with Himself that He doesn't want reach that state you do not have to ask for anything. That is the power you get after the Self-Realization if you have a Guru and anything. Its all there and you are so satisfied! I can go on talking about this Guru of that level and caliber. One should not try to become a Guru. That's very special power but I think, whateverI have said, please meditate on that. You are al impractical. If you try to become, you will capable of reaching that state, that State never, It has to come to you automatically of Peace and Joy. without any asking, without any effort. So 145 May God Bless You

 Param Pujya Mataji's Advice 11th March 1981 Delhi I have told you, the other day that which very few people understand, for these vibrations are nothing but the example, somebody brings me a Brahma-Shakti-the power of Brahma. The photograph of Shri Ganesh and says, "Should I worship this Shri Ganesh's power of Brahma is the power that creates, photograph or not"? First of all we should that desires, that evolves and it gives the see if vibrations are coming from it or not. living force also. It is the power which is giving us the living force. Now, it is not easy to understand what is a dead force and what is a living force. Living force is very Supposing you take a house. You must see that the house is giving good vibrations. We see the comfort, we see other things. simple to understand. An animal, say a little We might even see if it is good for other people to come in or not, but we do not worm, is a living force. It can turn itself the see the house from vibrations point of view. way it likes. It can save itself from danger. It may be a small little thing, but because it is living, it can save itself. But something For anything that we do, we have, now, to think in terms of vibratory awareness which which is dead cannot move by itself. So, means awareness that is working upon living things. As in the, say a cell at the tip the 'Self' part does not remain in it, as far of the root of a tree is a living thing. Of as it is concerned. course, it does not think, it is guided by Now, being a living force we should the living force itself. So, it knows how to try to find out, "Are we going to be the move with the living force, to live with it and how to understand the plan of the living living force or the dead one". Now, when we live in the world, we start thinking about our comforts; where we have to live, force to get along with it and how to merge what we have to do. When we think of all with it. But, we human beings have got the these things, you see, we are thinking of freedom to decide. Now, once you are the dead. But when we think of having a place or a house or an Ashram from the realised, you have got that living force angle that you will be doing some living within you. This is the living force you feel. So, you have to know how to use this living work, then you are giving life to that place. That atmosphere should be created from force to keep your bady, mind, ego, everything in the all that is dead to create the living force. superego and enlightened state, by understanding the Now, this is very very subtle thing,

 March-April, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Vojume-XVI, 3sue:3-4 fridge, because he wants a fridge, and he planning of the living force. It gives you all the ideas regarding must get it. Why he wants a tridge? most of the problems. For example, here Because he thinks it will give him more in this country and specially in Delhi, 1 find comfort. But, when he brings the fridge, he knows that it is not so. So, the best way to catch on the left Nabhi, also right nou that look at all dead things is not to go too far Swadhi-shthana and then on the Heart and also on your Agnya, These are the Chakras with them. If you have, well and good. If which deal with our being. So, let us try you do not have, well and good. You can from the left side. What happens? On the live with minimum of minimum or you left side the problem starts from left can live with maximum of maximum of Swadhishthna, because that is the first these. But when we start expanding our Chakra that starts emitting the negativity dead possessions, it is very much bad. within us. Now, left Swadhishthana is Then our attention goes into the dead. into our actually under control only of Shri Ganesh That's how we move because Shri Ganesh is the beginning of subconscious then over to collective subconscious. Then it moves higher to the life and also the link between the life and the death. So Ganesh is one who gives left Nabhi, and at left Nabhi, we start becoming crazy about these dead things. the balance, the "Vivek" the understanding to you by which you know how far to go For example, the watch, the Time. Time is a dead thing, it is not a living thing. It has with things. Now, when left Swathishthana catches, you start going to other people nothing to do with living thing. For example, who promise you such things, like "I will you cannot say exactly at what time the give you this and that, this will happen, flower will become a fruit. So this watch or time has nothing to do with the living force that will happen to you". But this left sided at all. It is human or man-made like the thing can also come from your own watch; particularly time is also man made. desire for wrong things. For example, we For example, today, time here is might be desiring something very wrong; we might be thinking that let us have this something, but in England it is different. If you say it is 4-0' clock in India, it is not the kind of a dead thing or that kind of dead thing or some sort of a special thing. same in England. So, the timing is not important. What time you arrive, what Suppose, somebody wants a refrigerator and keeps on thinking of it. He thinks that time you go, how many times you do it, is not important. he must have a fridge. He must go to the

 March - April, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue: 3-4 Because living force is infinite, it too much in the past, it is better to think of has no time limit or space limit, you cannot the future, so that you are pushed a little count it, the way it moves, the way it works bit to the centre. But, it is difficult with you out. Once we understand that it is a living human beings. Now, the other problem starts, force which is spontaneous, which is not bothered about our dead ideas, we come when we start feeling guilty about out of the dead. We were stones first, then when left Vishudhi catches. something, we became ameoba, then we gradually We start feeling guilty. "I should have not became human beings. So, our attention done this thing or that thing". Then you start is all the time towards the dead. What saying, "I am very miserable, I am very should we get, what should we have, what guilty" etc., you just start cursing yourself. This is another nonsense. That is how are the needs we have of this body which once you start doing that, then what happens is that you again become dead. is going to die. We do not see to the needs of the Spirit. By seeing to the needs of the Because living force will never condemn. spirit, you can overcome the left side. No, it will never. It goes on progressing You start looking after your spirit from this side itself, it sees, which side to move, which you know that you get your or that side. It is not going to condemn itself. It is not going to aggress anything. It vibrations. If your Spirit is happy, you get your vibrations, if it is unhappy, you has the wisdom to be in the Centre. do not get the vibrations. Such a That is how people should overcome their left side, by putting their attention away from comman thing! If you have any disease or a problem on left hand side, to give it a the dead things. You should watch from the Centre, when you are on the leftside. What balance, you put your attention to the you want to see, you don't see. But then future. But then people get stuck up on the future, if I say you look to the future. As ultimately to escape all this, what you do dead is dead and is 'Mithya' (illusion), same is to start blaming yourself all the time and feeling miserable. Now, this is the way you way future is also Mithya, is also not there. start ending up with yourleft side into a very Both the things are just the same. Whether o you go to left or right, whether you go to miserable state, that is the culmination of all these attachments to the left side. So, the subconscious or the supraconscious mind, both the things are just the same. ultimately you start thinking that you are So, no use going to the past, but if you are good for nothing, you are useless, you

 The Divine Cool Braeze. Volume-XVI, Issue 3-4 March- April, 2004 10 should have done this, you should have something great and this and that. That there should be many disciples that we done that. Now, at this time to overcome it, should have who should touch our feet and we should be called Great Gurus etc you have to count your blessings. Count So, in Sahaja Yoga some things your Blessings one by one. You have are prohibited. That nobody should got your Realisation. During thousands touch anybody's feet and no Sahaja Yogi of years how many people got realisation? You have got your vibrations. In so many should allow anyone to touch his or her centuries, how many people got them? It feet. This is one of the great Bandhans is written in Zen system that in eight for all Sahaja Yogis. No one should centuries there were altogether 26 touch other's feet and nobody should ask to touch his or her feet, whatever Kashyaps (Realised Souls). So, even after Buddha, how many got their realisation? may be your quality. Those who will touch will lose vibrations, and those You must think also that there are so many who will get salutations will also catch realised people, who talk the same on the heart. So, such conditions, which language, who talk the same tongue. You we have about Sahaja Yoga also, should must thank yourself also, that every thing can be known to you. be removed. We are all of us growing together. But, when you start catching on the We are part and parcel of one personality. left, you go in the past and you start saying, "Oh God? I am so useless, I am good for Nobody is higher or lower. One who thinks nothing. I am so useless, that I am still the slightest like this will go down faster. catching". As you know, those who catch This is the left side conditioning, where on the left hand side, are always people falter very much. So, such desires complaining, always grudging type must be given up in Sahaja Yoga. You must have very wider desires because of poor things, they suffer. Now, to match with that is the other side. So, if in Sahaja Yoga that all of us must get I tell you that you go to the other side also, it is a very dangerous game. For example, Realisation-say as many as possible. We should try to save as many people as we have so many conditionings in our possible. We should try to improve lives. You see, first of all our desire. Our ourselves as far as we can, and we are desire is to become excellent Sahaja nothing yet we cari improve and have so Yogis, to become Master Gurus and many biessings.

 19, Volume-XVI. tau The Eivine Cool Breeze, Volume-XV issue :3-4 March - Apnl, 2004 Now, the thoughts can come from you do not deviate to the right or to the left. the left side also. Like, if you have some This is something so subtle that you are Bhoots in your head, they can give you the left sided, you are not going to remain left thought that, "Oh, you are useless or good sided. You can become right-sided for nothing." Now, raise your right side and tomorrow, exactly, tomorrow you can come put down the left with your left hand. Now with right-sided problems. So, you must why do we do this? Because from your learn that Balancing, just like you start right side, you get the Grace and put down learning a bicycle. You might fall on this the left side. Such people who suffer from side or that side. the left side should try this. One more thing, Now, when do you learn cycling? If is, that when these ideas come to you or you ask me, I will say, "When you learn." I such thoughts come to you, that you are mean when you cycle down, that's the good for nothing etc., it is better to beat point when you learn. So, in Sahaja Yoga, yourself with shoes. Go and sing the praise to balance it, you have to watch yourself of the Lord and say that I am so happy, I carefully. Now where is it going? To the left side, then come to the right side. If have got everything around me. going to the right side, come to the left side. Now, the second thing is about the right side. On the right side, mostly you Now, come to the Centre, you just catch on the Swadhishthan. That is separate yourself, you detach yourself all because you think. This is another kind of the time. Not to criticize yourself nor to thinking that gives you catch at right aggress anyone or to criticize others, but Swadhishthan. Thinking, whether it comes use this point just to see yourself, just to see and guide yourself. Guidance is very. from right or the left will first give problem different from getting lost. Now that is what to your liver. The worst comes when both the sides are involved. There are some it is. Supposing the dead thing is there. Say this is a dead thing. When I throw it, it Bhoots which give you ideas that you are exactly will fall there. Living thing, if I throw good for nothing etc. While the other thing is when you start thinking that you are so it will not fall there exactly. So, the living great. In this such a wobbling starts force knows how to guide itself. In the coming and the confusion starts setting in. So, one must understand that in If you have learnt it, you have mastered same way you will learn to guide yourself. Sahaja Yoga, you are developing that Sahaja Yoga. No use condemning yourself, in any sharp edge, that central point from which

 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volumie-XVI, issue: 3-4 March- Apni, 2004 12 Mother. You don't ask anyone. way or thinking that you are great or small. But watch now, where the horse is going. This development should come to You are sitting on the top of the horse; now you, that, "what I do, I should know what lam doing. I should know what is correct. you are no more the horse. Before realisation you are the horse. Wherever it Ishould know how to correct it". should know 'I, here is the Spirit and not the Ego. takes you, you go there. It may stand there, No more the Ego exists or the Super-ego when it sees the grass and eat. Then the horse wants to kick somebody, it will do exists. It is the Spirit which guides you. You so. But, now, you have come out of the see the Realised children. They don't ask such questions. They know who is foolish, horse and sitting on the.horse as a Rider. who is stupid. They know who is caught Now you are the Rider and you must know how you are befooled by these things. up. They know whom to shut up and These desires, are all ancient, age old whom to argue. They do not sympathise things within you. See, also the aggression, with the people, who are caught up, They the Karma that you are doing are also just watch. If somebody comes, they will ancient. By doing this you will get this, tell me, "Mataji, this fellow is caught" you will get that. Many people will say, That's all. Somebody else comes. They "Mother, we are doing this, we are doing promptly tell me, "He is alright". That's all. They just certify. They do not hate anyone, so much for Sahaja Yoga; we have still not achieved anything". Now, what to do. they do not get worried about 'anything. If some body comes with a very bad Just can't help it. Now, you must find out, Badha, they say, "Better please, go away what is the matter with you. without any malice about the person, Now, if the Heart is catching, such Once, you are at the top of the hill, people can never progress. The Heart is the source of Light, it is the source of you have not to worry about the traffic. But, you are not yet on the top, that's why you Brahma- Shakti. Heart is the seat of Atma. If in the Heart there is no living force, then are worried that "I am climbing and failling, climbing and falling". This is just a Myth, how can you progress? You must know what to choose. just a mental shadow on your mind. This This is what Sahaja Yoga should make out is a fact that you are at the top of the hill. of you. You should grow mature to that But you have not asserted, the assertion point where you know what to choose. is not there. This is Growth. Then you don't ask of The God is the enjoyer. You cannot

 13 March April, 2004. The Divine Cooł Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issie:3- i4 force, it has to move, it will go where it has enjoy. You can only enjoy God, and it is to When our sense organs get enlightened the greatest enjoyment, to feel; what God then we shall not like to go to the unwanted has created for you, what a beautiful direction and say goodbye to many things. human in you fife He has given In this regard we have to be careful awareness by which you can know how much He has loved you, how much He about one thing, to keep the heart clean. has worked for you. He has brought you Those who have clean hearts have very few problems. That doesn't mean you keep to this level. What He has given you, you on thinking of stupidity. Clean heart means Surrender. In Sahaj Yoga if surrender is not can give to others and make others happy. If you think like that immediately both of your sides will be settled and you complete or if someone thinks oneself to be something special, then there could be yourself will be filled with Divine no growth in such a person. Ascent Vibrations. requires neither any education nor any Translated from Hindi speciality. "I have not felt it, I have not Now, I will tell in Hindi, You should eperienced it." It is your fault, not of Sahaja Yoga. Sometimes people talk to me in such sit on the throne, be seated, sit on the a way as if I had taken the contract or they throne. Sitting on the throne, yet begging have deposited some money with me! Shri and weeping! Committing this stupidity Mataji we have been coming to you for the while sitting on the throne! What to do with last 25 years! Nothing is going to happen such people? Ocupied the throne, you are even if you grow old, what to talk of 25 or the king. Sit on the throne and control your five sense organs; "Enough of it, now go 30 years! If you are not experiening you this way. This is good, that is good. I have Realisation, then there is definitely some fault in you. The moment you start When you .command seen enough of you." takings away your attention from yourself, and control yourself like this, only then you your short comings will appear to you and will become good Sahaja Yogis otherwise when you see your faults, see your you go by the command of your mind, "go shortcomings, it will be easy for you to get this way." You go that way and then say, "Shri Mataji what do I do? I tried to control rid of them. So occupy the throne like an my mind so much, so much, yet it goes emperor. If the king finds the subjects going astray, he forbids them from those things. that way"? What is 'Mana'? Mana is a living

 sze, Volume-XVI, issue 3-4 March - April, 2004 The Drvine Cool Bree or problems. You (Indians) get your The one who commands himseif is the only powerful person. realization very soon and they, because For example take these people. of their mistakes, take lot of time. You get While talking they even forget that whom realized in no time but you do not value it. They take time in getting realization but they are talking to! They talk in such a way value it a lot. They know the method. Look that one is astonished. They forget as what into their eyes how earnest they are! to say and what not to say. We should When I talk in Hindi, they listen to each have control over our tongue. This control could be acheived when we detach word very carefully. Although they do not ourselves from ourselves. This tongue understand the language yet how the has to be kept in control. vibrations flow from their hands! Their Slowly you will develop new habits, attention is always on the happening. They new methods and have new styles and have, now given away their lives to Sahaja then command yourself. Alway talk in third yaga. They think of nothing else that we shall do this and this and this. Only then person. A realized being never talks in first you will go deep. By giving away yourselves. person. He always talks in third person," we have to go there, sit there." Mostly to Sahaja Yoga, you grow. This is a fact. children do like that, they talk in third You have nothing to do in it, you lose nothing in it. You get the 'Khshema'(wealth and well person." This Nirmala will not go now. She will keep sitting here." Sahaj Yogi has also being). We have to give away the whole of to speak in that way. Slowly we have to ourselves ourselves to Sahaja Yoga. Every moment detach ourselves from renouncing our desires, our ideas, of life should be given to Sahaja Yoga. It means- 'living spontaneously'. Where the materialistic and other ideas such as ideas of power etc. We have to think as to what spontaniety will come from? It comes from living force-the living force which is within have we done for Sahaja Yoga and what us all the time. Nothing else should be have we to do. Still these things are less in India thought about. but in abundance abroad. They never Even otherwise you could never come to me and tell that such and such enjoy. The God only is the enjoyer. You relative of my father's grandfather's uncle's are mistaken to think yourselves to be the real brother is ill. Please cure him. They enjoyers. You cannot enjoy; only God could enjoy and He is the creator. You are only never tell me about their material diffculties

 March April. 2004 The Divine Col Broeze, 15 XVI, Issue: 3-4 Valume-X links in between, like pipes. You are the us. Now you can know your soul and the same. If you could enjoy anything at all, it is the God Almight who loves you profusely. This is the only truth with which soul of others. What a great blessing the God has given to us. With this thought be happy within. When you begin to enjoy the you could be in the state of joy, rejoice almighty in this manner then your heart expands. You will feel as if the whole nothing else nothing could give joy to you. creation has entered in it. Only He (The God) is the enjoyer. Today's message is that you should The reason is that today you want this; you get it, yet you are not happy.. begin to enjoy the God. Giving up all other Tomorrow you want something else and joys, enjoy the Almighty and meditate over what a bounty the God has given to you! then something else but you are not happy. Material things cannot make you happy. Oniy the God almighty is the Enjoy all the blessings that he has showered upon you. You will see that your attention has become steady. That is how enjoyer. So we should all enjoy (the God). Once we start enjoying the God then why you could grow in Sahaj Yoga. What have we received every do we need anything else to enjoy? So we minute? I have received so much, I have should have the pleasure of enjoying him. What a world the God has created! How received so much, keep on repeating, beautiful! How many beautiful things he otherwise your complaints and aggersion has given to us! We have become Sahaj will never come to an end. May God Bless You Yogis. God has awakened this power in To the Goddess, who among all created beings stands firm with the form of Mother, Reverence to Her, yea, reverence to Her! Reverence to Her,yea,reverence,yea,reverence! Markandya

 -: Invocation (Ahavan) :- "In SAHAJA YOGA, all the religions are respected because all the incarnations and previous prophets are in us. We know it for definite that they exist within us on our Centres. First, before starting the marriage, we had to ask them to come and be present on this function. This is called Ahavan. Now, they were all there. So we are now to thank them that you have been here and the marriage has been successful. In SAHAJA YOGA we are going to break all the barriers which make religions and people separate. All fanatical nonsense, old ideas which have propped up to make money out of religion, all these we are going to completely abolish and make one religion for all the humanity, which is religion of GOD, the religion of our evolution. May God bless you all". SHRI MATАЈІ on the occasion of marriage of Catherine & Gregoire on 1st Jan. 81 at RAHURI AFTER REALIZATION decode and respond to the messages from the Holy Spirit. They read other human beings as awareness systems. They direct our spiritual growth. 4. Collective consciousness is achieved. 1. The awareness space of the conscious mind increases. Ego and super-ego gradually drop down and are sucked back into Pingla and Ida. 2. The ascended Kundalini establishes a direct link with the unconscious. It The attention is drawn inside because of the inward happening of Kundalini's manifests as the flow of vibrations. 3. The deities on the chakras are awakened. They are the reflections of the original ascent. 5. In a fully mature realised being, the Deities ascend from their place of work deities on the Adi Chakras of the Virata in the Chakra, to their own seats within and they "Organise" our awareness accordingly. As they are linked together the Sahasrara. This is the stage of complete Divine Integration. by the ascended Kundalini the personality becomes integrated. They

 श्री माताजी का पत्र (मराठी) (Nirmala Yoga - 1981) लन्दन दिनांक 2-6-1980 मतप्रीय सहजयोगी मडळी यांस आशीर्वाद बनेश्वरी जो कार्यक्रम निश्चित केला आहे तों पूर्णतणे यशस्वी होणार आमचे लक्ष आहेच. पण सर्व परमेश्वरी कार्याला नवीन शक्ति प्राप्त होणार आहे. पुणेकरांनी पुण्याचे पुण्य सार्थक केले। हयात आमचें काय विषेश आहे। जे तुमचे होते ते जाणले व मिळविले। हेच आमच्या प्रसन्नतेचे निधान आहे। सहजयोगाचा महायोग घडत आहे। त्याची सुरवात बनेश्वरी होणार आहे। इकडे युरोपमध्यंगी जोरांत कार्य सुरू झाले आहे। ह्यवर्शी बरीच मंडळी येणार भारतात आहेत। मी नोव्हेम्बर मध्यें ये ईन। तोपर्यन्त खेडोपाड़ीं सहजयोगाची पताका झळीकली पाहिजे। तुमची सदैव आई-निर्मला तुम्हा सर्वांना अत्यन्त प्रेमपूर्वक आशीर्वाद. LONDON 2-9-1980 My dear Sahaja Yogis, The programmes which you have arranged at Baneshwar will certainly be very successful. Our attention is there. All God's work will now have a new dyna- mism. Sahaja Yogis of Pune have given fulfillments to the 'Punya'of Pune. There is nothing special of mine in it. Whatever is with you has been discovered by you and accepted. This is the source of joy. Sahaja Yoga is evolving as Maha Yoga. Baneshwer seminar will mani- fest that. Work has now commenced on very large scale in Europe also. This year many people will be coming to our holy land. I will come in November. Till then the message of Sahaja Yoga should reach every village. My affectionate blessings to all Ever Yours Your Mother Nirmala (Translation of Marathi Letter)

 RECEPTIONN TO SIR C.P. SRIVASTAVA (From Nirmala Yoga - 1981) It was a memorable joyous and settled in life and then she would be evening for, the Delhi people when they free to devote herself to the wider family welcomed Shri. C. P. Srivastava of Humanity. She kept her word and I amongst them on 4th January, 1980. kept mine. My daughters grew up. Credit Following is the text of his address on for bringing them up naturally goes to Her, because I was really very busy with the occasion. Mr. Subramanyam and dear my official duties and She gave me Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis of tremendous support by looking after the children, and the house and taking over Delhi, May I say first of all, how very grateful I am to all of you for the honour, every possible responsibility except my office work, which I kept to myself. Now, kindness and affection you have chosen when the daughters grew up, the to bestow upon me, this evening. For question of their marriage came up and me it is an experience which is very that was the test of her upbringing and cooling andI assure you, I will cherish it the test of children and so I asked my for a long time. daughters, "that now you have grown up, Sahaja yoga is now the very life you have travelled widely, you have been of my wife, whom you call Mataji; who abroad to many countries and well still remains my wife and as Sh educated, it is up to you to decide in what Subramanyamji said, She has play d the way would you like to get married". But role of a wife, a perfect wife itir y say as my wife had brought them up in true so, a perfect Mother and now a perfect Indian tradition, both of them said, that it Grandmother and what She is doing now was our duty as parents to find proper for the Humanity is something which bridegrooms for them and so whatever makes me particularly proud and most we decided was their decision. Living as gratified. Perhaps, I may mention to you we were, in Bombay, the people there that years ago when our two daughters sometimes did not even believe that were still little children and they were girls, who have been so well educated growing up, we both agreed that our first and widely travelled etc. would get married in our traditional Indian style and responsibility as parents must be bring them up properly, educate them custom, following ancient Indian values. and to see that they are properly married So as parents, we found bridegrooms for

 ssue : 3-4 March-April, The Civine Cool Breuze, Valtime-XVi i 2004 19 them, both are happily married and well want to know what is beyond this material world we see; what is our settled. Ever since then, my wife has destiny as human beings? There is now a moment in human history, when some been devoting her time, not only time I new revolution, spiritual revolution has to would say her soul to Sahaja Yoga and I have seen how wondrous her endeavors come about if the humanity is to be have been. In a world that we live in, saved, other wise war, conflict, strife will when you look up the newspapers in the destroy humanity. It is in this context, I morning, you find strife, trouble, see in Sahaja Yoga the beginnings of a new movement for humanity and I accidents and so on. She wants to bring therefore, wish to assure you that I feel peace, peace in a spiritual sense. Where there's animosity, she wants to proud of what you are doing as Sahaja substitute love for that, where there is Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis-true selfless bitterness, she wants to substitute love for each one, for everyone, true harmony for that and bring spiritual dedication to the ideals which are being development of the individuals. Now, to promoted and these are wonderful my way of thinking, the world is in values. turmoil. Not only in India, there is trouble everywhere. I find that really human Yoga in U.K. and I might tell you, what I T have seen the wonders of Sahaja have seen. I lead a very busy life being is in turmoil, within himself and outside. And then what is the need of the because of my responsibilities but once I was very grateful to my wife and Sahaja hour? Rich countries are no better. They might have more material goods but Yogis when they invited me to a function, about a month ago and there I saw a inside they are even more troubled than we are. We, in India have a certain group of, may be two hundred three degree of contentment, We have a rich hundred people, old, young, middle aged culture behind us, we have wonderful and children. They all seemed like happy tradition. Our marvelous traditions have family. They had come from different a very happy blend of materialism and parts of the country. All were together, spiritualism. In the West, spiritualism happy and cheerful, with a face, which has declined and therefore, there is exuded a certain amount of divinity. They more inner turmoil. Everywhere, the were happy and peaceful, very different people are looking for something. They from the usual crowd you see, full of

 March - April, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Valuime-XVI, Insue:3-4 about the best as anywhere in the world, tension, anger and bitterness; nothing seemed to affect them. One thing There is no country better than India, touched me most was that several there are no people better than Indians, if only we remember and become Indians. Being born in India is not enough, ladies came one by one, some of them with tears in their eyes, came to my wife, while I was sitting by her side saying, we must respect the values, which make "Mother, you have saved me and my son, India a great country, and Indians, the wise people. Our tradition is marvellous, who had gone astray, had taken to drugs and alcohol and has now been saved. very very rich. But we sometimes cease He has come back to the family. Now we to be ourselves. Now, if we become true Indians in the path of wisdom, which our are joyous family. How can we thank you forefathers laid down for us and we really enough for this?" Another lady comes develop spiritually ourselves the way this along and says", My daughter was going lady, my wife is propagating, I have no the way, we did not like and your Sahaja Yoga has brought her back to the family doubt at all, that a wonderful spiritual and now we are a united and happy uplifting is well on the way. family again". To my way of thinking, With these few words I want to even if one individual can be saved in express my deep gratitude to all of you this fashion, it is a unique achievement. for the love that you are giving my wife, If two can be saved it is better but if because you represent a fulfillment of dozens and hundreds can be saved it is her dream; it was her dream to build up a certain togetherness-a togetherness of marvellous. I feel this is a movement which holds great promise for humanity, spiritualism, a certain awareness of provided it is pursued strictly in ultimate reality. Therefore, your presence accordance with your values. Values are here is to me the embodiment, the very very important, particularly in fulfiliment of a dream she always had. I today's worid. Though, there has been want to thank you for all the love and a decline all over the world in these affection you have for her. I thank you very much for the kindness shown to me values which established our human society, yet we need to revive our values, today. I can only say that if in any way, and sustain them. I want to assure you my activities can be of slightest assistance to her, she has them; She that values in India, my own country, and I say so in all humility and sincerity, are has all her time for Sahaja Yoga and I

 March-April, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue 3-4 21 wish She had countries, Australia and of course, India am very happy about it. I not twentyfour but forty-eight hours in a is the motherland for this. May this. day. Whatever is available, She devotes movement grow. May more Sahaja Yogis herself in a very nice way. It is always participate in its activities and may we revive in India the great Indian spiritual embarrassing to talk about one's own wife but this relationship is just a fact values of which we should justly feel of life and there is a higher relationship proud. I shall conclude row, by thanking you for the honour you have done me that you have with Her. There are many qualities in Her, today and the very thoughtful gift which which you may not perhaps see. She you have chosen to present to me has believed in not taking but in giving Goddess Lakshmi. always. You know we have relations of Lakshmi shower on you all her May Goddess all kinds, some are well to do; many not blessings- Always. Later, Her Holiness Mataji so well to do; some are poor, some are in need and whoever gathered within our addressed the gathering thus: It is very embarrassing in this precincts at any stage of our service life, whatever we had, it was always way to speak about Mr. Srivastava. shared between my children and others Today, I am very happy that you are children in exactly the same way, and honouring him because if he was not there never was the slightest difference supporting me I could not have done between our own daughters and others' anything. Apart, from that, as he said daughters or sons who had gathered. about values, I have yet to come across This was from the very beginning. This a person who has values as Mr. is the kind of person that She has always Srivastava himself has. The difference been and therefore, I am not surprised is that you can imbibe values after that She is flowering into a spiritual self-realization very easily, but even person. Divinity is her own right. This is before self- realization he has them. He not something which has just happened is a very honest man. He bought ships taday: It has been there for sometime. worth crores and crores of rupees and It is becoming known more, now. The never he thought of any kind of movement is spreading. It is a dishonesty and he is a man of great movement which is voluntary. U.K., discipline. I think what we lack is France, Germany and other European discipline. As it is, the countries which

 March - April. 2004 The Divine Coof Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue 3-4 are disciplined have- themselves grown for three months. It is a great sacrifice very much and helped others to grow. but because he has seen that this is the But if Sahaja Yogis do not have discipline way, he not only allows me, but you know how generous he is about of Sahaja Yoga, then Sahaja Yoga will We see things and even be like any other nonsensical institution. everything. Mr. Srivastava's discipline is so great understand rationally that this is good, that I do not know how he manages it. still they are not identified with our selves. For example, for time, he is so While I see in him, his own discipline; particular, so also for consideration of when he rationally accepts something or thinks that it is correct then he just does others, for attending to his work, to see the people who come to see him, to see it. This is something which you have to what he has to say, how far to say what learn from someone who has done this all his life. l used to be amazed, as to to say at the right time. There is so much Sahaja in him, so much inborn in how he used to identify! There is so much integration in his actions and his him that at the right time, he will say the understanding. This is something which right thing. And above all the brilliance, he has, so much that he comes to the really surprises me, because after right conclusion immediately. He was realization after great Tapasya, one can not a realised soul, now I think he has achieve such an integration. We say touched the Sahasrara. But even before thing and do another, like so many this, he would reach the right conciusion, people, who criticise this, criticise that As you have seen about Sahaja Yoga but when it comes to them, they will do also, he has taken a right attitude. To themselves the same. If he has risen high; many people say that it is Mataji's take the right attitude is only possible, if you are really intelligent, otherwise, blessings even if it is partly that; still I those who are not, cannot, Pure would say that anyone like him would intelligence means that there is no bias rise specially in a country like ours, of ego or super-ego, no conditioning and where people see the honesty and integrity and high moral character as you could see it in its pure form. You can see that he has allowed me to work. To something special. Since I have come to India this time, he has been honoured accept that I should do all this work is in by so many institutions and so many itself a very big sacrifice for a man. None people that I was amazed, how much he of you would allow your wife to leave you

 Tre Divire Caol Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue :3-4 March - April, 2004 23 is respected. After all, he is like any other to go round to be necessary for us bureaucrat, otherwise, but the way he is identified with the ideals, he is a man persuade them. Another thing is that when I was of ideals. I am not an easy wife to live a child, my mother used to say that only I do not allow Shankar can marry you, the way you are with because as you know any hanky-panky in my own life. When innocent and the way you are generous; he joined Indian Administrative Service, because I saw anybody poor or needy I you won't believe that he was first would take out everything from my selected in Indian Foreign Service, He mother's 'Bhandar' (store) and give it. She would say "I do not know whom you was getting much more pay but I told him that first we have to serve our own would marry; the poor fellow will have to country and not go abroad to foreign be poor like Shankar because you will countries. He accepted to join I.A.S. not give away everything that he will have". because I asked him to but because he But I am like that, it is my Nature, If thought it was proper that we should anybody says, I like a thing, I will forget serve our motherland. He suffered a lot and will give it to him. He has a complaint in L.A.S. but he still stuck to his ideals. I that I have even given away our think, one should really imbibe from him engagement ring, But from one side I this, discipline of mind. This discipline gave from other side it came. Now he of the mind is that, whatever one should knows that. This nature of mine is not accept with one's mind, should be in easy for any husband to tolerate; the way one's action. You should be proud of I am generous. Again, my overloving nature for all of you. he understands that. I have tremendous feeling for you. Or your virtue. As you know, what company and status he has but he does not drìnk a drop of wine. One may just say that it course, when you come and disturb me, is because of Mataji. But, I have never the people have been disturbing me told him to do so. Of course, I have said much more now. Something happens, that I den't like drinking, but have never they must think of Mother, they must told him not to drink; I am not in that way come. The emergency exists always%3B interfering at all. I have never told him somewhere with somebody. He has been very patient in going through all this. about Sahaja Yoga also in this way. But it is his own understanding. If the people He can understand me as my husband, have that intelligence, then it would not he has all those qualities from his

 The Divine Coal Sreeze, Volume-XVI, Issue 3-4 March-April, 2004 24 childhood. He is a self-made man. live your life is important. Also, it is not easy to be my absolutely honest person, he never tells children, because I know what you do, I a lie, no hanky-panky, he never gossips. know everything about you. I also gossips. Again, he has created an image correct you, you know that But when in his international world that it is a you are sticking to me, it also shows that family that he is looking after. So you you belong to a category of people, bent hate gossiping myself and he never people aiso have to understand, if you upon evolving and being better people have to be Sahaja Yogis, you have to through inner transformation. To be a imbibe all these values, otherwise Sahaja Yogi is not an easy thing; that you Sahaja-Yoga will be completely doomed. can pay some money and become Sahaja Yogis have to come up, they members and become Mataji's disciples. have to decide that they have not to tell Even where you have become my lie's, they have to be honest, they have disciples, you have to pass certain tests to believe that the God, the Almighty is and you have to work hard for it, you their father and He is going to look after have to do a lot of Tapasya, living in your We have to change the family. That you have been doing, so I His children. map of this world, particularly of our feel very happy and proud of you as l am country. It needs people of character of him (Sir C. P.Srivastava) and I would and people who are fearless, 1o will like you to see how he has led his life. You can ask people, how he is so honest, face life as honest people, We have not lost anything; you have seen that with so good, so compassionate, to all the God's Grace when we had nothing also, people, Whatever are our defects, we we had a theft should see them first of all; we should we were happy. Once and all my saris and all his clothes, not see the defects of others. We, everything was lost, nothing was left. As Indians have particular type of defects, we had little money at that time and he which we should try to cure. The other had no clothes, so I told him to have his day, in our programme, some people clothes first and I couldn't buy them for came, who are starting an agitation Maharashtra, I told them, "there is no in myself; I had only one silk sari for seven years. But we managed it and it worked out so well after that. Whether you have use of starting an agitation because when you had the Govt., what did you do?" At it or not, is not the point, the way you the most, you would form the Govt. again

 March-Apri il, 2004 The Divine Cool Brez eze, Voluma-XVI, IBSue 3-4 what will you do then? They replied, difficult to sacrifice. I could see other what could we do now, some sugar women who had such a lot of ornaments and this and that but I have never felt like magnate has taken so much money, having these. Instead, I am proud of the has hoarded all the things and has raised fact that my husband is a man of virtue. the prices and now he is cashing because he has been paying for the This was the greatest ornament and election" ! said, "Now you decide, from pride that a woman can have. In the the Sahaja Yoga point of view, that you same way all Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja will not vote for a man who gives you Yoginis must think of virtues. We have a money or sells votes for money. Even little bit to assert our will power for food, we well our votes; we do not everybody has little weaknesses. Instead have self-restraint." At least Sahaja of justifying it, they should just try to Yagis must start. Let us all combine assert own will-power to cure it. I am sure a day will come when Mr. Srivastava will together and decide that neither will we see this country changing in real fashion, have any dishonest methods from any as he himself has been changing and corner, at any cost nor will we have anyone elected whom we know is not may be one of these days, he will work honest and upright. We will have to fight side by side with us. We need such it, then only our country is going to people who are seekers of divinity, and have come on this earth to transform this improve. Now, to begin with we will have pattern of things. to do some sacrifices, as you have seen May God bless you! I had also to sacrifice. But it is not so Do not go to the garden of flowers! O friend! go not there; In your body is the garden of flowers. Take your seat on the thousand petals of the Lotus, and there gaze upon the infinite beauty. Kabir

 Report From Rahuri (From Nirmala Yoga - 1981) The turn of the year brought a brief stay at Mr. Dhumal's residence indescribable blessings to all Sahaja Yogis nearby, they were joined by fifty Sahaja of Rahuri and surrounding areas when our Yogis from Australia, U.K., France, Spain, Portugal and Switzerland; all had darshan Divine Mother spent four days amongst them. The visit was unique and of of the lotus feet of the Divine Mother. The unprecedented joy because Her Holiness 'Haldi' ceremony was performed; in Mataji's programme not only included the preparation of their marriage, the blissful Kundalini Awakening sessions at bridegroom and the bride were smeared various places but also for the first time with turmeric paste according to the local Shri Ganesh Havan was performed on custom. 31st December 1980, and the first day of In the afternoon, there was mass 1981, became a day of great rejoicing, Kundalini-awakening function held in newly when our dear brother Gregoire from constructed Vitthal-Rukmani temple in the Switzerland was married to Catherine, in village Aradgaon, which Mataji lovingly calls as Awadgaon (meaning King of the a colorful ceremony performed according to the local Hindu rites in the holy villages). Near this village a Sahaja yoga presence of Divine Mother with the full Ashram is proposed to be built for which villagers have already donated land. Later participation of about four hundred Sahaja Yogis of all ages, who forgetting the in the evening, Mother visited another superficial differences of age, sex, village named Manori-Renuka. (Renuka is one of the names of Devi). A new centre language or nationality drank deeply into of Sahaja Yoga has come into existence. the gaiety of spiritual togetherness, expressing itself through spontaneous, The villagers are much impressed here tremendous flow of love and affection from because the villagers, who got their self- realization and became Sahaja Yogis were their hearts, their faces, visibly shining with joy like children bubbling; with delight able to completely give up drinking. Mataji was seated in a bullock-cart and taken out coming home together to the warm and in procession by the villagers. In her protected lap of their ever loving Mother. On the morning of 29th December speech, Mataji expressed her joy in working with rural masses, because they are more 1980, Sahaja Yogis from surrounding areas received Her Holiness Mataji at innocent, religious minded and have Rahuri Railway Station. Thereafter, during stronger faith in the presence of Divine

 ze, Volume-XVI, issue:3-4 The Divine Copot Brea March- April, 2004 power than the urban people. About two affection, forgetting barriers of language thousand persons got Realization at this and nationality. She saw how Vasundhra Occasion. (The Mother Earth) was also overjoyed at On the morning of Tuesday, the the ecstatic dancing of so many realisec 30th December, 1980, Mataji first visited souls and expressed it in the tremendous the village Takali-Minya, which is named flow of chaitanya (BIlissful Divine after Muslim Auliya Saint, who lived there. Vibrations) which was experienced by all. The dancing could be compared with The Mother said in her speech "that in the past, there are very few flowers like Minya Raskreeda. With the grace of Her Holiness of this village, but now the time has come Mataji, a temple of Adishakti is proposed when there will be very many flowers on to be built at this village soon. The last day of the year-31st the tree through Sahaja Yoga". She asked the foreign Sahaja Yogis present to visit December, 1980, will be remembered in the holy spot where the Minya was the history of Sahaja Yoga, as Her Holiness cremated; and enjoy the vibrations there. Mataji was worshiped for the first time as Next, she visited, Musalwadi, a Shri Ganesha, with His thousand names village of great religious history. Here, Her Holiness Mataji mentioned that the first Mataji was taken out in a procession. She piece of land and a big house for the first rode in a bullock-cart beautifully decorated Sahaja Yoga Ashram has been made with flowers and palm leaves, preceded available at the village Sangam near by Sahaja Yogis and local villagers, at the Pandharpur (Dist. Sholapur) through the accompaniment of the melodies of Indian donation by a gracious lady (mother-in-law music and playing of typical Maharashtrian of Sh. Dhumal) who was present at the "Lazim". Foreign Sahaja Yogis soon Occasion. Through Havana, we have caught up the local enthusiasm and offered our thanks and love to Shri spontaneously joined the joyous dancing Ganesha, who has purified the atmosphere of the rural bretheren, and were soon by removing the Badhas. Now, the land for Sahaja Yoga Ashrams elsewhere, also will be available more easily and these will transported into the ecstasy of thoughtless state. In Her speech Her Holiness Mataji expressed Her great delight at the sight of children, brothers and sisters coming come up soon at different places. During the evening, the Kundalini-. awakening programme was held at together from distant parts of the world and Mahatma Phule Agriculture University, greeting each other with so much love and

 March- April, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Ispue Rahuri and was attended by the Vice- Gregoire, the author of first book on Her chancellor, faculty students members, Holiness Mataji " The Advent" and Miss Agriculture Scientists Sahaja Yogis from OCatherine was to be held. Next Morning, abroad and different cities of India, viz., on the 1st January, 1981 was celebrated Bombay, Delhi, Pune, Satara, Dhule, this marriage. The Sahaja Yogis of Rahuri, Ahmadnagar, Shrigonda, Kopargaon, formed the Bride's party, while Mr. Niphad and adjoining villages of Rahuri in Gregoire's brother, Arnew, his wite and his large numbers. Her Holiness Mataji said sister and all other Sahaja Yogis from that there are limitations to the scientific foreign countries and different places in India formed bridegroom's party. All ladies, research. The real search should be inside the human being. Man should actualise his from bridegroom's party, according to local custom, put on beautiful bangles, provided potential by focussing his attention inside and should attain the higher plane of life. by bride's party. The Melodious strains of This can be achieved through Sahaja Yoga Shehnai, heralded the start of the and is the right of all human beings of ceremonies, in gaily decorated school different countries, religions, castes, sex compound in typical festive atmosphere. and age all over the world, To attain the Mr. Gregoire, dressed like a typical Indian higher plane of life is the further step of Bridegroom with turban on his head, and evolution of mankind in the play of the sword in his hand, mounted on a well- Divine, It is possible only through Sahaja decorated white horse and went in Yoga in the chaos of this Kaliyuga and procession accompanied by a playing real sense band and about three hundred Sahaja Yogis hence, Sahaja yoga is in a forming the bridegroom's party to the temple of Shri Mataji (Hanumana) for pujan Mahayoga. Gregoire marries Catherine and then returned to the marriage Mandap. on NEW YEAR DAY The main ceremony began with pujan of Her Holiness Mataji as Gauri by the bride and followed by 'Kanyadan' by Mr. The night of 31st December 1980 and 1st January 1981 was of a very great and Mrs. Dhumal, who officiated as bride's delights. The Mother went to the Public parents. The marriage ceremony was School at Rahuri Co-operative Sugar performed followed by the Hom and Factory where foreign Sahaja Yogis were Saptpadi. Then the newly married couple residing and where the marriage of Mr. sought blessings of Her Holiness Mataji.

 Tlie Blvine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue 3-4 March- April, 2004 This was followed by Lunch, which was of enjoying collective Bhajans-singing, on hosted by Mr. Gregoire. The marriage the platform in the company of our Mother. concluded after presents-token of their Next morning, all the Sahaja Yogis, mutual love-were exchanged between including the newly wedded couple left on the newly married couple and Sahaja Yogis a sight-seeing tour of Aurangabad, Ajanta from various places. and Ellora Caves via the nearby hallowed During the same night Her Holiness Mataji returned back to Bombay. All the spot, Seeta Nahani, the place where Shri Ram and Seetaji lived during their Vanvas Sahaja Yogis were present to see the (exile in forest). Mother off at the Rahuri Railway Station. The four day visit of Her Holiness Since the train was late by a couple of Mataji was full of immense joy, which on every hours, it provided further opportunity to us progressively increased succeeding day. Could you see the tides of that breath you would cease to see all else, And if you eould hear the whispering of the dream you would hear no other sound. But you do not see, nor do you hear, and it is well. The veil that clouds your eyes shall be lifted by the hands that wore it, And the clay that fills your ears shall be pierced by those fingers that kneaded it. And you shall see. And you shall hear. Yet you shall not deplore having known blindness, nor regret having been deaf. For in that day you shall know the hidden purposes in all things And you shall bless darkness as you would bless light. Khalil Gibran

 Words of Christ the Lord, the Aum and the Amen, the beginning of the Creation, the most beloved son of Shri Mataji On Vibrations: "I am the living bread which came down from heaven; if any one eats of this bread, he will live forever; and the bread which I shall John 6.51 give for the life of the world is my flesh". If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink. He who believes in me, as the scripture has said, "One of his heart shall flow rivers of living waters". John 7.57 On Agya Chakra: "Strive to enter by the narrow door; for many, I tell you, will seek to Luke 13.24 enter and will not be able". "I am the door; if any one enters by me, he will be saved, and will John 10.9 go in and out and find pasture" On Kundalini's Action: "To what shall I compare the Kingdom of God? It is like leaven that a woman took and hid in three measures of flour till it was all leavened3; What is the Kingdom of God like? And to what shall I compare it? it is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and sowed in his garden; and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air Luke 13.18 made nests in its branches"

 On 26th December 1980, Bombay Sahajayogis along with their foreign counterparts offered very warm tributes to Sir C.P. Srivastava for his appointment as Secretary General of IMCO (International Maritime Consultative Organisation) successively for the third time. Following is the text of the Reply given by Sir C. P. Srivastava, on this occasion Dear Members of the Universal responsibility which the Govt, of the country entrusted to me. I am deeply grateful to Her. But today what I want to state is that I am not grateful to Her but Sahajyoga family, 1 am very greatly honoured and very over whelmingly touched by the I am very proud of Her. And why amn 1 proud of her?I am proud because, at a time when the world is afflicted most generous observations which have been made about me and about my I can do to deserve work......whatever the love and affection that you have everywhere, whether you are in the East or in the West, whether you are in the North or in the South, everywhere you chosen to shower upon me. You have mentioned that I have been sacrificing find a certain feeling of unrest, of in order that my wife who is Mataji to you would be able to devote her time for unhappiness or a little frustration and people all over the world are wanting to Sahaja yoga. What I want to inform you is; it is not a sacrifice, it's a great know, "how can we all members of this universal world community live together privilege. When we got married, and that in happiness and in peace." This is the was more than a third of a century ago question before every thinking individual in the world today. And there must be (34 years ago) we had our family, a little family, and we agreed among ourselves that our first duty would be to bring up some answer to that, because after all our two daughters. We also agreed that we have to live together, and answer really is that all of us whether we belong once the daughters got married, She would be free to devote her time as much as possible to the service of humanity. to one country or another, we are members of one great universal family. After all, if we just remember, that the While our children were growing up-she gave all her time and devotion to them whole of universe that we know of there to bring them up and she gave me is only one planet on which there is life, tremendous support. Without her such as we have and that, we are the most fortunate persons to be those support, it would have been impossible for me to apply created by the Almighty to be the best myself for the

 The Divine Cool Breuze, Volume-XVI, Issue Marchi - Aprl. 2004 3-4 of creations, that itself is a very great family a Sahajyoga family. Sahajyogis wonderful privilege and the least that we should and Yoginis. What a somehow do is to live together as expression they had, what a feeling of brothers and sisters genuinely, not internal peace and calm they had, what merely thro' lips but thro' hearts and it is feelings of togetherness they had. That most important for us to come to that gave me a very deep impression, a stage. I have a feeling that the world is feeling that, that family had been now ready for a new revolution. There transformed from desperate individuals was the industrial revolution in the 19th coming from different parts of the century which brought economic country into a family mended together, prosperity to many parts of the world, knitted together with one purpose, viz., thus bringing prosperity to other parts. realising that we are members of one But that is not enough. For human beings family. They all wanted to assist each material prosperity is important, but it is other to help each other to grow together not the ultimate aim. There is much and to develop spiritually. Now', this is mor o in a human being than a mere a marvellous task, I think the world needs desire for material well being the this more than anything else. This spiritual part. It is only through spiritual country needs this much more than attainment, through spiritual satisfaction anything else. It is the transformation, it that genuine happiness can be attained, is the uplifting of the individual from and there must be some spark which within, which is most important. If that has to light and the source of the spark uplifting does not come, you will have is before you. This lady. So when I say I conflicts, you will not have the kind of am not sacrificing at all, indeed I am homogeneity or goodwill, which is so feeling to be a part of you, feeling to be essential for all of us to be able to live a part of this great endeavour, and I am proud of Her and the work She is doing. together in peace. So, She is giving you spiritual guidance and I have no doubt that I am one of those thousands and I might tell you something more. Very recently I had a unique experience, thousands who admire her, respect her She is a very busy person and if I may and my fullest support is available to Her say so without being immodest, I am also in everyway for the work that she is very busy with my work, but one evening She invited me very kindly to a function doing. But, I think, support is not the right word because She does not need like this in London. There I saw another support from anybody; but you see you

 Mirch - April, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, tssun: 3-4 kngun | must forgive me becauIse I have a groupism. I do not believe dichotomy. It is very difficult for me to confrontation, I do not believe that by forget that I am Her husband, so please fighting, the world can get along. I do not do forgive the expression that I have believe that the developing world can used but, it was in my capacity as a develop by fighting the developed world. | believe and I believe very sincerely consort and I want you to know that the work She is doing is, to my way of and genuinely, that all of us can get thinking, very very important for together only by way of togetherness, by humanity. In fact, I feel that it is only by co-operation and this is the message uplifting men and women everywhere thati give continuously." Now this is only throughout the world, that we can really one aspect of Sahaj Yoga, only an become worthy of the Almighty God who aspect, but this is the message that I give to the organisation that am privileged Now, in IMCO, the Organisation to serve and I am most gratified and that I am privileged to serve, I am very delighted that the governments as they has created us all. grateful for the kind words about my re- are represented in this Maritime election. It was most gratifying. Perhaps Organisation of the United Nations you know that this was unanimous, I System, accept that pliilosophy and mention this only for one reason, viz that they accept that by working together the you would hear that there are many people of the world engaged in Maritime issues that divide the world. On very few activity can make progress, which would issues the Governments of the World be satisfactory from the point of view of agree. Now, if they agreed upon re- everybody and if they re-elected me election, whether it was Soviet Union, unanimously, honour me greatly and my United States, United Kingdom, or country but to my way of thinking they Developing Countries or China or honoured the principle which is to guide the whole of United Nations system. So, Pakistan, well, they agreed to uphold a certain principle and in some way in some way there has been action and interaction between Sahaja Yoga on one perhaps the message of Sahaja Yoga was being given to them through me side and United Nations activity on the other. I have only a small responsibility coming from Her. And the message that I always give to the member countries in the United Nations system but to of the Organisation is: "VWe are not the extent that I can, it is my duty and it has been my endeavour always to serve divided into groups. I do not believe in

 March- April 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze. VoluTIe-XVI, issue: 3-4 the World Community in a far more of awareness, new level of human relationship based on love, affection, and elevated sphere-the spiritual sphere. Now to friends who have come realisation that human beings are born from abroad, as an Indian I would like to for great purposes. They are not born extend a very hearty and a very warm merely to live a routine life but the welcome. I feel very greatly honoured purposes are spiritual-much highly and privileged that you should be here elevated. For your success, for your at this time that you should spend your happiness and your wellbeing I will pray new Year Day in our country and I want and with these few words I want to thank to take this opportunity to wish you the you once again for the very very kind words in which all speakers referred me very very best for 1981 and the best that today and I may also thank her for all that I can do is to say let Sahaja Yoga which is universal, grow and grow and develop She is doing for me by supporting me really. Thank You Very Much. and really lift up the wored to a new leve! (Nirmala Yoga - 1981) The Breath Divine The Breath Divine went forth upon the morning hills. Albion moved Upon the rock he open'd his eyelids in pain3; in pain he moved. His stoney members he saw England. Ah, shall the dead live again? The Breath Divine went forth over the morning hills. Albion rose. William Blake

 Shri Adi Shakti Puja, Canajoharie, New York (USA), June 20, 1999 Fifty-four adorations were offeced to Shri Mataji by the U.S. collective for Adi Shakti Puja. (Shri Mataji reviewed and edited them, and added the last ten Herself) 1. Shri Adi Shakti, You are the Principle that created the fourteen bhuvanas of universes; You are beyond our comprehension, 2. The AUM is Your Sound which resonates Your three powers throughout the universe. 3. The joy of Your Attention, chidvilas, is expressed in all Your Creation. 4. In the Play of the Divine, God Almighty acts by Your Powers. 5. The Breath and Desire of Shri Sada Shiva are One with You. 6.The Paramchaitanya, which is Your Power, makes the stars and the heavens ring with joy for the delight of Shri Sada Shiva. 7. Indeed, You are the Source of Cosmic Energy. This Power rediates from You as the Finest Ethers of Divine Love. 8. Beyond matter, beyond consciousness, the Grace of Adi Shakti is where reality can be known. 9. You are the Ineffable, the Immeasurable. We call You Pneuma, Divine Breath, the Living Waters, yet You are so much more than this. Only the Deities have the Darshan of Your Greater Powers. 10. God Almighty in His Dance unifies with Your Complete Power as Shri Adi Shakti. 11. You are the Primordial Power of the Holy Spirit that mothered Shri Jesus. 12. You are the Creatrix, the Feminie Creative Energy that sustains the Peace of God Almighty. 13. Through Your Mahalaxmi Power, we experience the Timeless Peace of the Fourth Dimension. 14. Shri Adi Shakti, You enable God Almighty to do His Sacred work. Verily, you are the Most sublime Power in the cosmos. 15. God Almighty takes charge in a way swift and suprising if anyone acts against shri Adi Shakti. 16. Shri Ganesha, Your first creation, resonates in the carbon atom, the essence of life. May He reawaken innocence and wisdom in the very cells of humankind.

 March-April, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, VolumesXVI, issue :3-4 17. You created the World of the Divine, and the World of the Evolving. May our Evolution merge with this Divine Play. 18. O, Adi Shakti, Evolution is the force that gives rise to Your Divine Play in the lives of humanity. 19. The Adi Kundalini formed the primordial chakras, and opened the doors to the unfolding of life. 20. It is You who created the Kundalini of our Mother Earth. 21. The simplest flower has its fraction of You, the grandest tree has its share as well. 22. All Nature's Creatures are Yours, from the Beauty of Mother Earth's Green Sari to the Majesty of the Tiger and the Lion. 23. The Gravity of Mother Earth, and of all Your Heavenly Spheres, is controlled by Your Power Magnificent, 24. Your Power, the Paramchaitanya, adjusts nature and its elements, and its all pervading power opens us to Your Benevolence. 25. Shri Adi Shakti is the Artistic Creator of the Mother Earth and those who respect the Mother Earth are loved by You. 26. Shri Adi Shakti, the Land of Vishuddhi is one aspect of Your Vast creation. You will raise the Vibrations to transform the people of this land. 27. The native peoples of America worshipped Adi Shakti as the Great Mother, and they respected the land as sacred. May this attitude return to all others who live here and enjoy the land's bounty. 28. The mystery of living processes is Yours and Yours alone, and cannot be duplicated by any personality. Let humanity be aware of this. 29.O, Ritambhara Pragnya, You are One of the Powers of Shri Adi Shakti, You are the Power of all living work. 30. You regulate and organise all life. 31. You came, Shri Adi Shakti, as Surabhi, the Divine Cow, emerging from the Vishnuloka at Gokul, where Shri Krishna has His Childhood. 32. Shri Adi Shakti, let the feminine qualities of the Sahaja Yoginis manifest through the beauty of meditation, surrender and self-esteem. 33. You give to women the regal gentleness of Shaleenata to care for their families and to be the preservers of society. 34. Your Quality of Sharada Devi gives authority over the truth, art, music and drama. 35. You also came as Sati Devi, establishing a Royal Dharma to which we aspire. 36. O, Vag Devi, Goddess of Language, You give inspiration to the great poets and saints. 37. Shri Adi Shakti, to describe You is the work of poets and saints who awkwardly try to embrace a mystery on the horizon. 38. You are Para Shakti, the Power beyond all Powers. 39. Give us, O Adi Shakti, greater humility so that we can gain some small glimpse of Your Glory. 40. Make us like the Sufis and the

 March-Apil, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue:3-4 Gnostics, adoring You at every moment. Your Power of Mahalaxmi bridges over the Void to allow the Kundalini of the seekers to ascend. 41. Thank You, O Adi Shakti, for the seeking which brought us to Sahaja Yoga. You now lift up humanity into the Omega of the Last Judgment. 42. We pray that Adi Shakti's Love continues to protect all the saints and seekers around the world. 43. Shri Adi Shakti, Your Work is greater than any. You created the pithas, the chakras, nature and humanity, and its subtle workings. May the complexity of Your Work humble us down completely. 44. Your Love gives power to the Bandhan, which directs the vibrations. 45. Your Power of Kundalini brings freedom that is Divine. It is the only true freedom. 46. Flow through us freely. Help us give vibrations to all with Your Photograph of Living Vibrations. 47. Your Mahamaya Swarupa allows us to be near You, and it shields us from the Awesome Might that flows from You. 48. Shri Adi Shakti, please give us deeper powers of introspection so that we become self cleansing and self aware. 49. You are the Mother who desired that human beings be mirrors for God Almighty. 50. You have crafted beautiful mirrors of the Spirit in the Sahaja Yogis to help redeem humanity. 51. Your Compassion protects us from the anger of God Almighty. 52. Through Maya, humanity forgot the principles of life. Through Sahaja Yoga, humanity now remembers and absorbs the vibrations of Shri Adi Shakti. 53. May Your Evolutionary Force bring humanity to the inspired existence of the Golden Age. 54. You have disentangled us from the clutches of false pride, jealousy, attachment, greed, false identification and violence. 55. You have incarnated on this earth for the Last Judgment. 56. You are the Source of Cognitive Science and the Torsion Area. 57. Whatever human beings plan, You dismantle to destroy their egos: With one You destroy people like Hitler. subtle movement of Your finger, 58. You give powerful advice with very subtle humor. 59. You correct Sahaja Yogis, never by hrash words, but with very loving, gentle affection. 60. You explain the subtle meaning of all the Scriptures. 61. You expose the falsehood in very direct ways. 62. You do not know any fear and You give complete secutity to all Sahaja Yogis. 63. You respect Your Children and love them to make them perfect models for the rest of humanity. 64, You have given Sahaja Yogis sinless fun and a life of complete joy.

 Inherent hurdles in sustaining Our Realisation and How to Overcome them London December 10, 1979 All the worldly things so called are Today is the day for us to remember that Christ was born on this earth as a just like a dry grass 'trinavat'. So He was kept in a dry grass. To many it makes very human being. He came on this earth and the task that was before him was to unhappy, and they feel very sorry that Christ, the one who came to save us, was enlighten human awareness, with the sense of understanding which I say kept under such conditions and why not actualization within the awareness of God provided him with something better. human beings that they are not this body But to such people it does not matter, whether you are lying in a dried grass or in but they are the spirit. The message of Christ is this revelation, that is, you are your the stable or in the palaces. Everything is spirit, not your body. And He showed by just the same, for it does not touch them. his resurrection how we ascended into the They are so detached and they are completely in joy. They are the masters of realm of spirit, which He was, because He themselves. Nothing can master them. No was Pranava, He was Bramha, He was matter can master them, no comfort can Maha vishnu as I have told you about His master them. They are masters of birth and when He came on this earth in a body like a human being He wanted to complete comforts within themselves. They have achieved all the comforts within show another thing that spirit has nothing to do with money, has nothing to do with themselves. They are satisfied people. That's why they are kings. They are called power. It is all powerful, all pervading but is born in a stable, not in a palace or to a as kings not those kings who run after king but He was born to a very ordinary things or those kings who seek comforts in life. I mean if you have comforts well and person - a carpenter. Because if you are the king, as we say in Hindi language good, if you don't have well and good, Badshah', then nothing is greater than you. makes no difference. So, many people specially in Latin America when I went there Isn't it? It means simply that. Nothing is but we can't understand why Christ was higher than you, neither anything can barn as a poor man. This is again a human decorate you, because whatever you are, concept about God is. See he wants to you are at the highest.

 March - April, 2004 Thị Divirie Cool Briseza. Volume-XVI Issue:3-4 save us because He had many aspects I command God. Be born in a king's palace. You cannot order him about. We have our should say, not only to save human beings He came on this earth. There were many own concepts about God that why should he be a poor man. Why should he be more aspects. Also human beings have helpless? He never showed his demand that they must be saved. Why? One should I mean from God's angle if you helplessness. He was much more see, why should they be saved all of them? dynamic than all your kings and all your What have they done for God? How can politicians put together. He was not afraid of anyone. Whatever he had to say, He you demand God that you must save us? said it. He was not afraid of crucifixion or Can you? You cannot ask for that. So, he any such punishments, so called. It is only the human beings, you see who have these did come to create the passage between as you see here, the Vishudhi and the Sahsrara, this Agya. In the primordial being false ideas about life and that's why they want to put these ideas on to God also and the viraat. He was born there to open that try to make him follow their own conflicts. door. In evolution every incarnation has God is not your concept. He is not a come on this earth to open a particular door within us and to create that opening or that concept at all. To also say that concept is enlightenment in our awareness. So, Christ after all a concept is also a concept. This I have found out very recently. This is came precisely for opening this small little door which is constricted by our ego and another myth people carry. Those who say superego. Ego and superego are the two that oh! concept is a concept, alright Mataji says, alright, so what? But even this is a byproducts of our thought process. One, the thoughts that are of the past and the concept because concept is a thought. You have to rise beyond thought, at a higher other thoughts of the future. He came to make that gap to cross that gap and that's level, into thoughtless awareness, where you are not in thought but you are in the how he has sacrificed himself - his body. For you it is a very big thing of remorse centre of the thought. In the sense that one and repentance but for such people it is thought rises and falls and there is a place not. It's a play, They have to play a certain in between. Another thought rises and falls. You are in the centre of these thoughts. role. That's why I do not understand why do you show him to be such a lanky-panky The 'vilamb" as we call it, the time where you' pause. Then you will understand miserable creature. He was never Christ. He was here, partly of course to miserable. Such people can never be

 March-April, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue : 3-4 40 miserable as you are. This is another should be a festival of great joy. For he brought light for us by which you could see concept of man that he should be lanky- that there is someone called as god there panky, tally, skinny, starved, bones coming out count them one by one. Horrible I tell is someone who is going to remove this you. From his childhood to his death he ignorance. This was the first beginning. So, for us it is necessary to be first joyous and was jolly person, he was happiness, he be happy and relaxed and not to take was joy to make you all happy, to give you the light of happiness by enlightening your anything that seriously as we take because divine life doesn't make you serious source of joy that is your spirit in your heart because its all a play, it's a 'Maya' as seen that he came on this earth not only to. save you first to give you happiness, to give you in all the rituals that people follow in all the joy because human beings in their so called religious people. They are too ignorance and in this tomfoolery are serious to be religious and religious person unnecessarily beating themselves and is bubbling with laughter. He doesn't know how to hide his joy as he doesn't know how destroying themselves. When nobody asked you to go to pubs to get into trouble. to control laughter when he sees people I mean Nobody has asked you to go to races and who are unnecessarily serious. nobody is dead. The way they people say become bankrupts. Nobody has asked you to go to horrible gurus and get into is sometimes just don't know what to do troubles. But you seek your destruction with. They just can't control. So, there is morning till evening. Then he comes there nothing in this world for a person like Christ like a morning flower to make you happy. to feel sad about and if you really believe in Him, then please first of all give up your First, to make you happy, to give you joy. You see any child you see any child at least this silly sadness and sulking and sitting I know myself, I don't know about funny down and becoming morose, not talking to people here I mean for them flowers also anyone, silent bores all over. That is not look like thorns. I mean I don't know how the way to look at Christ. Se how He went and talked to the multitudes, how He they manage that stuff. But you see a child opened his hands to all the people around and how he tried to give them happiness. anywhere, enjoy, such a joy giving thing it is and this is the child of the divine that He has said that you are to be born comes on this earth as a child is the most again that means He had to do this work joy giving thing and that's why Christmas is for all of us, for the whole universe and that you have to get it sometime He

 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue : 3-4 March Apri, 2004 had promised that you are to be born again. Christ is to be born within us. I don't know you are to be Baptized and you are to be born again and now in Sahaja Yoga His promise is being fulfilled. So, be joyous that what Christians understand out of this. here at the Agya charka again Christ is born How do you become born again? Not by going through a ritual ofi christening within you and he is there and you know somebody, coming from a theological how you can ask for his help always. But the main thing that one has to college cannot make you Christian. Like in our India, we have some paid Brahmins understand that the time has come for you to get all that is promised in the scriptures as you have your paid people, you see. The not only in the Bible but all the scriptures whole day they will eat, drink, be marry and of the world. The time has come today that evening time they will come and pray and you have to become a Christian, a Brahmin, preach that sort of people. You have to be a Peer through your Kundalini awakening only. There is no other way out and that your last judgment is also now, Only a person who is authorized by God. Unless and until you are authorized by God you cannot give joy and that's why I have seen all these people, so called big pandits and the big priests and all of them are so serious because they are not authorized through your Kundalini awakening God is going to judge you. How is He going ta judge you are otherwise. You think of somebody now, a person comes now if somebody is Even on a Christmas day I mean sitting to judge. How? By how many hair by God, anybody who comes from a village may dressers you have been to or how many suits you have stitched for the Christmas, think that there is a funeral going on and or what presents you have bought and how after the funeral they go home and how do you celebrate, with a champagne? And many cards you have sent and to how after the funeral, the real funeral also they many people you have sent some other will celebrate this. I don't know why but they things which may not be very palatable. will take champagne. How can you That's not the way or is it that at what price celebrate Christ by insulting Him? He you have bought all the things. The way we are particular. Which way are we going to came to enlighten your awareness be judged by God? Not superficially people because He respected your awareness, the point at which it had reached. But you say so what depth have we got lets see, How far can we go in our depth, At the most are trying to put it down, Is this the way to we reach a point where we are nothing but understand Him and He has promised that

 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI. Issue: 3-4 March April, 2004 a ship. It's a different type of a judgment, a concept, again. So, whatever depth we know goes up to only rationality up to the of a personality. You can see how Christ was judged by human beings and how He concept point. Beyond that we cannot reach. So, how can we be judged? How was judged by God. He came and lived in do people are judged, if you go to a doctor. the dried straw like a feather. His Mother He has his instruments. He works it out, never felt his discomfort. In the same way, those who have not by their being, puts out his light, sees for himself and this is the position. And how your oppressed others or taken oppression are says, going to be judged as first class. spirituality is going to be judged? How a seed is judged - by sprouting it. When you In the Kundalini awakening itself sprout the seed and when you see its there are inherent defects. Inherently the germinating power you know that it's a Kundalini has some defects because of good seed or a bad seed. In the same way, your previous karmas, because what you you will be judged by the way you are have been doing in this life time, because germinated, the way you receive your the things that you have accepted as reality. realization, the way you retain it, the way It is just a concept because when you have not known the absolute, whatever you have you respect it. That is how you are going to be judged and not by the kind of dresses been knowing there will be a little bit of you are wearing, by the type of matching ignorance with it. Whatever you have done you do and the hair dressers you go to, in darkness will have a particle of darkness not by the big positions you occupy, the in it. So, without knowing realization if you are propagated, oh! We are great saints, big politicians and the big bureaucrats you become. Not by what kind of houses you this that, you will have no chance. If you think you are a very divine personality and have built and what kind of so called Noble prizes you have won. You are not also you are already a realized soul, no going to be judged by your philanthropic chances. All the priests of all the religions. work by that you think that you have given will be the last to get realization. Valmiki in his Ramayana has very so much money so much so because if you have given sơ much money, there will be big ego somewhere hanging and it will clearly said a very interesting story is there. That a dog was asked what you want to be in your next life. So, he told make bring you down. me anything but don't make me a This is a judgment in which the little Mathadheesh. Mathadheesh is a person feather is going to weigh much more than

 The Divine Cool Breeze. Volume-XVI, issue : 3 - 4 March-April, 2004 like priesthood. So, make me anything but are looking towards good but have not a priest anywhere. Just imagine a dog something hanging on to them which is not having that wisdom. But I do not say that so good. So, for these people there are all of them are like that. There may be inherently some defects in the Kundalini some who are really genuine. Some may which we must understand. be really realized people, may be The first of them is bad health, authorized by God but I am sure they are physical bad health, actual physical bad not accepted by the multitude. I am sure health. In this country specially, people of that because I have seen your history suffer from too much of cold and other and all that have seen, all such people troubles due to over calcium in the water. have been discarded and have been In the same way, according to the country, tortured. But now the time has come to 'sthanvishesh' as they call it you have your problems. Like in our country we have judge the right and the wrong. You cannot crucify anymore. You cannot. Everyone is some problems. Like in your country you going to be judged through Kundalini have certain problems. So, the physical awakening. Now, you should know there problems are according to the country are three categories of human beings. I where you have taken your birth. Most of don't know which way to start not to shock you have decided to take birth in particular you. One is human beings as we are, countries. That's why you are identified normal. They are called as Nara-yoni. The also to such an extent some that you think second category are Dev-yoni. Those who that there is no defect. Every country has are born seekers or realized souls, mostly a variety by which you suffer a certain realized souls are Dev-yonis and the third amount of setback in your health. So, for a ones are called as Rakshasas. These are Sahaja yogi, one should know that health called as Ganas. Actually these are called is very important thing because this body as Ganas but we can say the species is the temple of God and one has to look among human beings are Rakshasas after your health and you know also when means the people who are evil. So, we the Kundalini rises, the first thing that have evil people, excellent people and we happens that your health improves have in between people. Excellent people because of the parasympathetic fulfillment are very few. They are born realized. I don't because parasympathetic gives you have their problem much. One has to deal flows into enlightenment which sympathetic and your health improves. I with the people who are in the centre. They

 March - Aprit, 2004 The Divine Col Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue:3-4 SSU then this body is to be cleansed. It is done will not tell about it very elaborately today by Kundalini. That it does not have a because time is short but if you read my- I would say I haven't written much, but if separate work like a hospital. I have known people who went so mad with their you are listen to my lectures and some of power them have been written down, you will of curing that they started visiting regularly learn how Kundalini helps to cure most of the hospitals and they ended up in a the diseases except for which are being hospital only. They would not even come tempered by human ailments like a kidney to programs, they would not even come and see Me. So this is one of the greatest trouble, now has been cured by Sahaja hurdles you have got is the Vyadhi' - is the yoga. No doubt we can cure kidney trouble bodily ailments. And the bodily element also but a person who has been on the machine we tried cannot be cured. It can give him should not take you down too much if people have some problem forget it. longevity but he cannot be cured. Gradually it will improve. With some people But to cure people is not your job at all by any chance. You must remember it takes time to get alright. But the main this. No Sahaja yogi should take to curing thing is to get to your spirit. So, do not always say, Mother cure me, cure me, cure people. They can use my photograph but not to take to curing because it means you me. But just say Mother give me the are a big philanthropist personality. I have spiritual life and you will be cured seen people who have been curing, get into automatically. It may take time in some people, doesn't matter. You have been sick such a mania of curing that they forget that all your life, doesn't matter. Give more time they are also catching something and they are also getting some troubles and then and also follow the methods which I have told about different diseases specially liver they never cure themselves. Ultimately I in this country, cold and what you call this find that they get out of Sahaja yoga. But with the photograph you can cure people. Gout and all these troubles. You have Do not think that it is your duty that you remedies for all this. Diabetes you have, but work it out as a duty towards your body, are a great sort of a, what you call, a towards the temple and that should not be benefactor, physical benefactor. No, you not. You are a spiritual benefactor but the end of your life. That's a very little part. are Imean it would be something like cleaning the whole place and then you get out of it. as a byproduct the body of the person limproves because if Christ has to be awakened, if war has to come in this body They say then why did you clean. Like l

 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue : 3-4 March - April, 2004 have seen here people you see. When out. Of course those people who are we were in Oxtead, I was surprised useless, who do not want to haVe everybody used to polish everything and realization forget about them. But even after all and everything, sort of, lawn was done getting realization its an innate problem very well and everything cleaned very well with people that they do not want to work it and not even a rat would enter their out. They are lazy in simple words, they houses. For months to there I never saw are lazy. That is very much in this country. Surprising I mean the other day I saw a any person getting in, only getting out and they were so particular, husband and wife, picture where how from your country, so particular about cleanliness, neatness people went to Germany and blasted a everything and the both of them would complete machinery and a complete never even talk to each other. I have seen factory of that machinery which was selling that. There were seven houses except for pilot-less bombs and they have overdone our house and they were all surprised that everything, so the children are having a nice how many people are coming to our house. time, perhaps.. They said are you open house. I said yes, But in Sahaja yoga you have to be it is our open house. They couldn't alert. This is what exactly happens in understand what was wrong with us. Sahaja yoga when people come here. They Nobody would see that polished thing or get their realization, they feel the cool anything. breeze and its lost again. The reason is, So, that's how it should be that we they do not want to work it out. This is should not go to that extent that it becomes another danger, Akarmanyata. Then when a sort of a real Sahaja yoga and the rest it is lost, after one year they will come back, Mother we don't believe in it but I have got which is the most important is forgotten. Health will improve gradually as I have told some pain in the stomach. Will you cure you. But attention should be on your spirit. me? Instead of you becoming so equipped Attention should be on your spirit because with all the powers that you have, you it is the attention which goes into these become another useless person coming various directions and gets stuck. You just here, just to take my time. These powers are all within you. This is your property. allow it to work out and it will work out. The second hurdle which I feel is This is the property of your spirit which is called as Akarmanyata, as they call. It there inside which is bound to manifest but means a person does not want to work it because of certain hurdles that you accept,

 March - April, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue: that it does not. This is Akarmanyata, we Let me see. I must give a chance to myself. can say, which is not working it out, not If that is accepted then it works and then knowing about it, not understanding it, what they go to the second step. Everything Sahaja yoga is. How to manipulate this, cannot be just like a jet liner, sit down here what these vibrations are, how it works out, and next moment you are on the moon. Even if you are on the maon, still People just say oh! Its too much because they don't want to face the reality. Because you may start with the third danger which as soon as your Kundalini comes up, as is there - the Sanshya, is the doubting. I don't know how to describe this madness soon as the light comes in, before the eyes are closed you see, suddenly the light of doubting. For example, out of all of you, who have been here, I would say, at least I comes in, you don't want to open your eyes because too much you have been don't know how much percentage, have sleeping. Even if you open your eyes a little come out with on the second day, a very bit, oh! God you don't want to face the light great statement, Still I am doubting. Is that because you are identified with that state, the sign of wisdom? What are you you do not want to open your eyes. doubting? What have you found out so far? Kundalini opens your eyes, no doubt but From where does this come? is Mr. Ego again you close it down. So, it is in your about which I have given lectures after freedom to give up that Akarmanyata. Now lectures? Is Mr. Ego that is doubting it this is also can be very coliective. I can because he doesn't want you to find that you are identified by your ego and you do tell you this much. It's a very big disease which spreads, like say a husband wife is not want to find it because this Mr. Ego has been guiding your life throughout and now there. Wife is the one like. Instead of the you want to doubt. Doubt what? What are husband raising the wife, he will succumb to the wife, especially in the west. Just the you doubting? You felt the cool breeze, opposite in India because the husband is alright. Sit down then. It would be more dominating the woman will succumb something like somebody entering into a to the husband. So, what happens is that college, university and they are going sitting out of the two also who have got it are just down first day there. Teacher says, now wasted. Instead of that both of them could I give you. The this is the diagram, be very well realized and could be there. If students get up and say sir, we doubt. the one who is realized puts down his will, Really. What should the teacher say? But that no I will keep my eyes open to see. they will not say that because they have

 March- April, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue: 3-4 paid the fees. They have paid it, even if it follow. If you are going on the road you see is a horrible drama, boring one still we go you are used to say continental driving. So always you turn on the wrong side. But in through it because we have paid for it, you London you will be arrested. In the same see. To go through it. After all we have paid way, so far you have been doing continental it you see. What to do. driving. Now, you are in London. So you But for Sahaja yoga you cannot pay. Thave seen all kinds of tomfoolery people better take to the ways of Londoners and accept in so many gurus. Like somebody understand the roads and the maps and the regulations that are needed and try to says, I am going to teach you how to fly. You are absolutely ready for that. They will follow them. But you are doubting it. That's pay money and not doubt even à bit, that the main point. Then you don't want to follow the fellow who is propagating, is he flying, it. So, the Pramad is the mistakes that arise because Kundalini awakening is a free gift Have you seen him flying anywhere please at least ask that person to fly? to anyone who comes here, to anyone who They will see the Kundalini rising has been to any sort of hell or heaven or with your eyes. They will see it pulsating, has done black magic. That's the point about it and why do you doubt. You are not rising, breaking your Brahmarandhra, Still they will sit down and say I am doubting. paying any money. These two things go hand in hand, doubting and Pramad, is the Who are you? How far have you reached? Why are you doubting? What are you mistakes that we commit throughout, doubting? What have you known so far because we are doubting. That's why we about yourseli? Now, humble down do not take it up seriously, we do not understand it, the rule of the road and we yourself at this point. Humble down in your heart. No I have not known myself. I have just start driving and then we have to know myself. I have not known myself. I accidents. And then when we have accidents we blame Mataji for that. That is haven't got the absolute. With what instrument I am doubting. This is one of a very very common thing that happens that we blame Sahaja yoga. We blame that the greatest hurdles of Kundalini awakening spontaneous happening within us. We and in after awakening called as Sanshya. never take the blame upon ourselves. That, The fourth one which we can call it No I must have done this mistake, alright, doesn't matter. If I have made mistakes I as Pramad, is the one by which we go on faltering all the time. Foolish questions, I will 'rectify it, it's all right. mean there are certain things, one has to

 March- Aprit, 2004 The Divine Coal Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue 3-4 I somehow or other say, I have to be very Mother is forgiving no doubt. I forgive but sometimes my forgiveness is careful. I cant talk like a teacher so ! also of no use because unless and until somehow or other say, alright you give you realize that it was a mistake, you yourself a bandhan and now you put your should go this way instead of that way you hands towards me and see for yourself and all that. If they by any chance know that I have gone that way. So, rule of the road is to be understood. That is the one comes have found out that they are lying then they are finished. I must keep up their falsehood, to us called as Pramad. everything in Me. If by chance you see, I After that we have another inherent problem is called as 'Brahmadarshan', am very careful, though because I know We that they are always on a slippery ground. So, even if I mention in a way that's not so hallucinations. start seeing hallucinations, specially with people who take LCD and all the such things. They blunt or anything, still it might happen. but don't see Me sometimes. They just see one must know that it is for our good that light or any such hallucination, you see, of we have to stick on to the truth and we should not be led away by our own ideas the future or of the past. They may see Me as something else and they may see Me about ourselves. as something else. If you see Me in Then the another thing comes is Vishaychit, dreams is all right or see something in in which the attention is attracted by objects of your previous identifications. dreams is alright but you start seeing some Like your attention is has been, you say I things. That's called as Brahmadarshan. am very fond of cricket alright, you are but Brahma means illusion. Then you start developing illusions. But the worst part of you should not be a sick person.I mean it is that people start telling lies about it. I cricket doesn't mean that you become a know about everyone and when this cricket bat and you are good for nothing, Bramhadarshan starts is the most for anything else, for any practical dangerous thing, about vibrations also. purposes you are dead. That kind of Some people are absolutely cock sure craziness for anything whatsoever gets your attention into a very wrong state and about themselves. I see that and they will tell all world, you see. They dominate is also not good for all the Sahaja yogis. Today's lecture is more for the Sahaja everybody saying, the vibrations of this is yogis. So, I am pointing out what are the not good, the vibrations of that is not good inherent dangers of sustaining oui while they have no mastery over it. Now, if

 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Isaue 3-4 March - Aprl, 2004 Then there are two more stages in realization which is very important to which a Kundalini, which rises, also falls understand. down. This is an inherent danger in a Now, the two other very big dangers which we suffer from apart from that the people person. Many people have asked Me that get possessed and get ideas into their Mother, if we get realized, does it stay? It does stay, a part of it. Sometimes it is very heads. They start singing songs this that. Sometimes I am so embarrassed I don't thin part of it, sometimes the whole thing know what to say. I can see a devil is sucked back. It is sucked back. If so, , speaking through them but I just don't know then you will say, we start doubting. Where is it written that you will be lifted up and put how to tell them that oh! Please stop. Even praising me, I know what it is. But they just into something great, whatever may be your problems? Is it possible? Even from come up and say, Mother we want to sing a song. All right finished. I cannot say here, if I have to go to India, I have to get anything because they do not know what inoculations and vaccinations and I have they are singing. They do not know from to get My passport, go through an interview. While if you have to enter into the kingdom where they are get this knowledge. Is of God, then you are going to be judged. something else doing this. Because of all these problems, you get possessed. The Not only judged but even when supposing other day somebody came to Me and said you give a grace mark and all that and a that Mother, I am feeling very overconfident person is allowed to sort of get into the about myself and cock sure. Really? And I plane, may be that they may ask you to get down, Is possible and that happens with feel like doing something very high handed and he did it. First he saw the possession some of the people that the Kundalini falls down, Is a very, very dangerous sign. coming into him and then he did it and did It comes through many problems it in a very bad way. Everybody is angry with him. I know. But I am not, because like gurus and going to wrong places, also something is done in possession. You going to spirits and doing all black magic don't know what madness people can do and also bowing before people who are not when they get possessed. I mean they incarnations, worshipping wrong type of should end up in lunatic asylum but deities and also doing mad rituals, fasting because of being Sahaja yogis, they do all at wrong times and not understanding the these things. But still they are not stationed signs of fasting and of ritualism and charkas and the connections and the where they should be.

 March- Apri, 2004 The Divine Cool Braeze, Volume e-XVI, issue: 3 around yourself, meet people, talk to them, complete synthesis of Sahaja yoga. And it falls down. In some people you have seen the more you talk about it the more you do that Kundalini rises and immediately falls it, the more you give it the more it will flow. is a very, very dangerous thing The more you sit at home, oh! I am doing down my puja at home nothing. It will stagnate which really is very troublesome also. But and stagnate. You have to give it to others, still you can fix it up? Last danger that we have, is one you have to think of others. Thousands of should know that you start feeling that you them have to have it and that's why it is have become God or some like an important that don't get bloated with the incarnation or something. This is the idea that you have all the powers of the biggest danger and then you start taking world already manifesting. Never. When law into your own hands and start rebuking these powers really manifest you are really others or doing all kinds of high handed not aware of them. Absolutely. I mean I am the sun. Will business or getting over self satisfied with imagine the sun saying yourself. This is a very big danger. Humility he say so? When he is the sun what is is the only way to know that there's an there? If you go and ask the sun he will say, yes, by the way I am. What can I do about ocean before you. You have got into the boat alright but you have to know a lot. You it? It's that simple. You know, you become have to understand a lot and you have to a very simple person, absolutely simple person because there is no camouflage, still attend to your attention, to your chit, to there is no complication. You are that. your awareness and you have to still work So, anybody asks a funny question, it out in such a way that you really establish yourself as a full fledged Sahaja yogi, by you say, by the way, what is there to ask? which collectivity becomes a part and It is so. I mean, if I am a realized soul, I parcel of your being. By which you have am. What does it matter? With this no doubts left. From thoughtlessness understanding we have to go to Sahaja awareness you jump into doubtless yoga which I must say I am surprised how it is working, miraculously and it is working awareness. Unless and until that happens within you, is not ? but is a state in which out. But it is you who can settle it within only the Kundalini will rise whenever you yourself. will raise your hands. Unless and until you Now, among you some are only on have achieved that state, please try to work the periphery. We take them on the it out. Don't be lazy. You have to see periphery also, That you know very well.

 Some of them come in the centre and celebrating the great event of Christ's life. some are very few who are in the inner Let us know that Christ is born within us and the Bethlehem is within us. You don't circle. All of them are still in a state where have to go to Bethlehem. Its within us. He's they can be thrown out like a tangent goes out, you see. And then you don't there and we have to look after him, It's still a child. You have to respect it and you understand why a Sahaja yogi behaves like have to look after it. So, the light really that. If you see some Sahaja yogi behaving like that going in a tangent, know that you glows and people know that you are might do the same. So, be careful. So, realized souls. Nobody will doubt that you today at this juncture when we are are not. May God Bless You All.

 Memories of the Divine Mother .cont. from Nov-Dec,2003 And I saw Her coming out of the with [my sister] Maureen [Rossi). It had car and walking one or two steps. And a huge impact on me because l'd heard after that I got lost. I don't remember that there was a yogi lady and I had this kind of idea that l'd walk into a room full anything. And then I saw Her on the of sort of silence and perhaps little bells stage. It was like moonlight, watching tinkling somewhere and I walked in the Her. room. And it was so unlike what l'd Nirmal Gupta expected that the effect on me was really To be living in this time and to quite profound. I immediately felt that this have experienced all this is very difficult is what it must have been like to come Christ teaching in the to imagine sometimes. I wonder why I across was chosen and why I was so lucky marketplace. It completely hit me like enough to have been there in Her that, which was quite strange because I presence. It's all these little experiences, didn't have any kind of religious- you which stay with you for the rest of your know, religion wasn't part of my life. Quite the opposite, I was coming from a life. You can't ignore them. hippie background. And I just felt that Sharon Vincent here was an amazing personality and my How could someone like this be feeling was, "How can a being like this here? Actually, l'd seen Shri Mataji's exist? How could someone like that be here?" And the whole room seemed full I met Mother. I'd left photograph betore that yoga group before you brought the of light and there was a tremendous photo. I'd maved over to Baker Street impression of how powerful Shri Mataji and I did notice the photograph - was, but She was just very sweet. She appearing, being kind of furtively asked us to come and see Her and I concealed from me and I did hear about came up and She put Her hand on me and said, "This one's sick," 1 think were Shri Mataji, but I didn't hear anything that direct about it. But then I just said that the first words She said to me. And the I'd like to come and see Her. l'd heard meeting went on. It was just really quite magical, the whole amazing about these meetings and I came to the last meeting at Judd Street. One damp thing. I didn't really have a chance to figure out what it was all about, but I knew Sunday afternoon - raining - and I came

 March - April, 2004 The Divine Cool Biueze, Volume-XVI, Issue: 3-4 it was something quite mamentous. That Even walking up the street to go to that flat, I had this strongest urge to run away was the first meeting. She said I was sick and that I I've ever had in my life. Even though I needed something for my stomach and didn't know where I was going and I had She asked for a bottle and the strange only been told that. "This lady is a yoga thing was-no one else seemed to see this- but I saw Her take the bottle, turn round and open a sort of door into some teacher, but she doesn't teach Hatha Yoga." But I can remember thinking that if I wasn't with people that I felt would kind of an atomic furnace and put the say, "What on Earth are you up bottle in, take it out, shut the door and have run away. That's how strong I could to?" I'd give it to me. And I was quite astonished. feel the force I was walking towards. And I took it home, drank it and it had And when we went in the flat and the most extraordinary effect. It cleared we were told to take off our shoes, which me out. She said I had six months to live. was strange, and told to sit down and I Yes, I was really in quite a bad way. saw Shri Mataji working on this Indian We went back for more meetings gentleman, very strongly and sort of and I had a whole series of extraordinary telling him off and sorting him out, I experiences when She was there, but I thought She was a Goddess. That was think the thing that really hit me was a my first thought that came into my head and then I thought, "What on Earth do I kind of gut reaction, a kind of recognition mean by that? I don't even know what a that this was someone. I kept getting the Goddess is." But that's what it felt like. feeling that this was someone like And then She got on with seeing to Christ. That was the feeling that I had. And I was trying to kind of see how that everybody and when my turn came, if you like, She actually got up and walked made sense and fitted in. around, as well as sat down, and She' Pat Anslow told me to put my hands out and asked me what I felt and that second I felt my I had no idea what i had but 1 knew I had it It was the 16th September attention drawn to my hands and said, "Oh, I feel something." And She just said, 1975 that we first met Shri Mataji in that "May God bless you. You've got it." And I [Judd Street] flat and, similar to [my thought, "I've got it." I had no idea what I brother] Pat [Anslow], it couldn't have had, but I knew I had it. And that was it. helped being a most momentous feeling.

 March Apri, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue 3-4 And She then went on to everybody else. She said it is like the sunlight It was just great. I was dealt with. miracle, which 1 There was a Maureen Rossi experienced when we had a seminar in the English countryside. It was à long Stonehenge time ago, 1979, and Shri Mataji came. It And when we got down there, Shri was a very dark day with no sun, heavy clouds. It was very, very dull and heavy. Mataji bought us all ice creams, And just There was a lot of doubting in Sahaja like little kids, we were all running around our mum eating ice creams, walking Yoga at that time. And Shri Mataji was around the stones. And eventually we talking to us and said that She is Shri Krishna and Shri Jesus and Shri Mataji. stood close to Mother and were trying to feel the vibrations from the stones and She is all of them. She said it is like the oddly there were no vibrations coming sunlight. And at that moment the beam of sunlight came out of nowhere and from the stones. And some of the Sahaja shone on Her head and went away. And Yogis who had been there before and had felt the vibrations asked Mother. They to prove it, She said for the beam of light were really surprised and they said, come again on Her head. That happened "Look, we used to feel vibrations here two or three times. Out of nowhere the sun came. So this was the miracle 1 and we are not feeling any." And Mother witnessed together with about fifty yogis, turned to us and said, "That's because I am here." She said, "Out of respect for who where present at that time. Me, the stones are not emitting any Miodrag Radosavlievic vibrations. They are waiting for My permission." And then She basically I thought there was something said, "All right. Now." And the moment wrong with the camera She said that, the vibrations just came The first puja we had at Chelsham Road was the Bhoomi Puja, the puja to bless in waves from the stones. Bala Kanayson. the house. As the housewife, I was honoured to be called to actually offer the difterent items to Mother in the porch of the house. I was heavily pregnant with my second child at the time. Mother

 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, ssue 3-4 March - April, 2004 55 stood in the doorway and I offered the rice and other things to Her Feet. Everyone else crowded round in the hallway and garden. After we had finished the short puja, Mother told us to bury the offerings on the right of the doorway, between the door and the window. About a year later I was taking some photos of the children who were sitting on the front door step in one photo and standing on what was then a little lawn in front of the window by the door in the next one - the strange thing was that when the photos were developed, there was a bright light coming out of the ground where we had buried the offerings. At that time, we did not know about miracle photos and I thought there was something wrong with the camera. Linda Williams Reading the praise of the Goddess One time when we had a puja, the puja sort of started in the morning and went on through the whole of the day. And one particular puja, one of the very early pujas, we had a havan outside and we had this book of the thousand Sanskrit names of the Goddess. This was, I believe, actually the first puja in praise of Shri Mataji and was at Her house at Parklands, Hurst Green. We were sitting round there putting stuff on the havan and Shri Mataji was actually reading the names of Herself. As She pointed out, She said, "This is very strange because you've got the Goddess reading the praise of the Goddess, which is rather unusual." Because She was the only one who could read them. But whilst we were there- and it was really cold outside, it was late in the year - and the whole sky opened up like a great big halo above us. The sky was quite dark, but there was a whole light patch above where we were because the vibrations that were given out had sort of caused the sky to open. Douglas Fry



----------------------

2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 "Divine Cool Breeze
The
1V11
March April, 2004
Volume: XVI Issue: 3 & 4
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Maha Shivratri Puja, Pune 15-2-2004
2.
The Advice of Shri Mataji, 11-3-1981
7
From Nirmala Yoga
16
AHAVAN
A Letter of Shri Mataji - London 2-9-1980
Reception to Sir C.P. Shrivastava
Report from Rahuri
Words of Christ The Lord
Sir C.P.'s Reply
Shri Adi Shakti Puja, Canajoharie
35
38
Inherent hurdles
Memories of the Divine Mother
52
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 There would be no Kalyana without
Self-Realisation
this power is your wellbeing (Kalyana). The
one who gets this power should know that
now he has been blessed. It is difficult to
explain the word 'Kalyana'. 'Kalyana'
means success in every way: to be
nourished and glorified fully.
What should be the meaning when
someone blesses us and says, May you
have Kalyana (get blessed)?' What does it
mean? What is this Kalyana? This Kalyana
is what we call Self-Realisation (Atma
Sakshatkara). There would be no Kalyana
without Self-Realisation. It could neither be
understood nor absorbed. All these things
become blissfull and the person finds
oneself very comfortable and splendid
(Tejaswi). All that could be done for you to
achieve this state has been done. All the
labour has been done. But now when you
Mahashivratri Puja
have got this path of the Kalyana, what will
Pune Feb. 15, 2004
(Hindi Pravachan - Translated)
happen? Complete solution to everything
(Samadhana) comes in you. Now there is
Today we are present here to nothing to search for, you have become
worship the Guru, The Guru is regarded guru yourselves. Nothing special is now
going to be achieved. But you will
to be the highest of all the dieties. Who is
blessings
of
this
experience
the
this guru in reality? Which is the power that
is
of this state that
samadhana,
flows in it in abundance. This Gurutatva is
samadhana. You will understand it and get
the Shiva. The power that is in the form of
Shiva is to be regarded as the power of established in it.
First and foremost thing is Physical-
the Guru. When you get this power of the
Guru and it starts flowing in you, then you Physical Problems, Physical Weaknesses.
become Guru yourselves. But the job of All these problems disappear with this path
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 biggest of them is 'Peace'-Mental Peace,
of Kalyana. You will get rid of your physical
Physical Peace and, above all, Woridly
problems. If it has not yet taken place then
Peace. Many problems and difficulties are
one has to think that the state of kalyana
there in the world. They could all be got rid
has not yet been achieved. Secondly
of after achieving this Kalyana-Self-
Mental Weaknesses, the obstructions that
persist in your achieving the state of Realezation. They cease to exist. You find
Kalyana will be finished-the mental many people in this world, who, after
weakness that still persists in you and achieving this power, get established in
meditation while acting at their places. This
because of which you connot blossom.
That power lies in it. When you achieve is the Kalayana through which man gets
this power then you reaily have the complete balance.
You should take refuge in the Guru
kalyana-solution to all the problems,
means you get self-realized. Shri to attain this balance. By taking refuge at
the Holy Feet of the Guru, you will get such
Mahadeva is helpful in it too. When your
a perfect balance that you will feel as if you
Kundalini pierces the Sahsrara, Shri
had achieved everything and have nothing
Mahadeva is there. That is why He is called
more to get.
Mahadeva - The God of Gods is Mahadeva.
Such a balance gives tremendous
other
There
many
are
power. I call it the power of love. When one
achievéments in this path of Kalyana The
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 people put lot of
effort to attain
this power. But
this power could
be got from
other
some
people, from
someone who
himself
has
a 1ге аdy
A achieved it and
become
has
Godly.
(Pravachan in English)
receives it, the whole body gets thrilled as
This is a Subject which you can
it some Divine Power had embraced him.
In that state, the person rises above all the
only explain in Hindi Langauge which says
that this 'Gurupada' you get from somebody
worldly turmoils and inbalances and lives
in perfect balance. That is the reason why else. But that somebody else himself is
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Mairch - April, 2004
The Givine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVi, lssue
endowed with the power, the power of
the only way you can get to it is through
'Dhyana'. Dhyana is meditation. When you
Peace of Mind to begin with and also the
power to overcome all kinds of Earthly meditate, just meditate and meditate, do
not ask anything. Meditation itself gives you
Problems, Mental Problems, Physical
that instrument which can bear this great
Problems, All these problems you can
power of the Guru and then
solve through your mental balance and
you
mental blessings from your Guru. When automatically give this power to others. You
don't have to work it out. Just in your
you become Guru, you yourself have the
power to bless others. With your blessing
presence people can get this power of
complete satisfaction and there is salvation
power you can create a Guru out of mnany
for you and for others. So all the problems
and once the Guru is created and there is
Guru who has this power, it's very
which are faced for the jouney of ascent
are finished and you are drenched in the
satisfying and this is very ennobling. The
satisfaction is so much that you don't want
bliss of heavenly peace and joy. That's why
it is called as 'Kevalya', means only-only
anything.
This is the power of Shiva. You
the blessings. See that means there is no
other word to translate it. There is no other
have seen, Shiva doesn't have much
way of explaining it. It is a state, it is a
'Sthiti, a state. In that state you have to
clothes, He doesn't decorate himself, He
is just sitting in meditative mood all the
time. He doesn't want anything. He is so
you are in that state. It
rise. You know that
is a very remarkable thing that once you
satified with Himself that He doesn't want
reach that state you do not have to ask for
anything. That is the power you get after
the Self-Realization if you have a Guru and
anything. Its all there and you are so
satisfied! I can go on talking about this
Guru of that level and caliber. One should
not try to become a Guru. That's very
special power but I think, whateverI have
said, please meditate on that. You are al
impractical. If you try to become, you will
capable of reaching that state, that State
never, It has to come to you automatically
of Peace and Joy.
without any asking, without any effort. So
145
May God Bless You
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Param Pujya Mataji's Advice
11th March 1981
Delhi
I have told you, the other day that which very few people understand, for
these vibrations are nothing but the example, somebody brings me a
Brahma-Shakti-the power of Brahma. The photograph of Shri Ganesh and says,
"Should I worship this Shri Ganesh's
power of Brahma is the power that creates,
photograph or not"? First of all we should
that desires, that evolves and it gives the
see if vibrations are coming from it or not.
living force also. It is the power which is
giving us the living force. Now, it is not easy
to understand what is a dead force and
what is a living force. Living force is very
Supposing you take a house. You must see
that the house is giving good vibrations.
We see the comfort, we see other things.
simple to understand. An animal, say a little
We might even see if it is good for other
people to come in or not, but we do not
worm, is a living force. It can turn itself the
see the house from vibrations point of view.
way it likes. It can save itself from danger.
It may be a small little thing, but because
it is living, it can save itself. But something
For anything that we do, we have, now, to
think in terms of vibratory awareness which
which is dead cannot move by itself. So, means awareness that is working upon
living things. As in the, say a cell at the tip
the 'Self' part does not remain in it, as far
of the root of a tree is a living thing. Of
as it is concerned.
course, it does not think, it is guided by
Now, being a living force we should
the living force itself. So, it knows how to
try to find out, "Are we going to be the
move with the living force, to live with it
and how to understand the plan of the living
living force or the dead one". Now, when
we live in the world, we start thinking
about our comforts; where we have to live, force to get along with it and how to merge
what we have to do. When we think of all
with it.
But, we human beings have got the
these things, you see, we are thinking of
freedom to decide. Now, once you are
the dead. But when we think of having a
place or a house or an Ashram from the realised, you have got that living force
angle that you will be doing some living within you. This is the living force you feel.
So, you have to know how to use this living
work, then you are giving life to that place.
That atmosphere should be created from
force to keep your bady, mind, ego,
everything in the
all that is dead to create the living force.
superego and
enlightened state, by understanding the
Now, this is very very subtle thing,
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 March-April, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Vojume-XVI, 3sue:3-4
fridge, because he wants a fridge, and he
planning of the living force.
It gives you all the ideas regarding must get it. Why he wants a tridge?
most of the problems. For example, here Because he thinks it will give him more
in this country and specially in Delhi, 1 find
comfort. But, when he brings the fridge, he
knows that it is not so. So, the best way to
catch on the left Nabhi, also right
nou
that
look at all dead things is not to go too far
Swadhi-shthana and then on the Heart and
also on your Agnya, These are the Chakras with them. If you have, well and good. If
which deal with our being. So, let us try you do not have, well and good. You can
from the left side. What happens? On the live with minimum of minimum or you
left side the problem starts from left can live with maximum of maximum of
Swadhishthna, because that is the first these. But when we start expanding our
Chakra that starts emitting the negativity dead possessions, it is very much bad.
within us. Now, left Swadhishthana is Then our attention goes into the dead.
into our
actually under control only of Shri Ganesh
That's
how we
move
because Shri Ganesh is the beginning of subconscious then over to collective
subconscious. Then it moves higher to the
life and also the link between the life and
the death. So Ganesh is one who gives left Nabhi, and at left Nabhi, we start
becoming crazy about these dead things.
the balance, the "Vivek" the understanding
to you by which you know how far to go
For example, the watch, the Time. Time is
a dead thing, it is not a living thing. It has
with things. Now, when left Swathishthana
catches, you start going to other people nothing to do with living thing. For example,
who promise you such things, like "I will you cannot say exactly at what time the
give you this and that, this will happen, flower will become a fruit. So this watch or
time has nothing to do with the living force
that will happen to you". But this left sided
at all. It is human or man-made like the
thing can also come from your own
watch; particularly time is also man made.
desire for wrong things. For example, we
For example, today, time here is
might be desiring something very wrong;
we might be thinking that let us have this
something, but in England it is different. If
you say it is 4-0' clock in India, it is not the
kind of a dead thing or that kind of dead
thing or some sort of a special thing. same in England. So, the timing is not
important. What time you arrive, what
Suppose, somebody wants a refrigerator
and keeps on thinking of it. He thinks that
time you go, how many times you do
it, is not important.
he must have a fridge. He must go to the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 March - April, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue: 3-4
Because living force is infinite, it
too much in the past, it is better to think of
has no time limit or space limit, you cannot
the future, so that you are pushed a little
count it, the way it moves, the way it works
bit to the centre. But, it is difficult with you
out. Once we understand that it is a living
human beings.
Now, the other problem starts,
force which is spontaneous, which is not
bothered about our dead ideas, we come when we start feeling guilty about
out of the dead. We were stones first, then
when left Vishudhi catches.
something,
we became ameoba, then we gradually We start feeling guilty. "I should have not
became human beings. So, our attention
done this thing or that thing". Then you start
is all the time towards the dead. What saying, "I am very miserable, I am very
should we get, what should we have, what
guilty" etc., you just start cursing yourself.
This is another nonsense. That is how
are the needs we have of this body which
once you start doing that, then what
happens is that you again become dead.
is going to die.
We do not see to the needs of the
Spirit. By seeing to the needs of the Because living force will never condemn.
spirit, you can overcome the left side. No, it will never. It goes on progressing
You start looking after your spirit from
this side
itself, it sees, which side to move,
which you know that you get your or that side. It is not going to condemn
itself. It is not going to aggress anything. It
vibrations. If your Spirit is happy, you
get your vibrations, if it is unhappy, you has the wisdom to be in the Centre.
do not get the vibrations. Such a That is how people should overcome their
left side, by putting their attention away from
comman thing! If you have any disease
or a problem on left hand side, to give it a
the dead things. You should watch from the
Centre, when you are on the leftside. What
balance, you
put your attention to the
you want to see, you don't see. But then
future. But then people get stuck up on the
future, if I say you look to the future. As
ultimately to escape all this, what you do
dead is dead and is 'Mithya' (illusion), same
is to start blaming yourself all the time and
feeling miserable. Now, this is the way you
way future is also Mithya, is also not there.
start ending up with yourleft side into a very
Both the things are just the same. Whether
o
you go to left or right, whether you go to
miserable state, that is the culmination of
all these attachments to the left side. So,
the subconscious or the supraconscious
mind, both the things are just the same.
ultimately you start thinking that you are
So, no use going to the past, but if you are good for nothing, you are useless, you
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Divine Cool Braeze. Volume-XVI, Issue 3-4
March- April, 2004
10
should have done this, you should have something great and this and that. That
there should be many disciples that we
done that.
Now, at this time to overcome it, should have who should touch our feet and
we should be called Great Gurus etc
you have to count your blessings. Count
So, in Sahaja Yoga some things
your Blessings one by one. You have
are prohibited. That nobody should
got your Realisation. During thousands
touch anybody's feet and no Sahaja Yogi
of years how many people got realisation?
You have got your vibrations. In so many
should allow anyone to touch his or her
centuries, how many people got them? It feet. This is one of the great Bandhans
is written in Zen system that in eight for all Sahaja Yogis. No one should
centuries there were altogether 26 touch other's feet and nobody should
ask to touch his or her feet, whatever
Kashyaps (Realised Souls). So, even after
Buddha, how many got their realisation? may be your quality. Those who will
touch will lose vibrations, and those
You must think also that there are so many
who will get salutations will also catch
realised people, who talk the same
on the heart. So, such conditions, which
language, who talk the same tongue. You
we have about Sahaja Yoga also, should
must thank yourself also, that every thing
can be known to you.
be removed.
We are all of us growing together.
But, when you start catching on the
We are part and parcel of one personality.
left, you go in the past and you start saying,
"Oh God? I am so useless, I am good for
Nobody is higher or lower. One who thinks
nothing. I am so useless, that I am still the slightest like this will go down faster.
catching". As you know, those who catch This is the left side conditioning, where
on the left hand side, are always
people falter very much. So, such desires
complaining, always grudging type must be given up in Sahaja Yoga.
You must have very wider desires
because of poor things, they suffer. Now,
to match with that is the other side. So, if in Sahaja Yoga that all of us must get
I tell you that you go to the other side also,
it is a very dangerous game. For example,
Realisation-say as many as possible. We
should try to save as many people as
we have so many conditionings in our possible. We should try to improve
lives. You see, first of all our desire. Our ourselves as far as we can, and we are
desire is to become excellent Sahaja nothing yet we cari improve and have so
Yogis, to become Master Gurus and many biessings.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 19, Volume-XVI. tau
The Eivine Cool Breeze, Volume-XV issue :3-4
March - Apnl, 2004
Now, the thoughts can come from
you do not deviate to the right or to the left.
the left side also. Like, if you have some This is something so subtle that you are
Bhoots in your head, they can give you the
left sided, you are not going to remain left
thought that, "Oh, you are useless or good sided. You can become right-sided
for nothing." Now, raise your right side and
tomorrow, exactly, tomorrow you can come
put down the left with your left hand. Now with right-sided problems. So, you must
why do we do this? Because from your learn that Balancing, just like you start
right side, you get the Grace and put down
learning a bicycle. You might fall on this
the left side. Such people who suffer from side or that side.
the left side should try this. One more thing,
Now, when do you learn cycling? If
is, that when these ideas come to you or
you ask me, I will
say, "When you learn." I
such thoughts come to you, that you are mean when you cycle down, that's the
good for nothing etc., it is better to beat point when you learn. So, in Sahaja Yoga,
yourself with shoes. Go and sing the praise
to balance it, you have to watch yourself
of the Lord and say that I am so happy, I carefully. Now where is it going? To the
left side, then come to the right side. If
have got everything around me.
going to the right side, come to the left side.
Now, the second thing is about the
right side. On the right side, mostly you Now, come to the Centre, you just
catch on the Swadhishthan. That is
separate yourself, you detach yourself all
because you think. This is another kind of the time. Not to criticize yourself nor to
thinking that gives you catch at right aggress anyone or to criticize others, but
Swadhishthan. Thinking, whether it comes
use this point just to see yourself, just to
see and guide yourself. Guidance is very.
from right or the left will first give problem
different from getting lost. Now that is what
to your liver. The worst comes when both
the sides are involved. There are some
it is. Supposing the dead thing is there. Say
this is a dead thing. When I throw it, it
Bhoots which give you ideas that you are
exactly will fall there. Living thing, if I throw
good for nothing etc. While the other thing
is when you start thinking that you are so it will not fall there exactly. So, the living
great. In this such a wobbling starts force knows how to guide itself. In the
coming and the confusion starts setting in.
So, one must understand that in If you have learnt it, you have mastered
same way you will learn to guide yourself.
Sahaja Yoga, you are developing that Sahaja Yoga.
No use condemning yourself, in any
sharp edge, that central point from which
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volumie-XVI, issue: 3-4
March- Apni, 2004
12
Mother. You don't ask anyone.
way or thinking that you are great or small.
But watch now, where the horse is going.
This development should come to
You are sitting on the top of the horse; now
you, that, "what I do, I should know what
lam doing. I should know what is correct.
you are no more the horse. Before
realisation you are the horse. Wherever it Ishould know how to correct it". should
know 'I, here is the Spirit and not the Ego.
takes you, you go there. It may stand there,
No more the Ego exists or the Super-ego
when it sees the grass and eat. Then the
horse wants to kick somebody, it will do
exists. It is the Spirit which guides you. You
so. But, now, you have come out of the
see the Realised children. They don't ask
such questions. They know who is foolish,
horse and sitting on the.horse as a Rider.
who is stupid. They know who is caught
Now you are the Rider and you must know
how you are befooled by these things. up. They know whom to shut up and
These desires, are all ancient, age old whom to argue. They do not sympathise
things within you. See, also the aggression, with the people, who are caught up, They
the Karma that you are doing are also just watch. If somebody comes, they will
ancient. By doing this you will get this, tell me, "Mataji, this fellow is caught"
you will get that. Many people will say, That's all. Somebody else comes. They
"Mother, we are doing this, we are doing
promptly tell me, "He is alright". That's all.
They just certify. They do not hate anyone,
so much for Sahaja Yoga; we have still not
achieved anything". Now, what to do.
they do not get worried about 'anything. If
some body comes with a very bad
Just can't help it. Now, you must find out,
Badha, they say, "Better please, go away
what is the matter with you.
without any malice about the person,
Now, if the Heart is catching, such
Once, you are at the top of the hill,
people can never progress. The Heart is
the source of Light, it is the source of you have not to worry about the traffic. But,
you are not yet on the top, that's why you
Brahma- Shakti. Heart is the seat of Atma.
If in the Heart there is no living force, then
are worried that "I am climbing and failling,
climbing and falling". This is just a Myth,
how can you progress?
You must know what to choose. just a mental shadow on your mind. This
This is what Sahaja Yoga should make out
is a fact that you are at the top of the hill.
of you. You should grow mature to that But you have not asserted, the assertion
point where you know what to choose. is not there.
This is Growth. Then you don't ask of
The God is the enjoyer. You cannot
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 13
March April, 2004.
The Divine Cooł Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issie:3- i4
force, it has to move, it will go where it has
enjoy. You can only enjoy God, and it is
to When our sense organs get enlightened
the greatest enjoyment, to feel; what God
then we shall not like to go to the unwanted
has created for you, what a beautiful
direction and say goodbye to many things.
human
in
you
fife He has
given
In this regard we have to be careful
awareness by which you can know how
much He has loved you, how much He about one thing, to keep the heart clean.
has worked for you. He has brought you Those who have clean hearts have very
few problems. That doesn't mean you keep
to this level. What He has given you, you
on thinking of stupidity. Clean heart means
Surrender. In Sahaj Yoga if surrender is not
can give to others and make others happy.
If you think like that immediately both of
your sides will be settled and you complete or if someone thinks oneself to
be something special, then there could be
yourself will be filled with Divine
no growth in such a person. Ascent
Vibrations.
requires neither any education nor any
Translated from Hindi
speciality.
"I have not felt it, I have not
Now, I will tell in Hindi, You should
eperienced it." It is your fault, not of Sahaja
Yoga. Sometimes people talk to me in such
sit on the throne, be seated, sit on the
a way as if I had taken the contract or they
throne. Sitting on the throne, yet begging
have deposited some money with me! Shri
and weeping! Committing this stupidity
Mataji we have been coming to you for the
while sitting on the throne! What to do with
last 25 years! Nothing is going to happen
such people? Ocupied the throne, you are
even if you grow old, what to talk of 25 or
the king. Sit on the throne and control your
five sense organs; "Enough of it, now go 30 years! If you are not experiening you
this way. This is good, that is good. I have
Realisation, then there is definitely
some fault in you. The moment you start
When you .command
seen enough of you."
takings away your attention from yourself,
and control yourself like this, only then you
your short comings will appear to you and
will become good Sahaja Yogis otherwise
when you see your faults, see your
you go by the command of your mind, "go
shortcomings, it will be easy for you to get
this way." You go that way and then say,
"Shri Mataji what do I do? I tried to control
rid of them. So occupy the throne like an
my mind so much, so much, yet it goes emperor. If the king finds the subjects going
astray, he forbids them from those things.
that way"? What is 'Mana'? Mana is a living
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 sze, Volume-XVI, issue 3-4
March - April, 2004
The Drvine Cool Bree
or problems. You (Indians) get your
The one who commands himseif is the
only powerful person.
realization very soon and they, because
For example take these people.
of their mistakes, take lot of time. You get
While talking they even forget that whom
realized in no time but you do not value it.
They take time in getting realization but
they are talking to! They talk in such a way
value it a lot. They know the method. Look
that one is astonished. They forget as what
into their eyes how earnest they are!
to say and what not to say. We should
When I talk in Hindi, they listen to each
have control over our tongue. This control
could be acheived when we detach
word very carefully. Although they do not
ourselves from ourselves. This tongue understand the language yet how the
has to be kept in control.
vibrations flow from their hands! Their
Slowly you will develop new habits,
attention is always on the happening. They
new methods and have new styles and
have, now given away their lives to Sahaja
then command yourself. Alway talk in third
yaga. They think of nothing else that we
shall do this and this and this. Only then
person. A realized being never talks in first
you will go deep. By giving away yourselves.
person. He always talks in third person,"
we have to go there, sit there." Mostly to Sahaja Yoga, you grow. This is a fact.
children do like that, they talk in third
You have nothing to do in it, you lose nothing
in it. You get the 'Khshema'(wealth and well
person." This Nirmala will not go now. She
will keep sitting here." Sahaj Yogi has also
being).
We have to give away the whole of
to speak in that way. Slowly we have to
ourselves
ourselves to Sahaja Yoga. Every moment
detach ourselves from
renouncing our desires, our ideas,
of life should be given to Sahaja Yoga. It
means- 'living spontaneously'. Where the
materialistic and other ideas such as ideas
of power etc. We have to think as to what
spontaniety will come from? It comes from
living force-the living force which is within
have we done for Sahaja Yoga and what
us all the time. Nothing else should be
have we to do.
Still these things are less in India
thought about.
but in abundance abroad. They never
Even otherwise you could never
come to me and tell that such and such enjoy. The God only is the enjoyer. You
relative of my father's grandfather's uncle's
are mistaken to think yourselves to be the
real brother is ill. Please cure him. They
enjoyers. You cannot enjoy; only God could
enjoy and He is the creator. You are only
never tell me about their material diffculties
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 March April. 2004
The Divine Col Broeze,
15
XVI, Issue:
3-4
Valume-X
links in between, like pipes. You are the us. Now you can know your soul and the
same. If you could enjoy anything at all, it
is the God Almight who loves you
profusely. This is the only truth with which
soul of others. What a great blessing the
God has given to us. With this thought be
happy within. When you begin to enjoy the
you could be in the state of joy, rejoice almighty in this manner then your heart
expands. You will feel as if the whole
nothing else nothing could give joy to you.
creation has entered in it.
Only He (The God) is the enjoyer.
Today's message is that you should
The reason is that today you want
this; you get it, yet you are not happy.. begin to enjoy the God. Giving up all other
Tomorrow you want something else and joys, enjoy the Almighty and meditate over
what a bounty the God has given to you!
then something else but you are not happy.
Material things cannot make you happy.
Oniy the God almighty is the
Enjoy all the blessings that he has
showered upon you. You will see that
your
attention has become steady. That is how
enjoyer. So we should all enjoy (the God).
Once we start enjoying the God then why
you could grow in Sahaj Yoga.
What have we received every
do we need anything else to enjoy? So we
minute? I have received so much, I have
should have the pleasure of enjoying him.
What a world the God has created! How received so much, keep on repeating,
beautiful! How many beautiful things he otherwise your complaints and aggersion
has given to us! We have become Sahaj
will never come to an end.
May God Bless You
Yogis. God has awakened this power in
To the Goddess, who among all created beings
stands firm with the form of Mother,
Reverence to Her, yea, reverence to Her!
Reverence to Her,yea,reverence,yea,reverence!
Markandya
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 -: Invocation (Ahavan) :-
"In SAHAJA YOGA, all the religions are respected because
all the incarnations and previous prophets are in us. We know it for
definite that they exist within us on our Centres.
First, before starting the marriage, we had to ask them to
come and be present on this function. This is called Ahavan. Now,
they were all there. So we are now to thank them that you have been
here and the marriage has been successful.
In SAHAJA YOGA we are going to break all the barriers which
make religions and people separate. All fanatical nonsense, old
ideas which have propped up to make money out of religion, all
these we are going to completely abolish and make one religion for
all the humanity, which is religion of GOD, the religion of our
evolution. May God bless you all".
SHRI MATАЈІ
on the occasion of marriage of Catherine &
Gregoire on 1st Jan. 81 at RAHURI
AFTER REALIZATION
decode and respond to the messages
from the Holy Spirit. They read other
human beings as awareness systems.
They direct our spiritual growth.
4. Collective consciousness is achieved.
1. The awareness space of the conscious
mind increases. Ego and super-ego
gradually drop down and are sucked back
into Pingla and Ida.
2. The ascended Kundalini establishes a
direct link with the unconscious. It
The attention is drawn inside because of
the inward happening of Kundalini's
manifests as the flow of vibrations.
3. The deities on the chakras are awakened.
They are the reflections of the original
ascent.
5. In a fully mature realised being, the
Deities ascend from their place of work
deities on the Adi Chakras of the Virata
in the Chakra, to their own seats within
and they "Organise" our awareness
accordingly. As they are linked together
the Sahasrara. This is the stage of
complete Divine Integration.
by the ascended Kundalini the
personality becomes integrated. They
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 श्री माताजी का पत्र (मराठी)
(Nirmala Yoga - 1981)
लन्दन
दिनांक 2-6-1980
मतप्रीय सहजयोगी मडळी यांस आशीर्वाद
बनेश्वरी जो कार्यक्रम निश्चित केला आहे तों पूर्णतणे यशस्वी होणार आमचे लक्ष आहेच. पण सर्व
परमेश्वरी कार्याला नवीन शक्ति प्राप्त होणार आहे.
पुणेकरांनी पुण्याचे पुण्य सार्थक केले। हयात आमचें काय विषेश आहे। जे तुमचे होते ते जाणले व
मिळविले। हेच आमच्या प्रसन्नतेचे निधान आहे।
सहजयोगाचा महायोग घडत आहे। त्याची सुरवात बनेश्वरी होणार आहे। इकडे युरोपमध्यंगी जोरांत
कार्य सुरू झाले आहे। ह्यवर्शी बरीच मंडळी येणार भारतात आहेत। मी नोव्हेम्बर मध्यें ये ईन। तोपर्यन्त
खेडोपाड़ीं सहजयोगाची पताका झळीकली पाहिजे।
तुमची सदैव आई-निर्मला
तुम्हा सर्वांना अत्यन्त प्रेमपूर्वक आशीर्वाद.
LONDON
2-9-1980
My dear Sahaja Yogis,
The programmes which you have arranged at Baneshwar will certainly be
very successful. Our attention is there. All God's work will now have a new dyna-
mism. Sahaja Yogis of Pune have given fulfillments to the 'Punya'of Pune. There
is nothing special of mine in it. Whatever is with you has been discovered by you
and accepted. This is the source of joy.
Sahaja Yoga is evolving as Maha Yoga. Baneshwer seminar will mani-
fest that. Work has now commenced on very large scale in Europe also. This year
many people will be coming to our holy land. I will come in November. Till then
the message of Sahaja Yoga should reach every village.
My affectionate blessings to all
Ever Yours
Your Mother Nirmala
(Translation of Marathi Letter)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 RECEPTIONN TO SIR C.P. SRIVASTAVA
(From Nirmala Yoga - 1981)
It was a memorable joyous and settled in life and then she would be
evening for, the Delhi people when they free to devote herself to the wider family
welcomed Shri. C. P. Srivastava of Humanity. She kept her word and I
amongst them on 4th January, 1980.
kept mine. My daughters grew up. Credit
Following is the text of his address on for bringing them up naturally goes to
Her, because I was really very busy with
the occasion.
Mr. Subramanyam and dear my official duties and She gave me
Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis of tremendous support by looking after the
children, and the house and taking over
Delhi,
May I say first of all, how very
grateful I am to all of you for the honour,
every possible responsibility except my
office work, which I kept to myself. Now,
kindness and affection you have chosen when the daughters grew up, the
to bestow upon me, this evening. For question of their marriage came up and
me it is an experience which is very that was the test of her upbringing and
cooling andI assure you, I will cherish it the test of children and so I asked my
for a long time.
daughters, "that now you have grown up,
Sahaja yoga is now the very life you have travelled widely, you have been
of my wife, whom you call Mataji; who abroad to many countries and well
still remains my wife and as Sh
educated, it is up to you to decide in what
Subramanyamji said, She has play d the way would you like to get married". But
role of a wife, a perfect wife itir y say as my wife had brought them up in true
so, a perfect Mother and now a perfect
Indian tradition, both of them said, that it
Grandmother and what She is doing now was our duty as parents to find proper
for the Humanity is something which bridegrooms for them and so whatever
makes me particularly proud and most we decided was their decision. Living as
gratified. Perhaps, I may mention to you we were, in Bombay, the people there
that years ago when our two daughters sometimes did not even believe that
were still little children and they were girls, who have been so well educated
growing up, we both agreed that our first
and widely travelled etc. would get
married in our traditional Indian style and
responsibility as parents must be
bring them up properly, educate them custom, following ancient Indian values.
and to see that they are properly married
So as parents, we found bridegrooms for
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 ssue : 3-4
March-April,
The Civine Cool Breuze, Valtime-XVi i
2004
19
them, both are happily married and well want to know what is beyond this
material world we see; what is our
settled.
Ever since then, my wife has destiny as human beings? There is now
a moment in human history, when some
been devoting her time, not only time I
new revolution, spiritual revolution has to
would say her soul to Sahaja Yoga and I
have seen how wondrous her endeavors come about if the humanity is to be
have been. In a world that we live in,
saved, other wise war, conflict, strife will
when you look up the newspapers in the destroy humanity. It is in this context, I
morning, you find strife, trouble, see in Sahaja Yoga the beginnings of a
new movement for humanity and I
accidents and so on. She wants to bring
therefore, wish to assure you that I feel
peace, peace in a spiritual sense.
Where there's animosity, she wants to proud of what you are doing as Sahaja
substitute love for that, where there is Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis-true selfless
bitterness, she wants to substitute love for each one, for everyone, true
harmony for that and bring spiritual dedication to the ideals which are being
development of the individuals. Now, to promoted and these are wonderful
my way of thinking, the world is in values.
turmoil. Not only in India, there is trouble
everywhere. I find that really human Yoga in U.K. and I might tell you, what I
T have seen the wonders of Sahaja
have seen. I lead a very busy life
being is in turmoil, within himself and
outside. And then what is the need of the
because of my responsibilities but once
I was very grateful to my wife and Sahaja
hour? Rich countries are no better. They
might have more material goods but
Yogis when they invited me to a function,
about a month ago and there I saw a
inside they are even more troubled than
we are. We, in India have a certain group of, may be two hundred
three
degree of contentment, We have a rich hundred people, old, young, middle aged
culture behind us, we have wonderful and children. They all seemed like happy
tradition. Our marvelous traditions have family. They had come from different
a very happy blend of materialism and parts of the country. All were together,
spiritualism. In the West, spiritualism happy and cheerful, with a face, which
has declined and therefore, there is exuded a certain amount of divinity. They
more inner turmoil. Everywhere, the were happy and peaceful, very different
people are looking for something. They from the usual crowd you see, full of
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 March - April, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Valuime-XVI, Insue:3-4
about the best as anywhere in the world,
tension, anger and bitterness; nothing
seemed to affect them. One thing There is no country better than India,
touched me most was that several
there are no people better than Indians,
if only we remember and become
Indians. Being born in India is not enough,
ladies came one by one, some of them
with tears in their eyes, came to my wife,
while I was sitting by her side saying,
we must respect the values, which make
"Mother, you have saved me and my son, India a great country, and Indians, the
wise people. Our tradition is marvellous,
who had gone astray, had taken to drugs
and alcohol and has now been saved. very very rich. But we sometimes cease
He has come back to the family. Now we to be ourselves. Now, if we become true
Indians in the path of wisdom, which our
are joyous family. How can we thank you
forefathers laid down for us and we really
enough for this?" Another lady comes
develop spiritually ourselves the way this
along and says", My daughter was going
lady, my wife is propagating, I have no
the way, we did not like and your Sahaja
Yoga has brought her back to the family
doubt at all, that a wonderful spiritual
and now we are a united and happy
uplifting is well on the way.
family again". To my way of thinking,
With these few words I want to
even if one individual can be saved in express my deep gratitude to all of you
this fashion, it is a unique achievement. for the love that you are giving my
wife,
If two can be saved it is better but if because you represent a fulfillment of
dozens and hundreds can be saved it is
her dream; it was her dream to build up
a certain togetherness-a togetherness of
marvellous. I feel this is a movement
which holds great promise for humanity, spiritualism, a certain awareness of
provided it is pursued strictly in ultimate reality. Therefore, your presence
accordance with your values. Values are here is to me the embodiment, the
very very important, particularly in fulfiliment of a dream she always had. I
today's worid. Though, there has been want to thank you for all the love and
a decline all over the world in these affection you have for her. I thank you
very much for the kindness shown to me
values which established our human
society, yet we need to revive our values, today. I can only say that if in any way,
and sustain them. I want to assure you my activities can be of slightest
assistance to her, she has them; She
that values in India, my own country, and
I say so in all humility and sincerity, are has all her time for Sahaja Yoga and I
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 March-April, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue 3-4
21
wish She had countries, Australia and of course, India
am very happy about it. I
not twentyfour but forty-eight hours in a is the motherland for this. May this.
day. Whatever is available, She devotes
movement grow. May more Sahaja Yogis
herself in a very nice way. It is always participate in its activities and may we
revive in India the great Indian spiritual
embarrassing to talk about one's own
wife but this relationship is just a fact values of which we should justly feel
of life and there is a higher relationship proud. I shall conclude row, by thanking
you for the honour you have done me
that you have with Her.
There are many qualities in Her,
today and the very thoughtful gift which
which you may not perhaps see. She you have chosen to present to me
has believed in not taking but in giving Goddess Lakshmi.
always. You know we have relations of Lakshmi shower on you all her
May Goddess
all kinds, some are well to do; many not
blessings- Always.
Later, Her Holiness Mataji
so well to do; some are poor, some are
in need and whoever gathered within our
addressed the gathering thus:
It is very embarrassing in this
precincts at any stage of our service
life, whatever we had, it was always way to speak about Mr. Srivastava.
shared between my children and others Today, I am very happy that you are
children in exactly the same way, and honouring him because if he was not
there never was the slightest difference supporting me I could not have done
between our own daughters and others' anything. Apart, from that, as he said
daughters or sons who had gathered. about values, I have yet to come across
This was from the very beginning. This a person who has values as Mr.
is the kind of person that She has always Srivastava himself has. The difference
been and therefore, I am not surprised is that you can imbibe values after
that She is flowering into a spiritual self-realization very easily, but even
person. Divinity is her own right. This is before self- realization he has them. He
not something which has just happened is a very honest man. He bought ships
taday: It has been there for sometime. worth crores and crores of rupees and
It is becoming known more, now. The never he thought of any kind of
movement is spreading. It is a dishonesty and he is a man of great
movement which is voluntary. U.K., discipline. I think what we lack is
France, Germany and other European discipline. As it is, the countries which
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 March - April. 2004
The Divine Coof Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue
3-4
are disciplined have- themselves grown for three months. It is a great sacrifice
very much and helped others to grow.
but because he has seen that this is the
But if Sahaja Yogis do not have discipline way, he not only allows me, but you
know how generous he is about
of Sahaja Yoga, then Sahaja Yoga will
We see things and even
be like any other nonsensical institution. everything.
Mr. Srivastava's discipline is so great understand rationally that this is good,
that I do not know how he manages it. still they are not identified with our selves.
For example, for time, he is so While I see in him, his own discipline;
particular, so also for consideration of when he rationally accepts something or
thinks that it is correct then he just does
others, for attending to his work, to see
the people who come to see him, to see it. This is something which you have to
what he has to say, how far to say what learn from someone who has done this
all his life. l used to be amazed, as to
to say at the right time. There is so
much Sahaja in him, so much inborn in how he used to identify! There is so
much integration in his actions and his
him that at the right time, he will say the
understanding. This is something which
right thing. And above all the brilliance,
he has, so much that he comes to the really surprises me, because after
right conclusion immediately. He was realization after great Tapasya, one can
not a realised soul, now I think he has
achieve such an integration. We say
touched the Sahasrara. But even before thing and do another, like so many
this, he would reach the right conciusion, people, who criticise this, criticise that
As you have seen about Sahaja Yoga but when it comes to them, they will do
also, he has taken a right attitude. To themselves the same. If he has risen
high; many people say that it is Mataji's
take the right attitude is only possible, if
you are really intelligent, otherwise, blessings even if it is partly that; still I
those who are not, cannot, Pure would say that anyone like him would
intelligence means that there is no bias rise specially in a country like ours,
of ego or super-ego, no conditioning and where people see the honesty and
integrity and high moral character as
you could see it in its pure form. You can
see that he has allowed me to work. To something special. Since I have come
to India this time, he has been honoured
accept that I should do all this work is in
by so many institutions and so many
itself a very big sacrifice for a man. None
people that I was amazed, how much he
of you would allow your wife to leave you
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Tre Divire Caol Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue :3-4
March - April, 2004
23
is respected. After all, he is like any other
to go round to
be necessary for us
bureaucrat, otherwise, but the way he
is identified with the ideals, he is a man
persuade them.
Another thing is that when I was
of ideals. I am not an easy wife to live a child, my mother used to say that only
I do not allow
Shankar can marry you, the way you are
with because as you know
any hanky-panky in my own life. When innocent and the way you are generous;
he joined Indian Administrative Service, because I saw anybody poor or needy I
you won't believe that he was first would take out everything from my
selected in Indian Foreign Service, He mother's 'Bhandar' (store) and give it.
She would say "I do not know whom you
was getting much more pay but I told him
that first we have to serve our own
would marry; the poor fellow will have to
country and not go abroad to foreign be poor like Shankar because you will
countries. He accepted to join I.A.S. not give away everything that he will have".
because I asked him to but because he But I am like that, it is my Nature, If
thought it was proper that we should anybody says, I like a thing, I will forget
serve our motherland. He suffered a lot
and will give it to him. He has a complaint
in L.A.S. but he still stuck to his ideals. I that I have even given away our
think, one should really imbibe from him engagement ring, But from one side I
this, discipline of mind. This discipline gave from other side it came. Now he
of the mind is that, whatever one should
knows that. This nature of mine is not
accept with one's mind, should be in
easy for any husband to tolerate; the way
one's action. You should be proud of
I am generous. Again, my overloving
nature for all of you. he understands that.
I have tremendous feeling for you. Or
your virtue. As you know, what company
and status he has but he does not drìnk
a drop of wine. One may just say that it
course, when you come and disturb me,
is because of Mataji. But, I have never
the people have been disturbing me
told him to do so. Of course, I have said much more now. Something happens,
that I den't like drinking, but have never they must think of Mother, they must
told him not to drink; I am not in that way
come. The emergency exists always%3B
interfering at all. I have never told him somewhere with somebody. He has
been very patient in going through all this.
about Sahaja Yoga also in this way. But
it is his own understanding. If the people
He can understand me as my husband,
have that intelligence, then it would not he has all those qualities from his
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Divine Coal Sreeze, Volume-XVI, Issue 3-4
March-April, 2004
24
childhood. He is a self-made man. live your life is important.
Also, it is not easy to be my
absolutely honest person, he never tells
children, because I know what you do, I
a lie, no hanky-panky, he never gossips.
know everything about you. I also
gossips. Again, he has created an image correct you, you know that But when
in his international world that it is a you are sticking to me, it also shows that
family that he is looking after. So you you belong to a category of people, bent
hate gossiping myself and he never
people aiso have to understand, if you upon evolving and being better people
have to be Sahaja Yogis, you have to through inner transformation. To be a
imbibe all these values, otherwise
Sahaja Yogi is not an easy thing; that
you
Sahaja-Yoga will be completely doomed.
can pay some money and become
Sahaja Yogis have to come up, they members and become Mataji's disciples.
have to decide that they have not to tell Even where you have become my
lie's, they have to be honest, they have disciples, you have to pass certain tests
to believe that the God, the Almighty is and you have to work hard for it, you
their father and He is going to look after
have to do a lot of Tapasya, living in your
We have to change the family. That you have been doing, so I
His children.
map of this world, particularly of our feel very happy and proud of you as l am
country. It needs people of character of him (Sir C. P.Srivastava) and I would
and people who are fearless,
1o will like you to see how he has led his life.
You can ask people, how he is so honest,
face life as honest people, We have not
lost anything; you have seen that with
so good, so compassionate, to all the
God's Grace when we had nothing also, people, Whatever are our defects, we
we had a theft should see them first of all; we should
we were happy. Once
and all my saris and all his clothes, not see the defects of others. We,
everything was lost, nothing was left. As
Indians have particular type of defects,
we had little money at that time and he which we should try to cure. The other
had no clothes, so I told him to have his
day, in our programme, some people
clothes first and I couldn't buy them for came, who are starting an agitation
Maharashtra, I told them, "there is no
in
myself; I had only one silk sari for seven
years. But we managed it and it worked
out so well after that. Whether you have
use of starting an agitation because when
you had the Govt., what did you do?" At
it or not, is not the point, the way you the most, you would form the Govt. again
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 March-Apri
il, 2004
The Divine Cool Brez
eze, Voluma-XVI, IBSue 3-4
what will you do then? They replied, difficult to sacrifice. I could see other
what could we do now, some sugar
women who had such a lot of ornaments
and this and that but I have never felt like
magnate has taken so much
money,
having these. Instead, I am proud of the
has hoarded all the things and has raised
fact that my husband is a man of virtue.
the prices and now he is cashing
because he has been paying for the This was the greatest ornament and
election" ! said, "Now you decide, from pride that a woman can have. In the
the Sahaja Yoga point of view, that you same way all Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja
will not vote for a man who gives you Yoginis must think of virtues. We have a
money or sells votes for money. Even little bit to assert our will power
for food, we well our votes; we do not everybody has little weaknesses. Instead
have self-restraint." At least Sahaja of justifying it, they should just try to
Yagis must start. Let us all combine
assert own will-power to cure it. I am sure
a day will come when Mr. Srivastava will
together and decide that neither will we
see this country changing in real fashion,
have any dishonest methods from any
as he himself has been changing and
corner, at any cost nor will we have
anyone elected whom we know is not may be one of these days, he will work
honest and upright. We will have to fight side by side with us. We need such
it, then only our country is going to people who are seekers of divinity, and
have come on this earth to transform this
improve. Now, to begin with we will have
pattern of things.
to do some sacrifices, as you have seen
May God bless you!
I had also to sacrifice. But it is not so
Do not go to the garden of flowers!
O friend! go not there;
In your body is the garden of flowers.
Take your seat on the thousand petals of the Lotus,
and there gaze upon the infinite beauty.
Kabir
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Report From Rahuri
(From Nirmala Yoga - 1981)
The turn of the year brought a brief stay at Mr. Dhumal's residence
indescribable blessings to all Sahaja Yogis nearby, they were joined by fifty Sahaja
of Rahuri and surrounding areas when our
Yogis from Australia, U.K., France, Spain,
Portugal and Switzerland; all had darshan
Divine Mother spent four days amongst
them. The visit was unique and of of the lotus feet of the Divine Mother. The
unprecedented joy because Her Holiness 'Haldi' ceremony was performed; in
Mataji's programme not only included the preparation of their marriage, the
blissful Kundalini Awakening sessions at bridegroom and the bride were smeared
various places but also for the first time
with turmeric paste according to the local
Shri Ganesh Havan was performed on
custom.
31st December 1980, and the first day of
In the afternoon, there was mass
1981, became a day of great rejoicing,
Kundalini-awakening function held in newly
when our dear brother Gregoire from constructed Vitthal-Rukmani temple in the
Switzerland was married to Catherine, in
village Aradgaon, which Mataji lovingly calls
as Awadgaon (meaning King of the
a colorful ceremony performed according
to the local Hindu rites in the holy villages). Near this village a Sahaja yoga
presence of Divine Mother with the full Ashram is proposed to be built for which
villagers have already donated land. Later
participation of about four hundred Sahaja
Yogis of all ages, who forgetting the in the evening, Mother visited another
superficial differences of age, sex, village named Manori-Renuka. (Renuka is
one of the names of Devi). A new centre
language or nationality drank deeply into
of Sahaja Yoga has come into existence.
the gaiety of spiritual togetherness,
expressing itself through spontaneous, The villagers are much impressed here
tremendous flow of love and affection from because the villagers, who got their self-
realization and became Sahaja Yogis were
their hearts, their faces, visibly shining with
joy like children bubbling; with delight
able to completely give up drinking. Mataji
was seated in a bullock-cart and taken out
coming home together to the warm and
in procession by the villagers. In her
protected lap of their ever loving Mother.
On the morning of 29th December
speech, Mataji expressed her joy in working
with rural masses, because they are more
1980, Sahaja Yogis from surrounding
areas received Her Holiness Mataji at innocent, religious minded and have
Rahuri Railway Station. Thereafter, during stronger faith in the presence of Divine
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 ze, Volume-XVI, issue:3-4
The Divine Copot Brea
March- April, 2004
power than the urban people. About two affection, forgetting barriers of language
thousand persons got Realization at this
and nationality. She saw how Vasundhra
Occasion.
(The Mother Earth) was also overjoyed at
On the morning of Tuesday, the the ecstatic dancing of so many realisec
30th December, 1980, Mataji first visited souls and expressed it in the tremendous
the village Takali-Minya, which is named flow of chaitanya (BIlissful Divine
after Muslim Auliya Saint, who lived there.
Vibrations) which was experienced by all.
The dancing could be compared with
The Mother said in her speech "that in the
past, there are very few flowers like Minya
Raskreeda. With the grace of Her Holiness
of this village, but now the time has come
Mataji, a temple of Adishakti is proposed
when there will be very many flowers on
to be built at this village soon.
The last day of the year-31st
the tree through Sahaja Yoga". She asked
the foreign Sahaja Yogis present to visit December, 1980, will be remembered in
the holy spot where the Minya was
the history of Sahaja Yoga, as Her Holiness
cremated; and enjoy the vibrations there.
Mataji was worshiped for the first time as
Next, she visited, Musalwadi, a
Shri Ganesha, with His thousand names
village of great religious history. Here, Her Holiness Mataji mentioned that the first
Mataji was taken out in a procession. She
piece of land and a big house for the first
rode in a bullock-cart beautifully decorated Sahaja Yoga Ashram has been made
with flowers and palm leaves, preceded available at the village Sangam near
by Sahaja Yogis and local villagers, at the Pandharpur (Dist. Sholapur) through the
accompaniment of the melodies of Indian donation by a gracious lady (mother-in-law
music and playing of typical Maharashtrian of Sh. Dhumal) who was present at the
"Lazim". Foreign Sahaja Yogis soon
Occasion. Through Havana, we have
caught up the local enthusiasm and offered our thanks and love to Shri
spontaneously joined the joyous dancing
Ganesha, who has purified the atmosphere
of the rural bretheren, and were soon by removing the Badhas. Now, the land
for Sahaja Yoga Ashrams elsewhere, also
will be available more easily and these will
transported into the ecstasy of thoughtless
state. In Her speech Her Holiness Mataji
expressed Her great delight at the sight of
children, brothers and sisters coming
come up soon at different places.
During the evening, the Kundalini-.
awakening programme was held at
together from distant parts of the world and
Mahatma Phule Agriculture University,
greeting each other with so much love and
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 March- April, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Ispue
Rahuri and was attended by the Vice- Gregoire, the author of first book on Her
chancellor, faculty students members, Holiness Mataji " The Advent" and Miss
Agriculture Scientists Sahaja Yogis from OCatherine was to be held. Next Morning,
abroad and different cities of India, viz.,
on the 1st January, 1981 was celebrated
Bombay, Delhi, Pune, Satara, Dhule, this marriage. The Sahaja Yogis of Rahuri,
Ahmadnagar, Shrigonda, Kopargaon, formed the Bride's party, while Mr.
Niphad and adjoining villages of Rahuri in Gregoire's brother, Arnew, his wite and his
large numbers. Her Holiness Mataji said sister and all other Sahaja Yogis from
that there are limitations to the scientific foreign countries and different places in
India formed bridegroom's party. All ladies,
research. The real search should be inside
the human being. Man should actualise his
from bridegroom's party, according to local
custom, put on beautiful bangles, provided
potential by focussing his attention inside
and should attain the higher plane of life.
by bride's party. The Melodious strains of
This can be achieved through Sahaja Yoga Shehnai, heralded the start of the
and is the right of all human beings of ceremonies, in gaily decorated school
different countries, religions, castes, sex compound in typical festive atmosphere.
and age all over the world, To attain the Mr. Gregoire, dressed like a typical Indian
higher plane of life is the further step of Bridegroom with turban on his head, and
evolution of mankind in the play of the sword in his hand, mounted on a well-
Divine, It is possible only through Sahaja decorated white horse and went in
Yoga in the chaos of this Kaliyuga and procession accompanied by a playing
real sense
band and about three hundred Sahaja Yogis
hence, Sahaja yoga is in a
forming the bridegroom's party to the
temple of Shri Mataji (Hanumana) for pujan
Mahayoga.
Gregoire marries Catherine
and then returned to the marriage Mandap.
on NEW YEAR DAY
The main ceremony began with
pujan of Her Holiness Mataji as Gauri by
the bride and followed by 'Kanyadan' by Mr.
The night of 31st December 1980
and 1st January 1981 was of a very great
and Mrs. Dhumal, who officiated as bride's
delights. The Mother went to the Public parents. The marriage ceremony was
School at Rahuri Co-operative Sugar performed followed by the Hom and
Factory where foreign Sahaja Yogis were Saptpadi. Then the newly married couple
residing and where the marriage of Mr. sought blessings of Her Holiness Mataji.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Tlie Blvine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue 3-4
March- April, 2004
This was followed by Lunch, which was of enjoying collective Bhajans-singing, on
hosted by Mr. Gregoire. The marriage the platform in the company of our Mother.
concluded after presents-token of their Next morning, all the Sahaja Yogis,
mutual love-were exchanged between including the newly wedded couple left on
the newly married couple and Sahaja Yogis
a sight-seeing tour of Aurangabad, Ajanta
from various places.
and Ellora Caves via the nearby hallowed
During the same night Her Holiness
Mataji returned back to Bombay. All the
spot, Seeta Nahani, the place where Shri
Ram and Seetaji lived during their Vanvas
Sahaja Yogis were present to see the (exile in forest).
Mother off at the Rahuri Railway Station.
The four day visit of Her Holiness
Since the train was late by a couple of Mataji was full of immense joy, which
on every
hours, it provided further opportunity to us
progressively increased
succeeding day.
Could you see the tides of that breath you would cease to see all else,
And if you eould hear the whispering of the dream you would hear no
other sound.
But you do not see, nor do you hear, and it is well.
The veil that clouds your eyes shall be lifted by the hands that wore it,
And the clay that fills your ears shall be pierced by those fingers that
kneaded it.
And you shall see.
And you shall hear.
Yet you shall not deplore having known blindness, nor regret having
been deaf.
For in that day you shall know the hidden purposes in all things
And you shall bless darkness as you would bless light.
Khalil Gibran
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Words of Christ the Lord, the Aum and the
Amen, the beginning of the Creation, the most beloved
son of Shri Mataji
On Vibrations:
"I am the living bread which came down from heaven; if any one
eats of this bread, he will live forever; and the bread which I shall
John 6.51
give for the life of the world is my flesh".
If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink. He who believes in
me, as the scripture has said, "One of his heart shall flow rivers of
living waters".
John 7.57
On Agya Chakra:
"Strive to enter by the narrow door; for many, I tell you, will seek to
Luke 13.24
enter and will not be able".
"I am the door; if any one enters by me, he will be saved, and will
John 10.9
go in and out and find pasture"
On Kundalini's Action:
"To what shall I compare the Kingdom of God? It is like leaven that a
woman took and hid in three measures of flour till it was all leavened3;
What is the Kingdom of God like? And to what shall I compare it? it
is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and sowed in his
garden; and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air
Luke 13.18
made nests in its branches"
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 On 26th December 1980, Bombay Sahajayogis along with their foreign
counterparts offered very warm tributes to Sir C.P. Srivastava for his
appointment as Secretary General of IMCO (International Maritime
Consultative Organisation) successively for the third time.
Following is the text of the Reply given by Sir C. P. Srivastava,
on this occasion
Dear Members of the Universal responsibility which the Govt, of the
country entrusted to me. I am deeply
grateful to Her. But today what I want to
state is that I am not grateful to Her but
Sahajyoga family,
1 am very greatly honoured and
very over whelmingly touched by the
I am very proud of Her. And why amn 1
proud of her?I am proud because, at a
time when the world is afflicted
most generous observations which have
been made about me and about my
I can do to deserve
work......whatever
the love and affection that you have
everywhere, whether you are in the East
or in the West, whether you are in the
North or in the South, everywhere you
chosen to shower upon me. You have
mentioned that I have been sacrificing
find a certain feeling of unrest, of
in order that my wife who is Mataji to you
would be able to devote her time for unhappiness or a little frustration and
people all over the world are wanting to
Sahaja yoga. What I want to inform you
is; it is not a sacrifice, it's a great
know, "how can we all members of this
universal world community live together
privilege. When we got married, and that
in happiness and in peace." This is the
was more than a third of a century ago
question before every thinking individual
in the world today. And there must be
(34 years ago) we had our family, a little
family, and we agreed among ourselves
that our first duty would be to bring up
some answer to that, because after all
our two daughters. We also agreed that
we have to live together, and answer
really is that all of us whether we belong
once the daughters got married, She
would be free to devote her time as much
as possible to the service of humanity.
to one country or another, we are
members of one great universal family.
After all, if we just remember, that the
While our children were growing up-she
gave all her time and devotion to them
whole of universe that we know of there
to bring them up and she gave me
is only one planet on which there is life,
tremendous support. Without her such as we have and that, we are the
most fortunate persons to be those
support, it would have been impossible
for me to apply
created by the Almighty to be the best
myself for the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breuze, Volume-XVI, Issue
Marchi - Aprl. 2004
3-4
of creations, that itself is a very great family a Sahajyoga family. Sahajyogis
wonderful
privilege and the least that we should and Yoginis. What a
somehow do is to live together as expression they had, what a feeling of
brothers and sisters genuinely, not internal peace and calm they had, what
merely thro' lips but thro' hearts and it is feelings of togetherness they had. That
most important for us to come to that gave me a very deep impression, a
stage. I have a feeling that the world is feeling that, that family had been
now ready for a new revolution. There transformed from desperate individuals
was the industrial revolution in the 19th coming from different parts of the
century which brought economic country into a family mended together,
prosperity to many parts of the world, knitted together with one purpose, viz.,
thus bringing prosperity to other parts. realising that we are members of one
But that is not enough. For human beings family. They all wanted to assist each
material prosperity is important, but it is other to help each other to grow together
not the ultimate aim. There is much and to develop spiritually. Now', this is
mor o in a human being than a mere
a marvellous task, I think the world needs
desire for material well being the this more than anything else. This
spiritual part. It is only through spiritual country needs this much more than
attainment, through spiritual satisfaction anything else. It is the transformation, it
that genuine happiness can be attained, is the uplifting of the individual from
and there must be some spark which within, which is most important. If that
has to light and the source of the spark uplifting does not come, you will have
is before you. This lady. So when I say I conflicts, you will not have the kind of
am not sacrificing at all, indeed I am homogeneity or goodwill, which is so
feeling to be a part of you, feeling to be essential for all of us to be able to live
a part of this great endeavour, and I am
proud of Her and the work She is doing.
together in peace. So, She is giving you
spiritual guidance and I have no doubt
that I am one of those thousands and
I might tell you something more.
Very recently I had a unique experience,
thousands who admire her, respect her
She is a very busy person and if I may and my fullest support is available to Her
say so without being immodest, I am also in everyway for the work that she is
very busy with my work, but one evening
She invited me very kindly to a function
doing. But, I think, support is not the right
word because She does not need
like this in London. There I saw another support from anybody; but you see you
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Mirch - April, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, tssun: 3-4
kngun
|
must forgive me becauIse I have a groupism. I do not believe
dichotomy. It is very difficult for me to confrontation, I do not believe that by
forget that I am Her husband, so please fighting, the world can get along. I do not
do forgive the expression that I have believe that the developing world can
used but, it was in my capacity as a develop by fighting the developed world.
| believe and I believe very sincerely
consort and I want you to know that the
work She is doing is, to my way of and genuinely, that all of us can get
thinking, very very important for together only by way of togetherness, by
humanity. In fact, I feel that it is only by co-operation and this is the message
uplifting men and women everywhere thati give continuously." Now this is only
throughout the world, that we can really one aspect of Sahaj Yoga, only an
become worthy of the Almighty God who aspect, but this is the message that I give
to the organisation that am privileged
Now, in IMCO, the Organisation to serve and I am most gratified and
that I am privileged to serve, I am very delighted that the governments as they
has created us all.
grateful for the kind words about my re-
are represented in this Maritime
election. It was most gratifying. Perhaps Organisation of the United Nations
you know that this was unanimous, I System, accept that pliilosophy and
mention this only for one reason, viz that they accept that by working together the
you would hear that there are many people of the world engaged in Maritime
issues that divide the world. On very few activity can make progress, which would
issues the Governments of the World be satisfactory from the point of view of
agree. Now, if they agreed upon re- everybody and if they re-elected me
election, whether it was Soviet Union, unanimously, honour me greatly and my
United States, United Kingdom, or country but to my way of thinking they
Developing Countries or China or honoured the principle which is to guide
the whole of United Nations system. So,
Pakistan, well, they agreed to uphold a
certain principle and in some way in some way there has been action and
interaction between Sahaja Yoga on one
perhaps the message of Sahaja Yoga
was being given to them through me side and United Nations activity on the
other. I have only a small responsibility
coming from Her. And the message that
I always give to the member countries in the United Nations system but to
of the Organisation is: "VWe are not the extent that I can, it is my duty and it
has been my endeavour always to serve
divided into groups. I do not believe in
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 March- April 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze. VoluTIe-XVI, issue: 3-4
the World Community in a far more
of awareness, new level of human
relationship based on love, affection, and
elevated sphere-the spiritual sphere.
Now to friends who have come realisation that human beings are born
from abroad, as an Indian I would like to for great purposes. They are not born
extend a very hearty and a very warm merely to live a routine life but the
welcome. I feel very greatly honoured purposes are spiritual-much highly
and privileged that you should be here elevated. For your success, for your
at this time that you should spend your happiness and your wellbeing I will pray
new Year Day in our country and I want
and with these few words I want to thank
to take this opportunity to wish you the you once again for the very very kind
words in which all speakers referred me
very very best for 1981 and the best that
today and I may also thank her for all that
I can do is to say let Sahaja Yoga which
is universal, grow and grow and develop
She is doing for me by supporting me
really. Thank You Very Much.
and really lift up the wored to a new leve!
(Nirmala Yoga - 1981)
The Breath Divine
The Breath Divine went forth upon the morning hills.
Albion moved
Upon the rock he open'd his eyelids in pain3;
in pain he moved.
His stoney members he saw England. Ah, shall the dead
live again?
The Breath Divine went forth over the morning hills.
Albion rose.
William Blake
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Shri Adi Shakti Puja, Canajoharie,
New York (USA), June 20, 1999
Fifty-four adorations were offeced to Shri Mataji by the
U.S. collective for Adi Shakti Puja.
(Shri Mataji reviewed and edited them, and added the last ten
Herself)
1. Shri Adi Shakti, You are the Principle that created the fourteen bhuvanas of
universes; You are beyond our comprehension,
2. The AUM is Your Sound which resonates Your three powers throughout the
universe.
3. The joy of Your Attention, chidvilas, is expressed in all Your Creation.
4. In the Play of the Divine, God Almighty acts by Your Powers.
5. The Breath and Desire of Shri Sada Shiva are One with You.
6.The Paramchaitanya, which is Your Power, makes the stars and the heavens
ring with joy for the delight of Shri Sada Shiva.
7. Indeed, You are the Source of Cosmic Energy. This Power rediates from You as
the Finest Ethers of Divine Love.
8. Beyond matter, beyond consciousness, the Grace of Adi Shakti is where reality
can be known.
9. You are the Ineffable, the Immeasurable. We call You Pneuma, Divine Breath,
the Living Waters, yet You are so much more than this. Only the Deities have the
Darshan of Your Greater Powers.
10. God Almighty in His Dance unifies with Your Complete Power as Shri Adi Shakti.
11. You are the Primordial Power of the Holy Spirit that mothered Shri Jesus.
12. You are the Creatrix, the Feminie Creative Energy that sustains the Peace of
God Almighty.
13. Through Your Mahalaxmi Power, we experience the Timeless Peace of the Fourth
Dimension.
14. Shri Adi Shakti, You enable God Almighty to do His Sacred work. Verily, you are
the Most sublime Power in the cosmos.
15. God Almighty takes charge in a way swift and suprising if anyone acts against
shri Adi Shakti.
16. Shri Ganesha, Your first creation, resonates in the carbon atom, the essence
of life. May He reawaken innocence and wisdom in the very cells of humankind.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 March-April, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, VolumesXVI, issue :3-4
17. You created the World of the Divine, and the World of the Evolving. May our
Evolution merge with this Divine Play.
18. O, Adi Shakti, Evolution is the force that gives rise to Your Divine Play in the
lives of humanity.
19. The Adi Kundalini formed the primordial chakras, and opened the doors to the
unfolding of life. 20. It is You who created the Kundalini of our Mother Earth.
21. The simplest flower has its fraction of You, the grandest tree has its share as
well. 22. All Nature's Creatures are Yours, from the Beauty of Mother Earth's Green
Sari to the Majesty of the Tiger and the Lion. 23. The Gravity of Mother Earth, and
of all Your Heavenly Spheres, is controlled by Your Power Magnificent, 24. Your
Power, the Paramchaitanya, adjusts nature and its elements, and its all pervading
power opens us to Your Benevolence. 25. Shri Adi Shakti is the Artistic Creator of
the Mother Earth and those who respect the Mother Earth are loved by You.
26. Shri Adi Shakti, the Land of Vishuddhi is one aspect of Your Vast creation. You
will raise the Vibrations to transform the people of this land.
27. The native peoples of America worshipped Adi Shakti as the Great Mother, and
they respected the land as sacred. May this attitude return to all others who live
here and enjoy the land's bounty.
28. The mystery of living processes is Yours and Yours alone, and cannot be
duplicated by any personality. Let humanity be aware of this.
29.O, Ritambhara Pragnya, You are One of the Powers of Shri Adi Shakti, You are
the Power of all living work. 30. You regulate and organise all life.
31. You came, Shri Adi Shakti, as Surabhi, the Divine Cow, emerging from the
Vishnuloka at Gokul, where Shri Krishna has His Childhood. 32. Shri Adi Shakti, let
the feminine qualities of the Sahaja Yoginis manifest through the beauty of
meditation, surrender and self-esteem. 33. You give to women the regal gentleness
of Shaleenata to care for their families and to be the preservers of society. 34.
Your Quality of Sharada Devi gives authority over the truth, art, music and drama.
35. You also came as Sati Devi, establishing a Royal Dharma to which we aspire.
36. O, Vag Devi, Goddess of Language, You give inspiration to the great poets and
saints. 37. Shri Adi Shakti, to describe You is the work of poets and saints who
awkwardly try to embrace a mystery on the horizon. 38. You are Para Shakti, the
Power beyond all Powers. 39. Give us, O Adi Shakti, greater humility so that we
can gain some small glimpse of Your Glory. 40. Make us like the Sufis and the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 March-Apil, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue:3-4
Gnostics, adoring You at every moment. Your Power of Mahalaxmi bridges over
the Void to allow the Kundalini of the seekers to ascend. 41. Thank You, O Adi
Shakti, for the seeking which brought us to Sahaja Yoga. You now lift up humanity
into the Omega of the Last Judgment. 42. We pray that Adi Shakti's Love continues
to protect all the saints and seekers around the world. 43. Shri Adi Shakti, Your
Work is greater than any. You created the pithas, the chakras, nature and humanity,
and its subtle workings. May the complexity of Your Work humble us down
completely. 44. Your Love gives power to the Bandhan, which directs the vibrations.
45. Your Power of Kundalini brings freedom that is Divine. It is the only true freedom.
46. Flow through us freely. Help us give vibrations to all with Your Photograph of
Living Vibrations. 47. Your Mahamaya Swarupa allows us to be near You, and it
shields us from the Awesome Might that flows from You. 48. Shri Adi Shakti, please
give us deeper powers of introspection so that we become self cleansing and self
aware. 49. You are the Mother who desired that human beings be mirrors for God
Almighty. 50. You have crafted beautiful mirrors of the Spirit in the Sahaja Yogis to
help redeem humanity. 51. Your Compassion protects us from the anger of God
Almighty. 52. Through Maya, humanity forgot the principles of life. Through Sahaja
Yoga, humanity now remembers and absorbs the vibrations of Shri Adi Shakti. 53.
May Your Evolutionary Force bring humanity to the inspired existence of the Golden
Age. 54. You have disentangled us from the clutches of false pride, jealousy,
attachment, greed, false identification and violence.
55. You have incarnated on this earth for the Last Judgment.
56. You are the Source of Cognitive Science and the Torsion Area.
57. Whatever human beings plan, You dismantle to destroy their egos: With one
You destroy people like Hitler.
subtle movement of Your finger,
58. You give powerful advice with very subtle humor.
59. You correct Sahaja Yogis, never by hrash words, but with very loving, gentle
affection. 60. You explain the subtle meaning of all the Scriptures.
61. You expose the falsehood in very direct ways.
62. You do not know any fear and You give complete secutity to all Sahaja Yogis.
63. You respect Your Children and love them to make them perfect models for the
rest of humanity.
64, You have given Sahaja Yogis sinless fun and a life of complete joy.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Inherent hurdles in sustaining Our Realisation and How
to Overcome them
London
December 10, 1979
All the worldly things so called are
Today is the day for us to remember
that Christ was born on this earth as a just like a dry grass 'trinavat'. So He was
kept in a dry grass. To many it makes very
human being. He came on this earth and
the task that was before him was to unhappy, and they feel very sorry that
Christ, the one who came to save us, was
enlighten human awareness, with the
sense of understanding which I say kept under such conditions and why not
actualization within the awareness of God provided him with something better.
human beings that they are not this body But to such people it does not matter,
whether you are lying in a dried grass or in
but they are the spirit. The message of
Christ is this revelation, that is, you are your
the stable or in the palaces. Everything is
spirit, not your body. And He showed by just the same, for it does not touch them.
his resurrection how we ascended into the They are so detached and they are
completely in joy. They are the masters of
realm of spirit, which He was, because He
themselves. Nothing can master them. No
was Pranava, He was Bramha, He was
matter can master them, no comfort can
Maha vishnu as I have told you about His
master them. They are masters of
birth and when He came on this earth in a
body like a human being He wanted to complete comforts within themselves.
They have achieved all the comforts within
show another thing that spirit has nothing
to do with money, has nothing to do with themselves. They are satisfied people.
That's why they are kings. They are called
power. It is all powerful, all pervading but
is born in a stable, not in a palace or to a
as kings not those kings who run after
king but He was born to a very ordinary things or those kings who seek comforts
in life. I mean if you have comforts well and
person - a carpenter. Because if you are
the king, as we say in Hindi language good, if you don't have well and good,
Badshah', then nothing is greater than you. makes no difference. So, many people
specially in Latin America when I went there
Isn't it? It means simply that. Nothing is
but we can't understand why Christ was
higher than you, neither anything can
barn as a poor man. This is again a human
decorate you, because whatever you are,
concept about God is. See he wants to
you are at the highest.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 March - April, 2004
Thị Divirie Cool Briseza. Volume-XVI Issue:3-4
save us because He had many aspects I
command God. Be born in a king's palace.
You cannot order him about. We have our
should say, not only to save human beings
He came on this earth. There were many
own concepts about God that why should
he be a poor man. Why should he be more aspects. Also human beings have
helpless? He never showed his demand that they must be saved. Why?
One should I mean from God's angle if you
helplessness. He was
much more
see, why should they be saved all of them?
dynamic than all your kings and all your
What have they done for God? How can
politicians put together. He was not afraid
of anyone. Whatever he had to say, He you demand God that you must save us?
said it. He was not afraid of crucifixion or
Can you? You cannot ask for that. So, he
any such punishments, so called. It is only
the human beings, you see who have these
did come to create the passage between
as you see here, the Vishudhi and the
Sahsrara, this Agya. In the primordial being
false ideas about life and that's why they
want to put these ideas on to God also and
the viraat. He was born there to open that
try to make him follow their own conflicts.
door. In evolution every incarnation has
God is not your concept. He is not a
come on this earth to open a particular door
within us and to create that opening or that
concept at all. To also say that concept is
enlightenment in our awareness. So, Christ
after all a concept is also a concept. This I
have found out very recently. This is came precisely for opening this small little
door which is constricted by our ego and
another myth people carry. Those who say
superego. Ego and superego are the two
that oh! concept is a concept, alright Mataji
says, alright, so what? But even this is a
byproducts of our thought process. One,
the thoughts that are of the past and the
concept because concept is a thought. You
have to rise beyond thought, at a higher other thoughts of the future. He came to
make that gap to cross that gap and that's
level, into thoughtless awareness, where
you are not in thought but you are in the how he has sacrificed himself - his body.
For you it is a very big thing of remorse
centre of the thought. In the sense that one
and repentance but for such people it is
thought rises and falls and there is a place
not. It's a play, They have to play a certain
in between. Another thought rises and falls.
You are in the centre of these thoughts. role. That's why I do not understand why
do you show him to be such a lanky-panky
The 'vilamb" as we call it, the time where
you' pause. Then you will understand miserable creature. He was never
Christ. He was here, partly of course to miserable. Such people can never be
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 March-April, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue : 3-4
40
miserable as you are. This is another should be a festival of great joy. For he
brought light for us by which you could see
concept of man that he should be lanky-
that there is someone called as god there
panky, tally, skinny, starved, bones coming
out count them one by one. Horrible I tell is someone who is going to remove this
you. From his childhood to his death he ignorance. This was the first beginning. So,
for us it is necessary to be first joyous and
was jolly person, he was happiness, he
be happy and relaxed and not to take
was joy to make you all happy, to give you
the light of happiness by enlightening your
anything that seriously as we take because
divine life doesn't make you serious
source of joy that is your spirit in your heart
because its all a play, it's a 'Maya' as seen
that he came on this earth not only to. save
you first to give you happiness, to give you in all the rituals that people follow in all the
joy because human beings in their so called religious people. They are too
ignorance and in this tomfoolery are serious to be religious and religious person
unnecessarily beating themselves and is bubbling with laughter. He doesn't know
how to hide his joy as he doesn't know how
destroying themselves. When nobody
asked you to go to pubs to get into trouble.
to control laughter when he sees people
I mean
Nobody has asked you to go to races and
who are unnecessarily serious.
nobody is dead. The way they people say
become bankrupts. Nobody has asked you
to go to horrible gurus and get into is sometimes just don't know what to do
troubles. But you seek your destruction with. They just can't control. So, there is
morning till evening. Then he comes there
nothing in this world for a person like Christ
like a morning flower to make you happy.
to feel sad about and if you really believe
in Him, then please first of all give up your
First, to make you happy, to give you joy.
You see any child you see any child at least
this silly sadness and sulking and sitting
I know myself, I don't know about funny
down and becoming morose, not talking to
people here I mean for them flowers also anyone, silent bores all over. That is not
look like thorns. I mean I don't know how
the way to look at Christ. Se how He went
and talked to the multitudes, how He
they manage that stuff. But you see a child
opened his hands to all the people around
and how he tried to give them happiness.
anywhere, enjoy, such a joy giving thing it
is and this is the child of the divine that
He has said that you are to be born
comes on this earth as a child is the most
again that means He had to do this work
joy giving thing and that's why Christmas
is for all of us, for the whole universe and that you have to get it sometime He
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue : 3-4
March Apri, 2004
had promised that you are to be born again.
Christ is to be born within us. I don't know
you are to be Baptized and you are to be
born again and now in Sahaja Yoga His
promise is being fulfilled. So, be joyous that
what Christians understand out of this.
here at the Agya charka again Christ is born
How do you become born again? Not by
going through a ritual ofi christening within you and he is there and you know
somebody, coming from a theological how you can ask for his help always.
But the main thing that one has to
college cannot make you Christian. Like
in our India, we have some paid Brahmins
understand that the time has come for you
to get all that is promised in the scriptures
as you have your paid people, you see. The
not only in the Bible but all the scriptures
whole day they will eat, drink, be marry and
of the world. The time has come today that
evening time they will come and pray and
you have to become a Christian, a Brahmin,
preach that sort of people. You have to be
a Peer through your Kundalini awakening
only. There is no other way out and that
your last judgment is also now, Only
a person who is authorized by God. Unless
and until you are authorized by God you
cannot give joy and that's why I have seen
all these people, so called big pandits and
the big priests and all of them are so
serious because they are not authorized
through your Kundalini awakening God is
going to judge you. How is He going ta judge
you are otherwise. You think of somebody
now, a person comes now if somebody is
Even on a Christmas day I mean sitting to judge. How? By how many hair
by God,
anybody who comes from a village may dressers you have been to or how many
suits you have stitched for the Christmas,
think that there is a funeral going on and
or what presents you have bought and how
after the funeral they go home and how do
you celebrate, with a champagne? And many cards you have sent and to how
after the funeral, the real funeral also they many people you have sent some other
will celebrate this. I don't know why but they things which may not be very palatable.
will take champagne. How can you That's not the way or is it that at what price
celebrate Christ by insulting Him? He you have bought all the things. The way we
are particular. Which way are we going to
came to enlighten your awareness
be judged by God? Not superficially people
because He respected your awareness,
the point at which it had reached. But you say so what depth have we got lets see,
How far can we go in our depth, At the most
are trying to put it down, Is this the way to
we reach a point where we are nothing but
understand Him and He has promised that
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-43.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI. Issue: 3-4
March April, 2004
a ship. It's a different type of a judgment,
a concept, again. So, whatever depth we
know goes up to only rationality up to the of a personality. You can see how Christ
was judged by human beings and how He
concept point. Beyond that we cannot
reach. So, how can we be judged? How
was judged by God. He came and lived in
do people are judged, if you go to a doctor.
the dried straw like a feather. His Mother
He has his instruments. He works it out,
never felt his discomfort. In the same way,
those who have not by their being,
puts out his light, sees for himself and
this is the position. And how your oppressed others or taken oppression are
says,
going to be judged as first class.
spirituality is going to be judged? How a
seed is judged - by sprouting it. When you
In the Kundalini awakening itself
sprout the seed and when you see its there are inherent defects. Inherently the
germinating power you know that it's a Kundalini has some defects because of
good seed or a bad seed. In the same way,
your previous karmas, because what you
you will be judged by the way you are
have been doing in this life time, because
germinated, the way you receive your
the things that you have accepted as reality.
realization, the way you retain it, the way
It is just a concept because when you have
not known the absolute, whatever you have
you respect it. That is how you are going
to be judged and not by the kind of dresses
been knowing there will be a little bit of
you are wearing, by the type of matching
ignorance with it. Whatever you have done
you do and the hair dressers you go to,
in darkness will have a particle of darkness
not by the big positions you occupy, the in it. So, without knowing realization if you
are propagated, oh! We are great saints,
big politicians and the big bureaucrats you
become. Not by what kind of houses you
this that, you will have no chance. If you
think you are a very divine personality and
have built and what kind of so called Noble
prizes you have won. You are not also you are already a realized soul, no
going to be judged by your philanthropic chances. All the priests of all the religions.
work by that you think that you have given
will be the last to get realization.
Valmiki in his Ramayana has very
so much money so much so because if
you have given sơ much money, there will
be big ego somewhere hanging and it will
clearly said a very interesting story is
there. That a dog was asked what you
want to be in your next life. So, he told make
bring you down.
me anything but don't make me a
This is a judgment in which the little
Mathadheesh. Mathadheesh is a person
feather is going to weigh much more than
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze. Volume-XVI, issue : 3 - 4
March-April, 2004
like priesthood. So, make me anything but are looking towards good but have
not a priest anywhere. Just imagine a dog
something hanging on to them which is not
having that wisdom. But I do not say that so good. So, for these people there are
all of them are like that. There may be inherently some defects in the Kundalini
some who are really genuine. Some may
which we must understand.
be really realized people, may be
The first of them is bad health,
authorized by God but I am sure they are physical bad health, actual physical bad
not accepted by the multitude. I am sure
health. In this country specially, people
of that because I have seen your history suffer from too much of cold and other
and all that have seen, all such people troubles due to over calcium in the water.
have been discarded and have been
In the same way, according to the country,
tortured. But now the time has come to 'sthanvishesh' as they call it you have your
problems. Like in our country we have
judge the right and the wrong. You cannot
crucify anymore. You cannot. Everyone is some problems. Like in your country you
going to be judged through Kundalini have certain problems. So, the physical
awakening. Now, you should know there problems are according to the country
are three categories of human beings. I where you have taken your birth. Most of
don't know which way to start not to shock
you have decided to take birth in particular
you. One is human beings as we are, countries. That's why you are identified
normal. They are called as Nara-yoni. The
also to such an extent some that you think
second category are Dev-yoni. Those who
that there is no defect. Every country has
are born seekers or realized souls, mostly a variety by which you suffer a certain
realized souls are Dev-yonis and the third
amount of setback in your health. So, for a
ones are called as Rakshasas. These are
Sahaja yogi, one should know that health
called as Ganas. Actually these are called is very important thing because this body
as Ganas but we can say the species is the temple of God and one has to look
among human beings are Rakshasas
after your health and you know also when
means the people who are evil. So, we the Kundalini rises, the first thing that
have evil people, excellent people and we
happens that your health improves
have in between people. Excellent people
because of the parasympathetic fulfillment
are very few. They are born realized. I don't
because parasympathetic gives you
have their problem much. One has to deal
flows
into
enlightenment
which
sympathetic and your health improves. I
with the people who are in the centre. They
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-45.txt 
 March - Aprit, 2004
The Divine Col Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue:3-4
SSU
then this body is to be cleansed. It is done
will not tell about it very elaborately today
by Kundalini. That it does not have a
because time is short but if you read my-
I would say I haven't written much, but if
separate work like a hospital. I have known
people who went so mad with their
you are listen to my lectures and some of
power
them have been written down, you will of curing that they started visiting regularly
learn how Kundalini helps to cure most of the hospitals and they ended up in a
the diseases except for which are being hospital only. They would not even come
tempered by human ailments like a kidney to programs, they would not even come
and see Me. So this is one of the greatest
trouble, now has been cured by Sahaja
hurdles you have got is the Vyadhi' - is the
yoga. No doubt we can cure kidney trouble
bodily ailments. And the bodily element also
but a person who has been on the machine
we tried cannot be cured. It can give him should not take you down too much if
people have some problem forget it.
longevity but he cannot be cured.
Gradually it will improve. With some people
But to cure people is not your job
at all by any chance. You must remember it takes time to get alright. But the main
this. No Sahaja yogi should take to curing thing is to get to your spirit. So, do not
always say, Mother cure me, cure me, cure
people. They can use my photograph but
not to take to curing because it means you me. But just say Mother give me the
are a big philanthropist personality. I have spiritual life and you will be cured
seen people who have been curing, get into automatically. It may take time in some
people, doesn't matter. You have been sick
such a mania of curing that they forget that
all your life, doesn't matter. Give more time
they are also catching something and they
are also getting some troubles and then and also follow the methods which I have
told about different diseases specially liver
they never cure themselves. Ultimately I
in this country, cold and what you call this
find that they get out of Sahaja yoga. But
with the photograph you can cure people. Gout and all these troubles. You have
Do not think that it is your duty that you remedies for all this. Diabetes you
have,
but work it out as a duty towards your body,
are a great sort of a, what you call, a
towards the temple and that should not be
benefactor, physical benefactor. No, you
not. You are a spiritual benefactor but
the end of your life. That's a very little part.
are
Imean it would be something like cleaning
the whole place and then you get out of it.
as a byproduct the body of the person
limproves because if Christ has to be
awakened, if war has to come in this body They say then why did you clean. Like l
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-46.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue : 3-4
March - April, 2004
have seen here people you see. When out. Of course those people who are
we were in Oxtead, I was surprised useless, who do not want to haVe
everybody used to polish everything and
realization forget about them. But even after
all and everything, sort of, lawn was done getting realization its an innate problem
very well and everything cleaned very well
with people that they do not want to work it
and not even a rat would enter their
out. They are lazy in simple words, they
houses. For months to there I never saw
are lazy. That is very much in this country.
Surprising I mean the other day I saw a
any person getting in, only getting out and
they were so particular, husband and wife,
picture where how from your country,
so particular about cleanliness, neatness people went to Germany and blasted a
everything and the both of them would complete machinery and a complete
never even talk to each other. I have seen
factory of that machinery which was selling
that. There were seven houses except for
pilot-less bombs and they have overdone
our house and they were all surprised that
everything, so the children are having a nice
how many people are coming to our house.
time, perhaps..
They said are you open house. I said yes,
But in Sahaja yoga you have to be
it is our open house. They couldn't alert. This is what exactly happens in
understand what was wrong with us. Sahaja yoga when people come here. They
Nobody would see that polished thing or get their realization, they feel the cool
anything.
breeze and its lost again. The reason is,
So, that's how it should be that we they do not want to work it out. This is
should not go to that extent that it becomes
another danger, Akarmanyata. Then when
a sort of a real Sahaja yoga and the rest
it is lost, after one year they will come back,
Mother we don't believe in it but I have got
which is the most important is forgotten.
Health will improve gradually as I have told
some pain in the stomach. Will you cure
you. But attention should be on your spirit.
me? Instead of you becoming so equipped
Attention should be on your spirit because with all the powers that you have, you
it is the attention which goes into these
become another useless person coming
various directions and gets stuck. You just
here, just to take my time. These powers
are all within you. This is your property.
allow it to work out and it will work out.
The second hurdle which I feel is This is the property of your spirit which is
called as Akarmanyata, as they call. It there inside which is bound to manifest but
means a person does not want to work it
because of certain hurdles that you accept,
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-47.txt 
 March - April, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, issue:
that it does not. This is Akarmanyata, we
Let me see. I must give a chance to myself.
can say, which is not working it out, not If that is accepted then it works and then
knowing about it, not understanding it, what they go to the second step. Everything
Sahaja yoga is. How to manipulate this, cannot be just like a jet liner, sit down here
what these vibrations are, how it works out,
and next moment you are on the moon.
Even if you are on the maon, still
People just say oh! Its too much because
they don't want to face the reality. Because you may start with the third danger which
as soon as your Kundalini comes up, as is there - the Sanshya, is the doubting. I
don't know how to describe this madness
soon as the light comes in, before the eyes
are closed you see, suddenly the light
of doubting. For example, out of all of you,
who have been here, I would say, at least I
comes in, you don't want to open your
eyes because too much you have been don't know how much percentage, have
sleeping. Even if you open your eyes a little come out with on the second day, a very
bit, oh! God you don't want to face the light
great statement, Still I am doubting. Is that
because you are identified with that state, the sign of wisdom? What are you
you do not want to open your eyes. doubting? What have you found out so far?
Kundalini opens your eyes, no doubt but From where does this come? is Mr. Ego
again you close it down. So, it is in your about which I have given lectures after
freedom to give up that Akarmanyata. Now lectures? Is Mr. Ego that is doubting it
this is also can be very coliective. I can
because he doesn't want you to find that
you are identified by your ego and you do
tell you this much. It's a very big disease
which spreads, like say a husband wife is
not want to find it because this Mr. Ego has
been guiding your life throughout and now
there. Wife is
the one like. Instead of the
you want to doubt. Doubt what? What are
husband raising the wife, he will succumb
to the wife, especially in the west. Just the
you doubting? You felt the cool breeze,
opposite in India because the husband is alright. Sit down then. It would be
more dominating the woman will succumb something like somebody entering into a
to the husband. So, what happens is that
college, university and they are going sitting
out of the two also who have got it are just
down first day there. Teacher says, now
wasted. Instead of that both of them could
I give you. The
this is the diagram,
be very well realized and could be there. If students get up and say sir, we doubt.
the one who is realized puts down his will,
Really. What should the teacher say? But
that no I will keep my eyes open to see.
they will not say that because they have
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-48.txt 
 March- April, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue: 3-4
paid the fees. They have paid it, even if it follow. If you are going on the road you see
is a horrible drama, boring one still we go
you are used to say continental driving. So
always you turn on the wrong side. But in
through it because we have paid for it, you
London you will be arrested. In the same
see. To go through it. After all we have paid
way, so far you have been doing continental
it you see. What to do.
driving. Now, you are in London. So you
But for Sahaja yoga you cannot pay.
Thave seen all kinds of tomfoolery people
better take to the ways of Londoners and
accept in so many gurus. Like somebody understand the roads and the maps and
the regulations that are needed and try to
says, I am going to teach you how to fly.
You are absolutely ready for that. They will
follow them. But you are doubting it. That's
pay money and not doubt even à bit, that the main point. Then you don't want to follow
the fellow who is propagating, is he flying, it. So, the Pramad is the mistakes that arise
because Kundalini awakening is a free gift
Have you seen him flying anywhere please
at least ask that person to fly?
to anyone who comes here, to anyone who
They will see the Kundalini rising has been to any sort of hell or heaven or
with your eyes. They will see it pulsating, has done black magic. That's the point
about it and why do you doubt. You are not
rising, breaking your Brahmarandhra, Still
they will sit down and say I am doubting.
paying any money. These two things go
hand in hand, doubting and Pramad, is the
Who are you? How far have you reached?
Why are you doubting? What are you mistakes that we commit throughout,
doubting? What have you known so far because we are doubting. That's why we
about yourseli? Now, humble down do not take it up seriously, we do not
understand it, the rule of the road and we
yourself at this point. Humble down in your
heart. No I have not known myself. I have just start driving and then we have
to know myself. I have not known myself. I accidents. And then when we have
accidents we blame Mataji for that. That is
haven't got the absolute. With what
instrument I am doubting. This is one of a very very common thing that happens
that we blame Sahaja yoga. We blame that
the greatest hurdles of Kundalini awakening
spontaneous happening within us. We
and in after awakening called as Sanshya.
never take the blame upon ourselves. That,
The fourth one which we can call it
No I must have done this mistake, alright,
doesn't matter. If I have made mistakes I
as Pramad, is the one by which we go on
faltering all the time. Foolish questions, I
will 'rectify it, it's all right.
mean there are certain things, one has to
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-49.txt 
 March- Aprit, 2004
The Divine Coal Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue 3-4
I somehow or other say, I have to be very
Mother is forgiving no doubt. I
forgive but sometimes my forgiveness is careful. I cant talk like a teacher so !
also of no use because unless and until somehow or other say, alright you give
you realize that it was a mistake, you yourself a bandhan and now you put your
should go this way instead of that way you
hands towards me and see for yourself and
all that. If they by any chance know that I
have gone that way. So, rule of the road is
to be understood. That is the one comes
have found out that they are lying then they
are finished. I must keep up their falsehood,
to us called as Pramad.
everything in Me. If by chance you see, I
After that we have another inherent
problem is called as 'Brahmadarshan', am very careful, though because I know
We
that they are always on a slippery ground.
So, even if I mention in a way that's not so
hallucinations.
start seeing
hallucinations, specially with people who
take LCD and all the such things. They
blunt or anything, still it might happen. but
don't see Me sometimes. They just see
one must know that it is for our good that
light or any such hallucination, you see, of we have to stick on to the truth and we
should not be led away by our own ideas
the future or of the past. They may see Me
as something else and they may see Me
about ourselves.
as something else. If you see Me in Then the another thing comes is Vishaychit,
dreams is all right or see something in in which the attention is attracted by
objects of your previous identifications.
dreams is alright but you start seeing some
Like your attention is has been, you say I
things. That's called as Brahmadarshan.
am very fond of cricket alright, you are but
Brahma means illusion. Then you start
developing illusions. But the worst part of
you should not be a sick person.I mean
it is that people start telling lies about it. I
cricket doesn't mean that you become a
know about everyone and when this cricket bat and you are good for nothing,
Bramhadarshan starts is the most for anything else, for any practical
dangerous thing, about vibrations also. purposes you are dead. That kind of
Some people are absolutely cock sure craziness for anything whatsoever gets
your attention into a very wrong state and
about themselves. I see that and they will
tell all world, you see. They dominate is also not good for all the Sahaja yogis.
Today's lecture is more for the Sahaja
everybody saying, the vibrations of this is
yogis. So, I am pointing out what are the
not good, the vibrations of that is not good
inherent dangers of sustaining oui
while they have no mastery over it. Now, if
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-50.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Isaue 3-4
March - Aprl, 2004
Then there are two more stages in
realization which is very important to
which a Kundalini, which rises, also falls
understand.
down. This is an inherent danger in a
Now, the two other very big dangers which
we suffer from apart from that the people
person. Many people have asked Me that
get possessed and get ideas into their Mother, if we get realized, does it stay? It
does stay, a part of it. Sometimes it is very
heads. They start singing songs this that.
Sometimes I am so embarrassed I don't thin part of it, sometimes the whole thing
know what to say. I
can see a devil is sucked back. It is sucked back. If so,
,
speaking through them but I just don't know
then you will say, we start doubting. Where
is it written that you will be lifted up and put
how to tell them that oh! Please stop. Even
praising me, I know what it is. But they just
into something great, whatever may be
your problems? Is it possible? Even from
come up and say, Mother we want to sing
a song. All right finished. I cannot say here, if I have to go to India, I have to get
anything because they do not know what inoculations and vaccinations and I have
they are singing. They do not know from
to get My passport, go through an interview.
While if you have to enter into the kingdom
where they are get this knowledge. Is
of God, then you are going to be judged.
something else doing this. Because of all
these problems, you get possessed. The
Not only judged but even when supposing
other day somebody came to Me and said
you give a grace mark and all that and a
that Mother, I am feeling very overconfident person is allowed to sort of get into the
about myself and cock sure. Really? And I
plane, may be that they may ask you to get
down, Is possible and that happens with
feel like doing something very high handed
and he did it. First he saw the possession
some of the people that the Kundalini falls
down, Is a very, very dangerous sign.
coming into him and then he did it and did
It comes through many problems
it in a very bad way. Everybody is angry
with him. I know. But I am not, because like gurus and going to wrong places, also
something is done in possession. You going to spirits and doing all black magic
don't know what madness people can do
and also bowing before people who are not
when they get possessed. I mean they incarnations, worshipping wrong type of
should end up in lunatic asylum but deities and also doing mad rituals, fasting
because of being Sahaja yogis, they do all
at wrong times and not understanding the
these things. But still they are not stationed signs of fasting and of ritualism and
charkas and the connections and the
where they should be.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-51.txt 
 March- Apri, 2004
The Divine Cool Braeze, Volume
e-XVI, issue: 3
around yourself, meet people, talk to them,
complete synthesis of Sahaja yoga. And it
falls down. In some people you have seen
the more you talk about it the more you do
that Kundalini rises and immediately falls
it, the more you give it the more it will flow.
is a very, very dangerous thing
The more you sit at home, oh! I am doing
down
my puja at home nothing. It will stagnate
which really is very troublesome also. But
and stagnate. You have to give it to others,
still you can fix it up?
Last danger that we have, is one you have to think of others. Thousands of
should know that you start feeling that you
them have to have it and that's why it is
have become God or some like an important that don't get bloated with the
incarnation or something. This is the idea that you have all the powers of the
biggest danger and then you start taking
world already manifesting. Never. When
law into your own hands and start rebuking
these powers really manifest you are really
others or doing all kinds of high handed not aware of them. Absolutely. I mean
I am the sun. Will
business or getting over self satisfied with
imagine the sun saying
yourself. This is a very big danger. Humility he say so? When he is the sun what is
is the only way to know that there's an
there? If you go and ask the sun he will say,
yes, by the way I am. What can I do about
ocean before you. You have got into the
boat alright but you have to know a lot. You
it? It's that simple. You know, you become
have to understand a lot and you have to
a very simple person, absolutely simple
person because there is no camouflage,
still attend to your attention, to your chit, to
there is no complication. You are that.
your awareness and you have to still work
So, anybody asks a funny question,
it out in such a way that you really establish
yourself as a full fledged Sahaja yogi, by
you say, by the way, what is there to ask?
which collectivity becomes a part and It is so. I mean, if I am a realized soul, I
parcel of your being. By which you have am. What does it matter? With this
no doubts left. From thoughtlessness understanding we have to go to Sahaja
awareness you jump into doubtless yoga which I must say I am surprised how
it is working, miraculously and it is working
awareness. Unless and until that happens
within you, is not ? but is a state in which out. But it is you who can settle it within
only the Kundalini will rise whenever you yourself.
will raise your hands. Unless and until you
Now, among you some are only on
have achieved that state, please try to work the periphery. We take them on the
it out. Don't be lazy. You have to see periphery also, That you know very well.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-52.txt 
 Some of them come in the centre and celebrating the great event of Christ's life.
some are very few who are in the inner Let us know that Christ is born within us
and the Bethlehem is within us. You don't
circle. All of them are still in a state where
have to go to Bethlehem. Its within us. He's
they can be thrown out like a tangent goes
out, you see. And then you don't there and we have to look after him, It's
still a child. You have to respect it and you
understand why a Sahaja yogi behaves like
have to look after it. So, the light really
that. If you see some Sahaja yogi behaving
like that going in a tangent, know that you glows and people know that you are
might do the same. So, be careful. So, realized souls. Nobody will doubt that you
today at this juncture when we are
are not.
May God Bless You All.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-53.txt 
 Memories of the Divine Mother
.cont. from Nov-Dec,2003
And I saw Her coming out of the with [my sister] Maureen [Rossi). It had
car and walking one or two steps. And a huge impact on me because l'd heard
after that I got lost. I don't remember that there was a yogi lady and I had this
kind of idea that l'd walk into a room full
anything. And then I saw Her on the
of sort of silence and perhaps little bells
stage. It was like moonlight, watching
tinkling somewhere and I walked in the
Her.
room. And it was so unlike what l'd
Nirmal Gupta
expected that the effect on me was really
To be living in this time and to quite profound. I immediately felt that this
have experienced all this is very difficult is what it must have been like to come
Christ teaching in the
to imagine sometimes. I wonder why I
across
was chosen and why I was so lucky marketplace. It completely hit me like
enough to have been there in Her that, which was quite strange because I
presence. It's all these little experiences, didn't have any kind of religious- you
which stay with you for the rest of your know, religion wasn't part of my life.
Quite the opposite, I was coming from a
life. You can't ignore them.
hippie background. And I just felt that
Sharon Vincent
here was an amazing personality and my
How could someone like this be feeling was, "How can a being like this
here? Actually, l'd seen Shri Mataji's exist? How could someone like that be
here?" And the whole room seemed full
I met Mother. I'd left
photograph betore
that yoga group before you brought the of light and there was a tremendous
photo. I'd maved over to Baker Street impression of how powerful Shri Mataji
and I did notice the photograph - was, but She was just very sweet. She
appearing, being kind of furtively asked us to come and see Her and I
concealed from me and I did hear about came up and She put Her hand on me
and said, "This one's sick," 1 think were
Shri Mataji, but I didn't hear anything that
direct about it. But then I just said that the first words She said to me. And the
I'd like to come and see Her. l'd heard meeting went on. It was just really
quite magical, the whole
amazing
about these meetings and I came to the
last meeting at Judd Street. One damp thing. I didn't really have a chance to
figure out what it was all about, but I knew
Sunday afternoon - raining - and I came
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-54.txt 
 March - April, 2004
The Divine Cool Biueze, Volume-XVI, Issue: 3-4
it was something quite mamentous. That Even walking up the street to go to that
flat, I had this strongest urge to run away
was the first meeting.
She said I was sick and that I I've ever had in my life. Even though I
needed something for my stomach and didn't know where I was going and I had
She asked for a bottle and the strange only been told that. "This lady is a yoga
thing was-no one else seemed to see
this- but I saw Her take the bottle, turn
round and open a sort of door into some
teacher, but she doesn't teach Hatha
Yoga." But I can remember thinking that
if I wasn't with people that I felt would
kind of an atomic furnace and put the say, "What on Earth are you up
bottle in, take it out, shut the door and have run away. That's how strong I could
to?" I'd
give it to me. And I was quite astonished.
feel the force I was walking towards.
And I took it home, drank it and it had
And when we went in the flat and
the most extraordinary effect. It cleared
we were told to take off our shoes, which
me out. She said I had six months to live.
was strange, and told to sit down and I
Yes, I was really in quite a bad way.
saw Shri Mataji working on this Indian
We went back for more meetings gentleman, very strongly and sort of
and I had a whole series of extraordinary telling him off and sorting him out, I
experiences when She was there, but I thought She was a Goddess. That was
think the thing that really hit me was a my first thought that came into my head
and then I thought, "What on Earth do I
kind of gut reaction, a kind of recognition
mean by that? I don't even know what a
that this was someone. I kept getting the
Goddess is." But that's what it felt like.
feeling that this was someone like
And then She got on with seeing to
Christ. That was the feeling that I had.
And I was trying to kind of see how that
everybody and when my turn came, if you
like, She actually got up and walked
made sense and fitted in.
around, as well as sat down, and She'
Pat Anslow
told me to put my hands out and asked
me what I felt and that second I felt my
I had no idea what i had but 1
knew I had it It was the 16th September attention drawn to my hands and said,
"Oh, I feel something." And She just said,
1975 that we first met Shri Mataji in that
"May God bless you. You've got it." And I
[Judd Street] flat and, similar to [my
thought, "I've got it." I had no idea what I
brother] Pat [Anslow], it couldn't have
had, but I knew I had it. And that was it.
helped being a most momentous feeling.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-55.txt 
 March Apri, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, Issue 3-4
And She then went on to everybody else.
She said it is like the sunlight
It was just great. I was dealt with.
miracle, which 1
There was a
Maureen Rossi
experienced when we had a seminar in
the English countryside. It was à long
Stonehenge
time ago, 1979, and Shri Mataji came. It
And when we got down there, Shri was a very dark day with no sun, heavy
clouds. It was very, very dull and heavy.
Mataji bought us all ice creams, And just
There was a lot of doubting in Sahaja
like little kids, we were all running around
our mum eating ice creams, walking Yoga at that time. And Shri Mataji was
around the stones. And eventually we talking to us and said that She is Shri
Krishna and Shri Jesus and Shri Mataji.
stood close to Mother and were trying to
feel the vibrations from the stones and She is all of them. She said it is like the
oddly there were no vibrations coming sunlight. And at that moment the beam
of sunlight came out of nowhere and
from the stones. And some of the Sahaja
shone on Her head and went away. And
Yogis who had been there before and had
felt the vibrations asked Mother. They
to prove it, She said for the beam of light
were really surprised and they said, come again on Her head. That happened
"Look, we used to feel vibrations here two or three times. Out of nowhere the
sun came. So this was the miracle 1
and we are not feeling any." And Mother
witnessed together with about fifty yogis,
turned to us and said, "That's because I
am here." She said, "Out of respect for who where present at that time.
Me, the stones are not emitting any Miodrag Radosavlievic
vibrations. They are waiting for My
permission." And then She basically I thought there was something
said, "All right. Now." And the moment wrong with the camera
She said that, the vibrations just came The first puja we had at Chelsham Road
was the Bhoomi Puja, the puja to bless
in waves from the stones.
Bala Kanayson.
the house. As the housewife, I was
honoured to be called to actually offer the
difterent items to Mother in the porch of
the house. I was heavily pregnant with
my second child at the time. Mother
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-56.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze, Volume-XVI, ssue 3-4
March - April, 2004
55
stood in the doorway and I offered the rice and other things to Her Feet. Everyone
else crowded round in the hallway and garden. After we had finished the short
puja, Mother told us to bury the offerings on the right of the doorway, between the
door and the window.
About a year later I was taking some photos of the children who were sitting on the
front door step in one photo and standing on what was then a little lawn in front of
the window by the door in the next one - the strange thing was that when the
photos were developed, there was a bright light coming out of the ground where
we had buried the offerings. At that time, we did not know about miracle photos
and I thought there was something wrong with the camera.
Linda Williams
Reading the praise of the Goddess
One time when we had a puja, the puja sort of started in the morning and went on
through the whole of the day. And one particular puja, one of the very early pujas,
we had a havan outside and we had this book of the thousand Sanskrit names of
the Goddess. This was, I believe, actually the first puja in praise of Shri Mataji and
was at Her house at Parklands, Hurst Green. We were sitting round there putting
stuff on the havan and Shri Mataji was actually reading the names of Herself. As
She pointed out, She said, "This is very strange because you've got the Goddess
reading the praise of the Goddess, which is rather unusual." Because She was the
only one who could read them. But whilst we were there- and it was really cold
outside, it was late in the year - and the whole sky opened up like a great big halo
above us. The sky was quite dark, but there was a whole light patch above where
we were because the vibrations that were given out had sort of caused the sky to
open.
Douglas Fry
