Yuvadrishti An offering at the lotus feet of our Divine Mother by the Yirvashakti June 2004 Volume 5 Issue 2 ক

 IMATA I: ON MEDITATION SHRI Raja Janaka Devi's Yantra 8 The Shri Chakra ब्रह्म देव के बेटेः जद कु Four petals of Mooladhnra Kahlil Gibran ॐ कार का सन 10 12 A GIFT TO HUMANITY 18 You can send your suggestions, complaints and articles at following address: Yuvadrishti C/oNirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Plot No.8, Chandragupt Housing Soc., Behind Hotel Grace, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029. Ph.-020-25286537 e-mail: yuvadrishti@yahoo.com website: www.yuvadrishti.com detail with complete address and draft of Rs. I20/- in favour of For Subscription, send your "Nirmal Infosysterms & Technologies Pvt. Ltd." payable ar Pune ar above address.

 CHDI MATA Ne ON MEDITATION In the morning you get up, have your plane you cannot grow in Sahaja Yoga. So first bath, sit down, take some tea; don't talk. Don't thing is to establish your thoughtless awareness3B talk in the morning sit down, meditate because still you might feel little chakra blockages here at that time the Divine rays come in, the Sun and there; forget it. Just forget about it. comes afterwards. That's how the birds get up. That's how the flowers get up. They're all chakra is catching, you should awakened by that, and if you are sensitive you surrender this to You". Instead of doing any of will feel that by getting up in the morning you these things you can just say that. But, that will look at least ten years younger. Really, it's surrendering should not be rationalised. such a good thing to get up in the morning and you're still rationalising and worrying then, automatically you sleep early. This is for should I say this, it will never work out. If getting up, for sleeping that you'll manage yourself. Then, in the morning time you should just meditate. In meditation try to stop your thoughts. Watch My photograph with open and see that you Now start your surrendering. Now if a "Mother, 1 say If why I need not tell because there's pure Love and purity in your heart that's the best thing; that to do so is to surrender. Leave all the worries to Your Mother. Everything to Your Mother. But surrendering is one point that is very difficult in ego-oriented societies. Even talking about that, I feel a little bit worried. eyes stop your thoughts. You should stop your thoughts, then you go into meditation. The But if there's any simple thing to stop your thoughts is the Lord's Prayer, because chakra catching, just surrender. And that's the Agnya state. So in the morning you you'll see that the chakras are cleared remember Lord's Prayer or Ganesha's mantra. morning time you do not go on putting this way, It's just the same. Oryou even say "Iforgive",So that way, nothing; don't move your hands too you can start with Ganesha's mantra, say Lord's much in the morning. You'll find most of your Prayer and then say "I forgive". It works out. chakras will clear out in the meditation. Then you are in thoughtless awareness. Now you meditate, Before that, there's no try in your heart and there, try to put Your Guru, meditation. When the thou hts are coming or "I in the core of it. After establishing in the heart, have to take tea", "what shall I do", "now what we must bow to that with full devotion and have 1 to do", this will be there. So first you become mind after realisation is not imagination because thoughtlessly aware, then the growth of now your mind, your imagination, is itself spirituality starts after thoughtless awareness, enlightened. So project yourself in such a way not before. One should know that. On rational that you humble down at the Feet of Your Guru, thoughts coming in to you or any In the up. Try to put your Love in your heart. Just who's this and who's thať", all dedication. Now whatever you do with your

 become sort of, expanded. Expanse you see. u will Your Mother. And now ask for the necessary You will extend them in such a way that you temperament needed for meditation, or feel you are in control of them and by controlling atmosphere needed for meditation. Meditation those emotions your emotions are expanded, is when you are one with the Divine. Now if there are thoughts coming in first you have to say the first mantra, of course, and then breathing. watch inside. Also, you must say the mantra of breathing; reduce it, in the sense that Ganesha, will help some people, and then you breathed out, wait for a while, then breathe in. should watch inside and see for yourself which For a long time. Then you breathe out. So is the biggest hurdle. First the thought now for the thought you have to say the mantra of Nirvichara. Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Nirvichara SakshatShri connection is established. Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah enlightened and powerful. Now what you do is to watch your See now, try to reduce your have you during one minute your breathing will be less than normal, Alright? Try that, keep the attention on the emotions, you see? So that the Better? See, the Kundalini rises. Now, when you are breathing, you find that there is You space in-between which you just leave vacant. Breathe in. Keep it there. Now breathe out and a Now come to the hurdle of our ego. see the thought has stopped now no doubt, but there is still a pressure on the head. Soif itis ego, you have to say: Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Mahat Ahamkara Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah breathing in such a way, that you really reduce your breathing. Your attention should be on your heart or it could be your emotion, it's better Mahat means the great, Ahamkara to keep the breath inside for a while. Hold it. means the ego. You say it thrice. Now, even Bring it out. Hold out. Thenkeep it outside for a now, if you find that ego is still there, then while. Then again. Then you'll find that for a have to raise your left side to push it back to the you will not breathe. Good. See, you're right side. With your hand, one hand towards settled now. The Laya takes place between your the photograph. Push the left side higher and the right side lower so the ego and the superego get tie It up. Again, raise your Kundalini up on the balance. Do it seven times. Try to see how you head and tie It up. Again, raise your Kundalini are feeling inside, you see. you while Prana and your Mana. Both the Shaktis become one. Now raise your Kundalini up on top and the and tie It up thrice. Now at the Sahasrara you should say the So once you have given yourself a balance, then, the best thing is to pay attention to your emotions, to Mana Shakti. Watch them. You can enlighten your emotions, by thinking of Your Mother, Right? Just enlighten them. This solves all the problems. Whatever are the problems in the Mana. So once you are connected to those emotions and you start looking at them in your meditation you will see these emotions are rising within you and if you try to put these emotions on your Mother (as they say at the Lotus Feet of your Mother), they, those emotions, will start dissolving and they'll mantra of Sahasrara thrice. Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Kalki Sakshat Shri Sahasrara Swamini Moksha Pradayini Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah Now its open now, if you see, now you can open again your Sahasrara like this. And see that you are stationed there Once this has been done then you go into meditation. Reduce your breathing, will be better. You reduce your breathing as if stopping it, but no exertion about it. ftt 2

 Raja Janaka yogi must overcome his desires. While explaining the need of balance in daily life, he said that a man who has a quite temper and sound intellect takes success and failure in the same light arnd is not elated in times of pleasure nor depressed in times of pain. Shri Mataji has emphasized on maintaining balance in our daily life and has said that true ascent can only be achieved while maintaining balancing. "You all might be knowing about King Janaka. Nachiketa thought that this King Janaka who has crown on his head, he has all slaves and servants, there is dance going in front of him. When he comes in our Ashram my guru touches his feet? How is it that he is so great? So his Guru 50 said to him that he should himself go and see. Nachiketa went and stood in front of Janaka and said, " Please give me self realization, My Guru aja Janaka was an incarnation of has said that you can give self realization, so Shri Adi Guru Dattatreya. He was the son of please give me self realization" King Janaka King Hrasvaroma from the dynasty of the great said, "look, if you would have asked me whole universe I would have given but I cannot give King Nimi. His name was 'Seer Dhwaja' Janaka. Seer means plough and Dhwaja means flag signifying one who has a plough on his flag. doesn't know the subtle aspect of it then what is "Janaka' also means 'one who looks after, the use of giving it to such human being? The you realization, reason being that one who understands and cares for his subjects'. He was one who will understand its subtle aspect can the disciple of great sage Yajnavalkya. only get deeper into it." So, the tattwa of Raja Janaka believed in attaining the Prapancha is 'Pr' which means the light. Untill highest state (yogic state) while maintaining unless it is awakened within you all.you will balance and advised to conquer the enemies remain in Pancha' (means 'five', the five within us one at a time. On the path of ascent, a elements through which our evolution took place) and cannot enter in 'Prapancha'. When

 Nachiketa asked the above question to King Raja Janaka emphasized on having a balanced attention. The story of Shri Narada and Janaka. King Janaka asked Nachiketa to be with him. But at last Nachiketa understood that this a bowl of milk is an emblem of balanced man (King Janaka) has no attachments. He is not worried at all, neither he has any sticking with attention. Once Shri Narada asked Raja Janaka the reason for being called a 'Videha'. Raja worldly things or what we call as world. He is Janaka told Shri Narada that he will answer his like an ascetic. He will wear crown on his head of question later in the day. In the meantime, Raja king and sleep on the ground, like a real Emperor. He doesn't need any comforts, sometimes he will sleep on soft bed...sometimes Janaka gave Shri Narada a bowl of milk to carry. The bowl was full of milk to the extent that slightest movement of the bowl was enough to lie on the ground...like an Emperor within. He spill the milk. Shri Narada followed Raja Janaka is not worried of anything, he is not caught by everywhere he went with the bowl of milk. Shri Narada was very careful in handling the bowl as hedid not want to spill the milk. anything. The one who is in prapancha never gets effected by any comfort or any slavishness towards material. Even if you ask him to sleep When they retired for the evening, Shri by resting his head on stone, he can sleep. Ask Narada told Raja Janaka of being tired of carrying the bowl of milk. He requested Raja him to eat anything, without taste...he can eat and also he can eat in parties." -Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi ("Prapancha and Sahaj Yoga", 26.11.84) Janaka to explain him the reason of him being known as a Videha'. Raja Janaka asked Shri Narada "First of all tell me what you have seen?" shri Narada said "Nothing, except the bowl of Though Raja Janaka was engaged in preserving a kingdom and was a great ruler, he milk." Raja Janaka asked him "Didn't was never attached to Mithila (Raja Janaka's there was a big procession in my honor, then kingdom). According to Raja Janaka, his there was a court wherein there was a program you see enormous wealth and kingdom did not belong of dancing? Didn't you see anything?" Shri to him. The idea of not being bound to the world Narada told Him that he had not seen anything gave him constant joy and happiness. He would never be affected by any source of happiness or sorrow Shri Mataji has advised Sahaja Yogis to due to the bowl of milk. To this, Raja Janaka said that even he did not see anything. Every moment, he watched his attention. He made detach themselves from worldly things sure that his attention never spilled like milk. While maintaining the households, innately. His attention was always fixed on his spirit. Shri Mataji has told us to give up the Shri Mataji has spoken about Chitta- desires/thoughts of 'we' having worldly Nirodha. She said that Sahaja Yogis can develop this state by watching their attention. Our possessions. The concept of detachment must be imbibed by every Sahaja Yogi. attention should not be on worldly and

 materialistic possessions but on ourselves. Instead of thriving to save our worldly possessions, we must thrive to save our attention. Raja Janaka was beyond the conceptions of planning, existence, and emotions. It is important for Sahaja Yogis to attain Videha state through meditation and cross the boundaries of "There is only one pure desire and that is to be one with the divine." planning and emotions. Every incarnation has an associated 'Shakti'. Shri Seetaji, Mumbai Yuvashakti the daughter of Raja Janaka, was his Shakti. Raja Janaka found Seetaji in the form of an infant while ploughing the land for yajna. Being uncovered by the edge of a plough, he named her Seeta. Seetaji was also known as Janaki- the beloved daughter of Raja Janaka. "Seeta' literally means a furrow, a track of a plough shore. It is understood that Raja Janaka's palace was extremely beautiful due to the influence of Janaki. Since only a very exceptional man could be considered worthy of Seetaji, Raja Janaka arranged a Mother kindly bless Chandigarh with your Swayamavara. The Swayamavara was attended by many princes. The prince who could lift, bend and string the bow of Shri Shiva gifted by Varuna to Raja Janaka would marry Seetaji. Only Shri Ram could lift the heavenly bow. Thus, Shri Ram and Seetaji got divine attention for more and more pure and deep Sahaja Yogis should evolve here. married. While teaching karma yoga to Shri Arjuna, Shri Krishna gave the example of King Janaka attaining perfection by performing selfless work directed towards the well being of all. Raja Janaka was a brave king. Though peace loving by nature, he fought all the wars thrust on him by aggressive kings. He was well versed in shastras and Vedas as any sage of that time. He promoted and supported the sages and scholars who were following the path of Jnana' - the central path. Ritu Mehra Kaushik Panchal Wesee that the entire life of Raja Janaka is an inspiration for Ratilal & Sons all Sahaja Yogis. His principles are directly reflected in Sahaja Yoga. Shri Mataji has told us to work on these principles with the help of Sahaja Yoga. Once Raja Janaka told Suka that knowledge is within us; it is only to be uncovered. This is a reference to the All kind of textile Accessories, Ruti'C', Fibre, Nylon Parts, UHMWP Sheet, Rods & Sulzer Parts. hidden powers of human beings. Shri Mataji has spoken about the manifestation of these powers. All the hidden powers are C/54, Tirupati Estate, Nr. Manchhani Masjid, Millan Everest Cinema Road, Saraspur, Ahmedabad-380018. Ph. (0) 2748183. uncovered when kundalini shakti' is awakened by the divine grace of our Mother.

 Devils Yantra & The Shri Chakra Each deity has a yantra of his/her own. Pujas to Shri Vishnu are not performed using yantra or instruments. Only in the case of the goddess Amba the Shri Chakra is used to invoke her blessings. Mantra and Tantra form the two aspects of worship unto divine. Chanting of sounds arranged in a particular sequence bring the worshipper closer to that divine form. The sound forms in a mantra actually represent the forms of that particular deity. Along with this sound form the deity can also be represented diagrammatically. Each part of the yantra is not just a geometric representation but an instrument of immense power. In fact the yantra not only stands for a deity but also for his/her place of residence. The Shri Chakra consisting of lines, circles, squares and triangles all form a part of the chakra. The yantra has a central Bindu or a dot. Designs like this have the capacity to grasp the power of various deities and repulse the effect of evil powers. The middle portion of the chakra consists of 9 distinct triangles which criss-cross one another to form 43 triangles. The central dot is also considered as a triangle so that, there are 44 triangles in all. These 44 triangles are arranged in the form of 6 avarnas (Avarna means concealing or covering). In the diagram the similar colored ring formed by a set of triangles represents an avarna. The central dot is also regarded as an avarna so that there are 6 avarnas in all. There are shastras that deal with the presiding deity reside in which avarna, what truth it conveys, what blessings can be invoked by that deity and what mudra belongs to eachavarna. Apart from these 6 there are more avarnas so in all they are navvarnas (literally translated as 9 covers) great caution has to be invoked in using this diagram. This instrument of immense power can bring different results if not represented correctly. A yantra actually represents the place of residence of a deity. On the other hand it is also itself representative of that deity. (often Shri Chakra is considered the third place of residence of goddess Amba apart from the mount 'Meru' and the ocean of Ambrosia) Shri Chakra can also be represented in 3- dimensional form when each avarna form its own peaks built tier upon tier in a conical form called 'Meru'. Goddess Amba bestows us the 'Nitya-Shri' or the imperishable beatitude, the wealth of and unsurpassed bliss of the Atma. That is why in The Lalitha-Sahasranaman the first name of the goddess is Shri-Mata. In consonance with this everything attached to her is prefixed with Shri (Shri Vidya or Shri Chakra). - The above excerpt has been taken from Saudaryalahari. 6-

 बेद: नारद मुनी ब्रह्म देव के ब्रह्म देव के बेटे नारद मुनी के बहुत सारे किस्से देवी दिया था कि वे विष्षु के अवतार है। उन्होंने लक्ष्मण के में मिलते है। शास्त्रों में वर्णित नारद, इंद्र की महात्म्य तरह, टी. व्ही. पर कई बार दिखाए गए है। लेकिन उनके जीवन मे और भी बहुत सी घटनाएँ हुई जो बडी रो चक है। जैसे, उनका मनु-पुत्र रूप दुसरा जन्म; उनका श्री राम को नवरात्री पूजन करने के लिएमार्ग दर्शन देना; इन अनोखी घटनाओ का वर्णन देवी महात्म्य के अलग-अलग पाठों मे मिलता है। आईए, इन किस्से कहानियों को जजदीक से देखे और उनका लाभ उठाए। समक्ष अपना दुख प्रकट किया। श्री लक्ष्मण भी उन्हें सहानुभूती देने लगे। इस क्षण, नारद मुनी ने आकर श्री को दर्शन दिये। जारदने श्री राम को नवरात्री पूजन करने की सलाह दी। श्री राम ने पूर्ण श्रद्धा के साथ नवरात्री पूजन किया। पूजन के अन्त मे श्री शक्ति ने श्री राम को दर्शन दिये और विस्तार पूर्वक सारी बातें बताई कि श्री राम विष्णु के अव्तार हैं, और सारे देवी देवता उनके साहयता के लिए तत्पर हैं; तथा रावण ने सीताजी की परछाई मात्र को अशोक बाटिका मे रखा है; सीतजी को सीधे स्वर्म से भोजन पहुचाया जाता है, इत्यादी। इस प्रकार, नारद श्री राम के साक्षात्कार के साधन राम और श्री लक्ष्मण में के आदी जारदमुनी का मानव जन्म नारद मुनी और मनु, श्री ब्रह्म देव की संताने हैं। सृष्टी के निर्माण के कार्य का कार्यभार मनु को सौपा गया था। मनु के हजारो पुत्र थे। लेकिन, नारद मुनी, जो मनुष्य नही थे, उन मनु-पुत्रों को अपनी बुद्धिमत्ता से किसी ना किसी तरह डरा देते थे, इस व ी द बने। किी कारण सारे मनु-पुत्र घर त्याग कर चारों दिशाओं में चले गए। पुत्रों के चले जाने पर को राज्य शासन में युधिष्ठि र को नारद की सलाह दुख पहुँचा। उन्होने कई हजार मनु पुत्र और पैदा किये, पर वे भी नारद मुनी पुत्र की वाणी के प्रभाव से कही दूर-दूर चले नारद मुनी ने हर युग में भूमिकाए निभाई हैं। इसी लिए हर ग्रन्थ मे उनको सम्मान पूर्वक उच्च स्थान दिया गया है। इसका एक उदाहरण है, राज शासन के उपलक्ष्य मे युधिष्ठिर को दी गई सलाह : अपने अख्त्र-शस्त्र सदैव तैयार रखो , नौकरों को प्रेम से रखो, सैनिकों की तन्ख्वाह समय परदो, किसानो को कृषी-कार्य के लिए उचित साधन-सामान दो। ये सारी बाते आज भी हमारे आधुनिक वित्त मन्त्रालय में भी लागू होती है। इस प्रकार, जारद मुनी का विवेक स्पष्टहोता है। गए। इस तरह, मनु बार बार पुत्र जनते और नारद उन्हे भगा देते फिर मनु से ये देखा ना गया और उन्होने नारद को श्राप दिया की तुम भी मेरे पुत्र बन कर मानव जन्म लोगे। इस श्राप वश नारद मुनी ने इन्सान के रुप मे जन्म लिया। इस तरह धरती पर मनुष्य जाति हर कोने तक फैली, और इस कार्य को नारद मुनी के ्वारासम्पन्न किया गया। श्री राम के प्रेरणा रुप श्री नारद नारद का अर्थ नारद शब्द दो शब्दो से बना है : जर (बहुजनहिताय) और द ( दायक). नारद मुनी का कार्य बहुजन के हित में अपनी वीणा और वाणी का प्रयोग करना है। माना जाता है कि नारद मुनी ने वीणा का अविष्कार किया। वीणा हाथ में रामायण में सुग्रीव और बाली के बीच, किष्किंधा में युद्ध हुआ। श्री राम की कृपा से सुग्रीव ने बाली को हराया। युद्ध के पश्चात श्री राम सीताजी की याद मे चिन्तित हो गये। इस कारण उन्होंने भुला 7. - ড

 ब्रह्म देव के बेटे नारद मुनी के बहुत सारे किस्से देवी सीधे स्वर्ग से भीजन पहुचाया जाता है, इत्यादी। इस महात्म्य में मिलते हैं। शा्त्रों में वर्णित नारद, इंद्र की प्रकार, नारद श्री राम के देवी साक्षात्कार के साधन बने। तरह, टी. व्ही. पर कई बार दिखाए गए है। लेकिन उनके जीवन मे और भी बहुत सी घटनाएँ हुई जो बडी रोचक है। राज्य शासन मे युधिष्ठर को नारदकी सलाह जैसे, उनका मनु-पुत्र के रूप में दुसरा जन्म; उनका श्री नारद मुनी ने हर युग में भूमिकाए निभाई हैं। इसी लिए हर राम को नवरात्री पूजन करने के लिए मार्ग दर्शन देना; ग्रन्थ मे उनको सम्मान पूर्वक उच्च स्थान दिया गया है। इन अनोखी घटनाओ का वर्णन देवी महात्म्य के अलग- अलग पाठों मे मिलता है। आईए, इन किस्से कहानियों यूधिष्ठिर को दी गई सलाह : अपने अस्त्र शस्त्र सदैव को नजदीक से देखे और उनका लाभ उठाए। इसका एक उदाहरण है, राज शासन के उपलक्ष्य में तैयार रखो, नौकरों को प्रेम से रखो, सैनिकों की तन््वाह समय पर दो, किसानो को कृषी-कार्य के लिए उचित साधन-सामान दो। ये सारी बाते आज भी हमारे जारद मुनी कामानवजन्म नारद मुनी और मनु, श्री ब्रह्म देव की संताने है। सृष्टी के आधुनिक वित्त मन्त्रालय मे भी लागू होती हैं। इस प्रकार, निर्माण के कार्य का कार्यभार मनु कों सीपा गया था। मनु नारदमुनी का विवेक स्पष्ट होता है। के हजारो पुत्र थे। लेकिन, नारद मुनी, जो मनुष्य नही थे, उन मनु-पुत्रों को अपनी बुद्धिमत्ता से किसी ना किसी जारद का अर्थ तरह डरा देते थे, इस कारण सारे मनु-पुत्र घर त्याग कर नारद शब्द दो शब्दो से बना है : नर (बहुजनहिताय चारो दिशाओं में चले गए। पुत्रों के चले जाने पर मनु को और द (दायक). नारद मुनी का कार्य बहुजन के हित में दुख पहुँचा। उन्होने कई हजार पुत्र और पैदा किये, पर वे अपनी वीणा और वाणी का प्रयोग करना है। माना जाता है भी नारद मुनी की वाणी के प्रभाव से कही ढूर-दूर चले कि नारद मूनी ने वीणा का अविष्कार किया। वीणा हाथ गए। इस तरह, मनु बार बार पुत्र जनते और नारद उन्हे में लेकर वे तीनो जहाँ में प्रवास करते हैं। उनकी देव और भगा देते ।फिर मनु से ये देखा ना गया और उन्होने नारद दानव, दोनो से दोस्ती है। क्षेत्रज्ञ की तरह वे सारे जहाँ की को श्राप दिया की तुम भी मेरे पुत्र बन कर मानव जन्म लोगे। इस श्राप वश नारद मुनी ने इन्सान के रुप में जन्म कही भी पाप या अन्याय बढ़ता है तो कोई ना कोई उसे लिया । खबर दुनिया भर में प्रसारित करते हैं। इसी कारण अगर रोकने का प्रयास जरूर करता है। अधिकतर ऐसा ही होता है कि बड़ी समस्याओं क निदान सिर्फ देवी के द्वारा ही किया जाता है। इस तरह धरती पर मनुष्य जाति हर कोने तक फैली. और इसकार्य को नारदमुनी के द्ारासम्पन्न किया गया । दविजा नारद: मनुष्य जीवन का माहात्म्यः श्री राम के प्रेरणा रुप श्री नारद इतने बड़े आत्मसाक्षात्कारी कैसे बने? उनको नारद रामायण में सुग्रीव और बाली के बीच, किष्किंधा में युद्ध हुआ। श्री राम की कृपा से सुग्रीव ने बाली को हराया। यद्ध के पश्चात श्री राम सीताजी की याद मे चिन्तित हो गये। इस कारण उन्होंने भुला दिया था कि वे विष्षु के अवतार किया अनन्य भक्ति कैसे मिली? ये मनुष्य रूप में जन्म इतना आवश्यक क्यों है? इन गहरे प्रश्नो का उत्तर नारद की व्युत्पत्ति मे मिल सकता है। नारद पहले एक गंधर्व थे। उनका काम था दिव्य सं गी त "Blossom time has come and है। उन्होने लक्ष्मण के समक्ष अपना दुख प्रकट । श्री लक्ष्मण भी उन्हे सहानुभुती देने लगे। इस क्षण, नारद को दर्शन many ancient seekers मुनी ने आकर श्री राम और श्री लक्ष्मण are today getting their दिये। जारद ने श्री राम को नवरात्री पूजन करने की सलाह दी। श्री राम ने पूर्ण श्रद्धा के साथ नवरात्री self realization" पूजन किया। के अन्त मे श्री आदीशक्ति ने श्री राम को दर्शन दिये और विस्तार पूर्वक सारी बातें बताई कि श्री राम विष्णु के अवतार हैं, और सारे देवीं देवता उनके साहयता के लिए तत्पर हैं; तथा रावण ने सीताजी की परछाई मात्र को अशोक वाटिका मे रखा है: सीतजी को पूजन With Compliments M. Ravindra रचना। एक बार च ता ি उ न क । ৪ 8.

 Four petals of Meoladhara The petals are like catchment areas for the blessings or powers bestowed upon us by our Holy Mother. Ganesha to our Holy Mother. We pray, "Shri Mataji, please fill every cell of our being with the complete dedication and surrender of Shri Ganesha to Your Holy Lotus Feet". Secondly, the wisdom which Shri Ganesha endows and thirdly the The first petal goes in a downward direction towards the ground. It holds the joy of the Brahmanand- the pure and absolute joy of the divinity. So we can pray "Shri Mataji, please bless us with the joy of pure knowledge of the divinity. So here we pray, "Shri Mataji please bless us with the absolute wisdom of Shri Ganesha" and Brahmanand". "Shri Mataji please bless us with the pure knowledge of Your Divinity". The second petal goes towards the left. It holds two blessings - the first is that The fourth petal then goes upwards. Here there are two blessings which the petal holds. Firstly, the complete fearlessnesS, So we He removes the obstacles to our ascent. So, here we pray, "Shri Mataji, please let Shri Ganesh Tatwa remove all the obstacles to our pray "Shri Mataji please bless us with the Ascent", Secondly it holds the majesty and dignity that is brought by pure Spirit, so we pray, "Shri Mataji, please fill each cell of our being with the majesty and dignity of the pure Spirit". complete fearlessness of Shri Ganesha". Secondly this petal collects the amrut that trickles down from the Divine when the Sahasrara is open, so we pray "Shri Mataji, please fill each cell of our being with the nectar of Your Divine Love". Third is the petal, which goes to the right. Here there are three qualities, first, the absolute dedication and surrender of Shri with Best Compliments from: The sinner is dead, the egoistical is SHRI SARVESHWARA A-410, Nilgiri Apt., Alaknanda, New Delhi- 11019. not there, the frightened one is gone Mobile: 9811486329 E-mail: sarveshwara@vsnl.com for ever. You are a prophet. Rise in A Complete House of: All Printing Jobs & Stationery Supplier, Export Quality Binding of Books, Photo Albums, Photo Frame the Glory of that personality. 0000000000

 Kahlil Gibran: A Poignant Voice of Wisdom Kahlil Gibran, (1883-1931) was a poet who glimpsed the wisdom of the Divine while writing from the voice of a humble writer. A deeply realized soul, he was born in Lebanon, and wrote in Arabic for the first part of his life. He had a deep love of the Mother principle, and felt that one's Mother is an angel given by God that always watched over her child. A writer whose poetry has been translated into twenty languages, Gibran is unique in his voice of soul in union with vibrations. His images, which accompany his work, have been compared to William Blake's. Mother The most beautiful word on the lips of mankind is the word, "Mother", and the most beautiful call is the call of "My Mother". It is a word full of hope and love, a sweet and kind word coming from the depths of the heart. The mother is everything - She is our consolation in sorrow, our hope in misery, and our strength in weakness. She is the source of love, mercy, sympathy and forgiveness. He who loses his mother loses a pure soul who blesses and guards him constantly. Everything in nature bespeaks the mother. The sun is the mother of Earth and gives it its nourishment of heat; it never leaves the universe at night until it hos put the Earth to sleep to the song of the sea and the hym of birds and brooks. And this Earth is the mother of trees and flowers. It produces them, nurses them, and weens them. The trees and flowers become kind mothers to their fruits and seeds. And the mother, the prototype of all ~~From Broken Wings ~ existence, is the eternal spirit, full of beauty and love. Imbued with the mysticism of his culture, he went to the United States with relatives in his early years. Losing his mother and other close relatives at an early age affected him and brought him to look at the inner side of life. The result is work that expresses deeply the Guru principle in a biblical style of poetry and with a forthrightness of speaking from Divine Inspiration. He actually spent some of his first years in America in the ethnic quarter of the South end of Boston. Prejudice was deep in the city at that time, but he somehow was taken under the wing of teachers and artists of the local intellectual community and given opportunities that most working class children did not have. He later returned to Lebanon for university studies. He wrote in English language during the last twenty years of his life. If you haven't already read it, The Prophet is a best first step for reading Gibran. A best selling book when it was first published in 1923, it resurfaced in seeking circles in the 60's and 70's. Reading it now with the eyes of a yogi, The Prophet gives the reader the experience of a teacher of eternal wisdom. For example, in the chapter entitled "On Children", Gibran strikes a profound chord on the special nature of children that is especially akin to Shri Mataji's words. Continue on your adventure with Jesus Son of Man: His words and His deeds as told and recorded by those who knew Him. This book is a picture of Christ, full of living energy and overflowing with Ио

 wonder, painted through the reflections of His I1Our Kind Of Peoplell Our kinds of people are always different disciples as well as They find the tune always sweet others from the New And have the Rhythm always right Testament. A work of They are really close to our Heart breathta king imagination, Jesus Son of Man is They may not be your blood relations imbibed with a sense That's why they read your Inner thought Neither have any friendly connections Their unstinted laughter is full of Innocence That's why establish heavenly connections of Ganesha the Scribe, as he records the human responses to Divine events. Whether completely accurate or not, the force of the vibrations give proof of the truth spoken of Jesus in all of His power. Their thoughts always spell the truth Their desire is pure, like gold from hearth Their love is selfless, full of warmth That's why create longing for them, as aftermath As Ganesha gives the quality of wisdom, we must learn to introspect on the wisdom of the wise who come to our land by the grace of Shri Mataji. It must have a bit of a tapasya (penance) for Gibran's soul to be chatting over Victorian teacups and New York cafes, as his heart seemed so deeply rooted in his Arabic roots. They do not look at anyone's fault Neither boasts of what they got They do not have any greed left That's why they are always in limelight Their attention does not astray in family life Are out of worldly attachments, leading Seer's life Seek Divine knowiedge, meditating throughout life Yet by being in US (land of Shri Krishna - Vishuddhi), he was a pioneer of Aspire heavenly ascent, to fulfill this life vibrations in the US and he spoke the truth through his prose and poetry. It is said that Jesus actually spoke in poetry in Aramaic, in Because they are Shri Adishakti Mataji's 'Nirmalites the same land of Kahlil Gibran's birth. Gibran reaches back to this voice of Shri And are not apparel yogis, but truly become 'Sahaja Yogis' - Your kind always in Sahaja Jesus and carries its love, compassion and enlightenment to modern times. With best compliments from Karen DeNitto, US INDORE HOUSING 'A' Class Construction of With best compliments from Bunglows by qualified Dr. Mitesh Gandhi engineers as per IS-Code of Civil Engineering B.Sc. (Hons) M Comptom Practicing in UK 16, Ashish Regency, Pipliahana Chouraha, Ring Road, Indore. Ph-(0731) 2490953, 2490128 11

 ॐ कार का सजन टु सहजयोगी जानते हैं कि विश्व के सभी धर्मोका लक्ष्य जीव और आत्मा तथा आत्मा और परमात्मा का मिलन है,अ्थात साधक का अपने 'स्व' को पहचानना और उसके 'स्व' का लीन हो जाना है । व्यक्ति प र मेंाम परिवर्तनशील प्रेम के खेल की मुरली की तरह साक्षी आव से देखने लगताहै। कहागया: सर्वप्रथम शब्द था, शब्द परमात्मा में परमात्मा के पास था, शबब्द ही परमात्मा था। इस प्रकार परमात्मा ने शुरूआत की, सभी कुछ उनके ारा बनाया गया, कोई भी चीज उनके अंतरिक्त किसे ने नहीं बनाई। उन्हीं में जीवन था और जी व न ह के जब सहस्त्रार मे स्थापित कुण्डलिनी का मिलन अनाहत चक्र मे स्थित आत्मा से होता है, तो मानवीय चे तना को सर्वोच्च धर्म का हे। मानव क । T श प्र क थ।..... । प त य क मनुष्य को प्रक Tशि त करने वाला सच्चा प्रकाश संसार में आ रहा था । वो संसार में था और संसार उसी के द्वारा बनाया गया, फिर भी संसार उसे नही जानता था।' साक्षात्क र री होता है। यह आत्मा और शक्ति के सम्यकता की अवस्था है। यह अवस्था अव्यक्त परमात्मा तथा मानव के अंत: स्थित परमात्मा (आत्मा) के बीच योग को भी व्यक्त करती है, क्योंकि यह मूल अन्तर (जोन १) 'जिस लक्ष्य के विषय में वेढों ने घ्रोषणा की, जो (original distinction) से पहले की एकात्मकता सभी तपस्याओं में निहित है और जिसके उद्देश्य से मानव ब्रह्मचर्य और सेवा का जीवन व्यतीत करता सर्वशक्तिमान परमात्मा श्री सदाशिव और ॐकार (काठेपनिषद) अक्षर ॐ जो अनश्र ब्रह्म है वही ब्रहमाण्ड है। जो भी अस्तित्व मे था, जो भी अस्तित्व में है और यह एकात्मकता (unity) जिसे ब्रह्म तत्व ॐकार जिसका भी अस्तित्व होगा वह ॐकार ही है। तथा और आमीन (Amen) जैसे शब्दों से अभिव्यक्त जो भूत, भविष्य और वर्तमान से परे है, वह भी करते हैं, भगवान जीसस क्राइस्ट (परमात्मा के ॐकार ही है। जो कुछ भी हम ब्रह्म में देखते है, वह पुत्र, महाविष्णु) के रूप में अवतरित हुई। आईए ब्रह्म है। हमारे अंदर स्थित आत्मा भी ब्रह्म ही है। यह को प्रतिबिम्बित करती है । श्री है।' की स्थिति है, उसके बारे में संक्षिप्त में बताता हूँ। वह दिखाई पडने वाला अन्तर आदिशक्ति में मूलतः स्पष्ट हो जाता है। आत्मा ॐकार से एकरूपहै। देखते है कि प्राचीन काल में इसके विषय में क्या -( मचंडोंक्यउपनिषद) 12 काे

 लाओडीसी (Laodicea) के चर्च के देवढूत के ब्ारा आत्मसाक्षात्कार के पश्चात्, चैतन्य के रूप में लिखा गया; आमीन (Amen) शब्द, विश्वासपात्र इसकी अभिव्यक्ति को पराअनूकम्पी नाडी प्रणाली और सच्चा साक्षी है, तथा परमात्मा की सृष्टि (Parasympathetic Nervous System) के का प्रारम्भ है। - (John. The Apocalypse 3.14.) माध्यम से शरीर मे महसूस किया जा सकता है। यह शक्ति सर्वत्र कार्यरत है, और हर समय कार्यरत है, परन्तु आत्मसाक्षात्कार से पहले मनुष्य इसे महसूस नही करसकता। ईसाईयत और ॐकार शब्द को सहज कुण्डलिनी योग से संबंधित कर इन पावन अक्षरों में निहित प्रतीकात्मकताको समझसकते है। उपनिषद हमें बताते हैं कि, 'ॐकार पर ध्यान करने से विवेकशील साधक ब्रह्म को प्राप्त करता है। ॐकार ही ब्रह्म है । ॐकार ही सब कुछ है।' अबब प्रश्न यह उठता है कि ॐकार पर ध्यान किस प्रकार किया जाए। श्रीमाताजी ने इसका उत्तर सहजयोग के माध्यम में दिया है। अक्षर 'अ' विराट, (अर्थात आदि पुरूष) के तमोगुण को व्यक्त करता है (इच्छा - desiring Imood)। वरष्ठि में यह, वो ईश्वर है जिनकी शक्ति श्री महाकाली हैं। समष्ठि में यह ईडा नाडी है, अथात बाई अनुकम्पी नाडी प्रणाली (Left Sympathetic Nervous System)I &H aR पर यह अणु का नाभिक (Nucleus)है। मानव ॐकार किस प्रकार बनता है? - अक्षर अ','उ' और 'म्' को एकसाथरखकर । 'अ', 'उ' और 'म्' को एक साथकौन रखता है? - स्वयंकी कुण्डलिनी। कुण्डलिनी स्वयं को किस प्रकार अभिव्यक्त करती है? -सहजयोग से। अक्षर 'उ' आदि पुरूष के रजोगुण को व्यक्त करता है (क्रिया- Activating mood)। वष्ठि में यह हिरण्यगर्भ हैं, जिनकी शक्ति श्री महासरस्वती हैं। समष्ठि में यह पिंगला नाडी है, अर्थात ढाई अनुकम्पी नाडी प्रणाली (Right Sympathetic Nervous System)। सूक्ष्म स्तर पर यह अण के विद्युतअणु (Electrons) है। जिस प्रकार सर्वशक्तिमान पावन माँ श्री आदिशक्ति जे कार का सृजन किया, जिस प्रकार श्री गौरी ने श्री गणेशका सृजन किया, जिस प्रकारश्री पार्वती ने श्री कार्तिकेयकासृजन किया। जिस प्रकार श्री राधा ने श्री महाविष्णु का सृजन किया, जो श्री जीसस के 'म्' आदि पुरूष के सत्वगुण का " अ क्षर रप में मी मैरी की कोख से अवतरित प्रकार परम् पूज्य श्री माताजी निर्मला देवी ने सहजयोगियों की एक जाति का निर्माण किया है। श्री माताजी कहती हैं कि सहजयोगियों का सृजन, बिल्कुल श्री गणे श उसी प्रतिनिधित्व करता है (प्रकटन भाव - Revelation rnood), जो ॐ कार को साक्षात् आदिपुरूष, विराट के स्तर तक उठता है, जिसकी शक्ति श्री महालक्ष्मी है। समष्ठि में यह सुषम्ना नाडी है, अर्थात पराअनुकम्पी नारडी प्रणाली (Parasympathetic Nervous System) तथा सूक्ष्म स्तर पर यह अणु की कर्षणशक्ति (Valency)है। हुए, के स् ज न के समान किया गया है। ("The Advent, chapter 6: Religion d. Religions" के "Think of that dream, आदि कुण्डलिनी (आदि कुण्डलिनी के रूप मे आदिशक्ति कहलाती हैं, अर्थात जिनमें तीनो गुण है। वे 'अ','उ' और 'म्' को एक रूप करती है। अतः परमेश्वरी शक्ति के स्तर पर आदि कुण्डलिनी ॐकार का सृजन करती है, और वैयक्तिक रूप में, इसका अर्थ यह है कि आदिशक्ति ही श्री गणेश की माँहैं। that we have to transform Holy Spirit) त्रिगुणात्मिका each and every individual into good people" Ms. Malavika Agarwal अनुवादित) ॐकार एक नाद है, और चिन्ह 'ॐ' वास्तव में ऊर्जा की आदि गतिविधि का प्रतीक है। 13 छतीं हं

 Ancient Sahaja Tradition "References to Kundalini awakening, also called as Self-Realization, are seen in many ancient scriptures of all religions. But the way in which most great prophets wrote made it hard to understand exactly what they were writing about. Nothing is blatantly stated. Unless one has self-realization, this knowledge of the divine could be misinterpreted. It is only with self-realization that one can receive the total joy of great souls' prediction of Sahaja Yoga." Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi The origins of the word Sahaja are buried in the mists of time. By the time Kabir began using the word in his Hindi songs/poems in the fifteenth cerntury; Sahaja had been in use amongst the mystics of northern India for at least seven hundred years, and most probably much longer. The earliest usage is in Sanskrit: the Devi Sukta refers to the Brahmana, the Sahaja Yogi; in the Warahopanishad the arousing of Kundalini is linked to Sahaja Samadhi. The ascent of the Kundalini is described by Shankaracharya in his Saundarya Lahari. The Sahajiya Buddhists emerged in Berngal in eastern India somewhere between the 8th and 10h centuries. Saraha, Kanha, Bhusuka, Lui, Tilo, and others are known today only through their dohas and caryas (short songs), written in a now defunct language, Apabrahmsa, and in old Bengali. Many of the themes used in their songs can also be found in the work of the later saints such as Kabir, Dadu and Sundardas, in the verses and prayers of Nanak, the founding guru of the Sikh tradition, as well as in the work of later mystics in Bengal. The Nath yogis seem to have emerged in the 10th to 12th centuries in the hills and mountains of northern India. Their main teacher was Gorakhnath (12th century) who wrote extensively about the arousing of the Kundalini and the attainment of the Sahaja state. The secret knowledge of the Naths was passed on from teacher to pupil, and also shared with other mystics who were ready for realization. Thus Nath concepts can be found in the songs of the Rajasthani saints Mirabai, Dadu, and Sundardas, the Kashmiri saints Lalla and Rupa Bhavani, and many of the Marathi saints, notably Jnaneshvara, Muktabai, Namdev, Eknath, and Tukaram. Oblique references can also be found in the songs of some of the Sufi saints, notably Bulle Shah (Punjab) and Sachal and Shah Latif (Sind). THE In South India several of the Tamil Siddhis have described the ascending Kundalini, including Thirumoolar (6thcentury) in his Thirumanthiram, which has yet to be fully translated into English. But there have been distortions and deviations in the Sahaja tradition. In Bengal the Sahaja tradition, handed down from the Sahajiya Buddhists and the Nath yogis, has been distorted by some tantric practices. A similar situation has occurred in the Buddhist traditions of Nepal and Tibet. Using vibrational awareness, any Sahaja Yogi can differentiate the true Sahaja from the deviant. Answers: 1) Find the Himalayas (2) Find the land of Canajoharie next to Shri Krishna (3) Find kundalini at the roat of the tree. (4) Cabella. Find castle. (5) 'Dhirta' means 'charn-amrit' or ambrosia. Find the waterfall. (6) Find the angel of announcement. (7) Find Shri Shiva in Himalayas. 14

 Uttaranchal Seminar 2004 The Uttaranchal Indian National seminar hosted by the Uttaranchal State, at Hardwar from 10th to 14th June 2004. It was like a mini Ganapatipule experience in all respects. A massive response of approx. 2000 Sahaja Yogis mostly from Northern sector of India turned up, Here one felt blessed by graceful although roaring stream of Mother Ganges just like the majestic Grandfather Sea at Ganapatipule. It was a nice milieu surrounded by lush green forestry on one than up hand while it had a good stretch of grassy land on the other. Besides more numbers turned the arrangements organized.The main theme in this seminar was introspection, dedication and devotion towards Shri Mataji through recognition. Also to attain the state of doubtless awareness first so that all questions would be answered by a single statement that is "Grow inwards ...devotion dedication and recognition of Shri Mataji through Mahamantras (as we seem to utter the Mantra by lip service and don't understand the divine meaning that She is MahaLaxmi, Maha Swaraswati and Mahakali, Who has incarnated as Kalki for our salvage which should clarify all doubts in Sahaja). Also any petty issues in family matters or diseases in Sahaja should fall apart as we ascend in Sahaja". Regarding the subject of Yuva, the Yuva force in Cabella were praised and fondly cited as examples carrying out every aspect of work during the Puja and public programmes. They all are so educated and humble. In India also there is a good Yuva force. However, the Yuvas should be more forceful in their mission and should work in unity and harmony with guidance of the Leaders. No misunderstandings should prevail. Then only we can please our Mother.Besides that the seminar had many Yogis from the farming background. Thus Sahaja Farming became a very interesting topic. The effect of vibrated water on plants, seeds and sowing experiments were revealed in this field. It was interesting to note how Vibrated water changes its interfacial hydrogen: oxygen bonding angle from 120 to 104 degrees. Also how the Ganesh Tattwa in the roots of the seedling behaves. Sahaja farming yields are manifold compared to the normal yield and they become insect proof and rats do not eat away the products. It was also said that urban Yogis will visit the villages for self realization program.Meditation: Morning meditation had a different flavour. Just after the collective bandhan and Mahamantras Shri Mataji's audio was played. After the meditation shoe beating and Vishuddhi clearance was conducted in collective outside the pandal. One really is compelled to be happy to do all these so close to the nature, sitting on the grass and enjoying the mellifluous chirping of birds.Highlights:The meditation conducted mainly focused on Mother's talks from the golden audiotapes of yester years. (These are available to the collective in India through three volumes in sets of 10/10/5 on sale counter through Nirmal Infosystem & Technologies Pvt. Ltd., Pune).The evening sessions were mostly cultural activities. The Doordarshan channel Television crews were invited on the closing day to give a wide coverage of the seminar.On first day the evening opened up with a collective Havan. The heavy air had to settle to a cool surrounding. In the evenings there were Qawalies and Continued on page 17 15

 Yuvashakti Activities १३ जून २००४ के दिन पुणे में युवाशक्ति कार्यशाला का आयोजन किया गया। स्थान था खडकी केन्ट स्थित कारगिल हॉल1 कार्यशाला का शुभारम्भ प्रातः ९: ३० बजे तीन महामन्त्रों के उच्चारण से हुआ। पुणे के म्युझीक ग्रुप के साथ सभी ने भजनों का आनंद लिया, व उससे वातावरण भी श्रद्धामय व शांत हो गया। भजनों के पश्चात सामूहिकता में चक्रों के बीज-मन्त्रों का उच्चार किया गया, जिससे चक्रों की स्वच्छता में और सहायता मिली। ्फिर एक-एक करके युवाशक्ति के कई भाई-बहनों नें विभिन्न विषयों पर सब के साथ जानकारी बाँटी, जिसका सार निम्न-लिखित बिन्दुओं में मिलता है: श्री माताजी ने १९८७ में यूवाशक्ति की स्थापना की। उस समय उनके द्वारा युवाशक्ति को दिए गए निर्दशों तथा मार्गदर्शन के विषय में जानकारी दी गई। ध्यान में निर्विचार होना आवश्यक है। हर बार पूर्ण समर्पण करके ध्यान करना चाहिए। * सहज योग का प्रचार -प्रसार करते समय ध्यान रखने वाली व्यावहारिक बातें। * ध्यान से हमारी सामुहिक चेतना जागृत हो जाती है, जीवन कार्यक्षम बनता है, और व्यक्तित्व का विकास होता है। ध्यान, कुमकुम, पृथ्वी तत्त्व, प्रोटोकॉल्स इनका महत्त्व । चित्त की स्थिरता और पवित्रता का महत्त्व, तथा किस प्रकार चित्त को शुद्ध रखा जाए। * सहज योग का अथवा कोई भी कार्य करने के लिए अत्यन्त आवश्यक है सन्तुलन। साथ ही श्री माताजी के प्रति पूर्ण श्रद्धा और अटूट विश्वास होना चाहिए। हमारी सोच सकारात्मक होना चाहिए। कार्यशाला का अन्त पुनः एक बार ध्यान, तथा आरती से हुआ। इस कार्यशाला के माध्यम से सहज योग में नए आए हुए युवाओं को युवाशक्ति, सहज योग तथा सहज की संस्कृति का परिचय मिला, तथा ध्यान की गहनता का भी अनुभव मिला। Yuvashakti seminar at Viskhapatnam We had a wonderful Yuvashakti seminar at Viskhapatnam in the last weekend. Vishakhapatnam is a one night journey from Hyderabad which is full of hills & on one side of it is the sea. We have a few Meditation centers running in this place.It was spontaneously decided to have a Yuvashakti seminar in this place. All the Yuvashakti brothers & sisters from this area gathered at VT College (One of the meditation centers) on Sunday 9.30 AM.We experienced deep meditation, listening to a lecture of Shri Mataji on "How to get into thoughtless meditation". After that we had an interactive session where basic protocols of Sahaja yoga, like how & when we should put bandhans, and some treatments were explained. We also exchanged vibrations. Every one felt a tremendous flow of vibrations after this. This seminar was a medium to help us understand the purpose & responsibility of a Yuvashakti. We watched the video display of ShriMataji's bhajans & after that Yuvashakti had sung few bhajans & the seminar concluded at 1.30 PM with Aarti. This was the first time we had a Yuvashakti programme in this place. 16

 Public programme conducted by Yuvashakti in Warangal Warangal is around 140 kms. from Hyderabad where we & fewelders got an opportunity to conduct Self Realization programmes. Mainly two mobile stalls were installed in Warangal & Hanumankonda bus-station.Also Yuvashakti brothers & sisters from Hyderabad travelled to Warangal for the campaign. Hundreds got their Self Realization. As a result, spontaneously a public programme was arranged for those who visited the stalls, at REC Ladiesclub, Warangal. Self Realization Programme at Kapal Mochan By grace of Shri Mataji, we Sahaja Yogis from Yamuna Nagar were offered this great opportunity to organize three days public programme in Kapal Mochan fair. Kapal Mochan is a place near Yamuna Vnagar where Shri Rama, Pandavas & Guru Govind Singh after destroying the evil powers washed their sword in these rivers. Near About 40 public programmes were conducted in three days, Around 10000 people people got their Self-Realization. Most of them were Sikhs from small villages in Punjab & Haryana. Our pandal was beautifully decorated where Sufi music filled the air with vibrations. These bhajans and vibrations attracted many pilgrims. Similar kind of programmes were also arranged in Kurukshetra on Geeta Mohatsav for 4 days. There also thousands of seekers were blessed. Continued from page 15 Bhajans. Popular Sahaja singers like Deepak Verma, Mukhi Ram, Dr. Rajesh were the attractions, who carried away the collective to divine ecstasy as Sahajis danced to the. On the second day there was a very innovative drama based on the talks of Shri Mataji establishing the various relationships and values in our human lives. Such as, relationship of Children versus Parents, Husband Versus Wife, Status of Marriages in Sahaja, utilization of money in Sahaja etc. It was enchanting to evaluate our own strengths and weaknesses through this drama. Before concluding the seminar the entire excerpts of the talk from the old collection were gifted out to the collective. A precious treasure...all in one cassette (Nirmal Vaani). We need to enjoy every bit of what Shri Mataji bestows upon us as blessings staying as Sahaja Yogis and we have to purify our inner attention to get to complete nirvicharita as Shri Mataji says..."Thinking about the ascent, how you are going to rise, thinking of the moment when you had the joys, thinking of the day where you met me first, thinking of all the other beautiful and holy things, your mind can be cleansed. And whenever such a thought comes in, have to say, not this, not this". It's more mental than physical, I tell you. Iknow it's difficult, but you if you can getrealisation why not this also? 17

 A GIFT TO HUMANITY International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Divine place for. The Hospital has an Out Patient Centre-A GIFT TO HUMANITY by H.H.SHRI Department wherein non Sahaja Yogis have also MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI was inaugurated by walked in, got their realization and benefited HER DIVINE SELF on 19 March 1996. It is a both medically and spiritually. The Indoor Unique Centre where the patients are treated by Patients list includes patients not only from India but also from affluent countries like U.S.A, U.K., Austria, Canada, France, Singapore, New Zealand, China, Australia & Switzerland to name a few. The Health Centre has successfully progressed due to Blessings & Divine Attention of H.H. Shri Mataji. Initially starting from a total of about one thousand patients treated in year 1996 to about 2500 patients being treated in 2003. It is nothing but Shri Mataji's Divine Grace year and kind Attention that awareness of vibrational benefits is being highlighted. A Yogi/patient Divine Vibrations developed by practice of 8oes back not only physically cured but the Sahaja Yoga Meditation. Shri Mataji started this nourishment and rejuvenation for him/her to Unique Centre to make mankind realize the face the world with a balanced & positive Beneficial Effects of Kundalini awakening-it's attitude. Late Prof. U.C. Rai was initially Medical Benefits, how diseases can be cured appointed Director of Int. S.Y. Res. & Health without medicine. Here a Holistic approach Centre. After his heavenly abode in September towards a patient is taken .According to Sahaja 2001 Shri Mataji has appointed his daughter-in - Yoga hypothesis disease is a manifestation of an law Dr Madhur Rai as Chief Medical Officer of imbalance within the subtle energy system and correction at this level by Kundalini arousal by Grace of Divine Mother helps to cure diseases. This Divine knowledge given to us by Shri Mataji is being applied at International S.Y. Research & Health Centre and patients from all vibrational experience provides all the required I.S.Y.R. & H.C. over the world have benefited. Various Psychosomatic Diseases like Bronchial Asthma, Hypertension, Migraine Insomnia, Arthritis, Depression, Epilepsy and even Cancer have been treated successfully over here. It is not only medical but also vibrational benefits that Yogis from all over the world comne to this 18-

 Welcome to the kingdom of God! Welcomne to the world that you live in, but know not! We present.to you a snapshot of its harmony. To completely entrench your being in joy you must first visit the seven sacred places. The key lies in decoding the seven meanings. Let your spirit be your guide. May you triumphant in your journey! Jaishri Mataji Example:- It is eternal and has one thousand powers. It has been represented in ancient scriptures. Ans:-Find the Lotus in the picture. 1. His daughter is Shailaputri. He is the king of complete majesty, It is a magnificence which rises into the sky so pure and beautiful. 2. There is a vessel that cleans itself. Natives call it "Gana-jyo-hah-laje". It is filled with sweet music touching all that enter. 3. She is love. She is our root.She is the serpent power. 4. Its name is born of another language, it means 'beautiful'. Every corner of it resounds Her name, blessed are those who enterits domain. Follow the holy path to enterits realm. 5. It means Dhirta. The angels are guarding it's source. It was prohibited to doctors in olden days, they were not allowed and they had to fight for it. Sahaja yogis have been blessed to have it. In this kingdom of God it flows abundantly. 6. Shri Vishnumaya has the power of announcement. Let us also imbibe this quality just like the little one in the picture announcing the arrival of the Goddess. be 19-

 Tine Line 1947-55 2020 1970 2010 2000 1980 1960 1990 1940 1950 1930 1920 Shri Mataji got married to Sir C.P. Srivastava on the 7th April 1947. O..0th January 1948 Gandhiji was assassinated while going for his evening prayers in the Birla Bhavan in Delhi. Shri Mataji had met Gandhiji just one day before he was assassinated. Gandhiji took Her daughter on his lap and said "Nepali, you are the same to look at and now you are a mother. When are you going to start your spiritual work? Now we are free and you should start whatever you wanted to do". Sir C.P.ji was selected for both Indian Foreign Service (I.F.S.) and the Indian Administration Service (I.A.S.) and he was given a choice to select any of the two services. When he referred this to Shri Mataji, She told that serving the nation by staying in the nation is better than taking a post abroad. When Sir C.P.ji and Shri Mataji were staying in Bombay, their building was located very close to the Mantralaya. One day a big procession came to the Mantralaya but the police stopped, that infuriated the mob as a result a lathi charge was ordered and then the police started shooting people. Shri Mataji was watching this from the balcony of Her flat. She could not tolerate this and She rushed down to help those who were hurt. A few of them She brought up to the flat for first aid, She removed their bullets and dressed them. Shri Mataji's father passed away on 15th February 1955. Before his death he asked Shri Mataji "Have you been able to find the method?" He was asking about the mass realization. YUVADRISHTI Reg. No. yuvadrishti@yahoo.com SUBSCRIPTION FORM (FOR YUVADRISHTIUSE) (PLEASE FILL IN CAPITALS) Name (IN BLOCKS). Address City PIN. State Phone Email Dt. Drawn on Cash/DD No. Of Rs. DD should be sent in the favour of 'Nirmal Infosystems Pvt. Ltd." payable at Pune. Address for correspondence : dasfasdfdsa Signature 20

 हम शपथ लेते है कि हम श्री गणेशजी की पूजा करके, उन्हें सुरक्षा की याचना करके, व अपने मूलाधार में स्थापित होने का निरमन्त्रण देकर हम अपनी अबोधिता की, समाज के अनन्त आकर्षणों से रक्षा करेंगे। हम शपथ लेते है कि हम स्वयं को, चित्त में आत्मा के प्रकाश को ज्योतित होने से रोकने वाले सासारिक दाग-धब्वे एवं बाधाओं से मुक्त करेंगे। हम शपथ लेते हैं कि सन् २००० में सहस्रार दिन पर अपने महल में श्री माताजी ने जो युवाशक्ति से कहा था, कि एक पैना चित्त विकसित करे, ताकि वो हमारे भीतर परम-चैतन्य के, विश्व की सारी समस्याएँ सुलझाने के कार्य के लिए एक दिशा * सूचक वन सके, को पूरा करेंगे। हम शपथ लेते है कि सहजयोग के विषय पर बात करने के और विनम्रता-पूर्वक आत्मसाक्षात्कारदेने के हर अवसर का लाभ उठाएंगे। ह हम शपथ लेते हैं कि हम स्वयं के गुरू बनेंगे ताकि हमारे मुख से निकले शब्दों मे आत्म साक्षात्कारी गुरओं के विश्वास की गूँज हो तथा जो साधकों को आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त करने एवं विश्वनिर्मला धर्म में स्वतंत्र जीवन अपनाने के लिए प्रेरणा दे। हम शपथ लेते है कि हम अपने भयों का सामना करेंग और श्री माताजी से स्वयं का सामना करने तथासहजयोग प्रसार करने का साहस मांगेंगे। हम शपथ लेते है कि हम अपना अधिक से अधिक समय युवा शक्ति भाई-बहनो के साथ बिताएंगे, उनसे परमेश्वरी ज्ञान का आदान-प्रदान करेंगे और अगर आवश्यक हुआ तो उनकी रक्षा भी करेंगे। हम शपथ लेते है कि अपने अहं और प्रति-अहं पर काबू पाने के लिए तथा पूर्ण विश्वास बनाए रखने के लिए हम समर्पित होंगे । हम शपथ लेते है कि पूर्ण समर्पित व विनाम निष्ठा से हम अपनी परमेश्वरी माँ से प्रार्थना करेंगे कि वे हमें उनकी वास्तविकता की पहचान तथा हमें अशिवाद दे कि इस नव वर्ष में अपनी शपथ को पूर्ण करने से रोकने वाली दुर्बलताओं पर हम विजय प्राप्त कर सकें। हम आशा करते हैं कि ये नव वर्ष एक नई शक्तिशाली युवाशक्ति, जो माँ को इस बात का धन्यवाद देने की इच्छा से प्लावित है, कि उन्होंने हमें अपने बच्चे बनाया, ऐसी युवाशक्ति का उद्मव होगा। के

 ПИ



----------------------

2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yuvadrishti
An offering at the lotus feet of our Divine Mother by the Yirvashakti
June
2004
Volume 5
Issue 2
ক
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 IMATA I: ON MEDITATION
SHRI
Raja Janaka
Devi's Yantra 8 The Shri Chakra
ब्रह्म देव के बेटेः जद कु
Four petals of Mooladhnra
Kahlil Gibran
ॐ कार का सन
10
12
A GIFT TO HUMANITY
18
You can send your suggestions, complaints and articles at following address:
Yuvadrishti
C/oNirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No.8, Chandragupt Housing Soc.,
Behind Hotel Grace, Paud Road, Kothrud,
Pune-411029. Ph.-020-25286537
e-mail: yuvadrishti@yahoo.com
website: www.yuvadrishti.com
detail with complete address and draft of Rs. I20/- in favour of
For Subscription, send your
"Nirmal Infosysterms & Technologies Pvt. Ltd." payable ar Pune ar above address.
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 CHDI MATA Ne ON MEDITATION
In the morning you get up, have your plane you cannot grow in Sahaja Yoga. So first
bath, sit down, take some tea; don't talk. Don't thing is to establish your thoughtless awareness3B
talk in the morning sit down, meditate because still you might feel little chakra blockages here
at that time the Divine rays come in, the Sun and there; forget it. Just forget about it.
comes afterwards. That's how the birds get up.
That's how the flowers get up. They're all chakra is catching, you should
awakened by that, and if you are sensitive you surrender this to You". Instead of doing any of
will feel that by getting up in the morning you these things you can just say that. But, that
will look at least ten years younger. Really, it's surrendering should not be rationalised.
such a good thing to get up in the morning and you're still rationalising and worrying
then, automatically you sleep early. This is for should I say this, it will never work out. If
getting up, for sleeping
that you'll manage
yourself. Then, in the
morning time you
should just meditate.
In meditation
try to stop your
thoughts. Watch My
photograph with open
and see that you
Now start your surrendering. Now if a
"Mother, 1
say
If
why
I need not tell because
there's pure Love and purity in your heart that's
the best thing; that to do
so is to surrender.
Leave all the worries
to Your Mother.
Everything to Your
Mother.
But
surrendering is one
point that is very
difficult in ego-oriented
societies. Even talking
about that, I feel a little
bit worried.
eyes
stop your thoughts.
You should stop your
thoughts, then you go
into meditation. The
But if there's any
simple thing to stop
your thoughts is the Lord's Prayer, because chakra catching, just surrender. And
that's the Agnya state. So in the morning you you'll see that the chakras are cleared
remember Lord's Prayer or Ganesha's mantra. morning time you do not go on putting this way,
It's just the same. Oryou even say "Iforgive",So that way, nothing; don't move your hands too
you can start with Ganesha's mantra, say Lord's much in the morning. You'll find most of your
Prayer and then say "I forgive". It works out. chakras will clear out in the meditation.
Then you are in thoughtless awareness. Now
you meditate, Before that, there's no try in your heart and there, try to put Your Guru,
meditation. When the thou hts are coming or "I in the core of it. After establishing in the heart,
have to take tea", "what shall I do", "now what we must bow to that with full devotion and
have 1 to do",
this will be there. So first you become mind after realisation is not imagination because
thoughtlessly aware, then the growth of now your mind, your imagination, is itself
spirituality starts after thoughtless awareness, enlightened. So project yourself in such a way
not before. One should know that. On rational that you humble down at the Feet of Your Guru,
thoughts coming in to
you or any
In the
up.
Try to put your Love in your heart. Just
who's this and who's thať", all dedication. Now whatever you do with your
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 become sort of, expanded. Expanse you see.
u will
Your Mother.
And now ask for the necessary You will extend them in such a way that you
temperament needed for meditation, or feel you are in control of them and by controlling
atmosphere needed for meditation. Meditation those emotions your emotions are expanded,
is when you are one with the Divine.
Now if there are thoughts coming in first you
have to say the first mantra, of course, and then breathing.
watch inside. Also, you must say the mantra of breathing; reduce it, in the sense that
Ganesha, will help some people, and then you breathed out, wait for a while, then breathe in.
should watch inside and see for yourself which For a long time. Then you breathe out. So
is the biggest hurdle.
First the thought now for the thought you have
to say the mantra of Nirvichara.
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Nirvichara SakshatShri connection is established.
Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah
enlightened and powerful.
Now what you do is to watch your
See now, try to reduce your
have
you
during one minute your breathing will be less
than normal, Alright? Try that, keep the
attention on the emotions, you see? So that the
Better? See, the Kundalini rises. Now,
when
you are breathing, you find that there is
You
space in-between which you just leave vacant.
Breathe in. Keep it there. Now breathe out and
a
Now come to the hurdle of our ego.
see the thought has stopped now no doubt, but
there is still a pressure on the head. Soif itis ego,
you have to say:
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Mahat Ahamkara Sakshat
Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh
Namah
breathing in such a way, that you really reduce
your breathing. Your attention should be on
your heart or it could be your emotion, it's better
Mahat means the great, Ahamkara to keep the breath inside for a while. Hold it.
means the ego. You say it thrice. Now, even Bring it out. Hold out. Thenkeep it outside for a
now, if you find that ego is still there, then while. Then again. Then you'll find that for a
have to raise your left side to push it back to the you will not breathe. Good. See, you're
right side. With your hand, one hand towards settled now. The Laya takes place between your
the photograph.
Push the left side higher and the right
side lower so the ego and the superego get tie It up. Again, raise your Kundalini up on the
balance. Do it seven times. Try to see how you head and tie It up. Again, raise your Kundalini
are feeling inside, you see.
you
while
Prana and your Mana. Both the Shaktis become
one.
Now raise your Kundalini up on top and
the
and tie It up thrice.
Now at the Sahasrara you should say the
So once you have given yourself a
balance, then, the best thing is to pay attention to
your emotions, to Mana Shakti. Watch them.
You can enlighten your emotions, by thinking of
Your Mother, Right? Just enlighten them.
This solves all the problems. Whatever
are the problems in the Mana. So once you are
connected to those emotions and you start
looking at them in your meditation you will see
these emotions are rising within you and if you
try to put these emotions on your Mother (as
they say at the Lotus Feet of your Mother), they,
those emotions, will start dissolving and they'll
mantra of Sahasrara thrice.
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Kalki Sakshat Shri
Sahasrara Swamini Moksha Pradayini Mataji Shri
Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah
Now its open now, if you see, now you
can open again your Sahasrara like this.
And see that you are stationed there
Once this has been done then you go into
meditation.
Reduce your breathing, will be better.
You reduce your breathing as if stopping it, but
no exertion about it.
ftt
2
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Raja Janaka
yogi must overcome his desires. While
explaining the need of balance in daily life, he
said that a man who has a quite temper and
sound intellect takes success and failure in the
same light arnd is not elated in times of pleasure
nor depressed in times of pain. Shri Mataji has
emphasized on maintaining balance in our daily
life and has said that true ascent can only be
achieved while maintaining balancing.
"You all might be knowing about King
Janaka. Nachiketa thought that this King Janaka
who has crown on his head, he has all slaves and
servants, there is dance going in front of him.
When he comes in our Ashram my guru touches
his feet? How is it that he is so great? So his Guru
50
said to him that he should himself go and see.
Nachiketa went and stood in front of Janaka and
said, " Please give me self realization, My Guru
aja Janaka was an incarnation of has said that you can give self realization, so
Shri Adi Guru Dattatreya. He was the son of
please give me self realization" King Janaka
King Hrasvaroma from the dynasty of the
great
said, "look, if you would have asked me whole
universe I would have given but I cannot give
King Nimi. His name was 'Seer Dhwaja' Janaka.
Seer means plough and Dhwaja means flag
signifying one who has a plough on his flag. doesn't know the subtle aspect of it then what is
"Janaka' also means 'one who looks after, the use of giving it to such human being? The
you realization, reason being that one who
understands and cares for his subjects'. He was
one who will understand its subtle aspect can
the disciple of great sage Yajnavalkya.
only get deeper into it." So, the tattwa of
Raja Janaka believed in attaining the Prapancha is 'Pr' which means the light. Untill
highest state (yogic state) while maintaining unless it is awakened within you all.you will
balance and advised to conquer the enemies remain in Pancha' (means 'five', the five
within us one at a time. On the path of ascent, a elements through which our evolution took
place) and cannot enter in 'Prapancha'. When
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Nachiketa asked the above question to King
Raja Janaka emphasized on having a
balanced attention. The story of Shri Narada and
Janaka. King Janaka asked Nachiketa to be with
him. But at last Nachiketa understood that this
a bowl of milk is an emblem of balanced
man (King Janaka) has no attachments. He is not
worried at all, neither he has any sticking with
attention. Once Shri Narada asked Raja Janaka
the reason for being called a 'Videha'. Raja
worldly things or what we call as world. He is
Janaka told Shri Narada that he will answer his
like an ascetic. He will wear crown on his head of
question later in the day. In the meantime, Raja
king and sleep on the ground, like a real
Emperor. He doesn't need any comforts,
sometimes he will sleep on soft bed...sometimes
Janaka gave Shri Narada a bowl of milk to carry.
The bowl was full of milk to the extent that
slightest movement of the bowl was enough to
lie on the ground...like an Emperor within. He
spill the milk. Shri Narada followed Raja Janaka
is not worried of anything, he is not caught by
everywhere he went with the bowl of milk. Shri
Narada was very careful in handling the bowl as
hedid not want to spill the milk.
anything. The one who is in prapancha never
gets effected by any comfort or any slavishness
towards material. Even if you ask him to sleep
When they retired for the evening, Shri
by resting his head on stone, he can sleep. Ask
Narada told Raja Janaka of being tired of
carrying the bowl of milk. He requested Raja
him to eat anything, without taste...he can eat
and also he can eat in parties."
-Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi ("Prapancha and
Sahaj Yoga", 26.11.84)
Janaka to explain him the reason of him being
known as a Videha'. Raja Janaka asked Shri
Narada "First of all tell me what you have seen?"
shri Narada said "Nothing, except the bowl of
Though Raja Janaka was engaged in
preserving a kingdom and was a great ruler, he milk." Raja Janaka asked him "Didn't
was never attached to Mithila (Raja Janaka's there was a big procession in my honor, then
kingdom). According to Raja Janaka, his there was a court wherein there was a program
you see
enormous wealth and kingdom did not belong of dancing? Didn't you see anything?" Shri
to him. The idea of not being bound to the world
Narada told Him that he had not seen anything
gave him constant joy and happiness. He would
never be affected by any source of happiness or
sorrow Shri Mataji has advised Sahaja Yogis to
due to the bowl of milk. To this, Raja Janaka said
that even he did not see anything. Every
moment, he watched his attention. He made
detach themselves from worldly things sure that his attention never spilled like milk.
While maintaining the households,
innately.
His attention was always fixed on his spirit.
Shri Mataji has told us to give up
the
Shri Mataji has spoken about Chitta-
desires/thoughts of 'we' having worldly
Nirodha. She said that Sahaja Yogis can develop
this state by watching their attention. Our
possessions. The concept of detachment must be
imbibed by every Sahaja Yogi.
attention should not be on worldly and
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 materialistic possessions but on ourselves. Instead of thriving to
save our worldly possessions, we must thrive to save our
attention. Raja Janaka was beyond the conceptions of planning,
existence, and emotions. It is important for Sahaja Yogis to attain
Videha state through meditation and cross the boundaries of
"There is only one
pure desire and that
is to be one with
the divine."
planning and emotions.
Every incarnation has an associated 'Shakti'. Shri Seetaji,
Mumbai
Yuvashakti
the daughter of Raja Janaka, was his Shakti. Raja Janaka found
Seetaji in the form of an infant while ploughing the land for yajna.
Being uncovered by the edge of a plough, he named her Seeta.
Seetaji was also known as Janaki- the beloved daughter of Raja
Janaka. "Seeta' literally means a furrow, a track of a plough shore.
It is understood that Raja Janaka's palace was extremely beautiful
due to the influence of Janaki. Since only a very exceptional man
could be considered worthy of Seetaji, Raja Janaka arranged a
Mother kindly bless
Chandigarh with your
Swayamavara. The Swayamavara was attended by many princes.
The prince who could lift, bend and string the bow of Shri Shiva
gifted by Varuna to Raja Janaka would marry Seetaji. Only Shri
Ram could lift the heavenly bow. Thus, Shri Ram and Seetaji got
divine attention for
more and more
pure and deep
Sahaja Yogis should
evolve here.
married.
While teaching karma yoga to Shri Arjuna, Shri Krishna
gave the example of King Janaka attaining perfection by
performing selfless work directed towards the well being of all.
Raja Janaka was a brave king. Though peace loving by nature, he
fought all the wars thrust on him by aggressive kings. He was well
versed in shastras and Vedas as any sage of that time. He
promoted and supported the sages and scholars who were
following the path of Jnana' - the central path.
Ritu Mehra
Kaushik Panchal
Wesee that the entire life of Raja Janaka is an inspiration for
Ratilal & Sons
all Sahaja Yogis. His principles are directly reflected in Sahaja
Yoga. Shri Mataji has told us to work on these principles with the
help of Sahaja Yoga. Once Raja Janaka told Suka that knowledge is
within us; it is only to be uncovered. This is a reference to the
All kind of textile Accessories,
Ruti'C', Fibre, Nylon Parts,
UHMWP Sheet, Rods &
Sulzer Parts.
hidden powers of human beings. Shri Mataji has spoken about the
manifestation of these powers. All the hidden powers are
C/54, Tirupati Estate,
Nr. Manchhani Masjid,
Millan Everest Cinema Road,
Saraspur, Ahmedabad-380018.
Ph. (0) 2748183.
uncovered when kundalini shakti' is awakened by the divine
grace of our Mother.
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Devils Yantra & The Shri Chakra
Each deity has a yantra of his/her own. Pujas to Shri Vishnu are not performed using yantra or
instruments. Only in the case of the goddess Amba the Shri Chakra is used to invoke her blessings.
Mantra and Tantra form the two aspects of worship unto divine. Chanting of sounds arranged in a
particular sequence bring the worshipper closer to that divine form. The sound forms in a mantra
actually represent the forms of that particular deity. Along with this sound form the deity can also
be represented diagrammatically. Each part of the yantra is not just a geometric representation but
an instrument of immense power. In fact the yantra not only stands for a deity but also for his/her
place of residence.
The Shri Chakra consisting of lines, circles, squares and triangles all form a part of the chakra. The
yantra has a central Bindu or a dot. Designs like this have the capacity to grasp the power of various
deities and repulse the effect of evil powers.
The middle portion of the chakra consists of 9 distinct triangles which criss-cross one another to
form 43 triangles. The central dot is also considered as a triangle so that, there are 44 triangles in all.
These 44 triangles are arranged in the form of 6 avarnas (Avarna means concealing or covering). In
the diagram the similar colored ring formed by a set of triangles represents an avarna. The central
dot is also regarded as an avarna so that there are 6 avarnas in all. There are shastras that deal with
the presiding deity reside in which avarna, what truth it conveys, what blessings can be invoked by
that deity and what mudra belongs to eachavarna.
Apart from these 6 there are more avarnas so in all they are navvarnas (literally translated as 9
covers)
great caution has to be invoked in using this diagram. This instrument of immense power can
bring different results if not represented correctly.
A yantra actually represents the place of
residence of a deity. On the other hand it is
also itself representative of that deity. (often
Shri Chakra is considered the third place of
residence of goddess Amba apart from the
mount 'Meru' and the ocean of Ambrosia)
Shri Chakra can also be represented in 3-
dimensional form when each avarna form
its own peaks built tier upon tier in a
conical form called 'Meru'.
Goddess Amba bestows us the 'Nitya-Shri'
or the imperishable beatitude, the wealth of
and unsurpassed bliss of the Atma. That is
why in The Lalitha-Sahasranaman the first
name of the goddess is Shri-Mata. In
consonance with this everything attached
to her is prefixed with Shri (Shri Vidya or
Shri Chakra).
- The above excerpt has been taken from
Saudaryalahari.
6-
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 बेद: नारद मुनी
ब्रह्म देव के
ब्रह्म देव के बेटे नारद मुनी के बहुत सारे किस्से देवी
दिया था कि वे विष्षु के अवतार है। उन्होंने लक्ष्मण के
में मिलते है। शास्त्रों में वर्णित नारद, इंद्र की
महात्म्य
तरह, टी. व्ही. पर कई बार दिखाए गए है। लेकिन उनके
जीवन मे और भी बहुत सी घटनाएँ हुई जो बडी रो
चक है। जैसे, उनका मनु-पुत्र रूप दुसरा
जन्म; उनका श्री राम को नवरात्री पूजन करने के
लिएमार्ग दर्शन देना; इन अनोखी घटनाओ का
वर्णन देवी महात्म्य के अलग-अलग पाठों मे
मिलता है। आईए, इन किस्से कहानियों को
जजदीक से देखे और उनका लाभ उठाए।
समक्ष अपना दुख प्रकट किया। श्री लक्ष्मण भी उन्हें
सहानुभूती देने लगे। इस क्षण, नारद मुनी ने आकर श्री
को दर्शन दिये। जारदने श्री राम
को नवरात्री पूजन करने की सलाह दी। श्री राम ने पूर्ण
श्रद्धा के साथ नवरात्री पूजन किया। पूजन के अन्त मे श्री
शक्ति ने श्री राम को दर्शन
दिये और विस्तार पूर्वक
सारी बातें बताई कि श्री
राम विष्णु के अव्तार हैं,
और सारे देवी देवता उनके
साहयता के लिए तत्पर हैं; तथा
रावण ने सीताजी की परछाई मात्र
को अशोक बाटिका मे रखा है; सीतजी
को सीधे स्वर्म से भोजन पहुचाया जाता है,
इत्यादी। इस प्रकार, नारद श्री राम के
साक्षात्कार के साधन
राम और श्री लक्ष्मण
में
के
आदी
जारदमुनी का मानव जन्म
नारद मुनी और मनु, श्री ब्रह्म देव की संताने
हैं। सृष्टी के निर्माण के कार्य का कार्यभार
मनु को सौपा गया था। मनु के हजारो पुत्र
थे। लेकिन, नारद मुनी, जो मनुष्य नही
थे, उन मनु-पुत्रों को अपनी बुद्धिमत्ता से
किसी ना किसी तरह डरा देते थे, इस
व ी
द
बने।
किी
कारण सारे मनु-पुत्र घर त्याग कर चारों
दिशाओं में चले गए। पुत्रों के चले जाने पर
को
राज्य शासन में
युधिष्ठि र को नारद की सलाह
दुख पहुँचा। उन्होने कई हजार
मनु
पुत्र और पैदा किये, पर वे भी नारद मुनी
पुत्र
की वाणी के प्रभाव से कही दूर-दूर चले
नारद मुनी ने हर युग में भूमिकाए निभाई हैं। इसी
लिए हर ग्रन्थ मे उनको सम्मान पूर्वक उच्च स्थान
दिया गया है। इसका एक उदाहरण है, राज
शासन के उपलक्ष्य मे युधिष्ठिर को दी गई
सलाह : अपने अख्त्र-शस्त्र सदैव तैयार रखो ,
नौकरों को प्रेम से रखो, सैनिकों की तन्ख्वाह
समय परदो, किसानो को कृषी-कार्य के लिए
उचित साधन-सामान दो। ये सारी बाते आज
भी हमारे आधुनिक वित्त मन्त्रालय में भी लागू
होती है। इस प्रकार, जारद मुनी का विवेक
स्पष्टहोता है।
गए। इस तरह, मनु बार बार पुत्र जनते
और नारद उन्हे भगा देते फिर मनु से
ये देखा ना गया और उन्होने नारद को
श्राप दिया की तुम भी मेरे पुत्र बन कर
मानव जन्म लोगे। इस श्राप वश नारद
मुनी ने इन्सान के रुप मे जन्म लिया।
इस तरह धरती पर मनुष्य जाति हर कोने
तक फैली, और इस कार्य को नारद मुनी
के ्वारासम्पन्न किया गया।
श्री राम के प्रेरणा रुप श्री नारद
नारद का अर्थ
नारद शब्द दो शब्दो से बना है : जर
(बहुजनहिताय) और द ( दायक). नारद
मुनी का कार्य बहुजन के हित में अपनी वीणा
और वाणी का प्रयोग करना है। माना जाता है कि
नारद मुनी ने वीणा का अविष्कार किया। वीणा हाथ में
रामायण में सुग्रीव और बाली के बीच,
किष्किंधा में युद्ध हुआ। श्री राम की कृपा
से सुग्रीव ने बाली को हराया। युद्ध के
पश्चात श्री राम सीताजी की याद मे
चिन्तित हो गये। इस कारण उन्होंने भुला
7.
-
ড
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 ब्रह्म देव के बेटे नारद मुनी के बहुत सारे किस्से देवी सीधे स्वर्ग से भीजन पहुचाया जाता है, इत्यादी। इस
महात्म्य में मिलते हैं। शा्त्रों में वर्णित नारद, इंद्र की प्रकार, नारद श्री राम के देवी साक्षात्कार के साधन बने।
तरह, टी. व्ही. पर कई बार दिखाए गए है। लेकिन उनके
जीवन मे और भी बहुत सी घटनाएँ हुई जो बडी रोचक है। राज्य शासन मे युधिष्ठर को नारदकी सलाह
जैसे, उनका मनु-पुत्र के रूप में दुसरा जन्म; उनका श्री नारद मुनी ने हर युग में भूमिकाए निभाई हैं। इसी लिए हर
राम को नवरात्री पूजन करने के लिए मार्ग दर्शन देना; ग्रन्थ मे उनको सम्मान पूर्वक उच्च स्थान दिया गया है।
इन अनोखी घटनाओ का वर्णन देवी महात्म्य के अलग-
अलग पाठों मे मिलता है। आईए, इन किस्से कहानियों यूधिष्ठिर को दी गई सलाह : अपने अस्त्र शस्त्र सदैव
को नजदीक से देखे और उनका लाभ उठाए।
इसका एक उदाहरण है, राज शासन के उपलक्ष्य में
तैयार रखो, नौकरों को प्रेम से रखो, सैनिकों की
तन््वाह समय पर दो, किसानो को कृषी-कार्य के लिए
उचित साधन-सामान दो। ये सारी बाते आज भी हमारे
जारद मुनी कामानवजन्म
नारद मुनी और मनु, श्री ब्रह्म देव की संताने है। सृष्टी के आधुनिक वित्त मन्त्रालय मे भी लागू होती हैं। इस प्रकार,
निर्माण के कार्य का कार्यभार मनु कों सीपा गया था। मनु नारदमुनी का विवेक स्पष्ट होता है।
के हजारो पुत्र थे। लेकिन, नारद मुनी, जो मनुष्य नही थे,
उन मनु-पुत्रों को अपनी बुद्धिमत्ता से किसी ना किसी जारद का अर्थ
तरह डरा देते थे, इस कारण सारे मनु-पुत्र घर त्याग कर नारद शब्द दो शब्दो से बना है : नर (बहुजनहिताय
चारो दिशाओं में चले गए। पुत्रों के चले जाने पर मनु को और द (दायक). नारद मुनी का कार्य बहुजन के हित में
दुख पहुँचा। उन्होने कई हजार पुत्र और पैदा किये, पर वे अपनी वीणा और वाणी का प्रयोग करना है। माना जाता है
भी नारद मुनी की वाणी के प्रभाव से कही ढूर-दूर चले कि नारद मूनी ने वीणा का अविष्कार किया। वीणा हाथ
गए। इस तरह, मनु बार बार पुत्र जनते और नारद उन्हे में लेकर वे तीनो जहाँ में प्रवास करते हैं। उनकी देव और
भगा देते ।फिर मनु से ये देखा ना गया और उन्होने नारद दानव, दोनो से दोस्ती है। क्षेत्रज्ञ की तरह वे सारे जहाँ की
को श्राप दिया की तुम भी मेरे पुत्र बन कर मानव जन्म
लोगे। इस श्राप वश नारद मुनी ने इन्सान के रुप में जन्म कही भी पाप या अन्याय बढ़ता है तो कोई ना कोई उसे
लिया ।
खबर दुनिया भर में प्रसारित करते हैं। इसी कारण अगर
रोकने का प्रयास जरूर करता है। अधिकतर ऐसा ही होता
है कि बड़ी समस्याओं क निदान सिर्फ देवी के द्वारा ही
किया जाता है।
इस तरह धरती पर मनुष्य जाति हर कोने तक फैली. और
इसकार्य को नारदमुनी के द्ारासम्पन्न किया गया ।
दविजा नारद: मनुष्य जीवन का माहात्म्यः
श्री राम के प्रेरणा रुप श्री नारद
इतने बड़े आत्मसाक्षात्कारी कैसे बने? उनको
नारद
रामायण में सुग्रीव और बाली के बीच, किष्किंधा में युद्ध
हुआ। श्री राम की कृपा से सुग्रीव ने बाली को हराया। यद्ध
के पश्चात श्री राम सीताजी की याद मे चिन्तित हो गये।
इस कारण उन्होंने भुला दिया था कि वे विष्षु के अवतार
किया
अनन्य भक्ति कैसे
मिली? ये मनुष्य
रूप में जन्म इतना
आवश्यक क्यों
है? इन गहरे प्रश्नो
का उत्तर नारद की
व्युत्पत्ति मे मिल
सकता है। नारद
पहले एक गंधर्व थे।
उनका काम था
दिव्य सं गी त
"Blossom time has come and
है। उन्होने लक्ष्मण के समक्ष अपना दुख प्रकट ।
श्री लक्ष्मण भी उन्हे सहानुभुती देने लगे। इस क्षण, नारद
को दर्शन
many ancient seekers
मुनी ने आकर श्री राम और श्री लक्ष्मण
are today getting their
दिये। जारद ने श्री राम को नवरात्री पूजन करने की
सलाह दी। श्री राम ने पूर्ण श्रद्धा के साथ नवरात्री
self realization"
पूजन
किया। के अन्त मे श्री आदीशक्ति ने श्री राम को
दर्शन दिये और विस्तार पूर्वक सारी बातें बताई कि श्री
राम विष्णु के अवतार हैं, और सारे देवीं देवता उनके
साहयता के लिए तत्पर हैं; तथा रावण ने सीताजी की
परछाई मात्र को अशोक वाटिका मे रखा है: सीतजी को
पूजन
With Compliments
M. Ravindra
रचना। एक बार
च ता
ি
उ न क ।
৪
8.
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Four petals of Meoladhara
The petals are like catchment areas for the
blessings or powers bestowed upon us by
our Holy Mother.
Ganesha to our Holy Mother. We
pray,
"Shri Mataji, please fill every cell of our
being with the complete dedication and
surrender of Shri Ganesha to Your Holy
Lotus Feet". Secondly, the wisdom which
Shri Ganesha endows and thirdly the
The first petal goes in a downward
direction towards the ground. It holds the
joy of the Brahmanand- the pure and
absolute joy of the divinity. So we can pray
"Shri Mataji, please bless us with the joy of
pure
knowledge of the divinity. So here we
pray, "Shri Mataji please bless us with the
absolute wisdom of Shri Ganesha" and
Brahmanand".
"Shri Mataji please bless us with the
pure knowledge of Your Divinity".
The second petal goes towards the left.
It holds two blessings - the first is that
The fourth petal then goes upwards.
Here there are two blessings
which the petal holds.
Firstly, the complete
fearlessnesS, So we
He removes the obstacles to our
ascent. So, here we pray,
"Shri Mataji, please let Shri
Ganesh Tatwa remove
all the obstacles to our
pray "Shri Mataji please
bless us with the
Ascent", Secondly it
holds the majesty and
dignity that is brought by
pure Spirit, so we pray, "Shri
Mataji, please fill each cell of our
being with the majesty and dignity of
the pure Spirit".
complete fearlessness of
Shri Ganesha". Secondly this
petal collects the amrut that trickles
down from the Divine when the
Sahasrara is open, so we pray "Shri
Mataji, please fill each cell of our being
with the nectar of Your Divine Love".
Third is the petal, which goes to the right.
Here there are three qualities, first, the
absolute dedication and surrender of Shri
with Best Compliments from:
The sinner is dead, the egoistical is
SHRI SARVESHWARA
A-410, Nilgiri Apt., Alaknanda,
New Delhi- 11019.
not there, the frightened one is gone
Mobile: 9811486329
E-mail: sarveshwara@vsnl.com
for ever. You are a prophet. Rise in
A Complete House of:
All Printing Jobs & Stationery Supplier,
Export Quality Binding of Books,
Photo Albums, Photo Frame
the Glory of that personality.
0000000000
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Kahlil Gibran: A Poignant Voice of Wisdom
Kahlil Gibran, (1883-1931) was a poet who glimpsed the wisdom of the Divine while writing
from the voice of a humble writer. A deeply realized soul, he was born in Lebanon, and wrote in
Arabic for the first part of his life. He had a deep love of the Mother principle, and felt that one's
Mother is an angel given by God that always watched over her child.
A writer whose poetry has been translated into twenty languages, Gibran is unique in his voice of
soul in union with vibrations. His images, which accompany his work, have been compared to
William Blake's.
Mother
The most beautiful word on the lips of mankind is the word, "Mother", and the
most beautiful call is the call of "My Mother". It is a word full of hope and love, a
sweet and kind word coming from the depths of the heart. The mother is
everything - She is our consolation in sorrow, our hope in misery, and our
strength in weakness. She is the source of love, mercy, sympathy and
forgiveness. He who loses his mother loses a pure soul who blesses and
guards him constantly.
Everything in nature bespeaks the mother. The sun is the mother of Earth
and gives it its nourishment of heat; it never leaves the universe at night
until it hos put the Earth to sleep to the song of the sea and the hym of birds and brooks. And this
Earth is the mother of trees and flowers. It produces them, nurses them, and weens them. The trees
and flowers become kind mothers to their fruits and seeds. And the mother, the prototype of all
~~From Broken Wings ~
existence, is the eternal spirit, full of beauty and love.
Imbued with the mysticism of his culture, he went to the United States with relatives in his
early years. Losing his mother and other close relatives at an early age affected him and brought him
to look at the inner side of life. The result is work that expresses deeply the Guru principle in a
biblical style of poetry and with a forthrightness of speaking from Divine Inspiration.
He actually spent some of his first years in America in the ethnic quarter of the South end of
Boston. Prejudice was deep in the city at that time, but he somehow was taken under the wing of
teachers and artists of the local intellectual community and given opportunities that most working
class children did not have. He later returned to Lebanon for university studies. He wrote in English
language during the last twenty years of his life.
If you haven't already read it, The Prophet is a best first step for reading Gibran. A best selling
book when it was first published in 1923, it resurfaced in seeking circles in the 60's and 70's. Reading
it now with the eyes of a yogi, The Prophet gives the reader the experience of a teacher of eternal
wisdom. For example, in the chapter entitled "On Children", Gibran strikes a profound chord on the
special nature of children that is especially akin to Shri Mataji's words.
Continue on your adventure with Jesus Son of Man: His words and His deeds as told and recorded
by those who knew Him. This book is a picture of Christ, full of living energy and overflowing with
Ио
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 wonder, painted
through the
reflections of His
I1Our Kind Of Peoplell
Our kinds of people are always different
disciples as well as They find the tune always sweet
others from the New And have the Rhythm always right
Testament. A work of They are really close to our Heart
breathta king
imagination, Jesus
Son of Man is They may not be your blood relations
imbibed with a sense
That's why they read your Inner thought
Neither have any friendly connections
Their unstinted laughter is full of Innocence
That's why establish heavenly connections
of Ganesha the Scribe, as he records the
human responses to Divine events.
Whether completely accurate or not, the
force of the vibrations give proof of the truth
spoken of Jesus in all of His power.
Their thoughts always spell the truth
Their desire is pure, like gold from hearth
Their love is selfless, full of warmth
That's why create longing for them, as aftermath
As Ganesha gives the quality of
wisdom, we must learn to introspect on the
wisdom of the wise who come to our land
by the grace of Shri Mataji. It must have a bit
of a tapasya (penance) for Gibran's soul to
be chatting over Victorian teacups and New
York cafes, as his heart seemed so deeply
rooted in his Arabic roots.
They do not look at anyone's fault
Neither boasts of what they got
They do not have any greed left
That's why they are always in limelight
Their attention does not astray in family life
Are out of worldly attachments, leading Seer's life
Seek Divine knowiedge, meditating throughout life
Yet by being in US (land of Shri
Krishna - Vishuddhi), he was a pioneer of Aspire heavenly ascent, to fulfill this life
vibrations in the US and he spoke the truth
through his prose and poetry. It is said that
Jesus actually spoke in poetry in Aramaic, in Because they are Shri Adishakti Mataji's 'Nirmalites
the same land of Kahlil Gibran's birth.
Gibran reaches back to this voice of Shri
And are not apparel yogis, but truly become 'Sahaja Yogis'
- Your kind always in Sahaja
Jesus and carries its love, compassion and
enlightenment to modern times.
With best compliments from
Karen DeNitto, US
INDORE HOUSING
'A' Class Construction of
With best compliments from
Bunglows by qualified
Dr. Mitesh Gandhi
engineers as per IS-Code
of Civil Engineering
B.Sc. (Hons) M Comptom
Practicing in UK
16, Ashish Regency,
Pipliahana Chouraha, Ring
Road, Indore. Ph-(0731)
2490953, 2490128
11
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 ॐ
कार का सजन
टु
सहजयोगी जानते हैं कि विश्व के सभी धर्मोका
लक्ष्य जीव और आत्मा तथा आत्मा और परमात्मा
का मिलन है,अ्थात साधक का अपने 'स्व' को
पहचानना और उसके 'स्व' का
लीन हो जाना है । व्यक्ति
प र मेंाम
परिवर्तनशील प्रेम के
खेल की मुरली की
तरह साक्षी आव से
देखने लगताहै।
कहागया:
सर्वप्रथम शब्द था, शब्द
परमात्मा में
परमात्मा के पास था, शबब्द
ही परमात्मा था। इस प्रकार
परमात्मा ने शुरूआत की,
सभी कुछ उनके ारा बनाया
गया, कोई भी चीज उनके
अंतरिक्त किसे ने नहीं
बनाई। उन्हीं में
जीवन था और
जी व न ह
के
जब सहस्त्रार मे स्थापित
कुण्डलिनी का मिलन
अनाहत चक्र मे स्थित
आत्मा से होता है, तो
मानवीय चे तना को
सर्वोच्च धर्म का
हे।
मानव क ।
T श
प्र क
थ।..... ।
प त य क
मनुष्य को
प्रक Tशि त
करने वाला
सच्चा प्रकाश
संसार में आ रहा
था । वो संसार में
था और संसार उसी
के द्वारा बनाया
गया, फिर भी संसार
उसे नही जानता था।'
साक्षात्क र
री
होता है। यह आत्मा
और शक्ति के सम्यकता
की अवस्था है। यह अवस्था
अव्यक्त परमात्मा तथा मानव के
अंत: स्थित परमात्मा (आत्मा) के बीच योग
को भी व्यक्त करती है, क्योंकि यह मूल अन्तर
(जोन १)
'जिस लक्ष्य के विषय में वेढों ने घ्रोषणा की, जो
(original distinction) से पहले की एकात्मकता सभी तपस्याओं में निहित है और जिसके उद्देश्य से
मानव ब्रह्मचर्य और सेवा का जीवन व्यतीत करता
सर्वशक्तिमान परमात्मा श्री सदाशिव और ॐकार
(काठेपनिषद)
अक्षर ॐ जो अनश्र ब्रह्म है वही ब्रहमाण्ड है। जो
भी अस्तित्व मे था, जो भी अस्तित्व में है और
यह एकात्मकता (unity) जिसे ब्रह्म तत्व ॐकार जिसका भी अस्तित्व होगा वह ॐकार ही है। तथा
और आमीन (Amen) जैसे शब्दों से अभिव्यक्त जो भूत, भविष्य और वर्तमान से परे है, वह भी
करते हैं, भगवान जीसस क्राइस्ट (परमात्मा के ॐकार ही है। जो कुछ भी हम ब्रह्म में देखते है, वह
पुत्र, महाविष्णु) के रूप में अवतरित हुई। आईए ब्रह्म है। हमारे अंदर स्थित आत्मा भी ब्रह्म ही है। यह
को प्रतिबिम्बित करती है ।
श्री
है।'
की स्थिति
है, उसके बारे में संक्षिप्त में बताता हूँ। वह
दिखाई पडने वाला अन्तर
आदिशक्ति में
मूलतः
स्पष्ट हो जाता है।
आत्मा ॐकार से एकरूपहै।
देखते है कि प्राचीन काल में इसके विषय में क्या
-( मचंडोंक्यउपनिषद)
12
काे
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 लाओडीसी (Laodicea) के चर्च के देवढूत के ब्ारा आत्मसाक्षात्कार के पश्चात्, चैतन्य के रूप में
लिखा गया; आमीन (Amen) शब्द, विश्वासपात्र इसकी अभिव्यक्ति को पराअनूकम्पी नाडी प्रणाली
और सच्चा साक्षी है, तथा परमात्मा की सृष्टि (Parasympathetic Nervous System) के
का प्रारम्भ है।
- (John. The Apocalypse 3.14.)
माध्यम से शरीर मे महसूस किया जा सकता है। यह
शक्ति सर्वत्र कार्यरत है, और हर समय कार्यरत है,
परन्तु आत्मसाक्षात्कार से पहले मनुष्य इसे
महसूस नही करसकता।
ईसाईयत और ॐकार शब्द को सहज कुण्डलिनी
योग से संबंधित कर इन पावन अक्षरों में निहित
प्रतीकात्मकताको समझसकते है।
उपनिषद हमें बताते हैं कि, 'ॐकार पर ध्यान करने
से विवेकशील साधक ब्रह्म को प्राप्त करता है।
ॐकार ही ब्रह्म है । ॐकार ही सब कुछ है।' अबब
प्रश्न यह उठता है कि ॐकार पर ध्यान किस प्रकार
किया जाए। श्रीमाताजी ने इसका उत्तर सहजयोग
के माध्यम में दिया है।
अक्षर 'अ' विराट, (अर्थात आदि पुरूष) के
तमोगुण को व्यक्त करता है (इच्छा - desiring
Imood)। वरष्ठि में यह, वो ईश्वर है जिनकी शक्ति
श्री महाकाली हैं। समष्ठि में यह ईडा नाडी है,
अथात बाई अनुकम्पी नाडी प्रणाली (Left
Sympathetic Nervous System)I &H aR
पर यह अणु का नाभिक (Nucleus)है।
मानव ॐकार किस प्रकार बनता है? - अक्षर
अ','उ' और 'म्' को एकसाथरखकर ।
'अ', 'उ' और 'म्' को एक साथकौन रखता है? -
स्वयंकी कुण्डलिनी।
कुण्डलिनी स्वयं को किस प्रकार अभिव्यक्त
करती है? -सहजयोग से।
अक्षर 'उ' आदि पुरूष के रजोगुण को व्यक्त करता
है (क्रिया- Activating mood)। वष्ठि में यह
हिरण्यगर्भ हैं, जिनकी शक्ति श्री महासरस्वती हैं।
समष्ठि में यह पिंगला नाडी है, अर्थात ढाई
अनुकम्पी नाडी प्रणाली (Right Sympathetic
Nervous System)। सूक्ष्म स्तर पर यह अण के
विद्युतअणु (Electrons) है।
जिस प्रकार सर्वशक्तिमान पावन माँ श्री आदिशक्ति
जे कार का सृजन किया, जिस प्रकार श्री गौरी ने
श्री गणेशका सृजन किया, जिस प्रकारश्री पार्वती ने
श्री कार्तिकेयकासृजन किया। जिस प्रकार श्री राधा
ने श्री महाविष्णु का सृजन किया, जो श्री जीसस के
'म्' आदि पुरूष के सत्वगुण का
"
अ क्षर
रप में मी मैरी की कोख से अवतरित
प्रकार परम् पूज्य श्री माताजी निर्मला देवी ने
सहजयोगियों की एक जाति का निर्माण किया है।
श्री माताजी कहती हैं कि सहजयोगियों का सृजन,
बिल्कुल श्री
गणे श
उसी
प्रतिनिधित्व करता है (प्रकटन भाव - Revelation
rnood), जो ॐ कार को साक्षात् आदिपुरूष, विराट
के स्तर तक उठता है, जिसकी शक्ति श्री महालक्ष्मी
है। समष्ठि में यह सुषम्ना नाडी है, अर्थात
पराअनुकम्पी नारडी प्रणाली (Parasympathetic
Nervous System) तथा सूक्ष्म स्तर पर यह अणु
की कर्षणशक्ति (Valency)है।
हुए,
के
स् ज न के
समान किया
गया है।
("The
Advent,
chapter 6:
Religion
d.
Religions"
के
"Think of that dream,
आदि कुण्डलिनी (आदि कुण्डलिनी के रूप मे
आदिशक्ति
कहलाती हैं, अर्थात जिनमें तीनो गुण है। वे 'अ','उ'
और 'म्' को एक रूप करती है। अतः परमेश्वरी
शक्ति के स्तर पर आदि कुण्डलिनी ॐकार का
सृजन करती है, और वैयक्तिक रूप में, इसका अर्थ
यह है कि आदिशक्ति ही श्री गणेश की माँहैं।
that we have to transform
Holy Spirit) त्रिगुणात्मिका
each and every individual into
good people"
Ms. Malavika Agarwal
अनुवादित)
ॐकार एक नाद है, और चिन्ह 'ॐ' वास्तव में
ऊर्जा की आदि गतिविधि का प्रतीक है।
13
छतीं
हं
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Ancient Sahaja Tradition
"References to Kundalini awakening, also called as Self-Realization, are seen in many ancient scriptures
of all religions. But the way in which most great prophets wrote made it hard to understand exactly what
they were writing about. Nothing is blatantly stated. Unless one has self-realization, this knowledge of
the divine could be misinterpreted. It is only with self-realization that one can receive the total joy of
great souls' prediction of Sahaja Yoga."
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
The origins of the word Sahaja are buried in the mists of time. By the time Kabir began using the word in
his Hindi songs/poems in the fifteenth cerntury; Sahaja had been in use amongst the mystics of northern
India for at least seven hundred years, and most probably much longer.
The earliest usage is in Sanskrit: the Devi Sukta refers to the Brahmana, the Sahaja Yogi; in the
Warahopanishad the arousing of Kundalini is linked to Sahaja Samadhi. The ascent of the Kundalini is
described by Shankaracharya in his Saundarya Lahari. The Sahajiya Buddhists emerged in Berngal in
eastern India somewhere between the 8th and 10h centuries. Saraha, Kanha, Bhusuka, Lui, Tilo, and
others are known today only through their dohas and caryas (short songs), written in a now defunct
language, Apabrahmsa, and in old Bengali. Many of the themes used in their songs can also be found in
the work of the later saints such as Kabir, Dadu and Sundardas, in the verses and prayers of Nanak, the
founding guru of the Sikh tradition, as well as in the work of later mystics in Bengal.
The Nath yogis seem to have emerged in the 10th to 12th centuries in the hills and mountains of northern
India. Their main teacher was Gorakhnath (12th century) who wrote extensively about the arousing of
the Kundalini and the attainment of the Sahaja state. The secret knowledge of the Naths was passed on
from teacher to pupil, and also shared with other mystics who were ready for realization. Thus Nath
concepts can be found in the songs of the Rajasthani saints Mirabai, Dadu, and Sundardas, the Kashmiri
saints Lalla and Rupa Bhavani, and many of the Marathi saints, notably Jnaneshvara, Muktabai,
Namdev, Eknath, and Tukaram. Oblique references can also be found in the songs of some of the Sufi
saints, notably Bulle Shah (Punjab) and Sachal and Shah Latif (Sind).
THE
In South India several of the Tamil Siddhis have described the ascending Kundalini, including
Thirumoolar (6thcentury) in his Thirumanthiram, which has yet to be fully translated into English.
But there have been distortions and deviations in the Sahaja tradition. In Bengal the Sahaja tradition,
handed down from the Sahajiya Buddhists and the Nath yogis, has been distorted by some tantric
practices. A similar situation has occurred in the Buddhist traditions of Nepal and Tibet. Using
vibrational awareness, any Sahaja Yogi can differentiate the true Sahaja from the deviant.
Answers: 1) Find the Himalayas (2) Find the land of Canajoharie next to Shri Krishna (3) Find
kundalini at the roat of the tree. (4) Cabella. Find castle. (5) 'Dhirta' means 'charn-amrit' or
ambrosia. Find the waterfall. (6) Find the angel of announcement. (7) Find Shri Shiva in
Himalayas.
14
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Uttaranchal Seminar 2004
The Uttaranchal Indian National seminar hosted by the Uttaranchal State, at Hardwar from
10th to 14th June 2004. It was like a mini Ganapatipule experience in all respects. A massive
response of approx. 2000 Sahaja Yogis mostly from Northern sector of India turned up, Here one
felt blessed by graceful although roaring stream of Mother Ganges just like the majestic
Grandfather Sea at Ganapatipule. It was a nice milieu surrounded by lush green forestry on one
than
up
hand while it had a good stretch of grassy land on the other. Besides more numbers turned
the arrangements organized.The main theme in this seminar was introspection, dedication and
devotion towards Shri Mataji through recognition. Also to attain the state of doubtless awareness
first so that all questions would be answered by a single statement that is "Grow inwards
...devotion dedication and recognition of Shri Mataji through Mahamantras (as we seem to utter the
Mantra by lip service and don't understand the divine meaning that She is MahaLaxmi, Maha
Swaraswati and Mahakali, Who has incarnated as Kalki for our salvage which should clarify all
doubts in Sahaja). Also any petty issues in family matters or diseases in Sahaja should fall apart as
we ascend in Sahaja". Regarding the subject of Yuva, the Yuva force in Cabella were praised and
fondly cited as examples carrying out every aspect of work during the Puja and public
programmes. They all are so educated and humble. In India also there is a good Yuva force.
However, the Yuvas should be more forceful in their mission and should work in unity and
harmony with guidance of the Leaders. No misunderstandings should prevail. Then only we can
please our Mother.Besides that the seminar had many Yogis from the farming background. Thus
Sahaja Farming became a very interesting topic. The effect of vibrated water on plants, seeds and
sowing experiments were revealed in this field. It was interesting to note how Vibrated water
changes its interfacial hydrogen: oxygen bonding angle from 120 to 104 degrees. Also how the
Ganesh Tattwa in the roots of the seedling behaves. Sahaja farming yields are manifold compared
to the normal yield and they become insect proof and rats do not eat away the products. It was also
said that urban Yogis will visit the villages for self realization program.Meditation: Morning
meditation had a different flavour. Just after the collective bandhan and Mahamantras Shri Mataji's
audio was played. After the meditation shoe beating and Vishuddhi clearance was conducted in
collective outside the pandal. One really is compelled to be happy to do all these so close to the
nature, sitting on the grass and enjoying the mellifluous chirping of birds.Highlights:The
meditation conducted mainly focused on Mother's talks from the golden audiotapes of yester
years. (These are available to the collective in India through three volumes in sets of 10/10/5 on sale
counter through Nirmal Infosystem & Technologies Pvt. Ltd., Pune).The evening sessions were
mostly cultural activities. The Doordarshan channel Television crews were invited on the closing
day to give a wide coverage of the seminar.On first day the evening opened up with a collective
Havan. The heavy air had to settle to a cool surrounding. In the evenings there were Qawalies and
Continued on page 17
15
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Yuvashakti Activities
१३ जून २००४ के दिन पुणे में युवाशक्ति कार्यशाला का
आयोजन किया गया। स्थान था खडकी केन्ट स्थित
कारगिल हॉल1 कार्यशाला का शुभारम्भ प्रातः ९: ३० बजे
तीन महामन्त्रों के उच्चारण से हुआ। पुणे के म्युझीक ग्रुप के
साथ सभी ने भजनों का आनंद लिया, व उससे वातावरण भी
श्रद्धामय व शांत हो गया। भजनों के पश्चात सामूहिकता में
चक्रों के बीज-मन्त्रों का उच्चार किया गया, जिससे चक्रों की
स्वच्छता में और सहायता मिली। ्फिर एक-एक करके
युवाशक्ति के कई भाई-बहनों नें विभिन्न विषयों पर सब के
साथ जानकारी बाँटी, जिसका सार निम्न-लिखित बिन्दुओं
में मिलता है:
श्री माताजी ने १९८७ में यूवाशक्ति की स्थापना की। उस
समय उनके द्वारा युवाशक्ति को दिए गए निर्दशों तथा
मार्गदर्शन के विषय में जानकारी दी गई।
ध्यान में निर्विचार होना आवश्यक है। हर बार पूर्ण समर्पण करके ध्यान करना चाहिए।
* सहज योग का प्रचार -प्रसार करते समय ध्यान रखने वाली व्यावहारिक बातें।
* ध्यान से हमारी सामुहिक चेतना जागृत हो जाती है, जीवन कार्यक्षम बनता है, और व्यक्तित्व का विकास होता है।
ध्यान, कुमकुम, पृथ्वी तत्त्व, प्रोटोकॉल्स इनका महत्त्व ।
चित्त की स्थिरता और पवित्रता का महत्त्व, तथा किस प्रकार चित्त को शुद्ध रखा जाए।
* सहज योग का अथवा कोई भी कार्य करने के लिए अत्यन्त आवश्यक है सन्तुलन। साथ ही श्री माताजी के प्रति पूर्ण
श्रद्धा और अटूट विश्वास होना चाहिए।
हमारी सोच सकारात्मक होना चाहिए।
कार्यशाला का अन्त पुनः एक बार ध्यान, तथा आरती से हुआ। इस कार्यशाला के माध्यम से सहज योग में नए आए हुए
युवाओं को युवाशक्ति, सहज योग तथा सहज की संस्कृति का परिचय मिला, तथा ध्यान की गहनता का भी अनुभव
मिला।
Yuvashakti seminar at Viskhapatnam
We had a wonderful Yuvashakti seminar at Viskhapatnam in the last weekend.
Vishakhapatnam is a one night journey from Hyderabad which is full of hills & on one side of it is the
sea. We have a few Meditation centers running in this place.It was spontaneously decided to have a
Yuvashakti seminar in this place. All the Yuvashakti brothers & sisters from this area gathered at VT
College (One of the meditation centers) on Sunday 9.30 AM.We experienced deep meditation,
listening to a lecture of Shri Mataji on "How to get into thoughtless meditation". After that we had an
interactive session where basic protocols of Sahaja yoga, like how & when we should put bandhans,
and some treatments were explained. We also exchanged vibrations. Every one felt a tremendous
flow of vibrations after this. This seminar was a medium to help us understand the purpose &
responsibility of a Yuvashakti. We watched the video display of ShriMataji's bhajans & after that
Yuvashakti had sung few bhajans & the seminar concluded at 1.30 PM with Aarti. This was the first
time we had a Yuvashakti programme in this place.
16
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Public programme conducted by Yuvashakti in Warangal
Warangal is around 140 kms. from Hyderabad where we & fewelders got an opportunity to conduct
Self Realization programmes. Mainly two mobile stalls were installed in Warangal &
Hanumankonda bus-station.Also Yuvashakti brothers & sisters from Hyderabad travelled to
Warangal for the campaign. Hundreds got their Self Realization. As a result, spontaneously a public
programme was arranged for those who visited the stalls, at REC Ladiesclub, Warangal.
Self Realization Programme at Kapal Mochan
By grace of Shri Mataji, we Sahaja Yogis from Yamuna Nagar were offered this great opportunity to
organize three days public programme in Kapal Mochan fair. Kapal Mochan is a place near Yamuna
Vnagar where Shri Rama, Pandavas & Guru Govind Singh after destroying the evil powers washed
their sword in these rivers.
Near About 40 public programmes were conducted in three days, Around 10000 people people got
their Self-Realization. Most of them were Sikhs from small villages in Punjab & Haryana. Our
pandal was beautifully decorated where Sufi music filled the air with vibrations. These bhajans and
vibrations attracted many pilgrims.
Similar kind of programmes were also arranged in Kurukshetra on Geeta Mohatsav for 4 days.
There also thousands of seekers were blessed.
Continued from page 15
Bhajans. Popular Sahaja singers like Deepak Verma, Mukhi Ram, Dr. Rajesh were the attractions,
who carried away the collective to divine ecstasy as Sahajis danced to the. On the second day there
was a very innovative drama based on the talks of Shri Mataji establishing the various relationships
and values in our human lives. Such as, relationship of Children versus Parents, Husband Versus
Wife, Status of Marriages in Sahaja, utilization of money in Sahaja etc. It was enchanting to evaluate
our own strengths and weaknesses through this drama. Before concluding the seminar the entire
excerpts of the talk from the old collection were gifted out to the collective. A precious treasure...all
in one cassette (Nirmal Vaani). We need to enjoy every bit of what Shri Mataji bestows upon us as
blessings staying as Sahaja Yogis and we have to purify our inner attention to get to complete
nirvicharita as Shri Mataji says..."Thinking about the ascent, how you are going to rise, thinking of
the moment when you had the joys, thinking of the day where you met me first, thinking of all the
other beautiful and holy things, your mind can be cleansed. And whenever such a thought comes in,
have to say, not this, not this". It's more mental than physical, I tell you. Iknow it's difficult, but
you
if you can getrealisation why not this also?
17
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 A GIFT TO HUMANITY
International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Divine place for. The Hospital has an Out Patient
Centre-A GIFT TO HUMANITY by H.H.SHRI Department wherein non Sahaja Yogis have also
MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI was inaugurated by walked in, got their realization and benefited
HER DIVINE SELF on 19 March 1996. It is a both medically and spiritually. The Indoor
Unique Centre where the patients are treated by Patients list includes patients not only from
India but also from affluent countries like U.S.A,
U.K., Austria, Canada, France, Singapore, New
Zealand, China, Australia & Switzerland to
name a few. The Health Centre has successfully
progressed due to Blessings & Divine Attention
of H.H. Shri Mataji. Initially starting from a total
of about one thousand patients treated in
year
1996 to about 2500 patients being treated in
2003. It is nothing but Shri Mataji's Divine Grace
year
and kind Attention that awareness of vibrational
benefits is being highlighted. A Yogi/patient
Divine Vibrations developed by practice of 8oes back not only physically cured but the
Sahaja Yoga Meditation. Shri Mataji started this nourishment and rejuvenation for him/her to
Unique Centre to make mankind realize the face the world with a balanced & positive
Beneficial Effects of Kundalini awakening-it's attitude. Late Prof. U.C. Rai was initially
Medical Benefits, how diseases can be cured appointed Director of Int. S.Y. Res. & Health
without medicine. Here a Holistic approach Centre. After his heavenly abode in September
towards a patient is taken .According to Sahaja 2001 Shri Mataji has appointed his daughter-in -
Yoga hypothesis disease is a manifestation of an law Dr Madhur Rai as Chief Medical Officer of
imbalance within the subtle energy system and
correction at this level by Kundalini arousal by
Grace of Divine Mother helps to cure diseases.
This Divine knowledge given to us by Shri
Mataji is being applied at International S.Y.
Research & Health Centre and patients from all
vibrational experience provides all the required
I.S.Y.R. & H.C.
over the world have benefited.
Various Psychosomatic Diseases like Bronchial
Asthma, Hypertension, Migraine Insomnia,
Arthritis, Depression, Epilepsy and even Cancer
have been treated successfully over here. It is not
only medical but also vibrational benefits that
Yogis from all over the world comne to this
18-
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Welcome to the kingdom of God! Welcomne to the world that you live in, but know not! We present.to you
a snapshot of its harmony. To completely entrench your being in joy you must first visit the seven sacred
places. The key lies in decoding the seven meanings. Let your spirit be your guide. May you
triumphant in your journey!
Jaishri Mataji
Example:- It is eternal and has one thousand powers. It has been represented in ancient scriptures.
Ans:-Find the Lotus in the picture.
1. His daughter is Shailaputri. He is the king of complete majesty, It is a magnificence which rises
into the sky so pure and beautiful.
2. There is a vessel that cleans itself. Natives call it "Gana-jyo-hah-laje". It is filled with sweet music
touching all that enter.
3. She is love. She is our root.She is the serpent power.
4. Its name is born of another language, it means 'beautiful'. Every corner of it resounds Her name,
blessed are those who enterits domain. Follow the holy path to enterits realm.
5. It means Dhirta. The angels are guarding it's source.
It was prohibited to doctors in olden days, they were not allowed and they had to fight for it.
Sahaja yogis have been blessed to have it.
In this kingdom of God it flows abundantly.
6. Shri Vishnumaya has the power of announcement. Let us also imbibe this quality just like the
little one in the picture announcing the arrival of the Goddess.
be
19-
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Tine Line
1947-55
2020
1970
2010
2000
1980
1960
1990
1940
1950
1930
1920
Shri Mataji got married to Sir C.P. Srivastava on the 7th April 1947.
O..0th January 1948 Gandhiji was assassinated while going for his evening prayers in the Birla Bhavan in
Delhi. Shri Mataji had met Gandhiji just one day before he was assassinated. Gandhiji took Her daughter
on his lap and said "Nepali, you are the same to look at and now you are a mother. When are you going
to start your spiritual work? Now we are free and you should start whatever you wanted to do".
Sir C.P.ji was selected for both Indian Foreign Service (I.F.S.) and the Indian Administration Service (I.A.S.)
and he was given a choice to select any of the two services. When he referred this to Shri Mataji, She told
that serving the nation by staying in the nation is better than taking a post abroad.
When Sir C.P.ji and Shri Mataji were staying in Bombay, their building was located very close to the Mantralaya.
One day a big procession came to the Mantralaya but the police stopped, that infuriated the mob as a
result a lathi charge was ordered and then the police started shooting people. Shri Mataji was watching
this from the balcony of Her flat. She could not tolerate this and She rushed down to help those who were
hurt. A few of them She brought up to the flat for first aid, She removed their bullets and dressed them.
Shri Mataji's father passed away on 15th February 1955. Before his death he asked Shri Mataji "Have you
been able to find the method?" He was asking about the mass realization.
YUVADRISHTI
Reg. No.
yuvadrishti@yahoo.com
SUBSCRIPTION FORM
(FOR YUVADRISHTIUSE)
(PLEASE FILL IN CAPITALS)
Name (IN BLOCKS).
Address
City
PIN.
State
Phone
Email
Dt.
Drawn on
Cash/DD No.
Of Rs.
DD should be sent in the favour of 'Nirmal Infosystems Pvt. Ltd."
payable at Pune.
Address for correspondence :
dasfasdfdsa
Signature
20
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 हम शपथ लेते है कि हम श्री गणेशजी की पूजा करके, उन्हें सुरक्षा की याचना
करके, व अपने मूलाधार में स्थापित होने का निरमन्त्रण देकर हम अपनी
अबोधिता की, समाज के अनन्त आकर्षणों से रक्षा करेंगे।
हम शपथ लेते है कि हम स्वयं को, चित्त में आत्मा के प्रकाश को ज्योतित होने से
रोकने वाले सासारिक दाग-धब्वे एवं बाधाओं से मुक्त करेंगे।
हम शपथ लेते हैं कि सन् २००० में सहस्रार दिन पर अपने महल में श्री माताजी ने
जो युवाशक्ति से कहा था, कि एक पैना चित्त विकसित करे, ताकि वो हमारे भीतर
परम-चैतन्य के, विश्व की सारी समस्याएँ सुलझाने के कार्य के लिए एक दिशा
*
सूचक वन सके, को पूरा करेंगे।
हम शपथ लेते है कि सहजयोग के विषय पर बात करने के और विनम्रता-पूर्वक
आत्मसाक्षात्कारदेने के हर अवसर का लाभ उठाएंगे।
ह
हम शपथ लेते हैं कि हम स्वयं के गुरू बनेंगे ताकि हमारे मुख से निकले शब्दों मे
आत्म साक्षात्कारी गुरओं के विश्वास की गूँज हो तथा जो साधकों को
आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त करने एवं विश्वनिर्मला धर्म में स्वतंत्र जीवन अपनाने के
लिए प्रेरणा दे।
हम शपथ लेते है कि हम अपने भयों का सामना करेंग और श्री माताजी से स्वयं
का सामना करने तथासहजयोग प्रसार करने का साहस मांगेंगे।
हम शपथ लेते है कि हम अपना अधिक से अधिक समय युवा शक्ति भाई-बहनो
के साथ बिताएंगे, उनसे परमेश्वरी ज्ञान का आदान-प्रदान करेंगे और अगर
आवश्यक हुआ तो उनकी रक्षा भी करेंगे।
हम शपथ लेते है कि अपने अहं और प्रति-अहं पर काबू पाने के लिए तथा पूर्ण
विश्वास बनाए रखने के लिए हम समर्पित होंगे ।
हम शपथ लेते है कि पूर्ण समर्पित व विनाम निष्ठा से हम अपनी परमेश्वरी माँ से
प्रार्थना करेंगे कि वे हमें उनकी वास्तविकता की पहचान तथा हमें अशिवाद दे कि
इस नव वर्ष में अपनी शपथ को पूर्ण करने से रोकने वाली दुर्बलताओं पर हम
विजय प्राप्त कर सकें। हम आशा करते हैं कि ये नव वर्ष एक नई शक्तिशाली
युवाशक्ति, जो माँ को इस बात का धन्यवाद देने की इच्छा से प्लावित है, कि
उन्होंने हमें अपने बच्चे बनाया, ऐसी युवाशक्ति का उद्मव होगा।
के
 2004_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 ПИ
