The Divine Cool Breeze May-June, 2004

 In This Issue Self Realization and God Realization Christmas Puja, 25-12-03 (Ganpati Pule) 5 Navratri Puja, 28-9-79 7 From Nirmala Yoga - 1981:- (a) A Letter of Shri Mataji 22 (B) Guru Puja, London, 2-12-79 23 (c) Pravachan of Shri Mataji, Australia-22-3-81 35 Transformation - A Poem 47

 SELF REALIZATION & GOD REALIZATION Atman is the reflection of the Almighty attachment and no temptation. I do not feel (The Paramatman) in human being. Lord proud or jealous. I am no more desirous of Shiva resides in the heart as Atman, the achieving righteousness (Dharma), wealth spirit. H.H. Mataji says, "God realization is (Artha), sensual pleasure (Kama) and not possible without self realization". Adi- salvation (Moksha), I am Shiva, the Self, in Shankaracharya has beautifully described the form of consciousness and bliss. the experience in the following verses: मनोबुध्य्रहड् कार चित्तानि नाहं न च श्रोत्रजिह्े न च घ्राणनेत्रे। न च व्योमभूमिर्न तेजो न वायु- चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं।।१ । । न पुण्यं न पाप ने सौख्य न दुःख न मंत्रो न तीर्थं न वेदा न यज्ञीः अहं भोजनं नैव भोज्यं न भोक्ता चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं ।।4 ।। I am above sin and merit (Punya). sorrow and joy. I am not interested in I Mantras, holy places, Vedas and sacrifices am also not the earth, air, sky or space, (Yagya), I am not eatables, eating or eater. and fire. I am Shiva, in the state of I am Shiva, the Self, in the form of I am not mind, intellect, ego and chitta. Nor am I nose, tongue, ears or eyes. consciousness and bliss. न च प्राणासंज्ञो न वै पञ्चवायुर्न- वा सप्तयातुर्न वा पञ्चकोषः । न वाक पाणिपादौ न चोपस्थापायूः चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं। ।12 ।। I am not five vital forces (Pran, Apana, Udan, Saman, Vyan). I am not seven discrimination (of caste). I have no parents ingredients of body (blood, flesh, fats, and no birth. Nor have I teacher, and bone, nervous system and semen) I am disciples, friends and brothers. I am Shiva, also not five sheaths (Pancha Kosha) the Self, in the state of consciousness and around the self viz. Material or physical bliss. sheath i.e. body (Annamay Kosha) Vital sheath (Pranamay Kosha) Mental sheath (Gyanamay Kosha) Knowledge sheath (Vigyanamay Kosha) and Bliss sheath (Anandmaya Kosha) Nor am I five organs of action. I am Shiva in the state of and formless (Nirakar). Pervading the consciousness and bliss. न में मृत्युशङ्का न मे जातिभेदः पिता नैव में नैव माता न जन्मः। न बन्धुर्न मित्रं गुरु्नैव शिष्यः चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं । 15 ।। I have no fear of death and social अहं निर्विकल्पो निराकाररूपो विभुव्य्याप्य सर्वत्र सर्वेन्द्रियाणि| सदा मे समत्वं न मुक्तिर्नवन्धः चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं ।।6।। am Nirvikalpa (doubtless awareness) Universe, I am present equally everywhere and in all organs. I am neither free nor bound by any thing. I am Shiva, the Self, in consciousness and bliss. न में द्वेषरागौ न मे लोभमोहौ मदो नैव मे नैव मात्सर्यभावः । न धर्मों न चाथ्थों न कामो न मोक्ष चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं ।।3।। I have no hatred and no love, no by Adi-Shankaracharya relates to merging the form of consciousness and bliss. The experience so beautifully narrated

 ALO May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze of human consciousness into universal scriptures that there is no Shiva without consciousness. Human consciousness Shakti nor is there Shakti without Shiva. has its own limits owing to super- There is no distinction between them just as there is none between the moon and imposition of ego and super ego which universal moon light. G.De Kalbermatten writes in separate it consciousness and give its own identity "Advent' "Self realization, enlightenment to the individual consciousness distinct (Samadhi, Nirvana means firstly the from the Divine. By the grace of Her merging of the individual human Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, Sahaja awareness with the primordial energy i.e. Yogis have a distant glimpse of this highest with the Mother; the Mother will gradually stage on the evolutionary scale when they introduce the child to the father as the go into thoughtless awareness, which is energy of God knows God." He further also the first step towards merging into the writes "The Divine Mother is the from the Universal consciousness. Others spend quintessence of truth, existence and bliss. their lives striving to attain the stage where When we keep our attention on Her we Sahaja Yogis begin. As Divine Mother keep it on the Self, which is of same taught us, from the thoughtless awareness one goes into deeper stage of doubtless awareness and then to the higher levels relation to the seven Chakras we start nature. When we meditate on H.H. Mataji in of awareness. experiencing that our Seven selves are As the Kundalini descends from indeed part of the deities and that the Sahasrara, ego and super ego which drop deities are one with H.H. Mataji. Meditation down in the thoughtless stage again rise. Kundalini should therefore be settled in doubtless awareness. As we meditate on Sahasrara. This is possible by stabilizing Shri Mataji's Kundalini we really get lost like in the thoughtless stage; when ego and super ego are gradually sucked into Pingla silent". (All these may be done in relation and Ida Nadis, and awareness space of on this identity opens the deeper stage of a drop in the ocean. We are absolutely to Her Photo and not when She is present consciousness expands. in person) Indeed, the purpose of the human life can become a reality in this very life, at the Realization of the self and God realization which is the ultimate aim of lotus feet of Divine Mother. human life is not possible to be attained without surrendering to the lotus feet of the Om Twamewa Sakshat Shri Atman-Paramatman Sakshat Shri Bhagwati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namo-Namah. Divine Mother. She confers the knowledge of Shiva, the ultimate. She is also Shiv Shaktaikya Roopini i.e. whose form is union of Shiva and Shakti. It is said in the

 Christmas Puja Ganpati Pule-25-12-2003 AMD Today is a great day because we are belong to royal families or you may be a celebrating the birth of Jesus Christ. He poor person, there are always problems was such a great spiritual personality who facing. Christ has shown that though He had to suffer on the cross. This is what had to suffer so much He was so peaceful, many people don't understand that why a His life has given us an example. What we man of his caliber, of his standing, of his should be, how we should behave, when spirituality should have to go through so we are facing problems created by people. many ordeals in life. It is very easy to understand that he was born in the birthday and we are all celebrating because But today is a happy day because it is His circumstances which were against him, He has shown us a new path of spirituality which were against Divine Force. So to in which one has to suffer. Because of the overcome that people tried to destroy ignorance of many who are there, He Jesus Christ and He did not feel the pain, suffered so much. But today it is not so He did not feel the absurdity of those bad; people understand spirituality and people. On the contrary, he went through divinity and you are so many together now. In these sufferings Christ never cried or all that ordeal which also was divine and if you have got some divinity then you should wept. He went through it in a very resolute have courage and with that courage you manner. So what we have to learn from His can face all kinds of ordeals. Because life is that we should not be afraid, whatever might be happening to us we whenever you are on this Earth there are problems of different types. You may should not be afraid. But times have

 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze changed and people do not torture anyone Spiritual Life has gained significance in this because of your spirituality. It is not there, changed atmosphere. With this how many it is finished. Christ wiped out all that from of our distresses could be got rid of! With human minds and people respect you for spiritualism we could put an end to our being spiritual. This is the message of physical and mental problems, and also the hurdles in the path of ascent could also be Christ's life and we all should be very happy that He has shown us this path of removed. The life of the people of this world could progress only in spiritualism. How important it is to know that on one side is Jesus Christ-The Masiha of Spiritualism- endurance. The message of Sahajyoga is the same that you take your Realization, you take to spiritual life and everything will work out and on the other side are we people who because all the Divine Forces are with you. have got a little bit of spiritualism and because of us this world has become They are working out everything for you and you are so many who can say that, who peaceful, many problems have been solved have witnessed it. So, this kind of life that and human beings have realized the fact He had, you do not have to go through. He has done for us. We have to be happy and that attainment of spiritualism is the biggest achievement. On seeing your lives, your peaceful and joyous, that is without my behaviour, people have known it. All this transformation is because of you people. telling you, you must have experienced. These days also there are very cruel What I alone could have done! But when so many of you have taken to spiritualism, people, very absurd and extremely it shows how much the world has aggressive but still no one can harm you. Life has become very different and it changed. All the physical, mental and intellectual problems have been removed helped Christ that He has gone through all because of the effect of your vibrations. It that to save us from those ordeals. has impressed many people; they have realized that Sahaj Yoga brings about Hindi Pravachan of Shri Mataji tremendous transformation not only in an (Translated) individual but thousands of people could be Today is the birthday of Jesus Christ. transformed with Self-Realization. The We are all celebrating it with great gaiety. We know how much Jesus Christ whole society could be transformed. This suffered! But none of us has to undergo work that you are doing is very significant. those sufferings because the world has May God Bless You. changed and the society has changed.

 Relationship between Kundalini and Kalki Navaratri Puja, 28-9-1979, Mumbai Today, I am going to address you in population of the world is the maximum English language as desired by you. they say because all those, practically Even tomorrow perhaps we may have all those, who had aspirations to enter to use this foreign language. into the kingdom of God are born in the Today's subject is 'the relationship modern times and are going to be born between Kundalini and Kalaki'. The word very soon. This is the most important 'Kalaki' actually is an abbreviation of the time because Sahaja Yoga is the last word 'Nishkalanka'. Nishkalanka means judgement. It is fantastic to hear this but that's the fact and is the truth. Though the same as my name is, which means Nirmala. That it is spotlessly clean, you can understand that Mother's love something that is spotlessly clean is makes it very easy for you to get to your Realization and that the whole story of Nishkalanka, without any spots on it. Now, this incarnation has been the last judgement, which looks such a described in many Puranas, who will be horrifying experience, has been made coming on this earth, on a white horse, very beautiful and very tender and very in a village of Sambhalpur; they call it delicate and does not disturb you. But Sambhalpur. It's very interesting how this is the last judgement, I tell you, and people take everything so literally. The you all are going to be judged through word Sambhal means-bhal is the Sahaja Yoga whether you can enter into forehead, Sambhal means at that stage. the kingdom of God or not. That means Kalaki is situated on your Now, in Sahaja Yoga, people come in bhal. Bhal is the forehead and here he with different kinds of attentions or chitta. is going to be born, that is the real There could be people who have too meaning of the word Sambhalpur. much of tamasik vritti or what we call the In between Jesus Christ and his inertia or the more sort of sluggish or destroying incarnation of Mahavishnu slow moving temperaments. These called as Kalaki, there is a time given to when they are exaggerated people take human beings to rectify themselves, for to spirits or take to alcohols or to some them to enter into the kingdom of God, such thing which take you away from which in the Bible is called as the Last reality and make you numb with it. The Judgement, that you will be judged. All other side is as you know right hand side, of you will be judged on this earth. The people who have got too much ambitions.

 May-June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze They are extremely ambitious people. hardly about two to three hundred people They want to win the whole world and today over here but if I go to a village, they want to become something the whole viilage, say up to five to six independent on their own, malignant and thousand people come round and all of cancerous. They do not want to keep them get their Realization without any difficulty. Because here people are their relationship with the whole. You can see in this kaliyuga, how people have supposed to be very busy. They have so gone to their extremes! Some of them many other pre-occupations. They think are very much indulging into too much other things are much more important of alcoholism or you can call it than seeking God and wasting your time something running away from your in such pursuits like seeking God. Under such circumstances Sahaja awareness, from your self, from truth, the beauty. The others are denying it. Yoga takes its roots very sweetly into the They are denying everything that is heart of all the seekers. It works very spontaneously. You get your Realization beautiful and are ego oriented. without any difficulty, without any effort, So, we have people who are superego oriented, very much conditioned and without paying for it, without going into lethargic and lazy and absolutely any sort of strenuous exercise. But when we talk of Kalaki, we have to remember primitive. The other side is that we have people who are extremely ambitious, that between getting our Realization and dominating and are destroying each entering into the kingdom of God, we can other by their ambition and competition. falter very much. This is called as These two types of people of extreme Yogabhrashta sthiti. People take to yoga, nature are rather difficult to enter into they come into yoga and are then Sahaja Yoga but the people who are in enchanted still by their Pravrittis. For the center are easily absorbed in the example, an ego oriented man or a money oriented man or a man who wants to dominate can form a group of people Sahaja Yoga. Moreover, people who are less complicated, simple hearted as they are in the villages are very easily who he will able to dominate by his ideas absorbed by the Sahaja Yoga and they and can go in for a fall and the rest of take to it without any difficulty. Same in them will also go down, in Sahaja Yoga the city, you can see the result of so itself. This has been happening in much of work of mind that they are Bombay, very very often. It's a very very

 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze common thing that has been going on. surprising that invariably such people get But this is called a yogabhrashta sthiti, exposed in no time and they are known where a person falls from his yoga. He and they are gone case because their comes down of his yoga because chakras are caught. Their vibrations may be there but they go down and down and Sahaja Yoga gives you all the freedom whether to fall or to come up. But if you down till they are completely finished. Now, this yogabhrashta sthiti is the go to any other guru doing any other sort of yoga in which purification takes place worst thing that can happen to anyone. First of all you don't get your yoga and if and where people are trained and you get your yoga and then jump to this disciplined from very childhood, in those yogas, a guru will somehow or other see sort of a condition about which Shri that you are injured or you are hurt so Krishna has described that you go to Rakshas-yoni. badly that you have no connection with Those who come to Sahaja Yoga anybody else, like an operation they take must know that you have to stick on to out that personality and throw him out. one thing properly otherwise what is the But here it is left to your freedom. You yoni left? If you die without yoga, may be understand that you have to keep to the mains, you have to keep to the group, you are born again, may be. Of course you have to keep to the whole and not to this life is wasted. But if you try such tricks after coming to Sahaja Yoga and one person here and there who is trying try to impress another that you are a very to overpower the rest of them. In Sahaja Yoga, anybody who tries to come up too great realized soul or that you have much comes down. Because in the achieved this and achieved that, all this nature you have seen nothing grows out nonsense that you have been doing of bounds, like human beings are of a before getting to Realization, then there certain height, the trees are of certain is a very serious offence and you are heights. Everything is controlled. You punished for that. This is the power of cannot try to show off in Sahaja Yoga, Kalaki which is secretly doing things neither you should try to make a different behind Sahaja Yogis. For example there group or a different type of some special was a lady who came to see Me who thing. Specially I have seen in Sahaja wanted to publish something about Me and she was paid by some horrible fellow Yoga there are people who come up and she published something ask people to touch their feet. It is most and

 10 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2004 nonsensical, something that I never do. am telling to the whole world today So, everybody was very annoyed and that be careful, do not try to harm angry and said Mother you must punish others, do not try to take advantage her and you must take her to the court, of others and do not try to show off You must go for defa ation and all that. your own power because once this I said, I am not going to court, you better destruction will start in your life you won't know how to stop. go, give up these ideas but nobody would listen. It so happened that that paper Once I went to, I think I have told you before also that once I went to Andhra closed down for three and a half months and they had such a big setback. Of Pradesh and there I told people that you course this is not done by Me, I would should not grow any more of this say, as far as Mataji Nirmala Devi is tambacco-tobacco and they were very concerned, but is done by Kalaki. angry with me because they thought that Kalki means there are eleven powers this was their living. They are minting which are guarding the beauty of Sahaja money and indulging into all kinds of Yoga. Anybody who tries to play around things making too much of money and with Sahaja Yoga is harmed very badly. doing all kinds of papas. I said in this So, today is the day of telling you about world today you have come not for the dangers of playing with the Divine. creating more pap and more karmas on So far people have been taking them for your head but to do the cleansing of the granted. They have tortured people like papas the papakshalana'. You have not come here to add to your sins but to Christ. They have tortured great saints. All the time human beings have been cleanse them. This is the time of tortured and I have been warning in cleansing. That's why I am here 1s Nirmala to cleanse it while what are you every lecture practically that don't try that trick today because Kalki is doing is to add to your papas. What are already on and don't try to trouble you going to gain out of growing this anybody who is a saintly person, who horrible tobacco? But they would ot is a good person. Be careful about it listen to Me and then in three of My because Kalki is on and once this lectures, it is on the tape, people are saying that I said that be careful, the Kalki power comes on you, you would not know how to hide yourself. Not only in the seed will take respite on you. It those who are Sahaja Yogis but this I will come on you and you know what

 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 11 the river Yamuna and Ganges came in, I happened in Andhra. Same with Morvi, I was in London. I saw this on the TV, all will tell you. Only last year some people these pandas running away with their met me from Morvi, some very big people from Morvi and they all believed in a khomchas and everything. Of course with these horrible people horrible saint who is a horible fellow and who has really destroyed families after when you associate, when you live with families. I told them why do you believe them, you also suffer, the innocent, in this man. He is taking your attention suffer. Why should we be impressed by to materialistic things. Why do you such people? That's the thing you have believe in him? Every house in Morvi has to pay for. When you are impressed, you the picture of this horrible saint and when are so compromising, after all doesn't I told them they would not listen to me. matter. We are going there so we must They thought that I was just warning give something to this fellow also. He is them because I was sort of jealous of the panda of our forefather sitting down that fellow. And you know what has there and begging money, sitting before the river Ganges. Imagine, the giver of happened about Morvi, is a fact. All these things have been said in the the love and the giver of joy is flowing presence of other people so that they there and these people are sitting with have noted it down that what has their backs towards the river and asking happened in what place and how Mataji money from you. What silly people they has said. Before that also in Delhi, once are? Just stupid and useless people and met some of these people from you pay them money and you think that Vrindavan and who were telling me about you have done a great punya by donating the pandas and this and that and I said money to them. This sort of life we have all of you give up your profession, horrible been leading, a compromising not people you are. What business have you understanding what is truth, what is not truth. One side is a complete blind faith got to make money in the name of God? And all those Pandits and pandas and into all this kind of thing that is going on all these people are horrible parasites in this country and all over the world but on the society. You get out of your jobs. specially too much in this country. We The river Ganges on which you have are simple innocent people with lot of been feeding yourself will one day ruin bhavukta within us. That's true but that you completely and when the floods in doesn't mean that we should be stupid

 May- June, 2004 12 The Divine Cool Breeze and fools. For example, the other day at of clearing it out and understanding it through our developed brain, we just go a meeting in a place called Avadgaon, I on adding it. This is what I call the people said that these people in Vithala's mandir called as badhvei, should be who are tamasic, who do not use their brains, They are moodha buddhis. They nicely punished for the way they were ill treating these saints going down there just fall on somebody because there is using their feet for days together and some sort of a hypnotic influence or some sort of charismatic movement that something must be done to them. Everybody was little annoyed when I is on in the West, as you can see this said because for these poor people charismatic people will take thousands of rupees from them, thousand of rupees badhvas, who are rakshsas incarnate, are something great. They break the and they will give them epilepsy, heads of the people who walk all the gangarene. If not that then madness, thousands of miles there. They break lunacy, all sorts of things. But like mad their heads just like coconuts and all of are running after all these movements and are adding up to their destruction, them have pain in the head. Such cruelty they confer on these innocent simple to their pile of sins that they have people and do you think I should support committed, instead of spending them when stand for truth and for sometime in cleansing their sins. This time what we have got is the religion and for compassion? When I said this, some people you see, who had most precious time and one has to be some vested interest, must be the very careful and alert about oneself. One relations of the badhvas or whatever it should not depend on any other person is got angry with me. But thank God, for health in this. But should try to within three months time, the whole completely consolidate one's own belief the thing has been taken over by into the kingdom of God and occupy highest seat in the heart of God Almighty. government. It is so common with us that we see Because when Kalki will come, He will with our open eyes what is happening, slaughter all these people without any still we will be going on doing the same compassion. He is devoid of any thing in the temples, even in the name compassion. There are eleven Rudras in of God, we are doing sins after sins. We Him, means there are eleven destructive are adding sins to our sins and instead powers, absolutely powerfully settled in

 May - June, 2004 13 The Divine Cool Breeze Kalki only. I am just telling you that it is Him. And when I see all that because I can see all that, this emergency grows wrong and it is extremely wrong. It is into me and I tell you beware of it. Don't against your ascent. It is against your play fool with it. Don't take it easy and being and then you will not have any time do not compromise with nonsensical to repent and to ask this question what's people. Stick on to the right. Otherwise wrong. You'll be chucked off. That is what is the Kalki incarnation. He is going the day is very near when Kalki is going to come on a white horse, as they say. to come. It's a tremendous thing that is going The other type of people are who think to work out. Every human being is going no end of their intelligence. They have denied God. They say where is God. to be sorted out and nobody can then There is no God. We don't believe in play. See everything is being advertised, God. This is all nonsense. Science is everything is being published. Even this everything. What has science done so instrument that is created by science we far? Let's see that. What has science can use for spreading Sahaja Yoga. You done for us? Science has done nothing know if I put it on my chakras you get so far. It has only done all dead work. It the vibrations and you get your Realization. The whole science is has only made you ego-oriented. All the west is ego-oriented. They are finding all subservient to Sahaja Yoga. Like the other day some TV people came. They the methods of committing sins. How to commit the worst sin, they are finding said Mother, we want to have your TV methods and there are certain gurus in done. I said, you be careful before doing it. I don't want any publicity. So whatever India who are also supplying the you do, do it properly. Through TV we can knowledge, how to commit even worse and worse and worse sins. So they can give Sahaja Yoga. Supposing I am there easily go with two running jumps to hell. on the TV screen, I can ask people to Whatever is wrong is wrong whether put their hands and there can be it is today, tomorrow or yesterday or thousands who can get Realization, only thousands of years back. Whatever is seeing on the TV. Is a fact. That this is wrong for your Dharma, for your emitting from my being, is a fact. Why sustenance is wrong. The nuisance is should you feel angry about it? Why don't what's wrong in this? What's wrong in you come and test it? Why should you that? That question will be answered by be hurt? Why your ego should hurt you if

 14 May- June, 2004 The Divine GCool Breeze I am like that? If you are different, it other and all the disciples are being distributed, you take such a lot and I take doesn't hurt Me at all. If you know one work of say organizing this or that I don't such a lot and all of us will go to hell feel bad, why should you feel bad if direct. It's properly organized. Like one somebody is a Divine Personality. Why train is going first then the second train did you feel bad that Christ was Divine will leave and then the third train will Personality? Why did you murder Him? leave. The other side of this kind of Why did you kill Him? Why did you ambitiousness and the kind of ego torture all the people who were such orientation and money orientation we have, all the time we are busy with this saintly people? You were very wise and money. I call it a Bhrama, I call it a sweet. Isn't it? You have been very kind and nice people running after all kinds hallucination. It is a big hallucination with of wrong type of useless misguiding you people that you are running after money. It's another hallucination that you things. There are so many now who have come to misguide you. They are taking are running after prêt-atmas and dead bodies. These are two mirages you are money from you for misguiding you. They are taking money for giving you sins. running after. What are you going to get They are nicely booking you up for a trip out of this money? Go and see somebody to hell. They themselves are booked who is supposed to be a very very rich nicely there. And when I say about them man. Just go and see, is he a happy people feel very hurt that why should man? What is the analysis of his life? So called successful people. You just go Mataji talk against these gurus. They are and then see them. What is the success not gurus. They are Rakshasas. Once Christ stood up and said that they have? Who respects them? When they turn their back, people say O God, these devils and the children of devil will whose face have I seen! Let me go and have to go to hell. Then people got after Him and said, why do you say such wash my mouth. Are you auspicious? If things against them? They don't say somebody sees you, does any good anything against each other. Christ said, comes out of you, does some shubh the satan is not going to speak against happens to that person. Are you a its own house. They are very friendly kalayanmaya? Are you mangalmaya? What sort of a personality are you? Just with each other. There is no problem judge yourself. And that judgement can among them. They are very kind to each

 May - June, 2004 15 The Divine Cool Breeze There was a doctor who had come to take place, here is Sahaja Yoga. see me, who is a Sahaj Yogi. His son We had a patient who came to Sahaja came to see me, eight year old, is a very Yoga. And he told me Mother, I am a young boy, but I don't know what has good boy, had a Realization but he had a very bad Swadishthana. So, I asked happened to me that I have become inauspicious. I said, how do you know. him, does this man come to your house. He said wherever I go there is a quarrel He said yes, Mother he comes very between husband and wife, something often. Despite my warning he would go goes wrong with the children, the to their house and they would entertain children start crying and shouting and that gentleman, instead of telling him that screaming and now I am hated by you go to Mother and get yourself cleared everyone. Everyone says there is out. You see they are enticed and something wrong with me. I found out hypnotized by such a person. I asked him, I said have you got this man coming about him. What was the matter? He got cured. Now, he is emitting beautiful to your house? Yes, he said. I said, alright go and beat him with shoes as we vibrations. You can have very negative vibrations going out of you. You might do in our Sahaja Yoga and the boy got be doing sins without your knowledge cleared out. Do you want to ruin your and you could say O Mother, I am getting family, your children and everybody all the vibrations I am very good. Such because you are adhering to some people always deceive themselves and hypnotic fellow? At least have some others. Very good, O nothing wrong with consideration for that. There are many me! I am in first class condition. My like it but in Sahaja Yoga it is very easy to desert and even in London I know who vibrations are the best and that I am doing very well. Who is going to judge is going where and what are they doing. And I tell them don't do it, just don't do it, you is your deed. What would have you I have nothing to do. Immediately you done to others? Recently we had a must understand that our Mother who bishop like that and I found all those people who had touched that gentleman knows these things, She knows and if had Left Swadishthana catching, very She has told us, it is the thing to be done, not to be argued. Did you get your badly and when I told them that this was vibrations through argument? the wrong thing to do is to make this man But still in Sahaja Yoga also people so important. They all got after my life.

 May - June, 2004 16 The Divine Cool Breeze But Christ, is the embodiment of falter and that's the worst thing they will do because the yogabhrashtas are the forgiveness. Forgiveness of Christ is most condemned. Where will they go? I nothing but is the power of sustenance have to warn all the Sahaja Yogis who within him. If He explodes, the whole are here because Sahaja Yoga is the last forgiveness can come on us as a big disaster, if we are not able to understand judgement. Not only that you will be judged, that you are entering into the the value of His forgiveness. He has said kingdom of God, that you become the very clearly, that anything said against me will be tolerated but a word against citizens of God, is correct, but apart from that, that you are capable of being there, Holy Ghost won't be tolerated. He has whether you have the complete clearly said it, and now you have to surrendering and understanding of understand that. Holy Ghost is Adi Shakti. One has to understand that such Divine Laws. Even if you are belonging an incarnation is imminent and Krishna's to say India and a citizen of India but if you do mistakes and if you commit powers are given to him which are only Hanan-Shakti. Brahmadeva's powers criminal laws, you will be punished even which are only Hanan-Shakti are given then. So even if you become the citizen of God, you have to be very very careful to Him. Shiva's powers which are just Hanan-Shakti, the part of which is the about it. The second thing I would like to tell tandava, is given to Him. Then Bhairva's you is about the destroying powers of shakti which is also you know, what Bhairva has got, is symbol of Killing is a Kalki. Today's lecture is going to be very sharp for you because the incarnation big sword like thing and also Ganesha's Parsha and also Hanumana's all that you have asked me to speak on is a very sharp one, is the sharpest of all. Navsiddhis which are going to destroy We had say, Krishna's incarnation when are given to Him. All Buddha's He had Hanan-shakti. He has killed forgiveness and Mahavira's ahimsa is Kansa, He has killed so many rakshasas, going to turn upside down. All these you know, as child also He has killed eleven powers are going to come on Putna and so many people. But He did top of us when we will be finished leela also, He did love and He did give with Sahaja yoga, when we will be concessions to people. He forgave absolutely sorted out and the last killing will be done by Him. I wish it people also.

 17 May June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze was just a killing, it is not going to be having them in your heads. So, there is no hard and fast rule as to say who is a ordinary Hanan like even Devi has done because Devi has killed all the real negative and who is a real positive. rakshasas, thousands of years back but Only the Sahaja Yoga is going to cleanse you and make you absolutely positive, they are back in the seat again, all these positively good people and religious rakshasas. Now, the problem is very different, at people. This is the only way because the present moment, which you should your ankura when it starts giving you Realization you feel your Self, you feel try to understand. That in the olden days your Self and with that Self you know that till the Krishna's time when he says that, "yada yada hi dharmasya glanir bhavati you are your Self and not this mirage. Bhartah, vinashay ch dushkritam You start enjoying that Self. Once you pritranay ch sadhunam'. These two start enjoying it, you give up all those words you must understand. To destroy things that make you compromise and make you a horribly mixed up person. All very, dushkritam means, the cruel this confusion can go away. So, it is people or the negative forces and to save the saints 'sambhavami yuge yuge', I am essential that we should take to Sahaja Yoga in the most dedicated manner and going to come again and again. But the redeem ourselves of all our wrong doings problem of the kaliyuga is that there is no pure and simple person as a sadhu and also others' whom we know and this or as a rakshasa. So, many rakshasas is the only thing that we can give to our have entered into your brain. You side friends, relations and all the world with so many people who are wrong, around. People invite others for dinners, who are doing wrong, who are doing all have drinks, this that. What do you give kinds of wrong things in the name of them? Nothing. They will give presents politics, in the name of religion, in the on a birthday, they will go round and give garlands and exchange good wishes and name of progress and education and all everything. There in London when there that. Once you are sided with them, then they are in your brain. They are within is a Christmas day, their cards pile up, you and when they are within you, how pile up to such an extent that no letter to destroy-the dushkritam? They are can be sent for ten days before within you. You may be a good person Christmas. And when Christ, on the day but you may be destroyed because of when Christ is born, they will go in for a

 May - June, 2004. 18 The Divine Cool Breeze Champagne. Such foolish people, even programme here of Navaratri, where we somebody dies, they will go for a are going to have a little felicitation from Champagne. Champagne is their religion now and whisky is their Kundalini. They the Mother. To me the greatest felicitation will be when in this Bombay I will find cannot understand God. How can they more people realized, taking to Sahaja when they have made God according to Yoga seriously. And after coming to their own conception of falsehood. Sahaja Yoga, not to indulge in back- biting As a Mother I have to warn you, be careful. Do not play about with your Self. and small, petty-mindedness and getting angry with each other but being sensible and wise. It is most surprising those who Do not go down, but come up, come up and come up. I am here to help you. I am are supposed to be the cream of the nation, the most sophisticated people are here to work for you day and night that you so petty-minded and useless. I have to tell know I work very hard for you. I will spare no efforts to help you and do everything you these things because of the immediate emergency that is coming that is possible to make you alright, to forward before me and I am only praying pass this examination of last judgement but you have to cooperate with me and that it should not be in Bombay, that it you have to go ahead long about it and should start. Bombay had gone into the devote most of your time for Sahaja Yoga verge, if you remember the day when Rajesh Shah told me 'Mother, what about and for imbibing all that is great and noble. Kalki is a very big subject and if you see rain, what about rain, what about rain?' I the Kalki Purana, it is such a big book. Of wouldn't answer him, till he said, Mother, I know you are angry with Bombay people course lot of trash is also in there. But but still forgive them once again. And that when is the time coming, these people is the night when you started getting all say, we say this is a living process. When the work will be finished, when we will see this rain. Next calamity beware of it. I have to telll all Bombay people. Every time that there is no more chance of having any come back I find this kind of nonsense of more people in this line, Kalki will come the Sahaja Yogis getting after one man down. Let us see how many commit but there is a limit also of that. So, I would somewhere and getting lost and the another thing is that the Bombay people request you go out, call your friends, call are still most unaware of what is going to your relations, call your neighbours and fall onto them, most unaware how they all of them. Tomorrow is the last day of my

 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeza 19 awakening we find that if the Buddha is have made from amoeba to this stage. What God has done for them and what out of order, it doesn't rise. The whole head becomes a blockade. Such people they have to do for God? It's a very, very do not allow the Kundalini to rise above, sad affair extremely sad for the whole of the country because people try to follow we can say the Hamsa chakra. At the this Bombay. most they might try to raise up to Agya There are so many people who would but the Kundalini falls down. Of course like to follow an actor and an actress one of the reasons as I said that if you than to follow God. This is the trouble put your forehead before wrong gurus with our superficial temperaments. I also, you suffer. But too much thinking have to say that we have tomorrow a also creates a problem on the right hand very good programme and also a book side here and one of the, one of the has been written 'The Advent' by aspects of Kalki gets spoiled and there is an imbalance created on this side. The Gregoire Kalbermatein, who is a son of whole forehead if it is full of lots of bumps Baron and a Swiss boy and when he I could see clearly that he then one must know that the Kalki chakra came to me, is a seeker. Though he was a gone case, is out of order. If the Kalki chakra is out he was like a schizophrenic but of order, the person is about to go into absolutely a gone case. But I could see some sort of a very bad calamity, is a him that there is a big seeker within him sign of a person who is going to get. When the Kalki chakra is caught up, all and I had to work hard with him for a year to bring him round to his normal your fingers start burning. On the hands senses. But when there is not even and on the palms, sometimes even in the body you get terrible burning. A person's seeking within you and when you go that astray, what is going to happen to you, I Kalki chakra catching means he might be down with a horrible disease like don't know. So be careful. Be very very careful. cancer, may be leprosy, may be any Today is the day of warning you because such diseases or may be that he is about you have asked me to talk about Kalki. to collapse into some sort of a calamity. He is placed on aur forehead. When the So, Kalki chakra must be kept alright, in balance. At least there are eleven sub Kalki is caught up, the chakra of Kalki is caught up the whole of Buddha on top chakras of the Kalki chakra and out of goes out ot order. In the Kundalini them at least try to keep some of them

 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 20 alive so that other can be rescued. But nobody can stop it, nobody can stop it and the compassion of Mother also will if all the chakras are ruined then it is very not be listened because He may say that difficult to give you Realization. What is the thing, one should do to you have spoiled your children by giving keep your Kalki alright. To keep your them too much of looseness. So, I have to tell you that please don't do anything Kalki alright you must have that awe for God. If you do not have awe for God, if wrong and do not make me feel bad you are not afraid of God, if you are not about it because for a Mother it is very afraid that if you do wrong He is there difficult to tell these things. Its very hard with His wrath and that He is a wrathful for a Mother who has a tender heart and God and that He is full of poison for us, a kind heart for you to say all these things. But I have to request you that don't if we try to do anything wrong. If there is no fear of that, not that it is to be hidden play about because your Father is full of from me or from anybody else but you wrath and He can punish you, if you do yourself know that you are doing wrong. anything wrong. If you are doing something wrong and But if you do anything for Him or for you know in your heart of hearts that I your own being, for your self Realization, you will be placed in the highest position. am doing something wrong, please don't Today you may be the biggest millionaire, do it otherwise your Kalki will go out. When you have that awe for God and you you may be the richest man, you may be know that God is all pervading, is all the greatest political leader, you may be the Prime Minister and all that nonsense. powerful, He has powers to raise us to this state of higher being and also that In the presence of God, those who are dear to God, will be placed at the highest He has powers to bestow all the blessings that He has. He is the most positions and not all these worldly things compassionate God or we can say the which look so interesting and enchanting most compassionate Father that one to you. The most important thing is can think of. But in the same way, He where are you as far as God is has a wrath and that wrath when falls concerned. That relation you must upon you, be very very careful. As a establish by first finding out your Self, Mother, I have to warn you, 'Be careful your Atma through Sahaja Yoga and then relating yourself to that. about the wrath of your Father' because if He comes on you with that wrath, May God Bless You All

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2004 22 Letter of Shri Mataji addressed to London Sahaja Yogis My dearest Childre n, Thank you verg muchfox the heautitul flowers you remind me sent me. They 7 you all.9 missed much al those you wery veay days of seperation, tapes 9 hope you get my fom Ausfralia, 9 have Said lo6 new woncderful com my pack joyts things. 9 am to eujoy your soon and Sweet companyi yours as ou ex mother your lonng NA mala. 0our loV

 Guru Puja on Advent Sunday the 2nd Dec. 1979 At London A month back, I told Rustam that you incarnation of the "Primordial Master". must have a puja arranged this Sunday- this is a full Moon day and he asked me what should you call it. Is it Guru Puja or Dattatreya himself never said that He was the incarnation of the Primordial Master, with all these three forces acting through innocence came on this earth to Puja of Mahalakshmi or Ganesha's Puja. I told him "call it a Guru Puja" and he guide. Moses never said that though they asked me later on, much later, when I knew He was great. He had overpowered was going to India, that why not also Nature but He never said that He was the incarnation. have the Christmas Puja over here? At the time of Christ, one felt that it Today is a very important day because long time back when Christ was just a was necessary to say otherwise the child He read from the scriptures and people won't understand. If at that time they had recognized declared to the multitudes that He was the Advent, the incarnation who is the 'Christ', there would have been no Saviour. They believed that a Saviour is problem. But still human beings had to going to come. Today long time back on evolve further. Somebody had to cross a Sunday, He declared that He was the the Agya Chakra in the Virata to go Saviour. That's why Today is that Advent through that door; that is why Christ Sunday. He had to live for a very very came on this earth. short time so, at a very young age, He It is most surprising that in this tree of life when the roots give out the shoot had to declare that He was the Advent. Now it is remarkable to see that and the shoot gives out the branches, before this, no incarnation said publicly and the branches give out the leaves and the flowers also blossom out of the same that they were incarnations. Rama, of course, had forgotten that He was an tree, those who know the roots do not incarnation. In a way He made himself want to know the shoot, those who know to forget, played His Maya upon himself the shoot do not want to recognize the to become a complete Human being- flowers. This is typical human nature. "Maryada Purushottama" and Shri Krishna also told only one person, I never said about myself because it was felt that human beings have now Arjuna, just before He was to start the achieved another dimension of ego even worse than at the time of Christ. You may war. Abraham never said that He was the blame anything. You can call it industrial incarnation, though He was the

 May - June, 2004. 24 The Divine Cool Breeze revolution because you were away from that "Mataji" has to be something nature, whatever you may call it. But exceptional because nowhere in the human beings had lost all contact with scriptures was written down that such an incarnation would come on this earth reality. They were identified with artificiality and to accept such a great whose mere glance, even thought, can reality is going to be impossible for raise the "Kundalini". Many Saints who them. That is why I never said a word are away from the maddening crowds, sitting in the jungles, on the Himalayas, about Myself till, of course, some of the saints told about Me, some of the all know about it as their awareness is at a point, where they understand. They possessed people also told about Me and also people started wondering that understand much more than you do, because you are still children, newly how the most difficult thing of Kundalini Awakening takes place with that speed born. They are grown up.. But, "today is the day I declare that I am the One who has to save the in the presence of "Mataji". There was a temple in India and nobody knew about it. But they found humanity. I declare, I am the One who is "Adishakti", who is the Mother of that the ships which went near a all the mothers, who is the 'Primordial particular spot were drawn towards the Mother' the Shakti, the purest desire shore and it was difficult to ply them back and they had to put double force to take of God, who has incarnated on this them out of that attraction and they did Earth to give its meaning to itself; to not know that there was something that this creation, to human beings and I was acting; they thought there was am sure that through My Love and something wrong with the depth of the patience and through My powers I am sea but invariably it happened to so many going to achieve it." "I was the One who was born again ships. Then, they wanted to find out after all, what was happening to those and again, but now in my complete ships? Why were they being attracted form and with complete powers, I towards the shore? So they tried to find have come on this Earth, not only for out and when they went into the jungles salvation of human beings, not only they found a big temple, and on the top for their emancipation, but for of the temple was kept a huge mass of granting them the Kingdom of rational Heavens, the Joy, the Bliss that your So, through magnet. Father wants to bestow upon you. understanding people reached the point

 25 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze One is by which you cleanse people but These words are to be kept within the bounds of Sahaja Yogis only for the time only few of them. You take a handful of them and keep on cleansing them, so being. that their Chitta is completely cleansed And today is the day of Guru Puja not my Puja but your Puja as Gurus. I anoint all of you as Gurus, and today I will tell and then all their five elements are cleansed then the Kundalini is raised, the people get Realization. That is called the you, what I have bestowed upon you and what great powers you already have Shambhavopaya in which your personality is cleansed out completely, within you. Among you there are people who have still not been able to recognize. My is Shakti which makes your Kundalini Another is Shaktopaya, in which there announcement will work it out within rise, whatever may be the situation, and them-"The Recognition". Without then looks after the cleansing. So, in our recognition, you cannot see the play, Sahaja Yoga we have used the second without play you cannot have confidence upaya, for there is no time left for within yourself, without confidence you Shambhavopaya. That will be impossible cannot become a Guru, without to do it. So, in Shaktopaya what normally becoming a Guru, you cannot help people do is, the Shakti-Path. Shakti others and without helping others you Path is to make their power i.e. Shakti are not going to be in any way happy. So to fall upon another one, like the to break the chain, is very easy but to reflection, or as we say the light is falliing build the chain one after another is what on us. So they let their Kundalini's power you have to do. This is what you were fall onto the power of other's kundalini all wanting to be. So be confident and and then gradually raise it. But then, for that human beings as be joyous and be happy that all my powers will protect you, my love will they are, they have their very laborious nourish you, and my nature will fill you methods for that also. They first choose what is the problem of Kundalini and so with peace and Joy. they will go through all your history, this May God bless you! What you have got and what are and that, to find it out. What sort of parents you had, what kind of dreams your powers:- day I told about you have. They analyse you completely. other The Shambhavopaya and shaktopaya these Then they also find out what kind of are two methods of cleansing people. diseases you could have had. For

 May -June, 2004 26 The Divine Cool Breeze: example anybody who has got, say, eyes trouble or trouble with the nose or with happened to you! So only for Dikhsha, a personistaxed quite a lot.I meanyou have the throat or with the stomach and all to look after your Guru. Quite a lot. You have to take some fruits and things like that, money also some of these non- kinds of things are avoided. So you can imagine how many of us could fit into sensical people take, but that does not matter. Some Dakshina (aferuT) has to be that category. And then they would also find out what sort of life they have led and what sort of parents they have got. given because the Guru has to be looked after by chelas (disciples). The Guru is Mostly it was actually done to people who would, at a very young age, go to after all not attached to your wealth or the Gurus and ask of this Shakti-Path. anything you give but it is the duty of the Now, because of Me it has become Shishya (disciples) to look afterthe Guru. very simple as you know it-this Shakti That is why a litle money was also to be Path. That is what you have to do is given to a Guru-of-course, they are now Shakti-Path i.e, you have to throw your misusing the whole stuff. Because the light on to others. Shakti is power and Guru has to live some-where, he has to Path means to make it fall. So your have ahouse,alittle money was also given to him called as Dakshina. But the whole Shakti can now fall on anybody's Kundalini and it can rise. Now, it was a thing is now so misinterpreted and has very very difficult thing. They said that been taken to such anonsensical limit that only a person who was Veeta-Raga i.e. people are just making it an enterprise. But the Guru had to be something of the one who has conquered his Raga (ETT), Raga means any attachment-all that level who could raise the Kundalini and that Guru was Veet Raga-the one attachments, the one who has who has lost all attachment of the World, conquered. He who is without any attachment and is completely detached absolutely unattached, whose Chitta has in life can only make the Kundalini rise. been cleared so much that there is no So first of all Diksha (TeT) has to be greed left in him. There is no temptation given i.e, the initiation. That you have left in him, there is only forgiveness in the person. Such a person was regarded already got. The day you came to me you as Veet-Raga, and when such a person got the Dikhsha, You do not realise that raised the Kundalini, he could. Kundalini how it happens. Such a lot of things have happened to youtelescopically, thatyou do not realise how many things have could be commanded by only such rare people.

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2004 27 So first of all you have got the Dikhsha Mantra--"Rama", "Rama" only. But it had from the Guru, without any introduction. to be done with all those consultations So the Dikhsha you have got, you have of your constellations and everything, got the Maha Dikhsha also, first is your family, house, everything and then Diksha. What is Maha Dikhsha? The to be brought to that point, where the chakra is caught. Now supposing your second Maha Dikhsha is that you are four chakras are caught up,because you given a name 'Mantra' (only one name is given normally). But this Mantra also is to be taken out because the Guru, if denotes what is the trouble you are see whatever is in the horoscope, he knows, I mean these Gurus did not having, or what troubles you will be even know what chakras you were having. Physical only, to begin with. So, they would know through your Kundali catching. Just imagine! So they used to consult your i.e., through your horoscope, what was horoscope. You have come at such and the trouble you are having? Suppose you such time to me. Today you have come are having trouble in your stomach, so to me. What is your horoscope? So what they will go round and round and round must be your trouble? What is the and will find out one Mantra for the Nakshatra (constellation) under which stomach. Because, directly they cannot you are born? What were the names of find out like the Scientist. Scientists, how your parents? There used to be a big do they find out things? See, supposing science about it. They used to count you go to a doctor. He will takeout your from A, B, C, D like that and reach a eyes, wash it, will put it back, and say point, where they would find the word, eyes are alright. Then he will take out your teeth, make artificial teeth, then will say what is the second word, what is the third word like that and then they used say your teeth are alright. Then he will to consult some big Shastra (Science) take out your ears, fix up something new, and after consulting that they would find artificial thing, and say, it is alright. He out, what is the chakra catching in you. will take out your heart, examine it, put Then they would give you a Name- another-one there. It is like this', it is in "Alright, say "Rama". You go on saying the same way they used to do it because "Rama", "Rama" , till your right heart they were groping in the dark. As you chakra is clear. This may take two years, people know about chakras, they did not three years, may be two lives, may be know what are the chakras that are hundred lives. You carry on with one catching, So you can imagine what a

 The Divine Cool Breeze May June, 2004 the Kundalini on to the Sahastrara if it is Maha, Maha, Maha Dikhsha you have got falling down. You have got the power to inow! First is that you have got Dikhsha, the cleanse the Chakras of the other people. day your Kundalini rises-is the Dikhsha. You have got the power to fix the Chakras Then, you get your Realization. This is also by giving it a Bandhan. You have got out of question, they could never talk in one breath. You are kept hanging in the negativity through your Bandhan. You air all the time, upside down-just like have got power to direct your attention bats in the night, Then they would to any place by which you can know n power to protect yourself from ali consult other things like they would see about anyone who needs your help. You what kind of friends you have, what have got power to feel the problem in the people you are attracted to, so the collective also, like what is wrong with temperaments they will see. From that London? (Put your hands, what is wrong also they will 'judge. May give you with London? Like this) : Left Heart and another Mantra, So these Mantras you Right Heart. That way, everything but go on saying hours together with them, mainly Left Heart. Now you have got the all the time reciting these Mantras language to describe it. You have said without paying attention to your other left Heart. You have not hurt anybody by needs and it was when the Mantra was saying that. You Londoners are catching achieved then, they will say, 'alright on left Heart means what? That means Mantra is Siddha now for you'. It means you, you are going against the spirit. You that now you can use this Mantra for are not interested in spirit-you are materialists, egoistical, you do not care somebody else-i.e. Rama's mantra only for your spirit. You are trying to harm your you can use. Just imagine. spirit. You are drunkards. You are going, Now what have you got? You have got your Realization, alright. But, Realization to ruin yourself in drinks but all this you means that you have got complete don't say. You just say left Heart is knowledge as to what Mantra is to be catching, finished. You don't even say made for any chakra, whatsoever. You that you should do any forgiveness and can coin your own Mantras. Then you all that but you just put your hands like also have got the power to know all the this and ask for the forgiveness for Chakras which are needing the help. You Londoners on the Left Heart. They are forgiven and they drink more and more got power to raise the Kundalini of have other people, You have got power to fix and have a worse heart.

 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 29 So, all these powers you have got that, and everything. Even if somebody has the power, say, now, is to raise the Kundalini and to remove the obstructions in.the path of is a born realised person he does not Kundalini. If somebody's Agya Chakra know a word about how to raise the Kundalini. He cannot raise the Kundalini would be caught up, the Guru would not clear this Agya Chakra fearing that his unless and until he has become a SahajaYogi. So, those born realised who own Agya' Chakra could be caught up. think no end of themselves, should know So they had to do the Mantras to be that they have to become Sahaja Yogis Siddha. Siddha means the one which is proved now i.e. effective. Your every otherwise they cannot be effective, they cannot be Kriyavadi, they cannot go into Mantra is effective. You take the name action. of the Deity and your Mantra is effective- So, all these things you have got within is already Siddha. Like a bundle it has got everything in it, you open it and you yourself, that you have the full knowledge get it. If somebody's any chakra is about the Deities. You know why they get angry, what is the problem, by what sin catching, you just say the Mantra, and finished. As you have the knowledge of they get angry. Only if I say, "don't commit sin", finished. You will say, "what is a sin?" all the Mantras, you know what it is and you have all the knowledge and it is so Then, you say "don't commit this". But secret that others do not know. Even if now it is not only that but you try some tricks and you will have it, There is a you do not take the names, you just point compulsory Bandhan on you of your out everybody knows what is the matter, Mother. If you iry to drink you will vomit. If where to go, what to say. So, though it is so much secret, it is so much you do anything wrong your stomatch will go out, if you will try to avoid Sahaja Yoga understood between you. See the homogeneous understanding between you will have to be there. Because, though, us. We know wnat is what and then we you are not feeling it you have felt inside do not feel bad about ourselves and yourself the charm of Sahaja Yoga. about others. Though I say that your Mr. EGO is big, nobody hits me back, At the But there is a group of people still, who have been realised and who are not time of Christ it was impossible to take yet there. What is the difference between the name of EGO. Now you can say and two? Very simple-is the Recognition. Those who have not now you can see also clearly, your ego, recognised Me will not be blessed. They your super ego, your nonsense, this and

 May - June, 2004 30 The Divine Cool Breeze will be going round and round. So, it is group of people are the people who are necessary to recognise. Now there are coming from various sources of other some people, 1 will say, very good Gurus and things like that. Then there is example is Shirdi Sai Nath's disciples, a problem about them and such people, now He is no more, so they believe in when they come to Sahaja Yoga, they get him. Now where is He? They don't want their Realization. I am all generosity, ! to believe in the present incarnation. should say, they all get their Realization, They want to believe in something that whatever may be the case. Even, the is dead. They believe in Rama, they other day, we had a prostitute there, she believe in Christ, most of the Christians also got the Realization. And Sahaja Yoga also gives a very long rope. You do have this problem. Even they will relate Me to Christ. If they cannot relate Me to not lose your vibrations easily, if you get them properly. But what happens just Christ they cannot be in Sahaja Yoga or they will relate me only to Moses or after Sahaja Yoga, being the light, you start seeing all your defects within someone like that. You have to live in the present and you yourself. Then you want to deny Sahaja cannot conceptualise Me. Your concepts Yoga. Some people start getting the tingling; some people normally feel are limited. Supposing you are born here you will be a Christian, if you are born in alright, but in my presence they start shaking or going into contortions. As India you will be a Hindu. If you are born in China, you will be a Chinese. You soon as some people see me, you have could have been anything. So, when your seen, they become heated up. They get pain in the stomach, because when you misidentification working, starts face the light, you start facing your Self. immediately you know that you are misidentified because vibrations will And you do not want to face your Self- the main thing is that those who are not stop. So the group of people who are in between, the people who are not yet steady in Sahaja Yoga are not willlIng to settled down fully into Sahaja Yoga, who face them selves. If they would face would they themselves are not fully empowered are the people correct who cannot recognise. And they feel very themselves so fast because there is light, you don't identify yourself with your proud about it sometimes, that they do not recognise. It is foolishness. defects. You are the doctor, you have the light and you operate. Also you know how Immediately your vibrations will start to operate. flowing as soon as you recognise. Such

 31 May-June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze. Now some people have the habit of If, you are just going to decide on this justifying even their son or their brother point that "I am going to face myself, Let me see who I am" all these defects will or their wife or husband. You are not run away but you don't want to face that. helping them by that. Then these That is why those who get Realization, negative people have nature to go also do not want to come to it. Those together. Always two negative people will who also get cool breeze they do not join together to put up a show. I am think much of it, because if they think surprised that they don't have a union here, otherwise you could have negative much of it they will have to give up their ego, which they are identified with all people's union against Mataji. I mean. you could be facing like that because they these years. Moreover, they will have to see themselves. They say, "No, I am not always combine and there is a big better, I am getting tingling, this is fraternity among negative people-big happening and I am feeling needle and fraternity. Because you have seen that pins in my body, how can that be? It is those who are robbers, they always not helping me, Sahaja Yoga is taking combine together. They are very friendly, they keep all the secrets. But two good me backwards"! They will start blaming the Sahaja Yoga for it, instead of seeing people, if they combine, the whole world can be changed. So you must to people who have improved. understand that try to go to a person who But whom are you blaming? You are is positive, otherwise you cannot blaming something that is going to save you. You are blaming your saviour. It is develop your Sahaja Yoga. Whoever better to see your own problems, your talks negatively, do not go near him. But in this country there is another own defects and come out of it. To be very kind to yourself is this that you get group of people. Because you are going rid of all these serpents and scorpions to be Guru tomorrow, I am telling you all and all those things that äre hanging types. They do not want to face around and just become pure. The light themselves, but there are many ways by has come. In that light you should start which they avoid it. One of them is, that as soon as they get Realization, they seeing what is the Truth. Then your start analysing it. You give them anything, misidentifications will drop out and your real identification will be established, they will start analysing it. In this country they think they can analyse everything. I otherwise it cannot be done. You must learn to face yourself, Never justify. do not know from where they got this

 May - June, 2004 32 The Divine Cool Breeze idea. May be these scientists, may be done about these analytical people, that be is what you have to do with them. Now psychologists, may these intellectuals, so called; they might have given them this idea. They think that they listen very carefully you give Realization to some body. Alright? And the person can say that, "this is so because of this feels cool breeze in the hands. Now he starts saying, 'so what?' Now you tell him reason". But, you have not yet got your that you did not get them by thinking, did eyes opened, you are such little babies still, how can you analyse all these you? Or through analysis. You never had things? But you start analysing them before you have got it now. Now everything, "why this has happened? what are these? You cannot explain. So Why that has happened ?" Once you it is some thing that has happened to you start analysing, talking about it, now beyond your thinking power. It is higher power than your thinking. It is the analysing about it, you lose everything. What you have to do is to receive 'it', thoughtlessness. If some one is assimilate 'it', take 'it' more and more, thoughtless they think he is a madcap. So, when you talk of thoughtless expose yourself to 'it'. Do not find faults with Sahaja Yoga "but know that there awareness, they think you are primitive, are faults with in you which can only be because you do not think. It has really happened through a power which is much corrected through Sahaja Love. There are people, who even come on higher than your thinking. By thinking to me, "Why didn't you do like this, what have you done? By thinking you Mother? Why didn't you do like that, have cut your noses, cut your eyes, cut Mother?" I think I know my job very well. your hands. Everything you have cut. They try to teach Me also, "You should Now you are going to have a big war; have done like this, you should have wonderful thinking. So, you tell them by thinking you never got it and this is some done like that". Whichever way you do, if somebody is Jack in the Box he will higher power. Talk of higher things that always come up, because that is the has given you this. "So if you want to be nature of the person. So you change that in that higher power, than the lower nature, remove your springs a little bit, power of thinking, you just have to put settle down and these springs are thinking down". That's how they will come round. If you try to say "Oh please nothing but this analytical business. Such people, you meet many. So how don't think". "What, don't think. Is it not even thinkable. I mean it is that useless?" to approach these people? What I have

 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 33 This is to tackle, these people who are You are absolutely free. If you want to egoistical, who think and who do not go to Hell, I will give you a chariot to go accept even when they get the cool there, direct. If you want to go to the Heavens, I will give you a Vimana breeze. So, gradually you help them. (aeroplane) to go there. So it is for you Then for a Guru, as you are now. You have all the knowledge, all the power and people to become dynamic and to have everything. What you lack is the confidence in you. You know every confidence and you have inertia. I do not Chakra, you know the rising of Kundalini. know how this inertia is going to get out? You know everything, so you can take it Sometimes, people who are that inert, upon yourself. The person who can take they also have a use. They are put in it on himself. the cannons and blasted in the circus, I can be very angry with all of you. Very so they can show their feats. They are simple. But, no, I have to get the job done. I have to talk to you nicely, I have so inert, that nothing can disturb them. But you are my children, I have made to scold you sometimes. I have to ask you after the image of Jesus Christ, of you this way, marinate you that way Shri Ganesh. All their powers are sometimes, put little grease some times, do this, do that sometimes, give some available to you. But this is one point, I fail sometimes, heat at other times cold sometimes. I I don't know how to remove your inertia? manage them somehow; bring them Because you have not practiced round and treat them in such a way that they are there. Sahaja Yoga, you have not gone into any In the same way, you have to treat practice. You have got it very easily, cheaply. those people, not get angry with them. You do not understand its value and so To get angry is the easiest way, then you just want to have it as a side track. there will be no problems. Once I get You have to discipline yourself. Unless angry with you all, I will have my own peace, no problems.. But you have to be and until you discipline yourself, I leave it to your freedom becauseI have always really very very patient with all of them, believed in the freedom of my children Extremely patient-your language must because I think that they are not that low improve. "Please" "I am sorry", you have type that I should put freedom on them lots of words here but I think they have as a bar, that they should not use their lost their value. So we come to one point. We must freedom.

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2004 34 feel from our heart, we must feel from characters. You should study me how talk to people, how I show my complete our heart, that we must save this man. We have to help him. But sometimes ignorance even when I know how they you have to scold also because you will are caught up. I never tell them that they find most negative people are the are horribly caught up. Till they start greatest fussiest everborn. They create shaking there hands and absolutely they the greatest scenes ever possible. They go beyond. I never tell them personally. will show off the maximum. All this is In the same way you should also not tell possible when all this is over then there them that they are possessed, because will be the beginning of Sahaja Yoga. But that may affect people. Any curt answer, such a layer could be a load, so you have any sharp answer is not going to help. It is the thing you must understand that to decide whether you are just a load on Mataji. Have you come here to say that Gurudom is different and to be a Guru is my Father is ill, my mother is ill, or get different. You have to be extremely soft me a job or do this or do that. All these and very sweet otherwise all the things are good for-nothing, just useless. madcaps will run away and they will be To my mind its absolutely useless, it has shocked. They may not be good but tell them that they are good. You have to talk no meaning. Just don't think much of it. But now you should be alright, use it, in to them sweetly, you have to go all out, the same way you should talk to others bring them round, do every thing. Today in such a way, why are you bothering you all have to take a vow that you are about this? What is the use of it, what Gurus and so you are going to show that have you to do? In life when you start you have manifested your Guruness. When I come backI want to see what talking like that your wisdom will rise and every thing will get changed. Gurus have you have done, all of you. All of you to know from where their power has should get to it. come and they have to be ideal May God Bless You

 First talk of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi delivered in Maccabean Hall, Australia on 22-3-81 what is there to take a patent for it. We don't To all the seekers of truth. It's such a take patent for the light of the sun, and the, pleasure to come to this great country where there are so many seekers. So beauty of the stars. That's meant for many seekers are born in these modern everyone. The main thing is that these times. There were never born so many, lecturings and all such ventures are of no any time before. For example at the time use at all unless and until the happening of Christ, He had to gather crowds of takes place. It should happen to you. It's an actualisation, it is the Becoming which people but they had no seeking; they just listened to Him because they felt it was is important. It's not reading about it; it's a something new, Today, the time has come living force which is going to make us a higher personality: a prophet. As William where many seekers have taken their birth all over the world and they are seeking. Blake has very clearly said, that men of God will become prophets and the day will This is a fact one has to accept, there's no hypocrisy about it. Some people don't come when these prophets will have special capacity to transform other people understand that the seeking is there and as prophets; that time has come today. that whatever they're doing, right or wrong, actually they are seeking within William Blake could see hundred years back the working of Sahaja Yoga and today themselves. you can see the actualisation. Today, in the beginning, I will give you a Before you today they have placed the broadline of Sahaja Yoga, the one that means: a spontaneous happening within diagram of our being. It's a very us, of union with God. It's easy to talk complicated stuff; they are trying to make about it, anyone can talk about it. First, it a simple diagram for you though it looks when I went to America, people said, you still complicated. For example when you must get a patent on your lectures, Mother. are sitting in this room supposing there was no light, one has to just tell you that, just said, what's the I just smiled at them. I matter? They said, they might use your push the button and all the lights will be words and use the same things for their on. But behind this happening there is a own purpose and may be that they all do a big mechanism and a great organisation lot of harm to you. I said, no, it's nice, let that does it. It's not just the pushing of a button. Now my situation is such that I can them talk about because that's what has push the button, alright but people want to to happen, people have to know about it,

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2004 36 know the history and all the headache itself. Now for this desire of power, people about it; so I have to explain to you what is think that you can excite it or something. it about. Here you see the subtle force, the Some people have started enterprises of subtle being within us. This is a human Kundalini Yoga, of Kundalini awakening; it being which has evolved to this stage of is not a commercial stuff, it is not! It's a living process. You cannot commercialise You cannotp awareness and that he has to become that We have got brains, we are human instrument, say for example you try to make this microphone; people would beings, we must understand that we definitely ask, what is the purpose? Until it cannot pay for the Divine Love. On the is connected to the mains it has no contrary, you insult it, if you talk of money. purpose at all. In the same way you are God does not understand money, it's your created to be beautiful human beings and myth, human beings have created it; He you are to be connected to the mains, does not know what money is. You cannot otherwise you do not find your absolute pay for it! You cannot put in any effort for it. For becoming a fruit, a flower does not put value. Now the Kundalini about which many in any effort or pay any money. How much people have talked. I mean they have money did you pay to become a human written books after books, and I was being from a monkey? What effort did you put in to do that? It is spontaneous. Like a shocked for they do not know anything about it, and how could they write such big seed which sprouts through its primule and books; from where did they get the the same primule becomes the root and the shoot and a little cell at the tip of the knowledge? This Kundalini is a very simple thing. It is the pure desire within us, that root works out all the digging by itself, one has to become one with the Spirit, is spontaneously. Only living things can be the pure desire. So that through the Spirit, spontaneous. And then the shoot rises by we know God. This pure desire, this itself, becomes the leaves and becomes power of pure desire exists within us as the flowers and then the fruit: the whole map of its being is microscopically placed Kundalini. The whole being manifested, but in that seed. In the same way within us is still it is sleeping. It's completely there, after placed the primule, the germinating force, creating the whole being as a human being -still it is sleeping, because that power of called as Kundalini. And this force which exists within us in three and a half coils desire, has not got the chance to manifest

 37 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze (there's a big mathematics about it, which into a fruit. And this miracle you see every 1 think I cannot discuss it today, but day, billions and billions of these, we take sometime we'll discuss it). Now it is very it for granted. We have taken our human important to see the position of Kundalini : awareness also for granted, it's a good it is placed in the triangular bone, this bone thing, otherwise we start thinking about it, is called sacrum; the sacrum word comes we go into another tension mounting upon from the Greek language. Greeks must our heads. Now this force lies above the have known this that this is the sacred first centre. The first centre is called as Mooladhara bone, so they called it sacrum, It's most Chakra. Now this is a very big confusion, surprising. When they came to Australia, some Greeks, they must have felt the vibrations of your river, so they called it it is, modern times are known to be full of one of the biggest in the modern times. As confusions only. Only in confusions we Parramatta. Have you ever thought of what does that mean? It means the Holy Ghost. have to find the truth; uniess and until there is confusion, there cannot be that seeking. "Para' is beyond, supreme, 'Mata' is the Mother. Some realised soul must have felt And this cunfusion has reached such a the vibrations of this river and they must stage, that we are confused even about have named it. In the same way they must Kundalini. And there are people who have have felt that this bone is something worked hard to confuse us also. This important point, that the first centre within special, and this is the last bone that gets burnt up, when the. body is compietely us which is the centre of innocence is burnt under electrical pressure. Now this placed below the Kundalini, is extremely force resides in this bone, and you can see important to understand. And that Kundalini with your own eyes; today in the University resides in the triangular bone which is Mooladhara. So the centre of this power many students saw it: the pulsation of the Kundalini in the bone. Now can you do that, lies below the Kundalini. This is a very important point which I am going to tell you anyone of you, by jumping or by shouting or by screaming or by chanting or by today. The last centre within us, the paying. Whatever you can do cannot be seventh centre within us, manifests the Divine. Divine has to be something that is pelvic plexus, that's the subtle centre within us, which is below the sacrum bone, is a beyond human endeavour. You can jump, you can shout, you can do this, you can subtle centre. It looks after the prostrate do that, but you cannot transform a flower gland. Now this is the centre of innocence,

 38 May-Jurie, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze innocence is the first thing God has Christ, how can they accept such an created on this earth: is holiness, is beauty absurd thing, like by doing sex in a perverted manner you will reach God. Are of God, is love. And this innocence resides within us below the Kundalini and in my we now going to become just sex points? next lecture in the same hall I will be Have we no self-esteem left in ourselves, speaking in details about it, how it to understand that we are much more than a sex point, a mere sex point. This is the manifests other aspects in our life. But why best way of ruining people. This is the best this is an important point, that it is placed lower than the Kundalini because it says way of enticing people, but I tell you, you that our excretion is done by pelvic plexus are seekers, out and out you are seekers! which is manifested by this particular You must not listen until you have found centre called as Mooladhara Chakra, has out your spirit. You are not going to be nothing to do with Kundalini. It is very satisfied with all these nonsensical ideas. important to know this fact, that sex You will come back, I know, one day all of has nothing to do with Kundalini. If you will have to come back. But that time you will be so ruined, that I may not be able sexual manifestation is going to take you to God, animals would be much faster in to heip you. It's a very clearcut thing to their evolution than you are. understand, that sex has nothing to do with We have nothing to learn from animals. Kundalini awakening. She is your pure We are human beings. Those who want Mother, She is the Mother who is to learn from animals will become animals. individually with you. Forget your concepts, and forget your identifications. Please try Are we to become the frogs and earthworms now, or we have to become a to understand. She is your Mother, waiting for ages to give you your real birth. She is superior personality? A personality who is the Holy Ghost within you. She has to give completely in command, who is the master. Or are we to be slaves of our you your Realization, and She's just waiting and waiting to do it. I have seen some problems? How can we become masters of ourselves if we give in to our own being, people, who have a Kundalini, which just, to things that destroy us. So one has to like a wounded serpent is bending Her understand this point very very clearly, that head all sides and just breaking Her body; sex has nothing to do with Kundalini. It I have seen people with holes in the cannot! Before us is placed Christ. I'm Kundalini; how much we have harmed ourselves by foolish ideas, by listening to surprised that people who have known

 May June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Mother being connected to the child in a those people who are just trying to make very dirty manner. People might say the money out of us, and befool us. There are Freud talked about it. Freud was another some destroying forces that have come on this earth. Not some, but many and they half baked fellow, i must say. Absolutely half-baked without any wisdom about him. are very speedy. It's very easy to destroy something, but to construct is such a He must have had some problems like that difficult thing and to construct something himself, he was an abnormal personality living is even more difficult. Just we are to begin with. Apart from that all these, enamoured because we think it's easy. psychologists nmeet only abnormal people. Do they meet ever a normal personality? There are people who think that if you enrol yourself as somebody's disciple you'll be Who will go to a psychologist who is normal? Always mad people go to them. saved. How can you be saved? You have to grow yourself. You have to become. You must know what powers have you got from And these psychologists catch from the mad, and become mad. And then they start teaching you something which is really maddening. Now he was so half-baked that anyone of them. Those who say that you should have sexual freedom, O! the he just saw one side of our life. He didn't animals have all that, what is so special about getting a sexual freedom. I can't know that there was another side and another side. And for him sex became so understand, I mean in India you know how much people are producing children important, he could see perversions and things and we are really flabbergasted at without going to anyone of these gurus. On the contrary these gurus make you that. Those who are simple people, say in Indian villages, if you tell them like this they'll impotent and they teach you about the sex so that you feel as if the sexual act is a say what's wrcng with the fellow? He must very big thing to be achieved; it's such a go to lunatic asylum. Now we have to see what have we simple thing to do and for people who are achieved so far as a human being? What impotent it is a great thing, no doubt, but for people who are normal and natural it's are we as a human beings and what we have to achieve? If you see in this diagram so simple, just like going to the bathroom. (of course you should not take me for Why make such an ado about things which granted either). Today as in the T.V. they are so simple. This has gone too far now. asked me a question, that, do you mind if They have also suggested that, you can raise the Kundalini by sex. It's like the we doubt, said no, on the contrary, I'm

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2004 40 very happy, it shows that you are so very that's not everything that we have, we have free, You have to ask me questions, but many other things. Now this subconscious when it comes to these fake gurus, you mind within us has an area beyond it as just go headlong. You are so mesmerized the collective subconscious and that's a you do not even think what you are doing! dangerous area when you enter into that And you don't even see what others have area, you contract diseases like cancer. achieved. You see some people jumping You know that in Sahaja Yoga, we have definitely cured cancer. And I was amazed on the street, you also join them. You don't want to find out what power they have that those people who have got cancer and achieved, what is their situation, are they who came to me have got cured, were all affected more by the left side than the right better off than us or not if they have been cured of their troubles or not. On the side. And that you can find out yourself contrary if you find them you'll find that once you get your enlightenment and you they're recluses. They're even afraid become a realised soul. On the right hand side there is another power, which is called sometimes, I've seen, of vegetables. If you show them a garlic, they'll be frightened. as the power of action. You desire Some of the gurus have this problem also. something, and you have to act is Kriya Shakti. This is the future. Beyond the future They are told that you should not take any garlic, so, if you show them a garlic, they'll lies the supraconscious area, or the collective supraconscious. People have start jumping. What is this? Are we going to be frightened of garlics? Are we going to be that kind of a horrible human beings talked about it without telling you where is it within us. They have talked about Christ. Where is Christ within us? They have who are frightened of this and that. Now, within us lies on the left hand side, talked about Krishna, where is Krishna within us? What is the proof that He exists if you see, is the power of desire which comes more from the right. In sanskrit it at that particular centre within us? In the is called as Itcha Shakti. This is the pysche centre lies another power by which we about which Mr. Freud has talked, part of have become human beings. The it. You see he is a blind man leading evolutionary power, the sustenance power, the Religo, the religion, not the religion that everyone into doom, like him. Now this one is our past, is our conditioning, is the one we see but The religion. Carbon has four that is our subconscious mind and we valencies, gold has a quality that it is have a subconscious mind no doubt. But untarnishable, in the same way a human

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2004 being has got ten sustenances within it. what exercises are needed? What mantra And this sustenance which sustains it, is needed? We have great organisations which says he's a human being, is the in this country, and everywhere else where quality of a human being. So, we have they give a mantra. Now just think of it! three powers within us, in Sahaja Yoga There are six centres; these are the basic centres, there are many more, I don't want language we call it differently, to make it to tell you the number, otherwise you'll be simpler. These three powers exist within us. But the central power is a little cut off, surprised. But six main centres and .two if you see, there's a gap. This central on the left and the right are sun and the power by which we evolve, has not yet moon. And at the bottom is the seventh been connected with the mains and the one. cord is the Kundalini. In our heart resides So you can see there are nine centres, the spirit. In our heart it resides. It is the basically we have to know and there are reflection of God Almighty. "Unless and nine deities' on these nine centres. How until you have got your self-realization, can you give somebody one mantra? Supposing you have to pass through six unless and until you are connected with it, every religion, everything that you do has gates and you have only one pass, of the fifth one and you are at the first gate, how no meaning, it's like telephoning a 'person without any connection. You spoil it. So you will you pass through? These people have no idea! And they have given such horrible have to get connected. As today they asked me another question, which was mantras I was shocked. If you tell Indians interesting, about Hatha Yoga. I said they'll be surprised. One of them means nobody's doing Hatha Yoga; they are doing 'tinga' means (thumb). Can you imagine this could be a mantra, like this. It's such a some exercises most indiscriminately. Because attention is on the body, and ridiculous thing to say. Horrible things like that's why they are just doing something 'inga, pinga, tinga', these are no mantras, this is nonsense! And it's a mafia going on. without understanding why certain exercises have to be done, Acutally the They come and tell you in your ears, you real Hatha Yoga of Patanjali, you have to see you are not to tell it to anybody, I was have Ishwara Pranidhan; that means first most surprised that at the end it was the your God must be established! First you "fallopian tubes! I said what? Fallopian tubes! How can that be a mantra. And we must be connected. Let the Kundalini rise take it! We take it, we pay for it; people had and then know what chakras are catching,

 42 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze you know the job you can do it. If there's a paid £3,000 and they are given to eat for beautiful garden you can easily find out that one week, for £3,000, the boiled soup of there must be a gardener behind it who has the boiled potatoes. Just that water, for 5 days! and one day the rind and one day done the job. If somebody knows the job he can do it. the potatoes, to make them weak so that Now this central path is the path through they could become completely out of their which one has to rise. The Kundalini rises minds and then they can be mesmerized through a very thin line of Brahmanadi. In very well. Be càreful about these horrible the beginning only a hairlike thing rises, it people! They know that you are seekers, and ardently you are seeking. They know pierces through; in some people, of course, in a big way it rises also. And then that have money and they want to, play you it pierces this fontanel bone area which is upon your ego by saying that you can pay, a real baptism, real. Today only, people feit you must pay, how much money have you the cool breeze coming out of their heads. got? Those are all parasites of the worst Can you do that by jumping, or by paying type! These are all parasites, remember, money? They felt the cool breeze in the and the day will come when you recognise hand. It's written in the Bible, even in the them, when you'll be falling on the streets with epilepsys and all kinds of diseases Bible very clearly, that it's the cool breeze, cool breeze is the sign of the Holy Ghost. and then you'll be coming to me. There are already so many people who are coming You start feeling the cool breeze in your to me in that condition. I have to warn you hands and you start feeling the cool breeze on your head. This is the actualisation. Of again, be careful and understand that course, you people don't read other books people no knowledge these give whatsoever, they are just mesmerizing which are very good, like Adi Shankaracharya. People don't even like the you, not only because they want to make money but they are bent upon destroying mention of his name who has really and the Kingdom of God. They are bent upon clearly said that it is the cool breeze; the destroying you all.because they are satanic chaitanya is to be felt like cool breeze in people and they want to establish the the hands. They do not want that you should know the truth. And this is the truth kingdom of satan. For us, it is easy to take that when you get your Realization, you to these things, it's very easy to fall, as have to feel the coo breeze in your hands told you. But to rise is difficult. It's not so difficult also, spontaneity is so simple, if yourself. You have to judge yourself. I'm not

 May June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze going to tell you, it is you who has to see, it is you who has to feel, and then you have to grow and you have to know all and their Realization and when they got it, when they came back here they have given Realization in the. first shot to 300 people. everything, all the secrets of Divine And now they know such a lot about Science, You become the master then, you Kundalini, about awakening, about are the guru. You are the Spirit, and you enlightenment. It's all logical after Realization, before that it is blind rationality, should get it, it's your own which is given to you. I have nothing to do about it, I am which doesn't understand anything. This Kundalini is there, your own, Sahaja. 'Saha' just a catalyst. I should say, you can do it means with, 'ja' means born; it's born with yourself, once you get Realization you can you, it's within you. It has to only rise with give Realization. Actually Warren came to authority, with a person who knows how to me, and Terence, and they had been really do it. One should not feel hurt about it, lynched by all these gurus, and they were so unhappy. Just before leaving for India because I'm doing it, you better do it, I'll be he telephoned to me from Australia: very happy. You see, I'm a very happily 'Mother, we have got your telephone, can married woman, you know, I don't need any we come and see you ?' and I knew they were seekers. So first, I caught hold of thing, My husband has permitted me to go about doing this because he knows nobody them. You see, I don't work much in the can do it. I'll be very happy if you can do it, cities, I work in the villages because really I would like to retire. Moreover why should you feel bad if I do it? After all there villagers are easier to get Realization; the are so many things I can't do. I can't drive, other day we were in a village called Kadus, where six thousand people got I can't type, I don't know even how to open Realization, it was announced in the paper. your tins, I'm so hopelessly bad. So what So, in the cities these gurus work out is there to feel bad about it if I know how because they want money and the purse, to raise the Kundalini and when it is your you see, it's there in the cities. I work in right to know yourself and to get it the villages. Poor things had to go to the within yourself so that you achieve your villages where they don't even have proper real baptism, your real force, and once bathrooms, you have to go to the rivers to you have achieved it, first thing that have your bath and things and it was very happens is that you become a different spartan for comfortable Australians. But personality. You become something so they managed it somehow. And they got different.

 May - June, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze The other day a gentleman, old man, have become green. You do not keep notes of people whom you love and whom you who met me in Singapore long time back, he told me that: 'Mother, after Realization, feed..,Do you write down how many morsels you have fed the person, do you? actually I've not even touched it fully, but one thing happened to me, I just gave up gambling, smoking and drinking, just like that. What happened to me? I said, when This is love. Why do you need the proof? Why do you need, you are not paying me anything? Do you want to have any proof of the sun? You are not giving me anything! you have found out the real, you give up. When you have found the real diamond, of I'm not selling anything! There's no shop on ! You have to get this gift. You have to course, you give up the artificial ones. get it. So why do you want to judge me? If Because you are bored stiff, because you you don't get it, better try for it. What are find life so boring, human beings so boring, you going to gain by knowing about me, it's life so boring, so uninteresting, full of not easy to know about me. It's very very tensions, full of cruelty, full of problems, difficult. I'm such a camouflage. It's a very you want to take to these things. But once difficult thing to know; Better thing is, you you've found out your absolute, your sense know yourself, then you'll learn. Unless and of security is absolutely established, And the joy and happiness, the bliss that is until you know yourself, you won't know me. So no use asking me questions which are promised to you, starts pouring down into rather embarrassing, I won't be able to tell you. You feel so relaxed. Apari-from that, you; because I've become very clever now. Krishna, just told one person, Arjuna. He so many things happen to you that it is hard to tell you in this one lecture. I'm going to said, give up everything and follow me. He have many other lectures for you. Now first thing that happens is that physically you said that after Yoga you'll get the Kshema, get fit. It's not that I'm going to go to the means, well- being. Not before. You get hospital to find out who are physically unfit the well-being, physically, mentally. and start an enterprise: alright, pay so emotionally, materially, socially, in every way. And spiritually! He said after Yoga it much money to cure this disease and all will happen! Not before that. And that's what that. No, I do not know how many people I've cured, really I do not know, believe me. is going to happen to you when you get it. And I do not know how many of my If you don't get it today, "I don't ge: disciples have cured. It's like the sun disappointed. In that great England, the Jerusalem, according to William Blake, I shining, it does not know how many leaves

 May-June, 2004 45 The Divine Cool Breeze have to work very very hard. I've worked limited brain only, they reached it. They also reached so many conclusions, that like on only six people for four years, can you persons like Jung, the disciple of Mr. Freud believe it? Very difficult nuts to be cracked, you see. But once they were cracked it has the great, was such a sensible man that he said you must get your Realization, you like anything. And now we have blown up thousand of people who are realised. Of must get your Self-Realization, and he prepared the ground for Sahaja Yoga, for course, do not keep any records of them, he said, when you get your self-realization, there is no organisation, nothing. You know you will become collectively conscious. He them through your vibrations by which you talked about it. know that they are realised or not. Because So, one has to understand that this is you become collectively conscious, you become; again and again I say, it's the not only what I am saying, this has been becoming. You start feeling others and you said by all the great saints, by all the start feeling yourself. It is important, vital, incarnations, by all the great prophets. absolutely. The thing for you to do. You Mohammad said, you have to become the Peer. But you know what they are doing have to get it, if not today then tomorrow. about religion now. I do not want to fall into Why not do it today, it's a good idea. But after getting it one has to know that as controversies but you can yourself judge, Christ has described, some seeds fell on what have they done out of these the rock, in the same way it happens, you incarnations. You give them the best thing, the highest, they know how to spoil it. Like, have to look after it, you have to make it I would say that Hindus were told, that grow, you have to master it, and you have Atman, the spirit resides in everybody. They to become the guru yourself. And as I told had no business to start the different caste you this morning, you better go and ask all these gurus to pay back the money. This system, which depends on the birth. is best way we can understand that it's Actually jati (caste) means a person born beyond rationality. I'm talking about the with certain aptitudes. For example you are unlimited; our rationality is limited, our Brahmins, because you are Seekers, you are seeking the Brahma, so you are brains are limited. But many things can be Brahmins. Those who are seeking the understood. So many people reached the conclusion that it is the Kundalini power say, we seek in elections are awakening, is the one which is going to Kshatryas. Like that, these are the give us Self-Realization. Through their aptitudes of personalities which determine

 The Divine Cool Breeze May-June, 2004 46 a person's birth. Actually the one who has Being, the macrocosm, and we are cells. written Gita himself, was Vyasa, was an We have to relate ourselves to the whole and so we have to find out our relationship, illegitimate child of a fisherwoman and how could he say that you are born in a Brahmin the coordination between different cells, the family. It's a capacity, a category, You are love, the love between. Last of all I would like to say it is the in the category of those Seekers. You are Divine Love of God, is the grace of God the ones who are going to get Realization, that's why you are the Brahmins, and this which has made you a human being and it category can be anywhere. It can be in is His grace which is going to make you a Islamic world, it can be in China, and it can supreme human being. Because He wants be in Russia, it can be in England, and it is to have that power to flow through you, to in Australia. I have through my husband's job, been to all these countries. I was make you a hollow personality; like-the flute of Shri Krishna, so that you might feel His amazed. I've given Realization even to power and you manoeuvre it. And you enter into the Kingdom of God, because He's the Russians, they are very good for Realization. But they'll take time to Ocean of love. He forgives all your so- understand it to that extent. Because you called guilts; what guilts can we have, what are really free people; you are the people sins can we commit, only you are like little birds who sometimes feel guilty for bringing who are free, democratic, can have more a little straw from outside in the house. He open mind, to understand Sahaja Yoga, to is a loving Father, He is a Father who is achieve it to much greater heights. But still I would like to say that freedom doesn't- the Ocean of Forgiveness. He cleanses us completely, and He grants His beauty to us, mean abandonment. It doesn't mean that. Say in a plane if all the parts of the plane and you become His own children, who want to have freedom, what will happen to have been granted all His powers, in their the plane, ultimately? We are part and own beauty and its glory, May God bless you! parcel of one whole being. One Primordial

 TRANSFORMATION And evolved a beggar to a King A beggar I was, But paradoxicallyB Wandering in the dark lanes Of fusion between the world and the hell, Bestowing upon him perpetual servility. Ruled by Ego. Transcending him from all worldly stages, Until, I felt the touch of the elf at my crest With his embellishments; And the volcano erupted Changing from dime-worthed metal To the priceless divine ornament. But thereafter, Flew the moist florets embellished with love Making him clad Resembling, In pure snipetts, taking away from him His dirty royal attire The raise of the curtain from Between the source and the navigator; This flame Melts the ego; Giving a vision of the vicinity; Sublimates the eeriness. Which earlier was only dreamt of Resultantly, the darkness evacuates. Due to the absence of medium of sight, As it forces its way in, Facilitating the process of navigation. It evicts all negations. You held me carefully, Lifted me lovingly fram firestones The only feel, matter can understand Is the feel of utter bliss. To gently place me on the floral carpet of Eden. Liberated the soul The flowers blooming with From all bounds and powered The emancipated fragrant love; The soil full of divine tolerance and patience; The matter to create transcriptions Of what it felt, fulfilling all desires. The light sparkling and rellecting radiance: But still: The sky vast and engulfing. There remains a silent fire Gave momentum to the titanic endeavour Of union with the Cosmic Throne; To never stay apart and dissolve; In your arms completely. Made the resurrected matter enter. And there is an uncanny belief3B The borderless Kingdom; On this silent urge. Let me thrive on the infused energy Teena Bhandari Gifted by you.

 DK



----------------------

2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May-June, 2004
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 In This Issue
Self Realization and God Realization
Christmas Puja, 25-12-03 (Ganpati Pule)
5
Navratri Puja, 28-9-79
7
From Nirmala Yoga - 1981:-
(a) A Letter of Shri Mataji
22
(B) Guru Puja, London, 2-12-79
23
(c) Pravachan of Shri Mataji, Australia-22-3-81
35
Transformation - A Poem
47
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 SELF REALIZATION & GOD REALIZATION
Atman is the reflection of the Almighty attachment and no temptation. I do not feel
(The Paramatman) in human being. Lord proud or jealous. I am no more desirous of
Shiva resides in the heart as Atman, the achieving righteousness (Dharma), wealth
spirit. H.H. Mataji says, "God realization is (Artha), sensual pleasure (Kama) and
not possible without self realization". Adi- salvation (Moksha), I am Shiva, the Self, in
Shankaracharya has beautifully described the form of consciousness and bliss.
the experience in the following verses:
मनोबुध्य्रहड् कार चित्तानि नाहं
न च श्रोत्रजिह्े न च घ्राणनेत्रे।
न च व्योमभूमिर्न तेजो न वायु-
चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं।।१ । ।
न पुण्यं न पाप ने सौख्य न दुःख
न मंत्रो न तीर्थं न वेदा न यज्ञीः
अहं भोजनं नैव भोज्यं न भोक्ता
चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं ।।4 ।।
I am above sin and merit (Punya).
sorrow and joy. I am not interested in
I Mantras, holy places, Vedas and sacrifices
am also not the earth, air, sky or space, (Yagya), I am not eatables, eating or eater.
and fire. I am Shiva, in the state of I am Shiva, the Self, in the form of
I am not mind, intellect, ego and chitta.
Nor am I nose, tongue, ears or eyes.
consciousness and bliss.
न च प्राणासंज्ञो न वै पञ्चवायुर्न-
वा सप्तयातुर्न वा पञ्चकोषः ।
न वाक पाणिपादौ न चोपस्थापायूः
चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं। ।12 ।।
I am not five vital forces (Pran, Apana,
Udan, Saman, Vyan). I am not seven discrimination (of caste). I have no parents
ingredients of body (blood, flesh, fats, and no birth. Nor have I teacher, and
bone, nervous system and semen) I am disciples, friends and brothers. I am Shiva,
also not five sheaths (Pancha Kosha) the Self, in the state of consciousness and
around the self viz. Material or physical bliss.
sheath i.e. body (Annamay Kosha) Vital
sheath (Pranamay Kosha) Mental sheath
(Gyanamay Kosha) Knowledge sheath
(Vigyanamay Kosha) and Bliss sheath
(Anandmaya Kosha) Nor am I five organs
of action. I am Shiva in the state of and formless (Nirakar). Pervading the
consciousness and bliss.
न में मृत्युशङ्का न मे जातिभेदः
पिता नैव में नैव माता न जन्मः।
न बन्धुर्न मित्रं गुरु्नैव शिष्यः
चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं । 15 ।।
I have no fear of death and social
अहं निर्विकल्पो निराकाररूपो
विभुव्य्याप्य सर्वत्र सर्वेन्द्रियाणि|
सदा मे समत्वं न मुक्तिर्नवन्धः
चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं ।।6।।
am Nirvikalpa (doubtless awareness)
Universe, I am present equally everywhere
and in all organs. I am neither free nor
bound by any thing. I am Shiva, the Self, in
consciousness and bliss.
न में द्वेषरागौ न मे लोभमोहौ
मदो नैव मे नैव मात्सर्यभावः ।
न धर्मों न चाथ्थों न कामो न मोक्ष
चिदानन्दरूपः शिवोऽहं शिवोऽहं ।।3।।
I have no hatred and no love, no by Adi-Shankaracharya relates to merging
the form of consciousness and bliss.
The experience so beautifully narrated
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 ALO
May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
of human consciousness into universal scriptures that there is no Shiva without
consciousness. Human consciousness Shakti nor is there Shakti without Shiva.
has its own limits owing to super- There is no distinction between them just
as there is none between the moon and
imposition of ego and super ego which
universal moon light. G.De Kalbermatten writes in
separate it
consciousness and give its own identity "Advent' "Self realization, enlightenment
to the individual consciousness distinct (Samadhi, Nirvana means firstly the
from the Divine. By the grace of Her merging of the individual human
Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, Sahaja awareness with the primordial energy i.e.
Yogis have a distant glimpse of this highest with the Mother; the Mother will gradually
stage on the evolutionary scale when they introduce the child to the father as the
go into thoughtless awareness, which is energy of God knows God." He further
also the first step towards merging into the writes "The Divine Mother is the
from the
Universal consciousness. Others spend quintessence of truth, existence and bliss.
their lives striving to attain the stage where When we keep our attention on Her we
Sahaja Yogis begin. As Divine Mother keep it on the Self, which is of same
taught us, from the thoughtless awareness
one goes into deeper stage of doubtless
awareness and then to the higher levels relation to the seven Chakras we start
nature.
When we meditate on H.H. Mataji in
of awareness.
experiencing that our Seven selves are
As the Kundalini descends from indeed part of the deities and that the
Sahasrara, ego and super ego which drop deities are one with H.H. Mataji. Meditation
down in the thoughtless stage again rise.
Kundalini should therefore be settled in doubtless awareness. As we meditate on
Sahasrara. This is possible by stabilizing Shri Mataji's Kundalini we really get lost like
in the thoughtless stage; when ego and
super ego are gradually sucked into Pingla silent". (All these may be done in relation
and Ida Nadis, and awareness space of
on this identity opens the deeper stage of
a drop in the ocean. We are absolutely
to Her Photo and not when She is present
consciousness expands.
in person)
Indeed, the purpose of the human life
can become a reality in this very life, at the
Realization of the self and God
realization which is the ultimate aim of
lotus feet of Divine Mother.
human life is not possible to be attained
without surrendering to the lotus feet of the
Om Twamewa Sakshat
Shri Atman-Paramatman Sakshat
Shri Bhagwati Mataji
Shri Nirmala Devyai Namo-Namah.
Divine Mother. She confers the knowledge
of Shiva, the ultimate. She is also Shiv
Shaktaikya Roopini i.e. whose form is union
of Shiva and Shakti. It is said in the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Christmas Puja
Ganpati Pule-25-12-2003
AMD
Today is a great day because we are belong to royal families or you may be a
celebrating the birth of Jesus Christ. He poor person, there are always problems
was such a great spiritual personality who facing. Christ has shown that though He
had to suffer on the cross. This is what
had to suffer so much He was so peaceful,
many people don't understand that why a His life has given us an example. What we
man of his caliber, of his standing, of his should be, how we should behave, when
spirituality should have to go through so
we are facing problems created by people.
many ordeals in life. It is very easy to
understand that he was born in the birthday and we are all celebrating because
But today is a happy day because it is His
circumstances which were against him,
He has shown us a new path of spirituality
which were against Divine Force. So to in which one has to suffer. Because of the
overcome that people tried to destroy ignorance of many who are there, He
Jesus Christ and He did not feel the pain, suffered so much. But today it is not so
He did not feel the absurdity of those bad; people understand spirituality and
people. On the contrary, he went through
divinity and you are so many together now.
In these sufferings Christ never cried or
all that ordeal which also was divine and if
you have got some divinity then you should
wept. He went through it in a very resolute
have courage and with that courage you
manner. So what we have to learn from His
can face all kinds of ordeals. Because life is that we should not be afraid,
whatever might be happening to us we
whenever you are on this Earth there are
problems of different types. You may should not be afraid. But times have
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
changed and people do not torture anyone Spiritual Life has gained significance in this
because of your spirituality. It is not there, changed atmosphere. With this how many
it is finished. Christ wiped out all that from of our distresses could be got rid of! With
human minds and people respect you for spiritualism we could put an end to our
being spiritual. This is the message of physical and mental problems, and also the
hurdles in the path of ascent could also be
Christ's life and we all should be very happy
that He has shown us this path of removed. The life of the people of this world
could progress only in spiritualism. How
important it is to know that on one side is
Jesus Christ-The Masiha of Spiritualism-
endurance.
The message of Sahajyoga is the same
that you take your Realization, you take to
spiritual life and everything will work out and on the other side are we people who
because all the Divine Forces are with you. have got a little bit of spiritualism and
because of us this world has become
They are working out everything for you and
you are so many who can say that, who peaceful, many problems have been solved
have witnessed it. So, this kind of life that and human beings have realized the fact
He had, you do not have to go through. He
has done for us. We have to be happy and
that attainment of spiritualism is the biggest
achievement. On seeing your lives, your
peaceful and joyous, that is without my behaviour, people have known it. All this
transformation is because of you people.
telling you, you must have experienced.
These days also there are very cruel What I alone could have done! But when
so many of you have taken to spiritualism,
people, very absurd and extremely
it shows how much the world has
aggressive but still no one can harm you.
Life has become very different and it changed. All the physical, mental and
intellectual problems have been removed
helped Christ that He has gone through all
because of the effect of your vibrations. It
that to save us from those ordeals.
has impressed many people; they have
realized that Sahaj Yoga brings about
Hindi Pravachan of Shri Mataji
tremendous transformation not only in an
(Translated)
individual but thousands of people could be
Today is the birthday of Jesus Christ.
transformed with Self-Realization. The
We are all celebrating it with great gaiety.
We know how much Jesus Christ whole society could be transformed. This
suffered! But none of us has to undergo work that you are doing is very significant.
those sufferings because the world has
May God Bless You.
changed and the society has changed.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Relationship between Kundalini and Kalki
Navaratri Puja, 28-9-1979, Mumbai
Today, I am going to address you in population of the world is the maximum
English language as desired by you. they say because all those, practically
Even tomorrow perhaps we may have
all those, who had aspirations to enter
to use this foreign language.
into the kingdom of God are born in the
Today's subject is 'the relationship modern times and are going to be born
between Kundalini and Kalaki'. The word very soon. This is the most important
'Kalaki' actually is an abbreviation of the time because Sahaja Yoga is the last
word 'Nishkalanka'. Nishkalanka means
judgement. It is fantastic to hear this but
that's the fact and is the truth. Though
the same as my name is, which means
Nirmala. That it is spotlessly clean, you can understand that Mother's love
something that is spotlessly clean is
makes it very easy for you to get to your
Realization and that the whole story of
Nishkalanka, without any spots on it.
Now, this incarnation has been the last judgement, which looks such a
described in many Puranas, who will be
horrifying experience, has been made
coming on this earth, on a white horse, very beautiful and very tender and very
in a village of Sambhalpur; they call it delicate and does not disturb you. But
Sambhalpur. It's very interesting how this is the last judgement, I tell you, and
people take everything so literally. The you all are going to be judged through
word Sambhal means-bhal is the
Sahaja Yoga whether you can enter into
forehead, Sambhal means at that stage.
the kingdom of God or not.
That means Kalaki is situated on your
Now, in Sahaja Yoga, people come in
bhal. Bhal is the forehead and here he
with different kinds of attentions or chitta.
is going to be born, that is the real There could be people who have too
meaning of the word Sambhalpur.
much of tamasik vritti or what we call the
In between Jesus Christ and his inertia or the more sort of sluggish or
destroying incarnation of Mahavishnu
slow moving temperaments. These
called as Kalaki, there is a time given to
when they are exaggerated people take
human beings to rectify themselves, for to spirits or take to alcohols or to some
them to enter into the kingdom of God, such thing which take you away from
which in the Bible is called as the Last reality and make you numb with it. The
Judgement, that you will be judged. All
other side is as you know right hand side,
of you will be judged on this earth. The
people who have got too much ambitions.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 May-June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
They are extremely ambitious people. hardly about two to three hundred people
They want to win the whole world and today over here but if I go to a village,
they want to become something the whole viilage, say up to five to six
independent on their own, malignant and thousand people come round and all of
cancerous. They do not want to keep them get their Realization without any
difficulty. Because here people are
their relationship with the whole. You can
see in this kaliyuga, how people have
supposed to be very busy. They have so
gone to their extremes! Some of them many other pre-occupations. They think
are very much indulging into too much other things are much more important
of alcoholism or you can call it than seeking God and wasting your time
something running away from your in such pursuits like seeking God.
Under such circumstances Sahaja
awareness, from your self, from truth,
the beauty. The others are denying it. Yoga takes its roots very sweetly into the
They are denying everything that is heart of all the seekers. It works very
spontaneously. You get your Realization
beautiful and are ego oriented.
without any difficulty, without any effort,
So, we have people who are superego
oriented, very much conditioned and without paying for it, without going into
lethargic and lazy and absolutely any sort of strenuous exercise. But when
we talk of Kalaki, we have to remember
primitive. The other side is that we have
people who are extremely ambitious, that between getting our Realization and
dominating and are destroying each entering into the kingdom of God, we can
other by their ambition and competition. falter very much. This is called as
These two types of people of extreme Yogabhrashta sthiti. People take to yoga,
nature are rather difficult to enter into they come into yoga and are then
Sahaja Yoga but the people who are in enchanted still by their Pravrittis. For
the center are easily absorbed in the example, an ego oriented man or a
money oriented man or a man who wants
to dominate can form a group of people
Sahaja Yoga. Moreover, people who are
less complicated, simple hearted as
they are in the villages are very easily who he will able to dominate by his ideas
absorbed by the Sahaja Yoga and they and can go in for a fall and the rest of
take to it without any difficulty. Same in them will also go down, in Sahaja Yoga
the city, you can see the result of so itself. This has been happening in
much of work of mind that they are Bombay, very very often. It's a very very
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
common thing that has been going on. surprising that invariably such people get
But this is called a yogabhrashta sthiti, exposed in no time and they are known
where a person falls from his yoga. He and they are gone case because their
comes down of his yoga because chakras are caught. Their vibrations may
be there but they go down and down and
Sahaja Yoga gives you all the freedom
whether to fall or to come up. But if you down till they are completely finished.
Now, this yogabhrashta sthiti is the
go to any other guru doing any other sort
of yoga in which purification takes place
worst thing that can happen to anyone.
First of all you don't get your yoga and if
and where people are trained and
you get your yoga and then jump to this
disciplined from very childhood, in those
yogas, a guru will somehow or other see sort of a condition about which Shri
that you are injured or you are hurt so Krishna has described that you go to
Rakshas-yoni.
badly that you have no connection with
Those who come to Sahaja Yoga
anybody else, like an operation they take
must know that you have to stick on to
out that personality and throw him out.
one thing properly otherwise what is the
But here it is left to your freedom. You
yoni left? If you die without yoga, may be
understand that you have to keep to the
mains, you have to keep to the group, you are born again, may be. Of course
you have to keep to the whole and not to this life is wasted. But if you try such
tricks after coming to Sahaja Yoga and
one person here and there who is trying
try to impress another that you are a very
to overpower the rest of them. In Sahaja
Yoga, anybody who tries to come up too great realized soul or that you have
much comes down. Because in the achieved this and achieved that, all this
nature you have seen nothing grows out nonsense that you have been doing
of bounds, like human beings are of a before getting to Realization, then there
certain height, the trees are of certain is a very serious offence and you are
heights. Everything is controlled. You punished for that. This is the power of
cannot try to show off in Sahaja Yoga, Kalaki which is secretly doing things
neither you should try to make a different behind Sahaja Yogis. For example there
group or a different type of some special was a lady who came to see Me who
thing. Specially I have seen in Sahaja wanted to publish something about Me
and she was paid by some horrible fellow
Yoga there are people who come up and
she published something
ask people to touch their feet. It is most and
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2004
nonsensical, something that I never do. am telling to the whole world today
So, everybody was very annoyed and that be careful, do not try to harm
angry and said Mother you must punish others, do not try to take advantage
her and you must take her to the court, of others and do not try to show off
You must go for defa ation and all that. your own power because once this
I said, I am not going to court, you better
destruction will start in your life you
won't know how to stop.
go, give up these ideas but nobody would
listen. It so happened that that paper
Once I went to, I think I have told you
before also that once I went to Andhra
closed down for three and a half months
and they had such a big setback. Of Pradesh and there I told people that you
course this is not done by Me, I would should not grow any more of this
say, as far as Mataji Nirmala Devi is tambacco-tobacco and they were very
concerned, but is done by Kalaki.
angry with me because they thought that
Kalki means there are eleven powers this was their living. They are minting
which are guarding the beauty of Sahaja money and indulging into all kinds of
Yoga. Anybody who tries to play around things making too much of money and
with Sahaja Yoga is harmed very badly. doing all kinds of papas. I said in this
So, today is the day of telling you about world today you have come not for
the dangers of playing with the Divine. creating more pap and more karmas on
So far people have been taking them for
your head but to do the cleansing of the
granted. They have tortured people like
papas the papakshalana'. You have not
come here to add to your sins but to
Christ. They have tortured great saints.
All the time human beings have been cleanse them. This is the time of
tortured and I have been warning in cleansing. That's why I am here 1s
Nirmala to cleanse it while what are you
every lecture practically that don't try
that trick today because Kalki is doing is to add to your papas. What are
already on and don't try to trouble you going to gain out of growing this
anybody who is a saintly person, who horrible tobacco? But they would ot
is a good person. Be careful about it listen to Me and then in three of My
because Kalki is on and once this lectures, it is on the tape, people are
saying that I said that be careful, the Kalki
power comes on you, you would not
know how to hide yourself. Not only in the seed will take respite on you. It
those who are Sahaja Yogis but this I will come on you and you know what
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
11
the river Yamuna and Ganges came in, I
happened in Andhra. Same with Morvi, I
was in London. I saw this on the TV, all
will tell you. Only last year some people
these pandas running away with their
met me from Morvi, some very big people
from Morvi and they all believed in a khomchas and everything.
Of course with these horrible people
horrible saint who is a horible fellow and
who has really destroyed families after when you associate, when you live with
families. I told them why do you believe them, you also suffer, the innocent,
in this man. He is taking your attention suffer. Why should we be impressed by
to materialistic things. Why do you such people? That's the thing you have
believe in him? Every house in Morvi has
to pay for. When you are impressed, you
the picture of this horrible saint and when
are so compromising, after all doesn't
I told them they would not listen to me. matter. We are going there so we must
They thought that I was just warning give something to this fellow also. He is
them because I was sort of jealous of the panda of our forefather sitting down
that fellow. And you know what has there and begging money, sitting before
the river Ganges. Imagine, the giver of
happened about Morvi, is a fact.
All these things have been said in the the love and the giver of joy is flowing
presence of other people so that they there and these people are sitting with
have noted it down that what has their backs towards the river and asking
happened in what place and how Mataji
money from you. What silly people they
has said. Before that also in Delhi, once
are? Just stupid and useless people and
met some of these people from you pay them money and you think that
Vrindavan and who were telling me about
you have done a great punya by donating
the pandas and this and that and I said money to them. This sort of life we have
all of you give up your profession, horrible been leading, a compromising not
people you are. What business have you
understanding what is truth, what is not
truth. One side is a complete blind faith
got to make money in the name of God?
And all those Pandits and pandas and into all this kind of thing that is going on
all these people are horrible parasites
in this country and all over the world but
on the society. You get out of your jobs.
specially too much in this country. We
The river Ganges on which you have
are simple innocent people with lot of
been feeding yourself will one day ruin bhavukta within us. That's true but that
you completely and when the floods in doesn't mean that we should be stupid
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 May- June, 2004
12
The Divine Cool Breeze
and fools. For example, the other day at of clearing it out and understanding it
through our developed brain, we just go
a meeting in a place called Avadgaon, I
on adding it. This is what I call the people
said that these people in Vithala's
mandir called as badhvei, should be who are tamasic, who do not use their
brains, They are moodha buddhis. They
nicely punished for the way they were ill
treating these saints going down there just fall on somebody because there is
using their feet for days together and some sort of a hypnotic influence or
some sort of charismatic movement that
something must be done to them.
Everybody was little annoyed when I is on in the West, as you can see this
said because for these poor people charismatic people will take thousands
of rupees from them, thousand of rupees
badhvas, who are rakshsas incarnate,
are something great. They break the and they will give them epilepsy,
heads of the people who walk all the gangarene. If not that then madness,
thousands of miles there. They break lunacy, all sorts of things. But like mad
their heads just like coconuts and all of are running after all these movements
and are adding up to their destruction,
them have pain in the head. Such cruelty
they confer on these innocent simple to their pile of sins that they have
people and do you think I should support committed, instead of spending
them when stand for truth and for sometime in cleansing their sins.
This time what we have got is the
religion and for compassion? When I
said this, some people you see, who had most precious time and one has to be
some vested interest, must be the very careful and alert about oneself. One
relations of the badhvas or whatever it should not depend on any other person
is got angry with me. But thank God, for health in this. But should try to
within three months time, the whole completely consolidate one's own belief
the
thing has been taken over by into the kingdom of God and
occupy
highest seat in the heart of God Almighty.
government.
It is so common with us that we see Because when Kalki will come, He will
with our open eyes what is happening, slaughter all these people without any
still we will be going on doing the same compassion. He is devoid of any
thing in the temples, even in the name compassion. There are eleven Rudras in
of God, we are doing sins after sins. We
Him, means there are eleven destructive
are adding sins to our sins and instead powers, absolutely powerfully settled in
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 May - June, 2004
13
The Divine Cool Breeze
Kalki only. I am just telling you that it is
Him. And when I see all that because I
can see all that, this emergency grows wrong and it is extremely wrong. It is
into me and I tell you beware of it. Don't against your ascent. It is against your
play fool with it. Don't take it easy and being and then you will not have any time
do not compromise with nonsensical
to repent and to ask this question what's
people. Stick on to the right. Otherwise wrong. You'll be chucked off. That is
what is the Kalki incarnation. He is going
the day is very near when Kalki is going
to come on a white horse, as they say.
to come.
It's a tremendous thing that is going
The other type of people are who think
to work out. Every human being is going
no end of their intelligence. They have
denied God. They say where is God. to be sorted out and nobody can then
There is no God. We don't believe in play. See everything is being advertised,
God. This is all nonsense. Science is everything is being published. Even this
everything. What has science done so instrument that is created by science we
far? Let's see that. What has science
can use for spreading Sahaja Yoga. You
done for us? Science has done nothing know if I put it on my chakras you get
so far. It has only done all dead work. It
the vibrations and you get your
Realization. The whole science is
has only made you ego-oriented. All the
west is ego-oriented. They are finding all subservient to Sahaja Yoga. Like the
other day some TV people came. They
the methods of committing sins. How to
commit the worst sin, they are finding said Mother, we want to have your TV
methods and there are certain gurus in done. I said, you be careful before doing
it. I don't want any publicity. So whatever
India who are also supplying the
you do, do it properly. Through TV we can
knowledge, how to commit even worse
and worse and worse sins. So they can give Sahaja Yoga. Supposing I am there
easily go with two running jumps to hell. on the TV screen, I can ask people to
Whatever is wrong is wrong whether put their hands and there can be
it is today, tomorrow or yesterday or thousands who can get Realization, only
thousands of years back. Whatever is seeing on the TV. Is a fact. That this is
wrong for your Dharma, for your emitting from my being, is a fact. Why
sustenance is wrong. The nuisance is should you feel angry about it? Why don't
what's wrong in this? What's wrong in you come and test it? Why should you
that? That question will be answered by
be hurt? Why your ego should hurt you if
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 14
May- June, 2004
The Divine GCool Breeze
I am like that? If you are different, it other and all the disciples are being
distributed, you take such a lot and I take
doesn't hurt Me at all. If you know one
work of say organizing this or that I don't such a lot and all of us will go to hell
feel bad, why should you feel bad if direct. It's properly organized. Like one
somebody is a Divine Personality. Why train is going first then the second train
did you feel bad that Christ was Divine will leave and then the third train will
Personality? Why did you murder Him? leave. The other side of this kind of
Why did you kill Him? Why did you ambitiousness and the kind of ego
torture all the people who were such orientation and money orientation we
have, all the time we are busy with this
saintly people? You were very wise and
money. I call it a Bhrama, I call it a
sweet. Isn't it? You have been very kind
and nice people running after all kinds hallucination. It is a big hallucination with
of wrong type of useless misguiding you people that you are running after
money. It's another hallucination that you
things. There are so many now who have
come to misguide you. They are taking are running after prêt-atmas and dead
bodies. These are two mirages you are
money from you for misguiding you. They
are taking money for giving you sins. running after. What are you going to get
They are nicely booking you up for a trip out of this money? Go and see somebody
to hell. They themselves are booked who is supposed to be a very very rich
nicely there. And when I say about them man. Just go and see, is he a happy
people feel very hurt that why should man? What is the analysis of his life?
So called successful people. You just go
Mataji talk against these gurus. They are
and then see them. What is the success
not gurus. They are Rakshasas.
Once Christ stood up and said that they have? Who respects them? When
they turn their back, people say O God,
these devils and the children of devil will
whose face have I seen! Let me go and
have to go to hell. Then people got after
Him and said, why do you say such wash my mouth. Are you auspicious? If
things against them? They don't say somebody sees you, does any good
anything against each other. Christ said, comes out of you, does some shubh
the satan is not going to speak against happens to that person. Are you a
its own house. They are very friendly kalayanmaya? Are you mangalmaya?
What sort of a personality are you? Just
with each other. There is no problem
judge yourself. And that judgement can
among them. They are very kind to each
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 May - June, 2004
15
The Divine Cool Breeze
There was a doctor who had come to
take place, here is Sahaja Yoga.
see me, who is a Sahaj Yogi. His son
We had a patient who came to Sahaja
came to see me, eight year old, is a very
Yoga. And he told me Mother, I am a
young boy, but I don't know what has good boy, had a Realization but he had
a very bad Swadishthana. So, I asked
happened to me that I have become
inauspicious. I said, how do you know.
him, does this man come to your house.
He said wherever I go there is a quarrel He said yes, Mother he comes very
between husband and wife, something often. Despite my warning he would go
goes wrong with the children, the to their house and they would entertain
children start crying and shouting and that gentleman, instead of telling him that
screaming and now I am hated by you go to Mother and get yourself cleared
everyone. Everyone says there is out. You see they are enticed and
something wrong with me. I found out hypnotized by such a person. I asked
him, I said have you got this man coming
about him. What was the matter? He got
cured. Now, he is emitting beautiful to your house? Yes, he said. I said,
alright go and beat him with shoes as we
vibrations. You can have very negative
vibrations going out of you. You might do in our Sahaja Yoga and the boy got
be doing sins without your knowledge cleared out. Do you want to ruin your
and you could say O Mother, I am getting family, your children and everybody
all the vibrations I am very good. Such because you are adhering to some
people always deceive themselves and hypnotic fellow? At least have some
others. Very good, O nothing wrong with consideration for that. There are many
me! I am in first class condition. My like it but in Sahaja Yoga it is very easy
to desert and even in London I know who
vibrations are the best and that I am
doing very well. Who is going to judge is going where and what are they doing.
And I tell them don't do it, just don't do it,
you is your deed. What would have you
I have nothing to do. Immediately you
done to others? Recently we had a
must understand that our Mother who
bishop like that and I found all those
people who had touched that gentleman knows these things, She knows and if
had Left Swadishthana catching, very
She has told us, it is the thing to be done,
not to be argued. Did you get your
badly and when I told them that this was
vibrations through argument?
the wrong thing to do is to make this man
But still in Sahaja Yoga also people
so important. They all got after my life.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 May - June, 2004
16
The Divine Cool Breeze
But Christ, is the embodiment of
falter and that's the worst thing they will
do because the yogabhrashtas are the forgiveness. Forgiveness of Christ is
most condemned. Where will they go? I nothing but is the power of sustenance
have to warn all the Sahaja Yogis who within him. If He explodes, the whole
are here because Sahaja Yoga is the last forgiveness can come on us as a big
disaster, if we are not able to understand
judgement. Not only that you will be
judged, that you are entering into the the value of His forgiveness. He has said
kingdom of God, that you become the very clearly, that anything said against
me will be tolerated but a word against
citizens of God, is correct, but apart from
that, that you are capable of being there, Holy Ghost won't be tolerated. He has
whether you have the complete clearly said it, and now you have to
surrendering and understanding of understand that. Holy Ghost is Adi
Shakti. One has to understand that such
Divine Laws. Even if you are belonging
an incarnation is imminent and Krishna's
to say India and a citizen of India but if
you do mistakes and if you commit powers are given to him which are only
Hanan-Shakti. Brahmadeva's powers
criminal laws, you will be punished even
which are only Hanan-Shakti are given
then. So even if you become the citizen
of God, you have to be very very careful
to Him. Shiva's powers which are just
Hanan-Shakti, the part of which is the
about it.
The second thing I would like to tell tandava, is given to Him. Then Bhairva's
you is about the destroying powers of shakti which is also you know, what
Bhairva has got, is symbol of Killing is a
Kalki. Today's lecture is going to be very
sharp for you because the incarnation big sword like thing and also Ganesha's
Parsha and also Hanumana's all
that you have asked me to speak on is a
very sharp one, is the sharpest of all. Navsiddhis which are going to destroy
We had say, Krishna's incarnation when are given to Him. All Buddha's
He had Hanan-shakti. He has killed forgiveness and Mahavira's ahimsa is
Kansa, He has killed so many rakshasas, going to turn upside down. All these
you know, as child also He has killed eleven powers are going to come on
Putna and so many people. But He did top of us when we will be finished
leela also, He did love and He did give with Sahaja yoga, when we will be
concessions to people. He forgave absolutely sorted out and the last
killing will be done by Him. I wish it
people also.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 17
May June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
was just a killing, it is not going to be having them in your heads. So, there is
no hard and fast rule as to say who is a
ordinary Hanan like even Devi has done
because Devi has killed all the real negative and who is a real positive.
rakshasas, thousands of years back but Only the Sahaja Yoga is going to cleanse
you and make you absolutely positive,
they are back in the seat again, all these
positively good people and religious
rakshasas.
Now, the problem is very different, at people. This is the only way because
the present moment, which you should your ankura when it starts giving you
Realization you feel your Self, you feel
try to understand. That in the olden days
your Self and with that Self you know that
till the Krishna's time when he says that,
"yada yada hi dharmasya glanir bhavati you are your Self and not this mirage.
Bhartah, vinashay ch dushkritam You start enjoying that Self. Once you
pritranay ch sadhunam'. These two start enjoying it, you give up all those
words you must understand. To destroy things that make you compromise and
make you a horribly mixed up person. All
very, dushkritam means, the cruel
this confusion can go away. So, it is
people or the negative forces and to save
the saints 'sambhavami yuge yuge', I am
essential that we should take to Sahaja
Yoga in the most dedicated manner and
going to come again and again. But the
redeem ourselves of all our wrong doings
problem of the kaliyuga is that there is
no pure and simple person as a sadhu and also others' whom we know and this
or as a rakshasa. So, many rakshasas is the only thing that we can give to our
have entered into your brain. You side friends, relations and all the world
with so many people who are wrong, around. People invite others for dinners,
who are doing wrong, who are doing all have drinks, this that. What do you give
kinds of wrong things in the name of them? Nothing. They will give presents
politics, in the name of religion, in the on a birthday, they will go round and give
garlands and exchange good wishes and
name of progress and education and all
everything. There in London when there
that. Once you are sided with them, then
they are in your brain. They are within is a Christmas day, their cards pile up,
you and when they are within you, how pile up to such an extent that no letter
to destroy-the dushkritam? They are can be sent for ten days before
within you. You may be a good person Christmas. And when Christ, on the day
but you may be destroyed because of when Christ is born, they will go in for a
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 May - June, 2004.
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
Champagne. Such foolish people, even programme here of Navaratri, where we
somebody dies, they will go for a
are going to have a little felicitation from
Champagne. Champagne is their religion
now and whisky is their Kundalini. They
the Mother. To me the greatest felicitation
will be when in this Bombay I will find
cannot understand God. How can they more people realized, taking to Sahaja
when they have made God according to Yoga seriously. And after coming to
their own conception of falsehood.
Sahaja Yoga, not to indulge in back- biting
As a Mother I have to warn you, be
careful. Do not play about with your Self.
and small, petty-mindedness and getting
angry with each other but being sensible
and wise. It is most surprising those who
Do not go down, but come up, come up
and come up. I am here to help you. I am
are supposed to be the cream of the
nation, the most sophisticated people are
here to work for you day and night that you
so petty-minded and useless. I have to tell
know I work very hard for you. I will spare
no efforts to help you and do everything you these things because of the
immediate emergency that is coming
that is possible to make you alright, to
forward before me and I am only praying
pass this examination of last judgement
but you have to cooperate with me and that it should not be in Bombay, that it
you have to go ahead long about it and should start. Bombay had gone into the
devote most of your time for Sahaja Yoga verge, if you remember the day when
Rajesh Shah told me 'Mother, what about
and for imbibing all that is great and noble.
Kalki is a very big subject and if you see rain, what about rain, what about rain?' I
the Kalki Purana, it is such a big book. Of wouldn't answer him, till he said, Mother,
I know you are angry with Bombay people
course lot of trash is also in there. But
but still forgive them once again. And that
when is the time coming, these people
is the night when you started getting all
say, we say this is a living process. When
the work will be finished, when we will see
this rain. Next calamity beware of it. I have
to telll all Bombay people. Every time
that there is no more chance of having any
come back I find this kind of nonsense of
more people in this line, Kalki will come
the Sahaja Yogis getting after one man
down. Let us see how many commit but
there is a limit also of that. So, I would somewhere and getting lost and the
another thing is that the Bombay people
request you go out, call your friends, call
are still most unaware of what is going to
your relations, call your neighbours and
fall onto them, most unaware how they
all of them. Tomorrow is the last day of my
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeza
19
awakening we find that if the Buddha is
have made from amoeba to this stage.
What God has done for them and what out of order, it doesn't rise. The whole
head becomes a blockade. Such people
they have to do for God? It's a very, very
do not allow the Kundalini to rise above,
sad affair extremely sad for the whole of
the country because people try to follow
we can say the Hamsa chakra. At the
this Bombay.
most they might try to raise up to Agya
There are so many people who would but the Kundalini falls down. Of course
like to follow an actor and an actress one of the reasons as I said that if you
than to follow God. This is the trouble put your forehead before wrong gurus
with our superficial temperaments. I also, you suffer. But too much thinking
have to say that we have tomorrow a also creates a problem on the right hand
very good programme and also a book side here and one of the, one of the
has been written 'The Advent' by aspects of Kalki gets spoiled and there
is an imbalance created on this side. The
Gregoire Kalbermatein, who is a son of
whole forehead if it is full of lots of bumps
Baron and a Swiss boy and when he
I could see clearly that he
then one must know that the Kalki chakra
came to me,
is a seeker. Though he was a gone case,
is out of order. If the Kalki chakra is out
he was like a schizophrenic but of order, the person is about to go into
absolutely a gone case. But I could see some sort of a very bad calamity, is a
him that there is a big seeker within him sign of a person who is going to get.
When the Kalki chakra is caught up, all
and I had to work hard with him for a
year to bring him round to his normal your fingers start burning. On the hands
senses. But when there is not even and on the palms, sometimes even in the
body you get terrible burning. A person's
seeking within you and when you go that
astray, what is going to happen to you, I Kalki chakra catching means he might
be down with a horrible disease like
don't know.
So be careful. Be very very careful. cancer, may be leprosy, may be any
Today is the day of warning you because
such diseases or may be that he is about
you have asked me to talk about Kalki. to collapse into some sort of a calamity.
He is placed on aur forehead. When the So, Kalki chakra must be kept alright, in
balance. At least there are eleven sub
Kalki is caught up, the chakra of Kalki is
caught up the whole of Buddha on top chakras of the Kalki chakra and out of
goes out ot order. In the Kundalini them at least try to keep some of them
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
20
alive so that other can be rescued. But nobody can stop it, nobody can stop it
and the compassion of Mother also will
if all the chakras are ruined then it is very
not be listened because He may say that
difficult to give you Realization.
What is the thing, one should do to you have spoiled your children by giving
keep your Kalki alright. To keep your them too much of looseness. So, I have
to tell you that please don't do anything
Kalki alright you must have that awe for
God. If you do not have awe for God, if wrong and do not make me feel bad
you are not afraid of God, if you are not about it because for a Mother it is very
afraid that if you do wrong He is there difficult to tell these things. Its very hard
with His wrath and that He is a wrathful
for a Mother who has a tender heart and
God and that He is full of poison for us, a kind heart for you to say all these
things. But I have to request you that don't
if we try to do anything wrong. If there is
no fear of that, not that it is to be hidden
play about because your Father is full of
from me or from anybody else but you wrath and He can punish you, if you do
yourself know that you are doing wrong.
anything wrong.
If you are doing something wrong and
But if you do anything for Him or for
you know in your heart of hearts that I your own being, for your self Realization,
you will be placed in the highest position.
am doing something wrong, please don't
Today you may be the biggest millionaire,
do it otherwise your Kalki will go out.
When you have that awe for God and you
you may be the richest man, you may be
know that God is all pervading, is all the greatest political leader, you may be
the Prime Minister and all that nonsense.
powerful, He has powers to raise us to
this state of higher being and also that In the presence of God, those who are
dear to God, will be placed at the highest
He has powers to bestow all the
blessings that He has. He is the most positions and not all these worldly things
compassionate God or we can say the which look so interesting and enchanting
most compassionate Father that one to you. The most important thing is
can think of. But in the same way, He where are you as far as God is
has a wrath and that wrath when falls concerned. That relation you must
upon you, be very very careful. As a establish by first finding out your Self,
Mother, I have to warn you, 'Be careful
your Atma through Sahaja Yoga and then
relating yourself to that.
about the wrath of your Father' because
if He comes on you with that wrath,
May God Bless You All
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2004
22
Letter of Shri Mataji addressed to London Sahaja Yogis
My dearest Childre
n,
Thank you verg
muchfox
the heautitul flowers you
remind me
sent me.
They
7 you all.9 missed
much al those
you wery
veay
days of seperation,
tapes
9 hope you get my
fom Ausfralia, 9 have
Said lo6 new woncderful
com my pack
joyts
things.
9 am
to eujoy your
soon
and Sweet companyi
yours as
ou
ex
mother
your lonng NA mala.
0our loV
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Guru Puja on Advent Sunday the 2nd Dec. 1979
At London
A month back, I told Rustam that you incarnation of the "Primordial Master".
must have a puja arranged this Sunday-
this is a full Moon day and he asked me
what should you call it. Is it Guru Puja or
Dattatreya himself never said that He
was the incarnation of the Primordial
Master, with all these three forces acting
through innocence came on this earth to
Puja of Mahalakshmi or Ganesha's Puja.
I told him "call it a Guru Puja" and he
guide. Moses never said that though they
asked me later on, much later, when I knew He was great. He had overpowered
was going to India, that why not also Nature but He never said that He was the
incarnation.
have the Christmas Puja over here?
At the time of Christ, one felt that it
Today is a very important day because
long time back when Christ was just a
was necessary to say otherwise the
child He read from the scriptures and people won't understand.
If at that time they had recognized
declared to the multitudes that He was
the Advent, the incarnation who is the 'Christ', there would have been no
Saviour. They believed that a Saviour is problem. But still human beings had to
going to come. Today long time back on evolve further. Somebody had to cross
a Sunday, He declared that He was the the Agya Chakra in the Virata to go
Saviour. That's why Today is that Advent through that door; that is why Christ
Sunday. He had to live for a very very came on this earth.
short time so, at a very young age, He
It is most surprising that in this tree
of life when the roots give out the shoot
had to declare that He was the Advent.
Now it is remarkable to see that and the shoot gives out the branches,
before this, no incarnation said publicly
and the branches give out the leaves and
the flowers also blossom out of the same
that they were incarnations. Rama, of
course, had forgotten that He was an tree, those who know the roots do not
incarnation. In a way He made himself want to know the shoot, those who know
to forget, played His Maya upon himself the shoot do not want to recognize the
to become a complete Human being- flowers. This is typical human nature.
"Maryada Purushottama" and Shri
Krishna also told only one person,
I never said about myself because it
was felt that human beings have now
Arjuna, just before He was to start the achieved another dimension of ego even
worse than at the time of Christ. You may
war. Abraham never said that He was the
blame anything. You can call it industrial
incarnation, though He was
the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 May - June, 2004.
24
The Divine Cool Breeze
revolution because you were away from that "Mataji" has to be something
nature, whatever you may call it. But exceptional because nowhere in the
human beings had lost all contact with scriptures was written down that such
an incarnation would come on this earth
reality. They were identified with
artificiality and to accept such a great whose mere glance, even thought, can
reality is going to be impossible for raise the "Kundalini". Many Saints who
them. That is why I never said a word are away from the maddening crowds,
sitting in the jungles, on the Himalayas,
about Myself till, of course, some of the
saints told about Me, some of the all know about it as their awareness is
at a point, where they understand. They
possessed people also told about Me
and also people started wondering that understand much more than you do,
because you are still children, newly
how the most difficult thing of Kundalini
Awakening takes place with that speed born. They are grown up..
But, "today is the day I declare that
I am the One who has to save the
in the presence of "Mataji".
There was a temple in India and
nobody knew about it. But they found humanity. I declare, I am the One who
is "Adishakti", who is the Mother of
that the ships which went near a
all the mothers, who is the 'Primordial
particular spot were drawn towards the
Mother' the Shakti, the purest desire
shore and it was difficult to ply them back
and they had to put double force to take of God, who has incarnated on this
them out of that attraction and they did Earth to give its meaning to itself; to
not know that there was something that this creation, to human beings and I
was acting; they thought there was am sure that through My Love and
something wrong with the depth of the patience and through My powers I am
sea but invariably it happened to so many going to achieve it."
"I was the One who was born again
ships. Then, they wanted to find out
after all, what was happening to those and again, but now in my complete
ships? Why were they being attracted form and with complete powers, I
towards the shore? So they tried to find have come on this Earth, not only for
out and when they went into the jungles salvation of human beings, not only
they found a big temple, and on the top for their emancipation, but for
of the temple was kept a huge mass of granting them the Kingdom of
rational Heavens, the Joy, the Bliss that your
So,
through
magnet.
Father wants to bestow upon you.
understanding people reached the point
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 25
May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
One is by which you cleanse people but
These words are to be kept within the
bounds of Sahaja Yogis only for the time
only few of them. You take a handful of
them and keep on cleansing them, so
being.
that their Chitta is completely cleansed
And today is the day of Guru Puja not
my Puja but your Puja as Gurus. I anoint
all of you as Gurus, and today I will tell
and then all their five elements are
cleansed then the Kundalini is raised, the
people get Realization. That is called the
you, what I have bestowed upon you and
what great powers you already have Shambhavopaya in which your
personality is cleansed out completely,
within you.
Among you there are people who have
still not been able to recognize. My is Shakti which makes your Kundalini
Another is Shaktopaya, in which there
announcement will work it out within
rise, whatever may be the situation, and
them-"The Recognition". Without
then looks after the cleansing. So, in our
recognition, you cannot see the play, Sahaja Yoga we have used the second
without play you cannot have confidence upaya, for there is no time left for
within yourself, without confidence you Shambhavopaya. That will be impossible
cannot become a Guru, without to do it. So, in Shaktopaya what normally
becoming a Guru, you cannot help people do is, the Shakti-Path. Shakti
others and without helping others you Path is to make their power i.e. Shakti
are not going to be in any way happy. So to fall upon another one, like the
to break the chain, is very easy but to reflection, or as we say the light is falliing
build the chain one after another is what on us. So they let their Kundalini's power
you have to do. This is what you were fall onto the power of other's kundalini
all wanting to be. So be confident and and then gradually raise it.
But then, for that human beings as
be joyous and be happy that all my
powers will protect you, my love will they are, they have their very laborious
nourish you, and my nature will fill you methods for that also. They first choose
what is the problem of Kundalini and so
with peace and Joy.
they will go through all your history, this
May God bless you!
What you have got and what are and that, to find it out. What sort of
parents you had, what kind of dreams
your powers:-
day I told about
you have. They analyse you completely.
other
The
Shambhavopaya and shaktopaya these Then they also find out what kind of
are two methods of cleansing people. diseases you could have had. For
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 May -June, 2004
26
The Divine Cool Breeze:
example anybody who has got, say, eyes
trouble or trouble with the nose or with
happened to you! So only for Dikhsha, a
personistaxed quite a lot.I meanyou have
the throat or with the stomach and all to look after your Guru. Quite a lot. You
have to take some fruits and things like
that, money also some of these non-
kinds of things are avoided. So you can
imagine how many of us could fit into
sensical people take, but that does not
matter. Some Dakshina (aferuT) has to be
that category. And then they would also
find out what sort of life they have led
and what sort of parents they have got.
given because the Guru has to be looked
after by chelas (disciples). The Guru is
Mostly it was actually done to people
who would, at a very young age, go to after all not attached to your wealth or
the Gurus and ask of this Shakti-Path.
anything you give but it is the duty of the
Now, because of Me it has become Shishya (disciples) to look afterthe Guru.
very simple as you know it-this Shakti That is why a litle money was also to be
Path. That is what you have to do is given to a Guru-of-course, they are now
Shakti-Path i.e, you have to throw your misusing the whole stuff. Because the
light on to others. Shakti is power and
Guru has to live some-where, he has to
Path means to make it fall. So your have ahouse,alittle money was also given
to him called as Dakshina. But the whole
Shakti can now fall on anybody's
Kundalini and it can rise. Now, it was a
thing is now so misinterpreted and has
very very difficult thing. They said that
been taken to such anonsensical limit that
only a person who was Veeta-Raga i.e.
people are just making it an enterprise.
But the Guru had to be something of
the one who has conquered his Raga
(ETT), Raga means any attachment-all that level who could raise the Kundalini
and that Guru was Veet Raga-the one
attachments, the one who has
who has lost all attachment of the World,
conquered. He who is without any
attachment and is completely detached
absolutely unattached, whose Chitta has
in life can only make the Kundalini rise. been cleared so much that there is no
So first of all Diksha (TeT) has to be
greed left in him. There is no temptation
given i.e, the initiation. That you have left in him, there is only forgiveness in
the person. Such a person was regarded
already got. The day you came to me you
as Veet-Raga, and when such a person
got the Dikhsha, You do not realise that
raised the Kundalini, he could. Kundalini
how it happens. Such a lot of things have
happened to youtelescopically, thatyou do
not realise how many things have
could be commanded by only such rare
people.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2004
27
So first of all you have got the Dikhsha
Mantra--"Rama", "Rama" only. But it had
from the Guru, without any introduction. to be done with all those consultations
So the Dikhsha you have got, you have of your constellations and everything,
got the Maha Dikhsha also, first is your family, house, everything and then
Diksha. What is Maha Dikhsha? The to be brought to that point, where the
chakra is caught. Now supposing your
second Maha Dikhsha is that you are
four chakras are caught up,because you
given a name 'Mantra' (only one name
is given normally). But this Mantra also
is to be taken out because the Guru, if denotes what is the trouble you are
see whatever is in the horoscope,
he knows, I mean these Gurus did not having, or what troubles you will be
even know what chakras you were having. Physical only, to begin with. So,
they would know through your Kundali
catching. Just imagine!
So they used to consult your i.e., through your horoscope, what was
horoscope. You have come at such and
the trouble you are having? Suppose you
such time to me. Today you have come
are having trouble in your stomach, so
to me. What is your horoscope? So what
they will go round and round and round
must be your trouble? What is the and will find out one Mantra for the
Nakshatra (constellation) under which
stomach. Because, directly they cannot
you are born? What were the names of find out like the Scientist. Scientists, how
your parents? There used to be a big do they find out things? See, supposing
science about it. They used to count you go to a doctor. He will takeout your
from A, B, C, D like that and reach a
eyes, wash it, will put it back, and say
point, where they would find the word, eyes are alright. Then he will take out
your teeth, make artificial teeth, then will
say what is the second word, what is the
third word like that and then they used say your teeth are alright. Then he will
to consult some big Shastra (Science)
take out your ears, fix up something new,
and after consulting that they would find artificial thing, and say, it is alright. He
out, what is the chakra catching in you.
will take out your heart, examine it, put
Then they would give you a Name- another-one there. It is like this', it is in
"Alright, say "Rama". You go on saying
the same way they used to do it because
"Rama", "Rama" , till your right heart they were groping in the dark. As you
chakra is clear. This may take two years,
people know about chakras, they did not
three years, may be two lives, may be
know what are the chakras that are
hundred lives. You carry on with one
catching, So you can imagine what a
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May June, 2004
the Kundalini on to the Sahastrara if it is
Maha, Maha, Maha Dikhsha you have got
falling down. You have got the power to
inow!
First is that you have got Dikhsha, the
cleanse the Chakras of the other people.
day your Kundalini rises-is the Dikhsha. You have got the power to fix the Chakras
Then, you get your Realization. This is also by giving it a Bandhan. You have got
out of question, they could never talk in
one breath. You are kept hanging in the negativity through your Bandhan. You
air all the time, upside down-just like have got power to direct your attention
bats in the night, Then they would to any place by which you can know
n power to protect yourself from ali
consult other things like they would see
about anyone who needs your help. You
what kind of friends you have, what
have got power to feel the problem in the
people you are attracted to, so the collective also, like what is wrong with
temperaments they will see. From that London? (Put your hands, what is wrong
also they will 'judge. May give you with London? Like this) : Left Heart and
another Mantra, So these Mantras you Right Heart. That way, everything but
go on saying hours together with them, mainly Left Heart. Now you have got the
all the time reciting these Mantras language to describe it. You have said
without paying attention to your other left Heart. You have not hurt anybody by
needs and it was when the Mantra was saying that. You Londoners are catching
achieved then, they will say, 'alright on left Heart means what? That means
Mantra is Siddha now for you'. It means
you, you are going against the spirit. You
that now you can use this Mantra for are not interested in spirit-you are
materialists, egoistical, you do not care
somebody else-i.e. Rama's mantra only
for your spirit. You are trying to harm your
you can use. Just imagine.
spirit. You are drunkards. You are going,
Now what have you got? You have got
your Realization, alright. But, Realization to ruin yourself in drinks but all this you
means that you have got complete don't say. You just say left Heart is
knowledge as to what Mantra is to be catching, finished. You don't even say
made for any chakra, whatsoever. You that you should do any forgiveness and
can coin your own Mantras. Then you all that but you just put your hands like
also have got the power to know all the this and ask for the forgiveness for
Chakras which are needing the help. You
Londoners on the Left Heart. They are
forgiven and they drink more and more
got power to raise the Kundalini of
have
other people, You have got power to fix and have a worse heart.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
29
So, all these powers you have got that, and everything.
Even if somebody has the power, say,
now, is to raise the Kundalini and to
remove the obstructions in.the path of is a born realised person he does not
Kundalini. If somebody's Agya Chakra know a word about how to raise the
Kundalini. He cannot raise the Kundalini
would be caught up, the Guru would not
clear this Agya Chakra fearing that his unless and until he has become a
SahajaYogi. So, those born realised who
own Agya' Chakra could be caught up.
think no end of themselves, should know
So they had to do the Mantras to be
that they have to become Sahaja Yogis
Siddha. Siddha means the one which is
proved now i.e. effective. Your every otherwise they cannot be effective, they
cannot be Kriyavadi, they cannot go into
Mantra is effective. You take the name
action.
of the Deity and your Mantra is effective-
So, all these things you have got within
is already Siddha. Like a bundle it has
got everything in it, you open it and you yourself, that you have the full knowledge
get it. If somebody's any chakra is about the Deities. You know why they get
angry, what is the problem, by what sin
catching, you just say the Mantra, and
finished. As you have the knowledge of
they get angry. Only if I say, "don't commit
sin", finished. You will say, "what is a sin?"
all the Mantras, you know what it is and
you have all the knowledge and it is so Then, you say "don't commit this". But
secret that others do not know. Even if now it is not only that but you try some
tricks and you will have it, There is a
you do not take the names, you just point
compulsory Bandhan on you of your
out everybody knows what is the matter,
Mother. If you iry to drink you will vomit. If
where to go, what to say. So, though it
is so much secret, it is so much
you do anything wrong your stomatch will
go out, if you will try to avoid Sahaja Yoga
understood between you. See the
homogeneous understanding between you will have to be there. Because, though,
us. We know wnat is what and then we you are not feeling it you have felt inside
do not feel bad about ourselves and
yourself the charm of Sahaja Yoga.
about others. Though I say that your Mr.
EGO is big, nobody hits me back, At the
But there is a group of people still,
who have been realised and who are not
time of Christ it was impossible to take yet there. What is the difference between
the name of EGO. Now you can say and
two? Very simple-is the
Recognition. Those who have not
now you can see also clearly, your ego,
recognised Me will not be blessed. They
your super ego, your nonsense, this and
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 May - June, 2004
30
The Divine Cool Breeze
will be going round and round. So, it is group of people are the people who are
necessary to recognise. Now there are coming from various sources of other
some people, 1 will say, very good Gurus and things like that. Then there is
example is Shirdi Sai Nath's disciples,
a problem about them and such people,
now He is no more, so they believe in when they come to Sahaja Yoga, they get
him. Now where is He? They don't want their Realization. I am all generosity, !
to believe in the present incarnation. should say, they all get their Realization,
They want to believe in something that whatever may be the case. Even, the
is dead. They believe in Rama, they
other day, we had a prostitute there, she
believe in Christ, most of the Christians also got the Realization. And Sahaja
Yoga also gives a very long rope. You do
have this problem. Even they will relate
Me to Christ. If they cannot relate Me to
not lose your vibrations easily, if you get
them properly. But what happens just
Christ they cannot be in Sahaja Yoga or
they will relate me only to Moses or after Sahaja Yoga, being the light, you
start seeing all your defects within
someone like that.
You have to live in the present and you
yourself. Then you want to deny Sahaja
cannot conceptualise Me. Your concepts Yoga. Some people start getting the
tingling; some people normally feel
are limited. Supposing you are born here
you will be a Christian, if you are born in
alright, but in my presence they start
shaking or going into contortions. As
India you will be a Hindu. If you are born
in China, you will be a Chinese. You
soon as some people see me, you have
could have been anything. So, when your
seen, they become heated up. They get
pain in the stomach, because when you
misidentification
working,
starts
face the light, you start facing your Self.
immediately you know that you are
misidentified because vibrations will And you do not want to face your Self-
the main thing is that those who are not
stop. So the group of people who are in
between, the people who are not yet steady in Sahaja Yoga are not willlIng to
settled down fully into Sahaja Yoga, who face them selves. If they would face
would
they
themselves
are not fully empowered are the people
correct
who cannot recognise. And they feel very themselves so fast because there is
light, you don't identify yourself with your
proud about it sometimes, that they do
not recognise. It is foolishness.
defects. You are the doctor, you have the
light and you operate. Also you know how
Immediately your vibrations will start
to operate.
flowing as soon as you recognise. Such
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 31
May-June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze.
Now some people have the habit of
If, you are just going to decide on this
justifying even their son or their brother
point that "I am going to face myself, Let
me see who I am" all these defects will or their wife or husband. You are not
run away but you don't want to face that. helping them by that. Then these
That is why those who get Realization, negative people have nature to go
also do not want to come to it. Those together. Always two negative people will
who also get cool breeze they do not join together to put up a show. I am
think much of it, because if they think surprised that they don't have a union
here, otherwise you could have negative
much of it they will have to give up their
ego, which they are identified with all
people's union against Mataji. I mean.
you
could be facing like that because they
these years. Moreover, they will have to
see themselves. They say, "No, I am not always combine and there is a big
better, I am getting tingling, this is fraternity among negative people-big
happening and I am feeling needle and fraternity. Because you have seen that
pins in my body, how can that be? It is those who are robbers, they always
not helping me, Sahaja Yoga is taking combine together. They are very friendly,
they keep all the secrets. But two good
me backwards"! They will start blaming
the Sahaja Yoga for it, instead of seeing people, if they combine, the whole
world can be changed. So you must
to people who have improved.
understand that try to go to a person who
But whom are you blaming? You are
is positive, otherwise you cannot
blaming something that is going to save
you. You are blaming your saviour. It is develop your Sahaja Yoga. Whoever
better to see your own problems, your talks negatively, do not go near him.
But in this country there is another
own defects and come out of it. To be
very kind to yourself is this that you get group of people. Because you are going
rid of all these serpents and scorpions to be Guru tomorrow, I am telling you all
and all those things that äre hanging types. They do not want to face
around and just become pure. The light themselves, but there are many ways by
has come. In that light you should start which they avoid it. One of them is, that
as soon as they get Realization, they
seeing what is the Truth. Then your
start analysing it. You give them anything,
misidentifications will drop out and your
real identification will be established,
they will start analysing it. In this country
they think they can analyse everything. I
otherwise it cannot be done. You must
learn to face yourself, Never justify. do not know from where they got this
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 May - June, 2004
32
The Divine Cool Breeze
idea. May be these scientists, may be done about these analytical people, that
be is what you have to do with them. Now
psychologists, may
these
intellectuals, so called; they might have
given them this idea. They think that they
listen very carefully you give Realization
to some body. Alright? And the person
can say that, "this is so because of this feels cool breeze in the hands. Now he
starts saying, 'so what?' Now you tell him
reason". But, you have not yet got your
that you did not get them by thinking, did
eyes opened, you are such little babies
still, how can you analyse all these you? Or through analysis. You never had
things? But you start analysing them before you have got it now. Now
everything, "why this has happened? what are these? You cannot explain. So
Why that has happened ?" Once you it is some thing that has happened to you
start analysing, talking about it, now beyond your thinking power. It is
higher power than your thinking. It is the
analysing about it, you lose everything.
What you have to do is to receive 'it', thoughtlessness. If some one is
assimilate 'it', take 'it' more and more, thoughtless they think he is a madcap.
So, when you talk of thoughtless
expose yourself to 'it'. Do not find faults
with Sahaja Yoga "but know that there awareness, they think you are primitive,
are faults with in you which can only be because you do not think. It has really
happened through a power which is much
corrected through Sahaja Love.
There are people, who even come on higher than your thinking. By thinking
to me, "Why didn't you do like this, what have you done? By thinking you
Mother? Why didn't you do like that, have cut your noses, cut your eyes, cut
Mother?" I think I know my job very well. your hands. Everything you have cut.
They try to teach Me also, "You should Now you are going to have a big war;
have done like this, you should have wonderful thinking. So, you tell them by
thinking you never got it and this is some
done like that". Whichever way you do,
if somebody is Jack in the Box he will higher power. Talk of higher things that
always come up, because that is the has given you this. "So if you want to be
nature of the person. So you change that in that higher power, than the lower
nature, remove your springs a little bit, power of thinking, you just have to put
settle down and these springs are thinking down". That's how they will
come round. If you try to say "Oh please
nothing but this analytical business.
Such people, you meet many. So how don't think". "What, don't think. Is it not
even thinkable. I mean it is that useless?"
to approach these people? What I have
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
33
This is to tackle, these people who are
You are absolutely free. If you want to
egoistical, who think and who do not go to Hell, I will give you a chariot to go
accept even when they get the cool there, direct. If you want to go to the
Heavens, I will give you a Vimana
breeze. So, gradually you help them.
(aeroplane) to go there. So it is for you
Then for a Guru, as you are now. You
have all the knowledge, all the power and
people to become dynamic and to have
everything. What you lack is the confidence in you. You know every
confidence and you have inertia. I do not
Chakra, you know the rising of Kundalini.
know how this inertia is going to get out?
You know everything, so you can take it
Sometimes, people who are that inert, upon yourself. The person who can take
they also have a use. They are put in it on himself.
the cannons and blasted in the circus,
I can be very angry with all of you. Very
so they can show their feats. They are
simple. But, no, I have to get the job
done. I have to talk to you nicely, I have
so inert, that nothing can disturb them.
But you are my children, I have made
to scold you sometimes. I have to ask
you after the image of Jesus Christ, of you this way, marinate you that way
Shri Ganesh. All their powers are
sometimes, put little grease some times,
do this, do that sometimes, give some
available to you.
But this is one point, I fail sometimes, heat at other times cold sometimes. I
I don't know how to remove your inertia?
manage them somehow; bring them
Because you have not practiced round and treat them in such a way that
they are there.
Sahaja Yoga, you have not gone into any
In the same way, you have to treat
practice.
You have got it very easily, cheaply. those people, not get angry with them.
You do not understand its value and so To get angry is the easiest way, then
you just want to have it as a side track. there will be no problems. Once I get
You have to discipline yourself. Unless angry with you all, I
will have my own
peace, no problems.. But you have to be
and until you discipline yourself, I leave
it to your freedom becauseI have always
really very very patient with all of them,
believed in the freedom of my children Extremely patient-your language must
because I think that they are not that low improve. "Please" "I am sorry", you have
type that I should put freedom on them lots of words here but I think they have
as a bar, that they should not use their lost their value.
So we come to one point. We must
freedom.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2004
34
feel from our heart, we must feel from characters. You should study me how
talk to people, how I show my complete
our heart, that we must save this man.
We have to help him. But sometimes ignorance even when I know how they
you have to scold also because you will
are caught up. I never tell them that they
find most negative people are the
are horribly caught up. Till they start
greatest fussiest everborn. They create
shaking there hands and absolutely they
the greatest scenes ever possible. They go beyond. I never tell them personally.
will show off the maximum. All this is In the same way you should also not tell
possible when all this is over then there
them that they are possessed, because
will be the beginning of Sahaja Yoga. But
that may affect people. Any curt answer,
such a layer could be a load, so you have
any sharp answer is not going to help. It
is the thing you must understand that
to decide whether you are just a load on
Mataji. Have you come here to say that
Gurudom is different and to be a Guru is
my Father is ill, my mother is ill, or get different. You have to be extremely soft
me a job or do this or do that. All these and very sweet otherwise all the
things are good for-nothing, just useless. madcaps will run away and they will be
To my mind its absolutely useless, it has
shocked. They may not be good but tell
them that they are good. You have to talk
no meaning. Just don't think much of it.
But now you should be alright, use it, in
to them sweetly, you have to go all out,
the same way you should talk to others
bring them round, do every thing. Today
in such a way, why are you bothering you all have to take a vow that you are
about this? What is the use of it, what Gurus and so you are going to show that
have you to do? In life when you start you have manifested your Guruness.
When I come backI want to see what
talking like that your wisdom will rise and
every thing will get changed. Gurus have you have done, all of you. All of you
to know from where their power has should get to it.
come and they have to be ideal
May God Bless You
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 First talk of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
delivered in Maccabean Hall, Australia on 22-3-81
what is there to take a patent for it. We don't
To all the seekers of truth. It's such a
take patent for the light of the sun, and the,
pleasure to come to this great country
where there are so many seekers. So beauty of the stars. That's meant for
many seekers are born in these modern everyone. The main thing is that these
times. There were never born so many, lecturings and all such ventures are of no
any time before. For example at the time use at all unless and until the happening
of Christ, He had to gather crowds of takes place. It should happen to you. It's
an actualisation, it is the Becoming which
people but they had no seeking; they just
listened to Him because they felt it was
is important. It's not reading about it; it's a
something new, Today, the time has come living force which is going to make us a
higher personality: a prophet. As William
where many seekers have taken their birth
all over the world and they are seeking. Blake has very clearly said, that men of
God will become prophets and the day will
This is a fact one has to accept, there's
no hypocrisy about it. Some people don't come when these prophets will have
special capacity to transform other people
understand that the seeking is there and
as prophets; that time has come today.
that whatever they're doing, right or wrong,
actually they are seeking within William Blake could see hundred years
back the working of Sahaja Yoga and today
themselves.
you can see the actualisation.
Today, in the beginning, I will give you a
Before you today they have placed the
broadline of Sahaja Yoga, the one that
means: a spontaneous happening within diagram of our being. It's a very
us, of union with God. It's easy to talk complicated stuff; they are trying to make
about it, anyone can talk about it. First, it a simple diagram for you though it looks
when I went to America, people said, you still complicated. For example when you
must get a patent on your lectures, Mother.
are sitting in this room supposing there was
no light, one has to just tell you that, just
said, what's the
I just smiled at them. I
matter? They said, they might use your push the button and all the lights will be
words and use the same things for their on. But behind this happening there is a
own purpose and may be that they all do a big mechanism and a great organisation
lot of harm to you. I said, no, it's nice, let that does it. It's not just the pushing of a
button. Now my situation is such that I can
them talk about because that's what has
push the button, alright but people want to
to happen, people have to know about it,
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2004
36
know the history and all the headache
itself. Now for this desire of power, people
about it; so I have to explain to you what is
think that you can excite it or something.
it about. Here you see the subtle force, the
Some people have started enterprises of
subtle being within us. This is a human Kundalini Yoga, of Kundalini awakening; it
being which has evolved to this stage of is not a commercial stuff, it is not! It's a
living process. You cannot commercialise
You cannotp
awareness and that he has to become that
We have got brains, we are human
instrument, say for example you try to
make this microphone; people would beings, we must understand that we
definitely ask, what is the purpose? Until it cannot pay for the Divine Love. On the
is connected to the mains it has no contrary, you insult it, if you talk of money.
purpose at all. In the same way you are God does not understand money, it's your
created to be beautiful human beings and myth, human beings have created it; He
you are to be connected to the mains, does not know what money is. You cannot
otherwise you do not find your absolute
pay for it! You cannot put in any effort for it.
For becoming a fruit, a flower does not put
value.
Now the Kundalini about which many
in any effort or pay any money. How much
people have talked. I mean they have money did you pay to become a human
written books after books, and I was being from a monkey? What effort did you
put in to do that? It is spontaneous. Like a
shocked for they do not know anything
about it, and how could they write such big
seed which sprouts through its primule and
books; from where did they get the the same primule becomes the root and
the shoot and a little cell at the tip of the
knowledge? This Kundalini is a very simple
thing. It is the pure desire within us, that root works out all the digging by itself,
one has to become one with the Spirit, is spontaneously. Only living things can be
the pure desire. So that through the Spirit,
spontaneous. And then the shoot rises by
we know God. This pure desire, this itself, becomes the leaves and becomes
power of pure desire exists within us as the flowers and then the fruit: the whole
map of its being is microscopically placed
Kundalini. The whole being manifested, but
in that seed. In the same way within us is
still it is sleeping. It's completely there, after
placed the primule, the germinating force,
creating the whole being as a human being
-still it is sleeping, because that power of called as Kundalini. And this force which
exists within us in three and a half coils
desire, has not got the chance to manifest
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-37.txt 
 37
May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
(there's a big mathematics about it, which
into a fruit. And this miracle you see every
1 think I cannot discuss it today, but day, billions and billions of these, we take
sometime we'll discuss it). Now it is very it for granted. We have taken our human
important to see the position of Kundalini : awareness also for granted, it's a good
it is placed in the triangular bone, this bone thing, otherwise we start thinking about it,
is called sacrum; the sacrum word comes we go into another tension mounting upon
from the Greek language. Greeks must our heads. Now this force lies above the
have known this that this is the sacred first centre.
The first centre is called as Mooladhara
bone, so they called it sacrum, It's most
Chakra. Now this is a very big confusion,
surprising. When they came to Australia,
some Greeks, they must have felt the
vibrations of your river, so they called it it is, modern times are known to be full of
one of the biggest in the modern times. As
confusions only. Only in confusions we
Parramatta. Have you ever thought of what
does that mean? It means the Holy Ghost.
have to find the truth; uniess and until there
is confusion, there cannot be that seeking.
"Para' is beyond, supreme, 'Mata' is the
Mother. Some realised soul must have felt And this cunfusion has reached such a
the vibrations of this river and they must stage, that we are confused even about
have named it. In the same way they must
Kundalini. And there are people who have
have felt that this bone is something worked hard to confuse us also. This
important point, that the first centre within
special, and this is the last bone that gets
burnt up, when the. body is compietely us which is the centre of innocence is
burnt under electrical pressure. Now this placed below the Kundalini, is extremely
force resides in this bone, and you can see
important to understand. And that Kundalini
with your own eyes; today in the University resides in the triangular bone which is
Mooladhara. So the centre of this power
many students saw it: the pulsation of the
Kundalini in the bone. Now can you do that,
lies below the Kundalini. This is a very
important point which I am going to tell you
anyone of you, by jumping or by shouting
or by screaming or by chanting or by
today. The last centre within us, the
paying. Whatever you can do cannot be seventh centre within us, manifests the
Divine. Divine has to be something that is
pelvic plexus, that's the subtle centre within
us, which is below the sacrum bone, is a
beyond human endeavour. You can jump,
you can shout, you can do this, you can subtle centre. It looks after the prostrate
do that, but you cannot transform a flower
gland. Now this is the centre of innocence,
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-38.txt 
 38
May-Jurie, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
innocence is the first thing God has Christ, how can they accept such an
created on this earth: is holiness, is beauty absurd thing, like by doing sex in a
perverted manner you will reach God. Are
of God, is love. And this innocence resides
within us below the Kundalini and in my we now going to become just sex points?
next lecture in the same hall I will be Have we no self-esteem left in ourselves,
speaking in details about it, how it to understand that we are much more than
a sex point, a mere sex point. This is the
manifests other aspects in our life. But why
best way of ruining people. This is the best
this is an important point, that it is placed
lower than the Kundalini because it says
way of enticing people, but I tell you, you
that our excretion is done by pelvic plexus are seekers, out and out you are seekers!
which is manifested by this particular You must not listen until you have found
centre called as Mooladhara Chakra, has out your spirit. You are not going to be
nothing to do with Kundalini. It is very satisfied with all these nonsensical ideas.
important to know this fact, that sex You will come back, I know, one day all of
has nothing to do with Kundalini. If you will have to come back. But that time
you will be so ruined, that I may not be able
sexual manifestation is going to take you
to God, animals would be much faster in to heip you. It's a very clearcut thing to
their evolution than you are.
understand, that sex has nothing to do with
We have nothing to learn from animals. Kundalini awakening. She is your pure
We are human beings. Those who want Mother, She is the Mother who is
to learn from animals will become animals.
individually with you. Forget your concepts,
and forget your identifications. Please try
Are we to become the frogs and
earthworms now, or we have to become a
to understand. She is your Mother, waiting
for ages to give you your real birth. She is
superior personality? A personality who is
the Holy Ghost within you. She has to give
completely in command, who is the
master. Or are we to be slaves of our
you your Realization, and She's just waiting
and waiting to do it. I have seen some
problems? How can we become masters
of ourselves if we give in to our own being, people, who have a Kundalini, which just,
to things that destroy us. So one has to like a wounded serpent is bending Her
understand this point very very clearly, that head all sides and just breaking Her body;
sex has nothing to do with Kundalini. It I have seen people with holes in the
cannot! Before us is placed Christ. I'm Kundalini; how much we have harmed
ourselves by foolish ideas, by listening to
surprised that people who have known
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-39.txt 
 May June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mother being connected to the child in a
those people who are just trying to make
very dirty manner. People might say the
money out of us, and befool us. There are
Freud talked about it. Freud was another
some destroying forces that have come
on this earth. Not some, but many and they
half baked fellow, i must say. Absolutely
half-baked without any wisdom about him.
are very speedy. It's very easy to destroy
something, but to construct is such a He must have had some problems like that
difficult thing and to construct something himself, he was an abnormal personality
living is even more difficult. Just we are to begin with. Apart from that all these,
enamoured because we think it's easy. psychologists nmeet only abnormal people.
Do they meet ever a normal personality?
There are people who think that if you enrol
yourself as somebody's disciple you'll be Who will go to a psychologist who is
normal? Always mad people go to them.
saved. How can you be saved? You have
to grow yourself. You have to become. You
must know what powers have you got from
And these psychologists catch from the
mad, and become mad. And then they start
teaching you something which is really
maddening. Now he was so half-baked that
anyone of them. Those who say that you
should have sexual freedom, O! the
he just saw one side of our life. He didn't
animals have all that, what is so special
about getting a sexual freedom. I can't know that there was another side and
another side. And for him sex became so
understand, I mean in India you know how
much people are producing children important, he could see perversions and
things and we are really flabbergasted at
without going to anyone of these gurus. On
the contrary these gurus make you that. Those who are simple people, say in
Indian villages, if you tell them like this they'll
impotent and they teach you about the sex
so that you feel as if the sexual act is a
say what's wrcng with the fellow? He must
very big thing to be achieved; it's such a go to lunatic asylum.
Now we have to see what have we
simple thing to do and for people who are
achieved so far as a human being? What
impotent it is a great thing, no doubt, but
for people who are normal and natural it's
are we as a human beings and what we
have to achieve? If you see in this diagram
so simple, just like going to the bathroom.
(of course you should not take me for
Why make such an ado about things which
granted either). Today as in the T.V. they
are so simple. This has gone too far now.
asked me a question, that, do you mind if
They have also suggested that, you can
raise the Kundalini by sex. It's like the we doubt,
said no, on the contrary, I'm
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-40.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2004
40
very happy, it shows that you are so very
that's not everything that we have, we have
free, You have to ask me questions, but many other things. Now this subconscious
when it comes to these fake gurus, you mind within us has an area beyond it as
just go headlong. You are so mesmerized the collective subconscious and that's a
you do not even think what you are doing!
dangerous area when you enter into that
And you don't even see what others have
area, you contract diseases like cancer.
achieved. You see some people jumping You know that in Sahaja Yoga, we have
definitely cured cancer. And I was amazed
on the street, you also join them. You don't
want to find out what power they have that those people who have got cancer and
achieved, what is their situation, are they
who came to me have got cured, were all
affected more by the left side than the right
better off than us or not if they have been
cured of their troubles or not. On the side. And that you can find out yourself
contrary if you find them you'll find that once you get your enlightenment and you
they're recluses. They're even afraid
become a realised soul. On the right hand
side there is another power, which is called
sometimes, I've seen, of vegetables. If you
show them a garlic, they'll be frightened. as the power of action. You desire
Some of the gurus have this problem also.
something, and you have to act is Kriya
Shakti. This is the future. Beyond the future
They are told that you should not take any
garlic, so, if you show them a garlic, they'll
lies the supraconscious area, or the
collective supraconscious. People have
start jumping. What is this? Are we going
to be frightened of garlics? Are we going
to be that kind of a horrible human beings
talked about it without telling you where is
it within us. They have talked about Christ.
Where is Christ within us? They have
who are frightened of this and that.
Now, within us lies on the left hand side,
talked about Krishna, where is Krishna
within us? What is the proof that He exists
if you see, is the power of desire which
comes more from the right. In sanskrit it at that particular centre within us? In the
is called as Itcha Shakti. This is the pysche
centre lies another power by which we
about which Mr. Freud has talked, part of have become human beings. The
it. You see he is a blind man leading evolutionary power, the sustenance power,
the Religo, the religion, not the religion that
everyone into doom, like him. Now this one
is our past, is our conditioning, is the one we see but The religion. Carbon has four
that is our subconscious mind and we valencies, gold has a quality that it is
have a subconscious mind no doubt. But untarnishable, in the same way a human
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2004
being has got ten sustenances within it. what exercises are needed? What mantra
And this sustenance which sustains it, is needed? We have great organisations
which says he's a human being, is the in this country, and everywhere else where
quality of a human being. So, we have they give a mantra. Now just think of it!
three powers within us, in Sahaja Yoga There are six centres; these are the basic
centres, there are many more, I don't want
language we call it differently, to make it
to tell you the number, otherwise you'll be
simpler. These three powers exist within
us. But the central power is a little cut off,
surprised. But six main centres and .two
if you see, there's a gap. This central on the left and the right are sun and the
power by which we evolve, has not yet moon. And at the bottom is the seventh
been connected with the mains and the
one.
cord is the Kundalini. In our heart resides
So you can see there are nine centres,
the spirit. In our heart it resides. It is the basically we have to know and there are
reflection of God Almighty. "Unless and nine deities' on these nine centres. How
until you have got your self-realization, can you give somebody one mantra?
Supposing you have to pass through six
unless and until you are connected with it,
every religion, everything that you do has
gates and you have only one pass, of the
fifth one and you are at the first gate, how
no meaning, it's like telephoning a 'person
without any connection. You spoil it. So you
will you pass through? These people have
no idea! And they have given such horrible
have to get connected. As today they
asked me another question, which was mantras I was shocked. If you tell Indians
interesting, about Hatha Yoga. I said they'll be surprised. One of them means
nobody's doing Hatha Yoga; they are doing
'tinga' means (thumb). Can you imagine
this could be a mantra, like this. It's such a
some exercises most indiscriminately.
Because attention is on the body, and ridiculous thing to say. Horrible things like
that's why they are just doing something
'inga, pinga, tinga', these are no mantras,
this is nonsense! And it's a mafia going on.
without understanding why certain
exercises have to be done, Acutally the They come and tell you in your ears, you
real Hatha Yoga of Patanjali, you have to
see you are not to tell it to anybody, I was
have Ishwara Pranidhan; that means first most surprised that at the end it was the
your God must be established! First you "fallopian tubes! I said what? Fallopian
tubes! How can that be a mantra. And we
must be connected. Let the Kundalini rise
take it! We take it, we pay for it; people had
and then know what chakras are catching,
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-42.txt 
 42
May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
you know the job you can do it. If there's a
paid £3,000 and they are given to eat for
beautiful garden you can easily find out that
one week, for £3,000, the boiled soup of
there must be a gardener behind it who has
the boiled potatoes. Just that water, for 5
days! and one day the rind and one day done the job. If somebody knows the job
he can do it.
the potatoes, to make them weak so that
Now this central path is the path through
they could become completely out of their
which one has to rise. The Kundalini rises
minds and then they can be mesmerized
through a very thin line of Brahmanadi. In
very well. Be càreful about these horrible
the beginning only a hairlike thing rises, it
people! They know that you are seekers,
and ardently you are seeking. They know pierces through; in some people, of
course, in a big way it rises also. And then
that
have money and they want to, play
you
it pierces this fontanel bone area which is
upon your ego by saying that you can pay,
a real baptism, real. Today only, people feit
you must pay, how much money have you
the cool breeze coming out of their heads.
got? Those are all parasites of the worst
Can you do that by jumping, or by paying
type! These are all parasites, remember,
money? They felt the cool breeze in the
and the day will come when you recognise
hand. It's written in the Bible, even in the
them, when you'll be falling on the streets
with epilepsys and all kinds of diseases Bible very clearly, that it's the cool breeze,
cool breeze is the sign of the Holy Ghost.
and then you'll be coming to me. There are
already so many people who are coming You start feeling the cool breeze in your
to me in that condition. I have to warn you
hands and you start feeling the cool breeze
on your head. This is the actualisation. Of
again, be careful and understand that
course, you people don't read other books
people
no knowledge
these
give
whatsoever, they are just mesmerizing which
are very good, like Adi
Shankaracharya. People don't even like the
you, not only because they want to make
money but they are bent upon destroying mention of his name who has really and
the Kingdom of God. They are bent upon clearly said that it is the cool breeze; the
destroying you all.because they are satanic chaitanya is to be felt like cool breeze in
people and they want to establish the the hands. They do not want that you
should know the truth. And this is the truth
kingdom of satan. For us, it is easy to take
that when you get your Realization, you
to these things, it's very easy to fall, as
have to feel the coo breeze in your hands
told you. But to rise is difficult. It's not so
difficult also, spontaneity is so simple, if yourself. You have to judge yourself. I'm not
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-43.txt 
 May June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
going to tell you, it is you who has to see,
it is you who has to feel, and then you have
to grow and you have to know all and
their Realization and when they got it, when
they came back here they have given
Realization in the. first shot to 300 people.
everything, all the secrets of Divine And now they know such a lot about
Science, You become the master then, you
Kundalini, about awakening, about
are the guru. You are the Spirit, and you enlightenment. It's all logical after
Realization, before that it is blind rationality,
should get it, it's your own which is given
to you. I have nothing to do about it, I am
which doesn't understand anything. This
Kundalini is there, your own, Sahaja. 'Saha'
just a catalyst. I should say, you can do it
means with, 'ja' means born; it's born with
yourself, once you get Realization you can
you, it's within you. It has to only rise with
give Realization. Actually Warren came to
authority, with a person who knows how to
me, and Terence, and they had been really
do it. One should not feel hurt about it,
lynched by all these gurus, and they were
so unhappy. Just before leaving for India
because I'm doing it, you better do it, I'll be
he telephoned to me from Australia: very happy. You see, I'm a very happily
'Mother, we have got your telephone, can
married woman, you know, I don't need any
we come and see you ?' and I knew they
were seekers. So first, I caught hold of
thing, My husband has permitted me to go
about doing this because he knows nobody
them. You see, I don't work much in the
can do it. I'll be very happy if you can do it,
cities, I work in the villages because
really I would like to retire. Moreover why
should you feel bad if I do it? After all there
villagers are easier to get Realization; the
are so many things I can't do. I can't drive,
other day we were in a village called
Kadus, where six thousand people got
I can't type, I don't know even how to open
Realization, it was announced in the paper. your tins, I'm so hopelessly bad. So what
So, in the cities these gurus work out is there to feel bad about it if I know how
because they want money and the purse, to raise the Kundalini and when it is your
you see, it's there in the cities. I work in right to know yourself and to get it
the villages. Poor things had to go to the within yourself so that you achieve your
villages where they don't even have proper real baptism, your real force, and once
bathrooms, you have to go to the rivers to you have achieved it, first thing that
have your bath and things and it was very
happens is that you become a different
spartan for comfortable Australians. But personality. You become something so
they managed it somehow. And they got different.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-44.txt 
 May - June, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
The other day a gentleman, old man,
have become green. You do not keep notes
of people whom you love and whom you
who met me in Singapore long time back,
he told me that: 'Mother, after Realization,
feed..,Do you write down how many
morsels you have fed the person, do you?
actually I've not even touched it fully, but
one thing happened to me, I just gave up
gambling, smoking and drinking, just like
that. What happened to me? I said, when
This is love. Why do you need the proof?
Why do you need, you are not paying me
anything? Do you want to have any proof
of the sun? You are not giving me anything!
you have found out the real, you give up.
When you have found the real diamond, of
I'm not selling anything! There's no shop
on ! You have to get this gift. You have to
course, you give up the artificial ones.
get it. So why do you want to judge me? If
Because you are bored stiff, because you
you don't get it, better try for it. What are
find life so boring, human beings so boring,
you going to gain by knowing about me, it's
life so boring, so uninteresting, full of
not easy to know about me. It's very very
tensions, full of cruelty, full of problems,
difficult. I'm such a camouflage. It's a very
you want to take to these things. But once
difficult thing to know; Better thing is, you
you've found out your absolute, your sense
know yourself, then you'll learn. Unless and
of security is absolutely established, And
the joy and happiness, the bliss that is until you know yourself, you won't know me.
So no use asking me questions which are
promised to you, starts pouring down into
rather embarrassing, I won't be able to tell
you. You feel so relaxed. Apari-from that,
you; because I've become very clever now.
Krishna, just told one person, Arjuna. He
so many things happen to you that it is hard
to tell you in this one lecture. I'm going to
said, give up everything and follow me. He
have many other lectures for you. Now first
thing that happens is that physically you said that after Yoga you'll get the Kshema,
get fit. It's not that I'm going to go to the means, well- being. Not before. You get
hospital to find out who are physically unfit the well-being, physically, mentally.
and start an enterprise: alright, pay so emotionally, materially, socially, in every
way. And spiritually! He said after Yoga it
much money to cure this disease and all
will happen! Not before that. And that's what
that. No, I do not know how many people
I've cured, really I do not know, believe me. is going to happen to you when you get it.
And I do not know how many of my If you don't get it today, "I don't ge:
disciples have cured. It's like the sun disappointed. In that great England, the
Jerusalem, according to William Blake, I
shining, it does not know how many leaves
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-45.txt 
 May-June, 2004
45
The Divine Cool Breeze
have to work very very hard. I've worked limited brain only, they reached it. They
also reached so many conclusions, that like
on only six people for four years, can you
persons like Jung, the disciple of Mr. Freud
believe it? Very difficult nuts to be cracked,
you see. But once they were cracked it has the great, was such a sensible man that
he said you must get your Realization, you
like anything. And now we have
blown
up
thousand of people who are realised. Of must get your Self-Realization, and he
prepared the ground for Sahaja Yoga, for
course, do not keep any records of them,
he said, when you get your self-realization,
there is no organisation, nothing. You know
you will become collectively conscious. He
them through your vibrations by which you
talked about it.
know that they are realised or not. Because
So, one has to understand that this is
you become collectively conscious, you
become; again and again I say, it's the not only what I am saying, this has been
becoming. You start feeling others and you said by all the great saints, by all the
start feeling yourself. It is important, vital, incarnations, by all the great prophets.
absolutely. The thing for you to do. You Mohammad said, you have to become the
Peer. But you know what they are doing
have to get it, if not today then tomorrow.
about religion now. I do not want to fall into
Why not do it today, it's a good idea. But
after getting it one has to know that as controversies but you can yourself judge,
Christ has described, some seeds fell on what have they done out of these
the rock, in the same way it happens, you incarnations. You give them the best thing,
the highest, they know how to spoil it. Like,
have to look after it, you have to make it
I would say that Hindus were told, that
grow, you have to master it, and you have
Atman, the spirit resides in everybody. They
to become the guru yourself. And as I told
had no business to start the different caste
you this morning, you better go and ask all
these gurus to pay back the money. This system, which depends on the birth.
is best way we can understand that it's Actually jati (caste) means a person born
beyond rationality. I'm talking about the with certain aptitudes. For example you are
unlimited; our rationality is limited, our Brahmins, because you are Seekers, you
are seeking the Brahma, so you are
brains are limited. But many things can be
Brahmins. Those who are seeking the
understood. So many people reached the
conclusion that it is the Kundalini power say, we seek in elections are
awakening, is the one which is going to Kshatryas. Like that, these are the
give us Self-Realization. Through their aptitudes of personalities which determine
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-46.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May-June, 2004
46
a person's birth. Actually the one who has Being, the macrocosm, and we are cells.
written Gita himself, was Vyasa, was an
We have to relate ourselves to the whole
and so we have to find out our relationship,
illegitimate child of a fisherwoman and how
could he say that you are born in a Brahmin
the coordination between different cells, the
family. It's a capacity, a category, You are
love, the love between.
Last of all I would like to say it is the
in the category of those Seekers. You are
Divine Love of God, is the grace of God
the ones who are going to get Realization,
that's why you are the Brahmins, and this
which has made you a human being and it
category can be anywhere. It can be in
is His grace which is going to make you a
Islamic world, it can be in China, and it can
supreme human being. Because He wants
be in Russia, it can be in England, and it is
to have that power to flow through you, to
in Australia. I have through my husband's
job, been to all these countries. I was
make you a hollow personality; like-the flute
of Shri Krishna, so that you might feel His
amazed. I've given Realization even to power and you manoeuvre it. And you enter
into the Kingdom of God, because He's the
Russians, they are very good for
Realization. But they'll take time to Ocean of love. He forgives all your so-
understand it to that extent. Because you called guilts; what guilts can we have, what
are really free people; you are the people
sins can we commit, only you are like little
birds who sometimes feel guilty for bringing
who are free, democratic, can have more
a little straw from outside in the house. He
open mind, to understand Sahaja Yoga, to
is a loving Father, He is a Father who is
achieve it to much greater heights. But still
I would like to say that freedom doesn't- the Ocean of Forgiveness. He cleanses us
completely, and He grants His beauty to us,
mean abandonment. It doesn't mean that.
Say in a plane if all the parts of the plane
and you become His own children, who
want to have freedom, what will happen to
have been granted all His powers, in their
the plane, ultimately? We are part and own beauty and its glory,
May God bless you!
parcel of one whole being. One Primordial
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-47.txt 
 TRANSFORMATION
And evolved a beggar to a King
A beggar I was,
But paradoxicallyB
Wandering in the dark lanes
Of fusion between the world and the hell,
Bestowing upon him perpetual servility.
Ruled by Ego.
Transcending him from all worldly stages,
Until, I felt the touch of the elf at my crest
With his embellishments;
And the volcano erupted
Changing from dime-worthed metal
To the priceless divine ornament.
But thereafter,
Flew the moist florets embellished with love
Making him clad
Resembling,
In pure snipetts, taking away from him
His dirty royal attire
The raise of the curtain from
Between the source and the navigator;
This flame
Melts the ego;
Giving a vision of the vicinity;
Sublimates the eeriness.
Which earlier was only dreamt of
Resultantly, the darkness evacuates.
Due to the absence of medium of sight,
As it forces its way in,
Facilitating the process of navigation.
It evicts all negations.
You held me carefully,
Lifted me lovingly fram firestones
The only feel, matter can understand
Is the feel of utter bliss.
To gently place me on the floral carpet of Eden.
Liberated the soul
The flowers blooming with
From all bounds and powered
The emancipated fragrant love;
The soil full of divine tolerance and patience;
The matter to create transcriptions
Of what it felt, fulfilling all desires.
The light sparkling and rellecting radiance:
But still:
The sky vast and engulfing.
There remains a silent fire
Gave momentum to the titanic endeavour
Of union with the Cosmic Throne;
To never stay apart and dissolve;
In your arms completely.
Made the resurrected matter enter.
And there is an uncanny belief3B
The borderless Kingdom;
On this silent urge.
Let me thrive on the infused energy
Teena Bhandari
Gifted by you.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-49.txt 
 DK
